
--- Page 1 ---

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
1
Instability Suppression in a Swirl-Stabilized Combustor 
Using Microjet Air Injection 
Zachary A. LaBry,1 Santosh J. Shanbhogue,2 Raymond L. Speth,3 and Ahmed F. Ghoniem4 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 
In this study, we examine the effectiveness of microjet air injection as a means of 
suppressing thermoacoustic instabilities in a swirl-stabilized, lean-premixed propane/air 
combustor. High-speed stereo PIV measurements, taken to explore the mechanism of 
combustion instability, reveal that the inner recirculation zone plays a dominant role in the 
coupling of acoustics and heat release that leads to combustion instability. Six microjet 
injector configurations were designed to modify the inner and outer recirculation zones with 
the intent of decoupling the mechanism leading to instability. Microjets that injected air into 
the inner recirculation zone, swirling in the opposite sense to the primary swirl were 
effective in suppressing combustion instability, reducing the overall sound pressure level by 
up to 17 dB within a certain window of operating conditions. Stabilization was achieved near 
an equivalence ratio of 0.65, corresponding to the region where the combustor transitions 
from a 40 Hz instability mode to a 110 Hz instability mode. PIV measurements made of the 
stabilized flow revealed significant modification of the inner recirculation zone and 
substantial weakening of the outer recirculation zone. 
I. Introduction 
NCREASINGLY strict regulations on pollutant emission of gas turbines for power generation and aviation have 
led to the development of new concepts for combustor technology.  Among them, lean-premixed (LPM) 
combustion has arisen as one of the most promising concepts for future gas turbine applications, due in large part, to 
the significant reduction in thermal NOx production.1 Combustion instability, manifested as discrete-frequency, 
large-amplitude pressure oscillations is a major challenge facing the design of practical LPM combustors. These 
instabilities are driven by feedback interactions between the heat release and acoustic fields. They arise due to the 
relatively low energy required to sustain them, and the absence of the attenuation mechanisms present in more 
conventional combustors operating in non-premixed mode.1,2 
 
In order to achieve the reduction in pollutant emissions that lean-premixed combustion promises, effective 
means of creating stable operating regimes must be developed. Active control strategies, which attempt to either 
detect and correct, or preemptively correct for combustion instabilities have been studied, many of which focus on 
the modulation of fuel injection,3,4 through small holes known as “microjets.” Microjets allow for high injection 
velocities to be achieved with small mass flow rates. 
 
Passive control strategies, if they can be developed, have the advantages of decreasing the complexity and 
increasing the reliability of instability suppression. The use of microjets has also been explored as a potentially 
simple means of introducing passive flow control to mitigate combustion instabilities. Microjet air injection has 
been shown to be effective in a lean-premixed backward-facing step combustor under certain conditions.5-7 
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the potential effectiveness of microjet air injection for the suppression of 
thermoacoustic instabilities in an axisymmetric, swirl-stabilized combustor. Synchronized pressure data and high-
speed images for stereo PIV were recorded over a range of lean equivalence ratios. 
We designed and tested six different microjet injectors, each designed to modify the flow field in either the outer 
recirculation zone or the inner recirculation zone, with the intention of using the dynamics of the flow to decouple 
the feedback mechanism between the heat release of the flame and the acoustics. 
                                                          
1 Research Assistant, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Room 3-339. 
2 Post-Doctoral Research Associate, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Room 3-339D. 
3 Research Assistant, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Room 3-339. 
4 Ronald C. Crane ‘72 Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Room 3-342, Associate Fellow of AIAA. 
I
48th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition
4 - 7 January 2010, Orlando, Florida
AIAA 2010-1524
Copyright © 2010 by LaBry, Shanbhogue, Speth and Ghoniem. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.


--- Page 2 ---

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
2
 
 
 
II. Experimental Setup 
A. Axisymmetric Swirl Combustor 
The combustor consists of a cylindrical inlet pipe with a diameter of 38 mm, with a sudden expansion to 76 mm, 
as shown in Fig. 1. The inlet to the combustor is choked 54 cm upstream of the step. An axial swirler with eight 
vanes is located 10 cm upstream of the step and inducing clockwise swirl with a swirl number of 0.6. The length of 
the combustor and exhaust is 440 cm. Main air is supplied by an air compressor capable of delivering 110 g/s at 883 
kPa. Fuel is supplied by Sierra C100M mass flow controllers. Separate fuel lines allow for propane or carbon 
monoxide to be supplied as the primary fuel and either can be enriched with hydrogen. Fuel is injected upstream of 
the choke plate. 
 
B. Microjet Injector Design 
We designed and tested six microjet injector 
configurations for this study. Injectors were classified 
as either “tangential” or “radial”, and as either 
“straight,” 
“co-rotating,” 
or 
“counter-rotating.” 
Tangential microjets inject air tangential to the 
cylindrical surface of the combustor, whereas radial 
microjets inject air in the plane perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the combustor. 
The designs classified as counter and co-rotating 
introduce swirl to the injected air in the same sense as 
that of the main air for the co-rotating cases, and in the 
opposite sense as the main air for the counter-rotating 
cases. The straight tangential microjets inject air 
parallel to the longitudinal axis of the combustor, and the straight radial microjets inject air along radii of the 
combustor. In Fig. 2, we show a schematic of radial, counter-rotating microjets. 
The tangential co-rotating and counter-rotating microjets were designed to provide a swirl number of about 0.6, 
the same as the swirl number of the main swirler. This was achieved by angling the microjets 35 degrees from 
longitudinal axis of the combustor. The same relative angle of the microjets was used for the co-rotating and 
counter-rotating, radial microjets, which are offset from the radial direction by 35 degrees. No attempt has yet been 
made to optimize the offset angle for any of the four swirl-inducing microjets. 
 
Figure 2. Schematic 
of 
the 
“swirl-counter-swirl” 
configuration, 
showing 
normal, 
counter-rotating 
microjets inducing swirl counter to the main air 
swirler. 
Figure 1. Schematic of the “swirl-counter-swirl” configuration, showing radial, counter-rotating microjets 
inducing swirl counter to the main air swirler. 


--- Page 3 ---

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
3
C. Pressure Diagnostics and Stereo PIV 
Diagnostics were conducted using pressure microphones 
located at several positions along the length of the 
combustor, and a high-speed stereo particle image 
velocimetry (SPIV) system was setup to allow for further 
investigation into the physics of the flow in conditions of 
particular interest. 
Pressure was measured using Kulite MIC-series 
microphones, offset from the combustor in semi-infinite line 
configurations and Kistler 7061B water-cooled pressure 
sensors, flush-mounted with the inside of the combustor. 
Pressure data was recorded at 10 kHz, and was 
synchronized with the high-speed cameras for the PIV tests. 
Two high-speed CMOS cameras were mounted above 
the combustor, as shown in Fig. 3, to capture images at a rate of 2 kHz. A 50 W Nd:YLF laser was operated in twin 
pulse mode, and the beam was routed through sheet forming optics to produce a sub-millimeter light sheet. The field 
of view was a 76 mm by 76 mm square spanning the entire diameter of the combustor and the region immediately 
downstream of the expansion plane. 
Aluminum oxide particles of 0.9 to 2.2 µm diameter were injected into the flow as seeding particles. Air 
downstream of the choke plate was diverted into a cyclone-type seeder and back into the inlet flow upstream of the 
swirler. The inner surface of the quartz tube, below the light sheet, was sandblasted to reduce specular reflections. 
DaVis 7.2 software provided by LaVision processed the PIV images. 
Each individual test lasted 0.55 s during which 2200 images were recorded, creating 1100 velocity fields. For 
stable cases, a simple time-average of all velocity fields was computed. For unstable cases, velocity fields were 
averaged based on the corresponding phase of the upstream pressure oscillations. One cycle of the pressure 
oscillation was divided into 80 equally spaced bins, and velocity fields were binned accordingly, and all velocity 
fields in a given bin were averaged. Data presented here for the unstable cases represent two to three separate trial 
runs, with an average of 25 to 40 velocity fields per bin. 
III. Results 
A. Swirl Combustor Stability 
We conducted a series of experiments to explore the impact that each microjet injector design had on the 
stability of the combustor. For each injector, we set the Reynolds number at 19000, corresponding to a mass flow 
rate of 8.9 to 9.7 g/s and a mean inlet velocity of 7.1 to 7.5 m/s, depending on the inlet equivalence ratio. We fixed 
the mass flow rate through the microjet injectors 
at values from 1.0 to 3.0 g/s, and varied the inlet 
equivalence ratio from 0.85, as measured at the 
choke plate, down to the lean blow-off limit. 
Additionally, at several fixed values of the 
inlet equivalence ratio, just above the onset of 
the 110 Hz unstable mode of the combustor, we 
varied the microjet flow rate from 1.0 to 4.0 g/s. 
The radial, counter-rotating microjet injector 
was the only configuration that showed promise 
of a significant reduction in the overall sound 
pressure level over the baseline case with no 
microjet air injection. This configuration, 
labeled 
the 
“swirl-counter-swirl” 
(SCS) 
configuration, was chosen for further study. 
For the SCS configuration, the inlet 
equivalence ratio was varied from an inlet 
equivalence ratio of 0.85, down to the lean 
blow-off limit at fixed microjet flow rates of 1.2 
g/s, 1.6 g/s, and 2.0 g/s. In all cases the flow at 
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
135
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
Fully Mixed Equivalence Ratio, φm
Overall Sound Pressure Level, dB
 
 
Stable
40 Hz
110 Hz
No microjet air
1.2 g/s microjet air
1.6 g/s microjet air
2.0 g/s microjet air
Figure 4. Overall sound pressure level as a function of the 
fully mixed equivalence ratio for the SCS configuration. 
Figure 3. Schematic of  the stereo PIV setup. 


--- Page 4 ---

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
4
the microjets was choked, preventing microjet flow rates from coupling with pressure oscillations in the combustor. 
In Fig. 4, we present the overall sound pressure level for the baseline and three microjet flow rates as a function of 
the mixed equivalence ratio. The mixed equivalence ratio is computed assuming that the inlet fuel-air mixture and 
the secondary air from the microjets mix perfectly before burning. 
The overall sound pressure level as a function of both frequency and the mixed equivalence ratio is shown in 
Fig. 5 for the combustor with no microjet injection, 1.2 g/s, 1.6 g/s, and 2.0 g/s.  In the baseline case, the combustor 
transitions from a 40 Hz to a 110 Hz mode, with no significant reduction in OASPL during the transition. At an 
equivalence ratio of 0.56, the flame becomes stable. 
The stable flame is not compact, and extends downstream into the exhaust; the flame length is on the order of 
meters. The two unstable modes we studied, and the microjet stabilized mode all produce compact flames, which are 
completely contained within the quartz combustion chamber; the flame length for these modes is less than 0.5 m. 
B. Flow Field Observations without Microjet Injection 
We conducted two-dimensional and three-dimensional PIV measurements on the first three operating modes of 
the swirl combustor: the stable mode, the 40 Hz instability, and the 110 Hz instability. The stable mode of the 
combustor, which is only observed at low equivalence ratios, produces a long, conical flame that extents from the 
bluff body of the swirler downstream of the main combustion chamber. The time-averaged axial and tangential 
velocity profiles of this flame are shown in Fig. 6. The important flow features in the stable flame are the large inner 
recirculation zone, the outer recirculation zone and the relatively strong jet emanating from the edge of the inlet 
pipe. The tangential velocity field indicates that the flow is swirling clockwise as viewed from the inlet direction, 
which is the same sense of swirl as the main air swirler. 
Fully Mixed Equivalence Ratio, φm
Frequency, Hz
(a) No microjet air
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0
50
100
150
200
Fully Mixed Equivalence Ratio, φm
Frequency, Hz
(b) 1.2 g/s microjet air
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0
50
100
150
200
Fully Mixed Equivalence Ratio, φm
Frequency, Hz
(c) 1.6 g/s microjet air
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0
50
100
150
200
Fully Mixed Equivalence Ratio, φm
Frequency, Hz
(d) 2.0 g/s microjet air
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0
50
100
150
200
 
Figure 5. Sound pressure level spectra for a range of microjet flow rates in the SCS configuration. 


--- Page 5 ---

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
5
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
 
 
Figure 7. Axial velocity contours for the 40 Hz mode instability with no microjet air flow at an equivalence 
ratio of 0.68* as a function of the upstream pressure fluctuation, P´. Flow is from left to right. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Axial (left) and tangential (right) velocity contours for the stable flame with no microjet air 
injection at an equivalence ratio of 0.70.* Flow is from left to right. 
* 
The equivalence ratios seen in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 do not compare to those shown in Fig. 5 for the stable and 40 
Hz modes due to a strong hysteresis effect, and the equivalence ratio at which the combustor was ignited. 
Investigation of microjet suppression called for the careful control of the startup procedure prior to recording 
data, but the procedure was not necessary to characterize the basic modes of the combustor without microjets. 


--- Page 6 ---

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
6
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Axial (left) and tangential (right) velocity contours for the 110 Hz mode instability with no microjet 
air flow at an equivalence ratio of 0.75 as a function of the upstream pressure fluctuation, P´. Flow is from left 
to right. 


--- Page 7 ---

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
7
In Fig. 7, we show phase-averaged axial velocity field for the 40 Hz mode at the minimum, maximum, and zeros 
of its oscillation cycle. This mode is characterized by the relative steadiness of the jet and weak oscillations in the 
magnitude of the inner recirculation zone. The outer recirculation zone remains largely unaffected by the 
oscillations. The oscillations are associated with the shedding of large vortex rings within the inner recirculation 
zone. The 40 Hz mode has a broad peak when compared with other modes of instability in this combustor, and the 
result is that the peak-to-peak amplitude of the dominant frequency of oscillation is small compared to that of other 
modes. 
We show a sequence of axial and tangential velocity contours at different points in the cycle for the 110 Hz 
instability in Fig. 8. Data were phase-averaged, and the results are plotted for the maximum, minimum and zeros of 
the upstream pressure fluctuation. The 110 Hz mode features a sharper peak than the 40 Hz mode, and the resulting 
peak-to-peak amplitude of the dominant frequency of pressure fluctuations is correspondingly larger than that of the 
40 Hz mode. 
The 110 Hz mode shows strong dynamic behavior. We observe periodic collapse of the inner recirculation zone 
throughout the cycle. A strong recirculation zone forms with axial jets; as the recirculation zone weakens, the jets 
weaken and are deflected outward toward the walls of the combustion chamber; finally, the recirculation zone 
completely gives way to a strong forward jet. 
The largest forward and reverse velocity magnitudes are seen in the 110 Hz mode, with the jets reaching a 
velocity of 40 m/s, and the strong inner recirculation zone reaching a velocity of 30 m/s. 
Characteristic of the tangential velocity in all three cases—the stable mode, the 40 Hz instability, and the 110 Hz 
instability—is the observation that the largest tangential velocities correspond to the presence of strong jets from the 
inlet pipe surrounding the inner recirculation zone. 
C. Flow Field Observations with Microjet Injection in SCS Configuration 
Time-averaged contours of the axial and tangential velocity for the case of swirl stabilized flow are shown in 
Fig. 9. There are several features that distinguish the microjet stabilized flow field from the stable flow field of the 
combustor. The most notable feature is that the tangential velocity of the stabilized flow is counterclockwise, as 
viewed from the inlet, looking downstream. That is, the sense of swirl in the flow is dominated by the induced swirl 
of the microjets, not the main air swirler. The axial velocity reveals the presence of a bowl-shaped inner 
recirculation zone and an outer recirculation zone that is significantly diminished in both intensity and extent. 
The swirl number of the stabilized flow is 0.9, in the opposite sense as the stable flame. Whereas in all other 
cases we examined, the largest tangential velocities corresponded to the presence of strong jets (relative to the rest of 
the flow field), there are no strong jets in the stabilized flame, and the largest tangential velocities appear near the 
longitudinal axis of the combustor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Axial (left) and tangential (right) velocity contours for the microjet stabilized flame with 1.6 g/s of 
microjet air injection at a fully mixed equivalence ratio of 0.63. Flow is from left to right. 


--- Page 8 ---

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
8
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. 
Axial (left) and tangential (right) velocity contours for the 110 Hz mode instability at a mixed 
equivalence ratio of 0.68 with 0.9 g/s of microjet air flow as a function of the upstream pressure fluctuation, 
P´. Flow is from left to right. 


--- Page 9 ---

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
9
 We began to investigate the effect of the SCS microjet configuration in unstable cases, where the air flow rate 
through the injectors is insufficient to stabilize the flame. In Fig. 10, we show the a sequence of phase-averaged 
axial and tangential velocity contours for a case in which the 110 Hz instability mode was active and microjet air 
was being injected at a flow rate of 0.9 g/s. The inlet equivalence ratio was 0.75, and the fully mixed equivalence 
ratio was 0.68. 
The dynamics of the axial velocity are similar to those of the 110 Hz instability without microjet injection, with 
several notable exceptions. The collapse of the inner recirculation zone is phase-shifted when compared to the 
collapse with no microjet air injection. Additionally, the tangential velocity is more active than all other observed 
modes of operation. The bulk swirl is clockwise, dominated by the main air swirler, but a small zone of counter-
clockwise swirl, dominated by the microjet injection, appears when the axial velocity is low, as shown in Fig. 10(b). 
Strong jets form, as seen in Fig. 10(c) and 10(d), and we observe correspondingly large tangential velocities in the 
clockwise direction, displacing the counterclockwise zone into the outer recirculation zone. 
IV. Conclusion 
In this paper, we have used high-speed stereo PIV, synchronized with pressure measurements, to study the flow 
structure of thermoacoustic instabilities in a swirl-stabilized, lean-premixed propane/air combustor. We observed 
that the inner recirculation zone, formed downstream of the swirler, plays a dominant role in the coupling that 
occurs between acoustic oscillations and heat release that leads to combustion instability. 
We developed six sets of microjet air injectors, intended to break the feedback mechanism that give rise to 
instabilities by changing the dynamics of the flow field in the combustor. Consistent with our findings regarding the 
dominant role of the inner recirculation zone, we were able to achieve a 17 dB reduction in the overall sound 
pressure level by injecting high-velocity air into the inner recirculation zone. We observed the creation of a gap 
between the 40 Hz and 110 Hz instabilities of the swirl combustor when the microjets injected air swirling in the 
opposite sense of the inlet air, using the swirl-counter-swirl microjet configuration. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to acknowledge the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology for their 
support of this research. This work was funded by the KAUST grant, number KUS-110-010-01. 
References 
1 
Huang, Y., and Yang, V., “Dynamics and Stability of Lean-Premixed Swirl-Stabilized Combustion,” Progress in Energy 
and Combustion Science, Vol. 35, 2009, pp. 293-364. 
2 
Keller, J. J., “Thermoacoustic Oscillations in Combustion Chambers of Gas Turbines,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 33, No. 12, 
1995, pp. 2280-2287. 
3 
Lee, J. G., Kim, K., and Santavicca, D. A., “Effect of injection Location on the Effectiveness of an Active Control 
System Using Secondary Fuel Injection,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Vol. 28, 2000, pp. 739-746. 
4 
Tachibana, S., Zimmer, L., and Kurosawa, Y., “Active Control of Combustion Oscillations in a Lean Premixed Gas-
Turbine Combustor,” International Journal of Vehicle Design, Vol. 43, Nos. 1-4, 2007. 
5 
Hudgins, D. E., “Suppression of Premixed Combustion Dynamics Utilizing Microjet Air Injection,” M. S. Thesis, 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 2008. 
6 
Altay, H. M., “Physics-Based Flame Dynamics Modeling and Thermoacoustic Instability Mitigation,” Ph. D. Thesis, 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 2009. 
7 
Altay, H. M., Speth, R. L., Snarheim, D., Hudgins, D. E., Ghoniem, A. F., Annaswamy, A. M., “Impact of Microjet 
Actuation of a Backward-Facing Step Combustor,” 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, AIAA, Reno, NV, 
2007, AIAA Paper 2007-563. 
