
--- Page 1 ---

JOURNAL OF PROPULSION AND POWER
Vol. 11, No. 6, November-December 1995
Effect of Dilution Air on the Scalar Flowfield at
Combustor Sector Exit
A. Gulati,* A. Tolpadi,t and G. VanDeusent
General Electric Corporate R&D Center, Schenectady, New York 12301
and
D. BurrusJ
General Electric Aircraft Engines, Cincinnati, Ohio 45215-6301
Spontaneous Raman diagnostics are applied to the exit plane of a full-scale 10-cup double-annular research
combustor sector to obtain the mean and rms of temperature and mole fractions of major species for comparison
with predictions of the code CONCERT-3D for the same geometry and operating conditions. CONCERT-3D
has been developed and used extensively in the past and represents a fully elliptic three-dimensional computational
fluid dynamics code to predict flowfields in practical full-scale combustors. The theory/data comparison is
encouraging. The mean and rms temperature profiles and mean profiles of the major species are predicted
quite well by the model. Dilution air is shown to have a significant impact on the mean and rms temperature
profiles at the sector exit. The mean temperature profile is forced inbound by the outer dilution air, whereas
the inner dilution air forces the temperature profile to be center-peaked with lower peak values. The rms
turbulence fluctuation levels are generally increased by the dilution air. The effect on profiles of major species
is similar. CONCERT-3D predicts these trends well. Overall, larger values of rms fluctuations are measured
than predicted by the model. Possible reasons for these and other differences are discussed.
Introduction
U
UNDERSTANDING and predicting the role of dilution
air in advanced aircraft gas-turbine combustor design is
becoming increasingly important as combustors are operated
at increased stoichiometric values in an attempt to achieve
higher engine efficiencies. Dilution air is conventionally in-
troduced through rows of large holes in the outer and inner
liners within the region between the main combustion zone
(primary zone) and the combustor exit. The primary role of
dilution air is to lower the bulk exit temperature to levels
permissible by turbine material considerations, to shape the
temperature profile, and to obtain an acceptable pattern fac-
tor at the combustor exit. In general, there is more than one
row of dilution air (primary, secondary, and tertiary). Because
of the proximity of secondary and tertiary dilution jets to the
combustor exit and the turbulent mixing of the jets, large
fluctuations in temperature and mixture fraction values are
suspected to be present at the exit plane of the combustor.
A recent experimental study of a combustor sector reported
significant scalar fluctuations to be indeed present at the exit
of such a combustor.1 Such fluctuations are believed to be
responsible, in part, for the phenomena of hot streaks at the
combustor exit. Hot streaks are undesirable, they represent
losses in combustor efficiency, contribute to NOX emissions,
and can cause damage to turbine hardware. It is therefore
important to understand and quantify the effect of dilution
air on the exit scalar flowfield. In this article we present results
of a combined experimental/modeling effort to better under-
stand its role.
The research vehicle used in this study is a double-annular
10-cup combustor sector representing a 75-deg section of a
Presented as Paper 94-0221 at the AIAA 32nd Aerospace Sciences
Meeting, Reno, NY, Jan. 10-13, 1994; received Jan. 25, 1994; re-
vision received Feb. 16, 1995; accepted for publication Feb. 18, 1995.
Copyright © 1995 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.
^Mechanical Engineer. Member AIAA.
tMechanical Engineer.
:|:Staff Engineer. Member AIAA.
full annular combustor. Henceforth, this combustor will be
referred to as a five-cup sector, by which it is meant that there
are five cups in the inner dome and five in the outer dome,
thus making a total of 10 cups. Experimental data are obtained
at the exit of the five-cup sector by applying the technique of
spontaneous Raman/Rayleigh scattering. The experimental
results are compared with model predictions based upon
CONCERT-3D code simulations. CONCERTED is a fully
elliptic three-dimensional body-fitted computational fluid dy-
namics code developed extensively2"6 over the years that com-
bines reasonable combustion models with good numerical
procedures to yield a comprehensive modeling capability for
single- and two-phase flow predictions in practical gas-turbine
combustor geometries. The code is applied to the combustor
sector at the same operating conditions for which experimen-
tal data has been obtained. The role of dilution air is examined
by studying three different hardware configurations with holes
of secondary dilution air in the outer and inner liners of the
combustor sector closed/closed, open/closed, or open/open,
respectively.
Experimental Setup
The joint Raman/Rayleigh diagnostic system used in this
study is similar to that used in the past,7"9 with some
modifications1 to allow measurements in a practical combus-
tor. In brief, the Raman system consists of a Candela LFDL-
20 flashlamp pumped dye laser that provides pulses of ~1
J in ~2 /xs, within a 0.2-nm bandpass at 488.0 nm at 10
Hz. The laser beam is approximately 1 cm in diameter and
is focused by a 200-mm lens forming the probe volume.
The Raman scattered light is collected at right angles by an
achromatic 250-mm f/2 lens and is then collimated and re-
focused onto the entrance slit of a 3/4-m Spex polychrometer
following a x 3 magnification. The probe volume dimensions
are approximately 0.3 mm x 0.3mm x 0.6mm. The collected
light is then dispersed for detection by numerous RCA 4526
photomultiplier tubes located at appropriate locations in the
exit plane (Fig. 1) for detecting anti-Stokes Raman scattering
from nitrogen, Stokes vibrational Raman scattering from N2,
O2, H2, H2O, CO, CO2, and unburnt hydrocarbons (C-H
1162


--- Page 2 ---

GULATI ET AL.
1163
N2(AS) CO2 O2 CO N2 CH H2O H2
ABSORPTION LINES OF (^
X 488.0
650
700
RAM AN WAVELENGTH ^(n
0
N2(AS) 3mm
1
4880 A° 1mm
RAYLEIGH
5145A°lmi
C
D
n
o2:
|o DD D'Jo
M t t
\ \\ c^ 
1
Fi 
\ \ l-5mm F2
5mm \ \ 
5mm
\ N23mm
323mm CO 3mm 
H2O
5mm
nl
H25mm
4mm
POLYCHROMETER EXIT SLIT MASKINGS
Fig. 1 Schematic location of Raman vibrational bands and poly-
chrometer exit slit maskings for major species.
bond) and Rayleigh scattering. The differential voltages cor-
responding to the Raman signal minus the background are
collected using custom-designed simultaneous sample and hold
circuitry and are recorded for postprocessing using an IBM-
AT based data acquisition system.
The Raman system has been modified to correct for laser-
induced fluorescence interference by the addition of two pho-
tomultiplier tubes termed "Fj" and "F2" to monitor laser-
induced fluorescence at the exit plane of the polychrometer
in Raman-free regions of the spectra, as shown in Fig. 1 and
described in detail elsewhere. 1JO~12 For the present applica-
tion, a minimal amount of interference in the Raman signals
was observed since the combustor operates in a partially pre-
mixed mode.1 All of the data have been corrected for laser-
induced fluorescence on a shot-to-shot basis. The data is pro-
cessed as follows: the Raman signals are first corrected for
electrical noise and the mole fractions of major species ob-
tained using calibration factors developed with 100% pure
gases and well-calibrated gas mixtures. The fluorescence cor-
rection factors to account for laser-induced fluorescence, if
any, are then applied. The temperature is obtained using the
following iterative procedure1 13: the initial value of temper-
ature is guessed, based upon which mole fractions for all
major species are calculated using the equation of state, their
measured vibrational intensities, and high-temperature cor-
rection factors. The process is repeated until the sum of mole
fractions is unity. Convergence is typically obtained in one or
two iterations. Earlier work1-7'9 had shown this method to
yield the most accurate results in similar applications.
The five-cup double-annular research combustor sector used
in this study represents a 75-deg section of a full annular
combustor. The sector provides an exact simulation of the
general flow features while requiring only a fraction of the
airflow needed for the full combustor. One drawback to the
sector is the potential impact of sector sidewalls. The com-
bustor sector represents a short-length dual-annular dome
design. Each mixer cup features a two-stage counter-rotating
radial inflow-type swirler package with a simplex-type pres-
sure atomizing injector located centrally within the first
swirler stage. Combustor liner cooling is achieved using a
multihole approach. The combustor also employs a rather
Outer Liner Dilution Rows
Primary. Secondary
Tertiary
Tertiary
Primary Secondary
Inner Liner Dilution Rows
Fig. 2 Schematic of five-cup double annular research combustor sec-
tor.
complex pattern of liner and centerbody dilution. For the
outer liner, there are three rows of dilution holes arranged
in the following pattern; row 1 (closest to the primary zone-
primary dilution) consists of one hole per cup section located
in-line with the cup centerline; row 2 (located further down-
stream-secondary dilution) consists of three holes per cup
section located at ±2.5 deg and ±7.5 deg relative to the cup
centerline; row 3 (closest to sector exit-tertiary dilution) con-
sists of three holes per cup section located in-line with the
cup centerline and ±5.0 deg relative to the cup centerline.
Note that for row 2, the holes located at ±7.5 deg actually
lie along the boundary between adjacent cups. As such, only
half of each hole is considered to be within the cup section.
For the inner liner also there are three rows of dilution holes
arranged in a similar pattern, the primary row consists of one
hole per cup section located at ±7.5 deg relative to the cup
centerline; the secondary row consists of two holes per cup
section located in-line with the cup centerline and at ±7.5
deg relative to the cup centerline; and the tertiary row consists
of two holes per cup section located at ±3.75 deg relative to
the cup centerline. Figure 2 provides a schematic of the sector
and the dilution rows. The following three sector configura-
tions were examined in this study: configuration no. 1 in which
the secondary dilution row holes on both the outer and inner
liners were blocked off (henceforth, referred to as OC/IC for
outer closed/inner closed), configuration no. 2 with the outer
liner secondary dilution row holes opened and the inner closed
(OO/IC), and configuration no. 3 in which both the outer and
inner liner secondary dilution rows were opened (OO/IO).
The sector exit is 100 mm wide with the inner annuli of radius
180 mm and the outer annuli of radius 280 mm approximately.
Governing Equations and the Numerical Approach
The governing equations represent the conservation of mass
and momentum in the three coordinate directions. Turbu-
lence is modeled using the standard k-e turbulence model.
The combustion model utilizes a conserved scalar variable for
the fuel mixture fraction with assumed probability density
function (PDF) and a fast chemistry approach for the tur-
bulence/chemistry interaction.2 A conservation equation is
also written for the fluctuation in the mixture fraction.14 This
fluctuation is modeled as the variance of the mixture fraction.
The equilibrium density for the fuel is initially obtained as a
function of the mixture fraction. Assuming a beta PDF, and
convoluting this equilibrium distribution with the PDF, a look-
up table is generated that contains the density as a function
of the mixture fraction and its variance.2 Thus, based upon
the computed values of the mixture fraction and its variance,
the density field is obtained from this table and is used in all


--- Page 3 ---

1164
GULATI ET AL.
of the equations that are being solved. Using a coordinate
transformation, the governing equations are transformed from,
in general, an arbitrarily shaped physical domain to a rectan-
gular parallelepiped. The equations are solved in this bound-
ary-fitted coordinate system using the SIMPLE pressure
correction algorithm.15 The governing equations, their dis-
cretization, and the numerical algorithm have been described
in detail elsewhere.3"5
The temperature field, the variance of the temperature (from
which the rms temperature is calculated), and the distribution
of the mole fractions of species within the combustor are all
obtained as a postprocessing step. In the same manner as the
density, the equilibrium temperature and species mole frac-
tions are initially obtained as a function of the mixture frac-
tion. These equilibrium distributions are convoluted with the
PDF to yield a second look-up table that contains the tem-
perature, its variance, and the species mole fractions as a
function of the mixture fraction and its variance. The distri-
bution of all these quantities within the combustor are then
obtained from this second look-up table using bilinear inter-
polation based upon calculated values of the mixture fraction
and its variance.
Application of CONCERT-3D to Sector
A single-cup section of the combustor sector was first mod-
eled within the structured body-fitted grid. It was assumed
that the single cup behaved exactly the same as its adjacent
neighbors, allowing the use of periodic boundary conditions
at the interfaces and a reduced manageable grid. The single-
cup section represents the center cups of the five-cup sector.
A common grid was generated for use with all three com-
bustor configurations. The CONCERT-3D grid generator al-
lows the inclusion of circular features into the grid surfaces
to represent liner dilution holes and inlet plane swirler/mixer
discharge features. The single-cup section was modeled using
a grid mesh of 45 x 49 x 25 (total = 55,125) points. This
level of grid density allows for acceptable run times and costs
and provides exit pattern factor solutions with sufficient ac-
curacy.2"5 For the three configurations the secondary row
dilution features were activated/deactivated as necessary to
replicate the test configurations. Figure 3 presents an iso-
metric view of the single-cup section grid mesh. The CON-
CERT-30 model extended only to the exit plane of the com-
bustor. The effects of the entrainment of room air at the
Fig. 3 Isometric three-dimensional view of computational grid for
single-cup section modeling.
Fig. 4 Isometric three-dimensional view of computational grid for
full five-cup sector modeling.
combustor exit are therefore not represented. To explore the
impact of the sidewalls a CONCERT-3D model of the entire
five-cup sector was also generated. This grid mesh replicated
the exact single-cup grid mesh five times over. The resulting
grid consists of 45 x 49 x 131 (288,855) points. This approach
eliminated any grid density differences between the two models.
Figure 4 presents an isometric view of the generated grid
mesh. For the five-cup section model, wall boundary condi-
tions were imposed along the two tangential boundaries to
represent the presence of the test rig sidewalls.
Boundary conditions that need to be specified for the model
calculations are the inlet air temperature, pressure, total air-
flow, total fuel flow, airflow distribution for the array of com-
bustor air injection features, fuel flow distribution to each
inlet swirl cup mixer/injector, and the velocity and fuel dis-
tribution characteristics discharging from each swirl cup mixer/
injector. The airflow distribution boundary conditions are based
upon a measured airflow calibration test. The swirl cup mixer/
injector discharge velocity characteristics are based upon laser
velocimetry data used earlier to qualify a CONCERT-2D axi-
symmetric model of the cup. Gaseous fuel is assumed in all
modeling even though liquid fuel is used in the experiment,
which is reasonable since the elevated temperature of 600 K
for combustor sector operation should result in short droplet
lifetimes given the excellent atomization characteristics of the
mixer/injector used in this combustor. In the application of
practical combustors at low power conditions such as at idle,
the droplet lifetimes can be significant and will have to be
included in the analysis.5 Internal heat transfer effects, in-
cluding convection to the linear walls and radiation effects,
are not modeled in these calculations. Each single-cup section
model was run for 1500 iterations producing acceptably con-
verged solutions. The five-cup sector model was run only for
test configuration no. 3 (OO/IO). This larger model required
a total of 4500 iterations to achieve similar levels of conver-
gence. Convergence is based upon levels of the residuals for
the mass, momentum, and kinetic energy equations and on
the overall level of kinetic energy in the calculation.
Application of Ranian to Sector
The Raman system consisting of the laser and the receiving
optics is mounted on a three-dimensional traversing table.
The optics of the Raman system are modified such that the
collecting lens is at an angle of 60 deg to the main flow axis
to allow closer optical access. The sector is mounted in a large
plenum with a modified face plate that allows optical access
to within 12.5 mm of the sector exit with the modified Raman
system. All the Raman data is obtained at this axial plane.
Numerous radial profiles spanning the sector exit are obtained
for each configuration. Figure 5 shows a schematic of the
experimental setup. All of the cups of the sector are fueled.
Liquid fuel (kerosene) is used. The sector is operated with
preheated air of up to 600 K. Flow capabilities allow operation


--- Page 4 ---

GULATI ET AL.
1165
Table 1 Table listing operating conditions for the three configurations
Configuration
OC/IC
OO/IC
00/00
P
combustor,
mm-Hg
24.70
24.70
24.70
T
inlet,
K
555
555
555
Airflow,
kg/s
0.600
0.684
0.741
Fuel outer
annulus,
kg/s
0.0049
0.0054
0.0059
Fuel inner
annulus,
kg/s
0.0065
0.0074
0.0077
Fuel outer
annulus,
%
43.0
42.4
43.3
Total
fuel,
kg/s
0.0114
0.0128
0.0136
Overall
equivalence
ratio
0.29
0.29
0.29
Liquid Fuel
(Kerosene)
Entrance
Slit
FS Mirror
3/4 m Polychromator
Concave
Mirrors
Photomultiplier Tubes
Pre-Amplifier Filter
CANDELA Pulsed Dye Laser
3D Traversing Table
Holds Laser and All Optics
Fig. 5 Schematic of combustor sector and Raman setup.
over a wide range of air flow rates (up to 2 kg/s) and equiv-
alence ratios (up to stoichiometric).
Results
Comparison of Model Predictions with Raman Data
Table 1 lists the operating conditions for the three config-
urations. In all cases the air pressure drop across the com-
bustor was maintained constant at 24.7 mm of Hg, the com-
bustor inlet temperature at 555 K, and the overall equivalence
0.29 with 43% of fuel going to the outer annulus. This was
done to assure dynamics-free operation since the combustor
was found to exhibit low-frequency rumble with matched fuel
flow rate (50% each annuli) at these conditions. The Raman
data presented here are in terms of derived statistical quan-
tities (mean and rms) based upon 200 data points at every
location. The CONCERT-30 modeling results are based upon
single-cup section model.
Figures 6-8 show comparisons of the predicted mean and
rms temperature profiles and mean profiles of mole fraction
of major species with Raman data at the centerline of the
sector for the OC/IC configuration. The ordinate (y axis) in
all figures is the percent height with zero representing the
bottom of the sector exit and 100% corresponding to the top
of the sector exit. The thermocouple data shown in Fig. 6 for
comparative purposes has been obtained with a type-B dou-
ble-sheathed thermocouple located 12.5 mm further down-
stream of the Raman probe volume. Figure 6 shows that the
mean temperature profile at the centerline is predicted well
by the model. The profile is inner-peaked for this configu-
ration with the peak value closely matching the measured
thermocouple data. The trends for the thermocouple data and
the Raman data agree. The thermocouple data have been
corrected for radiation losses. The double-sheath arrange-
ment used to minimize radiation loss makes the estimation of
convective losses extremely difficult. The Raman data for
temperature involves an estimated uncertainty of ±70 K on
a shot-to-shot basis and ± 20 K for the mean value. The sharp
drop in the mean temperature profile at the edges in the
experimental data is probably due to entrainment of room air
beyond the sector exit and is not taken into account in the
model. Both the CONCERT-3D and the measured temper-
ature profiles show an almost linear increase toward the peak
from the outer edge of the sector exit.
Figure 7 shows the comparison of rms temperature (nor-
malized by local mean) predictions with measured Raman
data. The Raman data shown are for true rms values. True
rms are estimated to be 1-2% lower than the measured val-
ues, depending upon the location due to the estimated1 shot-
to-shot rms Raman temperature variation of up to 5%. The
comparison of the rms temperature profile is encouraging.
The shape of the profile with a peak in the center and sharp
rise at the edges is predicted well. CONCERT-3D, however,
consistently predicts lower rms values than measured. A pos-


--- Page 5 ---

1166
GULATI ET AL.
1.25
0.25 -
-0.25
200 
400 
600
800 
1000 1200 1400
TEMPERATURE (K)
1600 1800 2000
Fig. 6 Comparison of mean temperature profile at the centerline of
the sector exit obtained with Raman diagnostics and thermocouple
data with CONCERT-3D model predictions for OC/IC configuration
(Figs. 6-8). Operating conditions listed in Table 1 for Figs. 6-12.
1.25
0.75 -
0.5
20% 
40% 
60%
NORMALIZED RMS TEMPERATURE FLUCTUATIONS (%)
80%
Fig. 7 Centerline profiles of normalized rms temperature fluctua-
tions.
sible reason could be the effect of the turbulence model and
the constants used in the code predictions. It is well known14
that the standard k-e turbulence model has certain deficiencies
when applied to highly swirling flows, particularly in the pre-
diction of mixing levels that can be lower such as those ob-
served here. Also, the combustion model used in this code
assumes fast chemistry and does not account for possible finite
rate chemistry effects that may contribute to the differences.
The data presented here are based on an assumed value of
0.25 for the turbulent Schmidt number in the equations for
the mixture fraction and its variance. Code predictions of
turbulence levels are sensitive to the value of this constant.
The value of the Schmidt number used here is consistent with
other applications of this model.5
A comparison of measured centerline profiles of major spe-
cies with predicted values is shown in Fig. 8. The profiles for
nitrogen and oxygen are predicted very well. Raman mea-
surements for these major species are estimated to involve
an estimated uncertainty of ±1% for mean mole fraction
values. The profile for oxygen shows a minimum in the bottom
half of the annuli corresponding to the peak in temperature
as expected. The other major species corresponding to water
and carbon dioxide are shown in Fig. 8b. The profile for water
is inner-peaked for both the measured and the predicted quan-
tities, as was the case with the temperature profile, and the
data agrees well. For carbon dioxide, the trends are predicted
correct, but the data does not peak to as high values as pre-
dicted. This is believed to be due to inaccuracies in measuring
carbon-dioxide due to the complexity of the molecule, its close
0.75 -
0.5 --
0.25 -
-0.25
a)
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9
MOLE FRACTION
0.75 --
0.5 -
0.25 -
0 -
0.02
0.04
MOLE FRACTION
0.06
b)
Fig. 8 Centerline profiles of mean mole fraction of major species: a)
N2 and O2 and b) H2O and CO2.
proximity to oxygen, and the fact that only a small fraction
of the Raman fundamental vibrational band overlaps the exit
slit masking provided for carbon dioxide. Thus, the Raman
signals for carbon dioxide are inherently low and its high-
temperature correction factors difficult to estimate. The error
bars for Raman measurements of water and carbon dioxide
are estimated to be ±10% and ±50% of the mean, respec-
tively. This is consistent with reported accuracies for Raman
measurements in other similar studies.9-11 The data for the
remaining species, i.e., hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and un-
burned hydrocarbons are not shown because the predicted
and measured values are both negligible (less than 1%). This
also suggests that the flame front does not extend beyond the
sector exit as confirmed by visual observations. Random streaks
are, however, observed intermittently.
Effect of Dilution Air
Figure 9 shows the effect of dilution air on the centerline
mean temperature profile. The trend is predicted correctly.
The predicted profiles and the measured data show that as
the outer row of dilution air is opened, the profile becomes
more inner-peaked, i.e., the jets appear to push the com-
bustion zone more toward the inner liner and the peak value
increases. The opening of the inner row of dilution air (OO/IO)
has an opposite and more dramatic effect, probably because
the jets are closer to the combustion zone as evidenced by
the inner-peaked profile. The inner dilution air shifts the peak
of the temperature profile back towards the center and the
peak value is lowered. The drop in the peak value suggests
that the inner dilution air penetrates the combustion zone and
leads to enhanced mixing and cooling of the combustion prod-
ucts. The overall effect of outer and inner dilution (OO/IO)
is to thus make the temperature profile center-peaked with a
lower peak value. Figure 9 clearly shows the dramatic impact


--- Page 6 ---

GULATI ET AL.
1167
1.25
1 -
0.75
0.5 -
0.25
0
-0.25
0 
200 400 
600 
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
MEAN TEMPERATURE (K)
0 
200 400 
600 
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
MEAN TEMPERATURE (K)
Fig. 9 Effect of dilution air on mean temperature.
of dilution air on the exit-temperature profile and its role in
obtaining the desired exit pattern factor. The effect of dilution
air on normalized rms temperature profiles at sector exit is
shown in Fig. 10. The trends are predicted well, but the mea-
sured values are consistently larger than predicted as discussed
earlier. There are other differences. The outer dilution air is
predicted to increase the rms turbulence level throughout the
exit profile with a more dramatic increase in the upper half
of exit profile, whereas the measured data show a larger in-
crease in turbulence levels in the bottom half of the temper-
ature profile. The effect of inner dilution air is, however,
predicted correctly and is seen to result in overall enhanced
turbulence levels at the exit plane with a marked increase in
the bottom half of the sector exit.
The effect of dilution air on the mean temperature profile
at a circumferential location midway between adjacent cups
is shown in Fig. 11. Similar effect is observed at this location,
as at the centerline. The predicted and measured profiles show
similar trends, i.e., that the outer dilution air causes a slight
inbound shift in the peak of the temperature profile and in-
creases it slightly, whereas the inner dilution air decreases the
peak and results in a more center-peaked (in this case slightly
outboard) temperature profile. At this location, however, di-
lution air has less impact on the temperature profile.
The previous data show that the effect of dilution air is
dependent upon the circumferential location in the exit plane.
In order to obtain an estimate of the effect of dilution air on
the overall sector exit temperature pattern the predicted and
measured values of the average and maximum temperature
at the sector exit plane are presented in Fig. 12 for the three
configurations. For the CONCERT-SD predictions, the so-
lution has been circumferentially averaged through all of the
angular locations (over the single-cup section) to yield the
———— 
OC/IC
- - - - 
OO/IC
• — — - OO/IO
CONCERT
20% 
40% 
60%
NORMAUZEO RMS TEMPERATURE FLUCTUATIONS <%)
-055
————— 
OC/IC
— - - - - 
OO/IC
— — — - OO/IO
CONCERT
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
MEAN TEMPERATURE (K)
1 -
0.75 -
05 -
0.25 •
0 -
•n« -
+0 A
+ 
0 
A
+ 
OA
+ OA
o+ * 
+ OC/IC
0 + 
A
* *\ 
o 00/IC
+ 
OA
+ 
<* 
A 00/10
+ 
A O
-I- 
tf>
+ 
O A
+ 
0 A
+ 
0 A
+ 
0 
A
+ 
O 
A
+ 
0 
A
0 + 
A
OAt
A+ 
0
+ A 
0
—————— . —————— 1 —————— , —————— 1 —————— , —————— 1
-RAMAN
-RAMAN
-RAMAN
•»
0%
80%
20% 
40% 
60%
NORMALIZED RMS TEMPERATURE FLUCTUATIONS (%)
Fig. 10 Effect of dilution air on normalized rms temperature fluc-
tuations.
0 A
•O 
A
+A
+A
+ OC/IC-RAMAN
O OO/IC-RAMAN
A OO/IO-RAMAN
A
A
A 
0+
* +
A 
Oh
A 0 +
-K>
+o
0-
A + 0
+ C&
O A
0 A
-f-
-h
0 
200 
4X) 
600 
800 
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
MEAN TEMPERATURE (K)
Fig. 11 Effect of dilution air on mean temperature profile at a cir-
cumferential location midway between two adjacent cups.


--- Page 7 ---

1168
GULATI ET AL.
1.25
1
H 0.75
CD
jjj 
0.5
# 0.25
0
-0.25
OC/IC
200 
400 
600 
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
*
1.2
1
0.8
g 0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
1.2
1
H 6.8
0 0.6
uiX 0.4
* 0.2
0
-0.2
OO/IC
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
OO/IO
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
MEAN TEMPERATURE (K)
Fig. 12 Effect of dilution air on radial profiles of average and max-
imum temperature across one-cup (center-cup) section of the five-cup
sector.
mean radial profile. The Raman data profiles are based upon
the average and maximum of the three radial profiles obtained
at the exit plane for all configurations. These profiles were
obtained in-line with the center cup, midway between two
adjacent cups, and in-line with the adjacent cup. Encouraging
comparison is obtained for both the average and maximum
values. As observed earlier, the outer dilution air results in
more inner-peaked profile, whereas the combination of outer
and inner dilution air results in a more center-peaked profile.
The profile of the maximum temperature for the OO/IO con-
figuration shows a double peak in the data. This is not clearly
understood at present, but is believed to be due to cup-to-
cup variations in the temperature field, probably due to cup-
to-cup differences in physical hardware and inlet flow varia-
tions. Temperature rake data obtained in the past at the exit
plane of full annulus combustor tests have shown similar sig-
nificant circumferential variation in radial temperature pro-
files, which has been attributed to cup-to-cup variations in
practical hardware.16 To determine if the cup-to-cup varia-
tions could be a result of sidewalls and assumed periodic
boundary conditions, a detailed CONCERT-SO calculation
was done for the full five-cup sector for the OO/IO config-
uration using the grid shown in Fig. 4. The results (not pre-
sented here) showed a negligible effect of sidewalls and pe-
riodic boundary conditions on predictions in the center region
of the sector. This shows that the single-cup section model is
indeed representative of the center-cup region of the full five-
cup sector.
Conclusions
1) The Raman system has been successfully applied to the
exit plane of a full-scale five-cup double-annular combustor
sector to obtain temperature and scalar flowfield measure-
ments with liquid fuel (kerosene) and a good quality database
has been established for direct comparison and qualification
of CONCERT 3-D and other computational models.
2) The theory/data comparison looks encouraging and shows
that mean and rms temperature profiles and mean profiles of
major species are predicted well by the model. The centerline
temperature profile is inner-peaked with both outer and inner
dilution rows blocked (OC/IC configuration). The rms tem-
perature values are underpredicted. The mean major species
profiles follow a trend similar to mean temperature and the
data are predicted well. Potential reasons for some differences
have been noted. The greatest uncertainties in Raman mea-
surements lie in the measurement of carbon dioxide. In terms
of modeling the largest uncertainties are involved in the pre-
dictions of the turbulence levels. The role of turbulent Schmidt
number, grid size, and the turbulence models used should be
re-examined to improve predictive capabilities of the model.
A more demanding comparison such as in the vicinity of swirl
cup regions is required to further qualify the model and the
Raman diagnostics system.
3) Dilution air has a significant effect on the mean and rms
temperature profiles at the combustor exit. The outer dilution
air forces the combustion zone further inward and results in
slightly higher values of temperature (peak) there, whereas
the inner dilution air causes an opposite trend and in com-
bination with outer dilution results in a more center-peaked
temperature profile with a reduced peak. Both of these trends
are predicted well by the model. The model consistently un-
derpredicts the level of turbulence fluctuations at the exit,
although the trend of increased turbulence with dilution air
is predicted correctly.
4) The impact of dilution air varies with circumferential
location. The model again predicts the trends correctly. The
model is, however, unable to account for cup-to-cup flowfield
variations observed in the data. Comparison of single-cup
section modeling results with full five-cup sector modeling
shows that the single cup periodic section model is fairly rep-
resentative of the center region of the full five-cup sector.
Overall, the results show that dilution air can be used to tailor
the flowfield at the sector exit and that CONCERT-3D rep-
resents a good tool to optimize combustor exit pattern factor
via dilution air.
Acknowledgments
The technical assistance of Frank Haller is gratefully ac-
knowledged. The authors are also grateful to Will Dodds and
Ramani Mani for providing financial support and encourage-
ment.
References
'Gulati, A., "Raman Measurements at the Exit of a Combustor
Sector," Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 10, No. 2, 1994, pp.
169-175.
2Shyy, W., Correa, S. M, and Braaten, M. E., "Computation of
Flow in a Gas Turbine Combustor," Combustion Science and Tech-
nology, Vol. 58, 1988, pp. 97-117.
3Shyy, W., Tong, S. S., and Correa, S. M., "Numerical Recircu-
lating Flow Calculation Using a Body-Fitted Coordinate System,"
Numerical Heat Transfer, Vol. 8, 1985, pp. 99-113.
4Tolpadi, A. K., and Braaten, M. E., "Study of Branched Tur-
boprop Inlet Ducts Using a Multiple Block Grid Calculation Pro-
cedure," Journal of Fluids Engineering, Vol. 114, No. 3, 1992, pp.
379-385.
5Tolpadi, A. K., "Calculation of Two-Phase Flow in Gas Turbine
Combustors," Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
(to be published).
AShyy, W., and Braaten, M. E., "A Numerical Study of Flow in a
Gas Turbine Combustor," AIAA Paper 87-2132, 1987.
7Gulati, A., and Correa, S. M., "Raman/LV Measurements and
Modeling in a CO/H2/N2 Flame at High Reynolds Number," Archi-


--- Page 8 ---

GULATI ET AL.
1169
vum Combustionis, Vol. 10, Nos. 1-4, 1990, pp. 17-39.
8Correa, S. ML, and Gulati, A., "Measurements and Modeling of
a Bluff Body Stabilized Flame," Combustion and Flame, Vol. 89,
No. 2, 1992, pp. 195-213.
9Correa, S. M., Gulati, A., and Pope, S. B., "Raman Measure-
ments and Joint PDF Modeling of a Non-Premixed Bluff Body-Sta-
bilized Methane Flame," 25th Symposium (International) on Com-
bustion (Irvine, CA), The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, PA, 1994.
10Masri, A. R., Bilger, R. W., and Dibble, R. W., "Fluorescence
Interference with Raman Measurements in Nonpremixed Flames of
Methane," Combustion and Flame, Vol. 68, 1987, pp. 109-119.
"Dibble, R. W., Masri, A. R., and Bilger, R. W., "The Sponta-
neous Raman Scattering Technique Applied to Non-premixed Flames
of Methane," Combustion and Flame, Vol. 67, 1987, pp. 189-206.
l2Dibble, R. W., Starner, S. H., Masri, A. R., and Barlow, R. S.,
"An Improved Method of Data Acquisition and Reduction of Laser
Raman-Rayleigh Scattering from Multispecies," Applied Physics B,
Special Issue on Combustion Diagnostics, 1990, pp. 1727-1731.
"Drake, M. C., Lapp, M., and Penney, C. M., "Use of the Vi-
brational Raman Effect for Gas Temperature Measurements," Tem-
perature Its Measurement and Control in Science and Industry, edited
by J. F. Schooley, Vol. 5, Pt. 1, American Institute of Physics, New
York, 1982, pp. 631-638.
l4Jones, W. P., and Whitelaw, J. H., "Calculation Methods for
Reacting Turbulent Flows: A Review," Combustion and Flame, Vol.
48, 1982, pp. 1-26.
!5Patankar, S. V., Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1980.
16Burrus, D. L., Chahrour, C. A., Sabla, P. E., Seto, S. P., Taylor,
J. R., and Foltz, H. P., "Energy Efficient Engine Combustion System
Component Technology Development Report," NASA Final Rept.,
R82AEB401,Nov. 1982.
Tactical Missile Warheads
Joseph Carleone, editor
The book's chapters
are each self-con-
tained articles;
however, the topics
are linked and may
be divided into three
groups. The first group
provides a broad
introduction as well as
four fundamental
technology areas,
namely, explosives,
dynamic character-
ization of materials,
explosive-metal
interaction physics,
and hydrocodes, The
second group
presents the me-
chanics of three
major types of
warheads, shaped
charges, explosively
formed projectiles,
and fragmentation
warheads. The
interaction with
Place your order today! Call 1 -800/682-AIAA
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Publications Customer Service, 9 Jay Could Ct., P.O. Box 753, Waldorf, MD 20604
FAX 301/843-0159 
Phone 1 -800/682-2422 
9 a.m. - 5 p.m. Eastern
various types of
targets is also pre-
sented. The third
group addresses test
methodology. Flash
radiography and high-
speed photography
are covered exten-
sively, especially from
an applications point
of view. Special
methods are also
presented including
the use of
tomographic recon-
struction of flash
radiographs and the
use of laser interfer-
ometry.
1993, 745 pp.illus,
Hardback
ISBN 1-56347-067-5
AIAA Members $89.95
Nonmembers$ 109.95
Order #:V-155(945)
Sales Tax: CA residents, 8.25%; DC, 6%. For shipping and handling add $4.75 for 1 -4 books (call
for rates for higher quantities). Orders under $100.00 must be prepaid. Foreign orders must be
prepaid and include a $20.00 postal surcharge. Please allow 4 weeks for delivery. Prices are
subject to change without notice. Returns will be accepted within 30 days. Non-U.S. residents
are responsible for payment of any taxes required by their government.
