
--- Page 1 ---

Swirler Flow Field Characteristics in a Sudden Expansion
Combustor Geometry
A. Panduranga Reddy,∗R. I. Sujith,† and S. R. Chakravarthy∗
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600 036, India
DOI: 10.2514/1.15940
The present study investigates the ﬂow ﬁeld characteristics of a gas turbine swirler in a model combustion
chamber, using particle image velocimetry. Detailed mean and RMS velocities, vorticity, Reynolds shear stress, and
pseudoturbulent kinetic energy were obtained at various cross sections downstream of the swirler and in a plane
along the inlet ﬂow direction. The experiments were performed in a sudden expansion square geometry. A central
toroidal recirculation zone and corner recirculation zone was observed and characterized. Another instability
caused by swirl, called precessing vortex core, has been observed far downstream of the swirler, in the plane located
at Z=D  2:5 and 1.25 (D, diameter of the swirler) depending on the pressure drop across the swirler. High RMS
velocity magnitudes are observed in several cross-sectional planes indicating high levels of turbulence generated by
the swirling effect which promotes rapid mixing. The structure of the complex swirling ﬂow ﬁeld has been
investigated both qualitatively and qualitatively.
I.
Introduction
S
WIRLING ﬂows, which are highly three dimensional in nature,
have the characteristics of both rotating motion and free
turbulence phenomenon encountered in jets and wake ﬂows. They
occur in a wide range of applications such as gas turbines, gasoline
and diesel engines, and industrial furnaces. Swirl has a large scale
effect on ﬂow ﬁelds. The simplest means of generating a swirling
ﬂow is by the use of a vane swirler to induce a tangential velocity
component to an otherwise axial ﬂow of an annular round jet [1]. If
the strength of the swirl is greater than a certain critical value, the
forces due to the induced pressure gradients exceed the forward
kinetic forces. The ﬂow reverses its direction on the axis of symmetry
and a central toroidal recirculation zone (CTRZ) is generated.
Many researchers have worked on swirling ﬂows issuing into a
conﬁned region. Vu and Gouldin [2] studied swirling ﬂow
surrounded by nonswirling coﬂow in a conﬁned duct. Rhode et al. [3]
performed static pressure probe measurements of mean velocity in a
ﬂow through a swirler suddenly expanding into a circular duct.
Samimy and Langenfeld [4] and Ahmed [5] had the swirler unit
located about 50 mm upstream of the sudden expansion. Al-Abdeli
and Masri [6,7] used a burner with a hybrid bluff body swirl design,
incorporating a central jet surrounded by a swirling annulus, to
investigate turbulent isothermal swirling jets. They conclude that the
precession frequency appears to be a function of swirl number as well
as the Reynolds number of both the central jet and the swirling
annulus. The swirling ﬂow ﬁeld in a realistically complicated
geometry of a gas turbine combustor has been experimentally
characterized by Bharani et al. [8]. Similar studies have also been
reported in Mongia et al. [9]. The most signiﬁcant ﬁnding from the
bulk of these reports is that the maximum turbulent intensity ranges
from 36% [4] to 100% [5], depending upon the level of swirl.
This feature has also been highlighted by Mongia et al. [9].
Most of the studies mentioned above have adopted the LDV
technique to determine the velocity distribution in the swirl ﬂow
ﬁeld. Notable exceptions are the investigations by Kucukgokoglan
and Aroussi [10] and Pruvost et al. [11], which adopt the particle
image velocimetry (PIV) technique [12,13]. Kucukgokoglan and
Aroussi [10] investigated the interaction of four corotating and
counter-rotating isothermal swirler burner ﬂows in a water tank.
Pruvost et al. [11] performed measurements of the three mean
components and turbulence intensities of the velocity ﬁeld in a
swirling ﬂow, induced by a tangential inlet in an annulus. However,
the data obtained from these experiments do not comprehensively
characterize the recirculation zones which are predominant features
of the swirling ﬂows that determine the ﬂame anchoring capabilities
in a combustion chamber. In the recent past more experiments were
carried out in this direction. Li and Gutmark [14] investigated the
large scale structures in a swirl-dump combustor for both cold and
combustion conditions. Gallaire et al. [15] have studied the response
of a swirling jet to various azimuthal modes and frequencies forced at
the nozzle exit using PIV. Various dynamical states concerned with
the vortex breakdown are described as a function of swirl number.
Apart from these, the advances in the computational ﬂuid
dynamics (CFD) made it possible to predict the precessing vortex
core (PVC) and the inﬂuence of side wall expansion angle and swirl
generator on ﬂow pattern using the unsteady Reynolds-averaged
Navier–Stokes (U-RANS) and the k–" model with a few limitations
[16–18]. Recently many investigations [19–23] have used LES
successfully for simulating the swirling ﬂows. They point out the
importance of suitable inlet boundary conditions to emulate the
turbulent conditions in the laboratory experiments. They predicted
several modes of precession as swirl intensity increases, in which the
precession as well as the spiral structure of the ﬂow reverses
direction. They also showed that the transitions between various
modes are accompanied by abrupt changes in precession frequency.
The present study investigates the ﬂow ﬁeld characteristics of a
swirler in a sudden expansion model combustion chamber of square
geometry, using PIV. Two-component PIV is adopted as the
diagnostic technique to obtain the velocity vector ﬁeld in planes
along and perpendicular to the axis of the test section. The
experiments were aimed at understanding the swirl ﬂow ﬁeld
characteristics both qualitatively and quantitatively in a rather simple
geometry which closely resembles a sector of annular combustor of a
gas turbine [20]. Apart from providing exhaustive mean and
turbulent velocity data, the structure and length scales of the CTRZ
and CRZ obtained from the PIV measurements are also emphasized,
which is not so easy to obtain with other existing techniques. The
results are, quite instructive in that they indicate high levels of
turbulent intensity as expected, besides allowing for examination of
typical length scales of vortical structures and recirculation zone in
the ﬂow ﬁeld, as mentioned earlier.
Presented as Paper 0217 at the 43rd Aerospace Sciences Meeting and
Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 10–13 January 2005; received 7 February 2005;
revision received 20 November 2005; accepted for publication 22 January
2006. Copyright © 2006 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved. Copies of this paper may be made for
personal or internal use, on condition that the copier pay the $10.00 per-copy
fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923; include the code $10.00 in correspondence with the CCC.
∗Department of Aerospace Engineering.
†Department of Aerospace Engineering; sujith@iitm.ac.in (corresponding
author).
JOURNAL OF PROPULSION AND POWER
Vol. 22, No. 4, July–August 2006
800


--- Page 2 ---

II.
Experimental Procedure
The schematic of the test section and the swirler unit used in the
present study are shown in Fig. 1. The test section has a square cross-
section of 120 mm side, and is 500 mm long [Fig. 1a]. The exit of the
test section is under ambient conditions. The test section has glass
windows for optical access on all four sides; the two side faces are
made entirely of glass to allow a light sheet perpendicular to the axis
of the test section, whereas the top and bottom sides have a glass slit
of 10 and 15 mm width, respectively, which allows light sheet along
the axis of the test section. In the former arrangement, the camera is
placed downstream of the exit of the test section, and in the latter, the
ﬂow ﬁeld is viewed from one ofthe side faces. Twopressure taps, one
at about 50 mm upstream of the swirler, and another on the square
ﬂange at the exit plane of the swirler, are connected to two limbs of a
U-tube mercury manometer for measurement of the pressure-drop
across the swirler within an uncertainty of 2.5%. The swirler is ﬁtted
to the center of a square ﬂange of 120 mm side, which is attached to
the upstream end of the test section. The swirler has an inner (hub)
diameter of 33 mm and an outer diameter (D) of 40 mm, and contains
12 straight vanes inclined at an angle () of 50 to the free stream
direction as shown in Fig. 1b. The central portion of the swirler is
blocked by a circular disc (hub). The experimental test facility has
provision for supply of compressed air up to 6 bar from three
reservoirs with a capacity of 12 m3 each. Air enters through a settling
chamber with internal dimensions of 300  400  300 mm3, into a
1.5 m long seamless tube of 50 mm internal diameter (I.D.) that leads
to the swirler. The tube is ﬁtted with 50 mm long ﬂow straightners at
its inlet. A glass tube of 50 mm I.D., 2 mm wall thickness, and
100 mm length, is ﬁxed at the other end of the seamless tube. This
glass tube section is located 100 mm upstream of the swirler, where it
provides optical access for the inlet velocity measurement using PIV.
A twin resonator frequency-doubled Nd:YAG laser at 532 nm
wavelength (Quantel, France, Inc., make) is used as a source of
illumination for the PIV measurements in the test section. An
interline transfer digital CCD camera (Pixelﬂy model, PCO Imaging,
Germany, Inc., make) is used for acquiring the images. It has a
resolution of 1360  1024 pixels. A 75 mm, F1.2 Zoom lens
(Computar, Japan, Inc., make) was used for imaging the ﬂow ﬁeld of
120  120 mm. Measurements were also made in the near ﬁeld of
the swirler very close to the vanes covering two regions of interest
(ROI) 20  20 mm and 40  40 mm named as ROI-1 and ROI-2,
respectively. For this purpose still higher zoom lens with
speciﬁcations 300 mm, F4.0 (DL Macro super, Sigma Japan, Inc.,
make) and CCD camera (SensiCam, PCO Imaging, Germany, Inc.,
make) with resolution 1024  1280 pixels were used. The velocities
for the close-up locations were expected to be high and hence a
smaller delay time between the laser pulses is required. With
SensiCam, the delay between the two successive images as low as
200 ns was possible. Olive oil is used to generate tracer particles
using a seeding arrangement that employs Laskin nozzles [12].
Compressed air with 0.5 to 1.5 bar pressure difference with respect to
the outlet pressure is applied to the Laskin nozzles to create air
bubbles of size <1 m within the liquid. Such size of the seeding
particles ensures that they follow the ﬂow very closely [24]. The
seeding particles are injected into the settling chamber to ensure
proper mixing of the particles which then travel along the 1.5 m long
inlet duct before entering the swirler unit. The concentration of
seeding particles is controlled by ﬁne tuning of a bypass valve. The
laser
and
the
camera
are
synchronized
with
a
sequencer
(SequencerV8.0 HardSoft, Germany, Inc., make). Seco2003, has
been used as an interface program to generate the transistor transistor
logic pulses from the sequencer in a required sequence. More than
200 pairs of instantaneous images are obtained for determining
ensemble-averaged
velocity
vectors
and
the
RMS
velocity
ﬂuctuations.
The PIV images were analyzed using the cross-correlation
software PivView [25]‡ on a PC. The PIV provides the velocity
vector ﬁeld u; v sampled on 2-D x; y, evenly spaced grid
(interrogation areas). The differential quantities such as the vorticity,
deﬁned as !z  @v=@x  @u=@y were obtained by implementing
the ﬁnite differencing scheme (least squares method) on the
measured spatial velocity vector ﬁeld [12]. The 2-D PIV technique is
difﬁcult to implement for a highly three-dimensional ﬂow ﬁeld such
as that investigated here, because a trade-off is necessitated to obtain
appreciable displacement of particles in the given time-interval
between two laser pulses and to minimize out-of-plane loss of
particles at the same time. The uncertainty in velocity measurement
depends on several aspects extending from the recording process to
the methods of evaluation as summarized in Raffel et. al. [12],
pp. 134–146. The interrogation area for determining the cross-
correlation of the pair of images is maintained at 64  64 pixels, with
an overlap of 75% between adjacent cells in the near ﬁeld of the
swirler (up to Z=D  1:25) and it is 32  32 pixels, with an overlap
of 50% in the far ﬁeld of the swirler (from Z=D  2:5). The time
interval between the pulses is varied in the range of 1–120 s,
depending upon the range of velocities in different regions of the
ﬂow ﬁeld in different planes of the test section, so that the particle
displacement obtained is 4 pixels. A subpixel accuracy of 0.2 pixel
can be obtained, which yields an uncertainty in the mean velocity
measurement within 3% [26] and for differential quantities like
vorticity within 4.5%.
III.
Results and Discussion
Measurements were performed for pressure drops of 0.1 and
0.05 bar across the swirler which corresponds to a Reynolds number
of 32,000 and 27,000, respectively, at the inlet. A fully developed
turbulent ﬂow is established as measured in the glass tube section
about 2:5D upstream of the swirler, with a centerline ensemble-
averaged velocity of 10 and 8 m=s, respectively, under the test
conditions mentioned above. The maximum value of RMS velocity
as a fraction of mean velocity magnitude is observed to be around
0.09.
To characterize the swirl ﬂow, a nondimensional number called as
swirl number S, is deﬁned as the ratio of axial ﬂux of swirl
momentum divided by the axial ﬂux of axial momentum times the
equivalent nozzle radius. The swirl number of the annular swirler
with constant vane angle () used in the present study is given by
Beer and Chigier [27]
b) 
40
33
a) 
Glass windows for optical 
accessibility 
10 mm-wide slit to allow light 
sheet in axial plane 
Inlet
Swirler 
Pressure taps 
Ø 50
120
170
525
Top view
z
y
120
y
x
50
Ø 50
120
170
525
Top view
z
y
120
y
x
50
Fig. 1
a) Schematic of the experimental test section with sudden
expansion geometry; b) the vane swirler used in the present setup
showing the hub (33 mm) and outer diameter of vanes (40 mm).
‡Web address: http://www.pivtec.com [cited 25 September 2005].
PANDURANGA REDDY, SUJITH, AND CHAKRAVARTHY
801


--- Page 3 ---

S  2
3
1  Dh=D3
1  Dh=D2

tan 
where Dh  diameter of the hub (33 mm), D  outer diameter of
the vanes (40 mm), and  is the vane angle (50 deg). Thus the swirl
number is calculated to be 1.09 in the present case, which
corresponds to a strong swirl .
A.
0.1 Bar Pressure Drop Test Condition
The instantaneous ﬂow ﬁeld measurements (Fig. 2) for the
pressure drop of 0.1 bar show the complexity of the three
dimensional swirling ﬂow investigated in the present study. The
contours of vorticity are superposed over the velocity vector ﬁelds
for a better understanding of the interaction of these ﬁelds with each
other. The instantaneous velocity ﬁelds in the cross-sectional plane
located at Z=D  0:5 from the swirler exit [Fig. 2a] shows several
small-scale vortical structures distributed concentrically over the
cross section of the test section. It can be observed that these vortices
of high strength are paired as positive (white) and negative (black)
patches alternatively corresponding to each vane in the near ﬁeld of
the swirler.
The ﬂow undergoes separation at the leading and trailing edges of
the swirler vanes, and also behaves as multiple jets issuing out of the
individual vane passages atthe exit of swirler. These features result in
the effect of counter-rotating vorticity pairs that are observed to be
equal in number to that of the vane passages. The typical length
scales of the turbulence involved could be approximated with the
swirler vane gap, that is, around 3 to 5 mm. These jets try to expand
interacting with each other. High velocity gradients are observed in
this region of expansion. However, proceeding a little further
downstream of the swirler in plane Z=D  1:25 [Fig. 2b], the
strength of these pairs is observed to be declining rapidly as the ﬂow
expands into the test section and it appears to be distributed
uniformly throughout the plane.
The PVC can be observed from various instantaneous velocity
vector plots obtained at the cross-sectional plane located at an axial
distance of Z=D  2:5 downstream of the swirler as shown in Fig. 3,
for the pressure drop of 0.1 bar test condition. The large cross bars
represent the geometric center of the test section. The small cross “×”
represent the approximate center of the precessing swirl. The
swirling ﬂow appears to be centered at a particular location, and it
Fig. 2
The
instantaneous
velocity
and
vorticity
contour
plots
illustrating a) vorticity pairs corresponding to each swirler vanes in
the near ﬁeld at plane Z=D  0:5 and b) absence of vorticity pairs in
plane Z=D  1:25 further downstream of the swirler for pressure drop
of 0.1 bar test condition. The reference vector of 15 m=s is shown at the
top right corner of corresponding planes. The vectors shown are
undersampled by a factor 2 in both x and y direction for clarity.
e) 
0
1                  2
3
X/D
Y/D
0   
1
2
3
X
b) 
0
1                  2
3
0   
1
2
3
X/D
Y/D
X
0
1                  2
3
0   
1
2
3
Y/D
c)
X/D
X
Y/D
0   
1
2
3
0
1                  2
3
f) 
X
X/D
Y/D
0   
1
2
3
0
1                  2
3
X/D
d) 
X
a)
X/D
0
1                  2
3
Y/D
X
0   
1
2
3
Fig. 3
PVC observed from the various instantaneous velocity vector
plots a)–f) obtained in cross-sectional plane at axial location Z=D  2:5,
for the pressure drop of 0.1 bar test condition. The vectors shown are
undersampled by a factor 2 in both x and y direction for clarity.
802
PANDURANGA REDDY, SUJITH, AND CHAKRAVARTHY


--- Page 4 ---

keeps changing its position instantaneously. The center of the swirl
indicated with “×” keeps precessing above the geometric axis of
symmetry in counter clockwise direction [Fig. 3a–3f]. The
magnitude of the velocities in this plane were observed to be varying
from 5 m=s to a maximum of 18 m=s as indicated with the reference
vector of 10 m=s. The existence of the PVC indicates the instability
due to swirl. Spectral analysis was not performed as time series data
could not be obtained at the low framing rates (2 image pairs per
second), and hence the frequency of the PVC could not be
determined. Thus, the results on PVC presented here are qualitative,
as they were obtained from observation of several instantaneous
velocity vector ﬁelds in different cross-sectional planes. The PVC
appears to be persisting for a long distance downstream, at
Z=D  2:5, more than what is normally reported, presumably due to
the conﬁnement. These types of ﬂow ﬁelds can be substantially
affected by the exhaust conﬁguration, the diameter, location (i.e.,
centrally located, off center, etc.), even when it is a long way
downstream. In the present study, the exhaust was simply let to
atmosphere without any extension duct.
The structure of the central toroidal recirculation zone (CTRZ) and
the corner recirculation zone (CRZ) obtained for the pressure drop of
0.1 bar test condition is illustrated in Fig. 4. Over 200 velocity vector
ﬁelds were ensemble averaged, and the structure of the CTRZ and
CRZ was obtained from the contour of the axial velocity in the plane
perpendicular to the swirler. The lengths L; l and widths B; b as
shown in the ﬁgure characterize the CTRZ and CRZ, respectively.
The central plane is chosen due to its easy optical accessibility
compared with any other planes. It can be noted that the shape of the
CRZ is considerably distorted in the circumferential direction
according to the expanding geometry. For instance, on a 45 plane
the CRZ width and length would be expected to be larger compared
with the central plane whereas as the CTRZ width and the length will
remain same, as analyzed from the PIV data obtained in the cross
sections, close to the swirler exit (Z=D < 2). The length scales of the
CTRZ and CRZ observed from the plots for both the test conditions
are summarized in Table 1. The values in the table are obtained by
close observation of the plots with an uncertainty of 5%.
The ensemble-averaged velocity vector ﬁeld, corresponding to the
cross-sectional planes at Z=D  0:5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, 2.5 downstream
of the swirler are plotted together in a 3-D cascaded view as shown in
Fig. 5a. A strong outward radially expanding swirl ﬂow can be
observed in the plane at Z=D  0:5. The velocities in this plane were
observed to be having a maximum value of 27 m=s. The central low
velocity region (CTRZ) can be observed in this plane. Large velocity
gradients are obtained in the region of interaction of CTRZ and CRZ
with the jet issuing from the swirler. Subsequent near-ﬁeld locations,
such as at Z=D  0:75, 1, 1.25 exhibit homogenization of the swirl
ﬂow ﬁeld in the azimuthal direction. Proceeding further downstream
of the swirler at Z=D  2:5, 5, 10 (only up to Z=D  2:5 is shown in
the ﬁgure) the magnitude ofvelocities were observed tobe drastically
reduced. Most of the ﬂow is observed near to the walls and velocity
magnitude is approximately constant over a large area.
The turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations are obtained from the
instantaneous velocity ﬂow ﬁeld. The RMS velocity magnitude
(

u02  v02
p
, where u and v in their usual notation) plots with
isocontour lines obtained at several cross-sectional planes for these
test condition are shown in Fig. 5b. These plots illustrate the
complexity of the ﬂow ﬁeld due to high turbulence generated by the
swirler. The maximum RMS velocity magnitude is measured to be
around 15 m=s in the plane at Z=D  0:5, where the maximum mean
velocity is 27 m=s. The turbulence levels in the recirculation zones
are observed to be high even where the mean ﬂow ﬁeld velocities are
low, especially in the central recirculation zone along the axis of the
Fig. 4
The structures of the CTRZ and CRZ obtained from ensemble-
averaged axial isovelocity contour plot for the pressure drop of 0.1 bar
test condition.
Table 1
The approximate length scales of the CTRZ and CRZ obtained in the meridional plane for the two pressure-drop test conditions
Pressure drop across the swirler [bar]
Length of the CTRZ [L]
Width of the CTRZ [B]
Length of the CRZ (reattachment point) [l]
Width of the CRZ [b]
0.1
4D
2:25D
0:75D
0:5D
0.05
3D
1:87D
0:5D
0:35D
Fig. 5
a)
Mean
velocity
vector
plots
(the
vectors
shown
are
undersampled by a factor 3 in both x and y direction for clarity) and
b) RMS velocity magnitude (

u02  v02
p
) plots with isocontour lines in
several cross-sectional planes downstream of the swirler exit for P of
0.1 bar across the swirler.
PANDURANGA REDDY, SUJITH, AND CHAKRAVARTHY
803


--- Page 5 ---

test section. The turbulence level is observed to be decaying rapidly
as we proceed further downstream of the swirler. The turbulence
levels are observed to be very high near the swirler essentially due to
two competing effects, that is, the turbulence generated due to the
ﬂow exiting from the swirler and the ﬂow from the CRZ and CTRZ.
This substantial level of turbulence cannot be ignored in numerical
models based on the Reynolds-averaging approach (RANS), which
inherently assumes small levels of turbulence intensity (TI) .
The mean vorticity with isocontour lines obtained in various cross-
sectional planes are shown in Fig. 6a. The instantaneous vorticity at
each
grid
point
x; y
is
ensemble
averaged
over
several
instantaneous vorticity data, that is, wzx; y  	PN
i1 wz;ix; y
=N
where N is the number of instantaneous values (200 PIV images)
over which the ensemble average is carried out. The number of
images to calculate the mean quantities was determined by means of
a convergence test [27]. Two hundred images were observed to be
enough to determine the ensemble average of a ﬂuctuating quantity
as

u02
p
and

v02
p
, unlike only 100 images that were required for the
mean quantities such as u etc. to converge within 3% accuracy. The
mean vorticity convergence test carried out on a ﬁxed point at
Z=D  1:25, and x; y  26:888; 26:88 indicated that even for
differential quantities like vorticity measured in our case, has started
to converge for 150 images within 4.5% accuracy. The vortex pairs
of high strength (6000 s1) that were observed in the instantaneous
images are averaged out and two circular bands of positive and
negative vorticity are observed to be distributed concentrically. The
Reynolds shear stress (u0v0) contour plots with isocontour lines
obtained in various cross-sectional planes downstream of the swirler
are presented in Fig. 6b. The convergence test results indicated that
u0v0 and v0w0 ensemble averaged over 200 images has converged
within 7.5% accuracy. A thick region of high Reynolds shear stress is
formed in between the two shear layers produced due to the
interaction of CRZ and CTRZ with the swirling jet. This region has a
high momentum exchange between the low velocity CTRZ and the
high velocity swirling jet issuing from the swirler. This is an
important characteristic of the swirling ﬂow ﬁeld. The magnitudes of
shear stress obtained in the planes at Z=D  0:75, 1, 1.25 indicate a
drastic decay due to the expansion of these regions throughout the
cross-sectional plane.
To measure the third velocity component (in the axial direction w),
PIV measurements were made in the central plane along the test
section. The laser light sheet is passed through the slits provided
along the test section. The measurements were performed for a total
length of 10D in steps of 2:5D each starting from the swirler exit. The
results of ﬁrst two locations (up to 5D) are plotted together in a single
plane (Fig. 7), for qualitative understanding of the ﬂow features. The
scales of the mean velocity, vorticity, and shear stresses contours are
maintained the same as that of the cross-sectional planes for the ease
of comparison. Figure 7a shows the instantaneous vorticity
overlapped with the velocity vector plot. Two reference vectors
(10 m=s) are used because two different regions (Z=D  0 to 2.5,
and 2.5 to 5) are plotted together. Also, it should be noted that these
two regions were imaged at different instants. The complexity of the
swirl ﬂow ﬁeld in the near ﬁeld can be observed in this plot.
Figures 7b–7e show the mean velocity magnitude, RMS velocity
magnitude, vorticity, Reynolds shear stress contour plots including
isocontour lines, obtained in this plane for the 0.1 bar pressure-drop
test condition. A large recirculation bubble (CTRZ) is set up
downstream of the reattachment point, in view of the ﬂow reversal
along the centerline [Fig. 7b]. A maximum of 20 m=s is observed in
this plane. The velocities in the central core region are observed to be
insigniﬁcant. A gradual decay of velocity magnitude is observed in
the axial direction as ﬂow straightens up at the exit of the test section.
The RMS velocity ﬂuctuations in the CTRZ is around 7 m=s at axial
location Z=D  4 [Fig. 7c]. It can be clearly seen that the maximum
ﬂuctuation levels are observed in the region that separates the CRZ
and CTRZ. The small-scale vortices that are generated near the vanes
of the swirler are now observed in the thick averaged region in the
form of two separate bands [Fig. 7d]. These zones are paired as
positive and negative vorticity depending upon their roll-up
Fig. 6
a) Mean vorticity contour plots and b) Reynolds shear stress
(u0v0) contour plots with isocontour lines invarious cross-sectional planes
downstream of the swirler exit for P of 0.1 bar across the swirler.
Fig. 7
a) Instantaneous vorticity overlapped with velocity vector plot;
b) the mean velocity vector plot (the vectors shown are undersampled by
a factor 3 in z direction and 2 in y direction for clarity); c) RMS velocity
contour; d) mean vorticity contour; e) Reynolds shear stress contour,
showing isocontour lines in plane along the inlet ﬂow direction for P of
0.1 bar across the swirler.
804
PANDURANGA REDDY, SUJITH, AND CHAKRAVARTHY


--- Page 6 ---

direction. The magnitude of the vorticity is observed to be strong in
the near ﬁeld of the swirler up to Z=D  3. The levels of vorticity are
observed to be weak or insigniﬁcant after Z=D  4, far downstream
of the swirler exit. The magnitude of Reynolds stress is observed to
be high in the region between the CRZ and CTRZ [Fig. 7e]. Two
shear layers are observed due to interaction of the CTRZ and CRZ
with the swirling jet. The decay of these stresses in a streamwise
direction is very rapid, which indicates a signiﬁcant diffusion and
dissipation of the turbulence in the streamwise direction.
B.
0.05 Bar Pressure Drop Test Condition
This section discusses a few results obtained for the 0.05 bar
pressure drop across the swirler test condition. This corresponds to an
inlet velocity of 8 m=s (Re  27; 000) measured inside the glass
tube. The mean velocity vector ﬁeld corresponding to the cross-
sectional planes at Z=D  0:5, 0.75, 1, 1.25, 2.5 downstream of the
swirler are plotted together in a 3-D cascaded view as shown in
Fig. 8a. A strong outward radially expanding swirl ﬂow can be
observed in the plane at Z=D  0:5. The maximum velocity in this
plane was observed to be 17 m=s. Subsequent near-ﬁeld locations,
such as at Z=D  0:75, 1, 1.25 exhibit homogenization of the swirl
ﬂow ﬁeld in the tangential direction. The reattachment of the swirling
jet with the walls of the test section is observed at Z=D  0:75 plane,
which was observed at Z=D  1 for the 0.1 bar test condition.
The RMS velocity magnitude plots obtained at several cross-
sectional planes for these test condition are shown in Fig. 8b. The
ﬂuid elements at the boundary of the recirculation zones have an
equal probability to move in all the directions. Therefore, due to high
ﬂuctuations intheﬂow ﬁeld, themean velocity magnitude is veryless
in these regions. Hence in the Z=D  0:5 plane, the regions with high
turbulence levels are observed in the corners as well as in the central
core region. At Z=D  0:75 plane there is a decrease in turbulence
level from the corners of the test section whereas, a slight increase is
observed in the central recirculation zone.
C.
Pseudoturbulence Energy Spectrum
Pseudoturbulence energy spectrum has been calculated on the
basis of vortex core diameters and squared circulations of the
detected vortices [28]. A coherent structure detection algorithm,
based on the properties of selectivity in space and scale of the
continuous wavelet transform was used for this purpose. The vortex
core radii and circulation are determined using wavelet analysis of
Fig. 8
a)
Mean
velocity
vector
plots
(the
vectors
shown
are
undersampled by a factor 3 in both x and y direction for clarity);
b) RMS velocity magnitude (

u02  v02
p
) contour plots in cross-sectional
planes at different axial locations from the swirler exit for P of 0.05 bar
across the swirler.
Fig. 9
Pseudoturbulence energy spectrum calculated on the basis of the
vortex core diameters and squared circulations of the detected vortices at
Z=D  0:05 for a) 0.1 bar and b) 0.5 bar pressure-drop test conditions.
The straight lines in plots a) and b) represent the slope of the turbulence
energy spectrum. c) The variation in slope of several cross-sectional
planes downstream of the swirler for both the test conditions.
PANDURANGA REDDY, SUJITH, AND CHAKRAVARTHY
805


--- Page 7 ---

PIV data. The wavelet used is the two dimensional isotropic Marr
(Mexican hat) wavelet ( ) given by
 r; l  1
r

2 
r
l
2
exp

 r2
2l2

The square of circulation versus the inverse of core size associated
with the detected eddy structures corresponding to Z=D  0:5 for the
pressure drop of 0.1 and 0.05 bar test condition are illustrated in
Figs. 9a and 9b, respectively. This illustration is different in several
aspects than the classical power spectrum obtained using fast Fourier
transform where the energy versus wavelength of a sine and cosine
base (wave number) is presented. In an isotropic and homogeneous
turbulence [29] this spectrum may contain an inertial regime with a
decaying slope of 5=3. In the present study, the slopes of the
average results using the ensemble of the detected vortices
corresponding to each cross-sectional area were investigated. These
slopes were observed to be converging within 2% accuracy and were
varying from 1:49 to 2:9 depending upon their location [Fig. 9c].
The shaded region is approximated with a least square ﬁt. The
straight line thus obtained represents the slope of the energy
spectrum decay. A slope of 3 was observed by Schram [30] for his
experiments on ﬂow over a backward facing step.
The pseudoturbulence energy spectrum obtained on the basis of
vortex core diameters and squared circulations of the detected
vortices in several cross-sectional planes gives an insight of the
turbulence energy spectrum from the measured PIV data in this ﬂow
ﬁeld. Further work would be needed to investigate the relationship
between the instantaneous scales characterizing the eddy structures
and the wavelengths at a given location from a FFT based energy
spectrum that is usually used to characterize turbulent ﬂows.
D.
Close-Up Locations
As mentioned earlier, experiments were also performed in very
near ﬁeld of the Swirler (Z=D  0:125, 0.25, and 0.375), covering
two regions of interest of 20  20 mm (ROI-1) and 40  40 mm
(ROI-2). These two locations are chosen such that they provide
details of the ﬂow ﬁeld in one full quadrant of the test section as
shown in Fig. 10a. The instantaneous velocity vector plot superposed
by vorticity contour at Z=D  0:125, 0.375 are shown in Figs. 10b
and 10c for the ROI-1 and ROI-2, respectively. The vorticity
magnitude is observed to be varying from 140; 000 to 112; 000 s1
and the velocity magnitudes are varying from 2 to 90 m=s in the ROI-
1. The air passing through the vane passages expands suddenly into
the test section producing sharp velocity gradients in the radial
direction. This creates a high level of shear at the jet boundary, which
is the cause for large vorticity magnitudes near the tip of the vanes. It
can be observed from ROI-2 that the ﬂow through the corner is
entrained into the jet, which describes clearly the corner effects in
sudden expansion geometry as investigated in the present study.
The overall ﬂow ﬁeld structure near to a single swirler vane was
observed from the mean velocity vector ﬁeld in ROI-1 (not shown in
the interest of space). The magnitudes of mean velocity and vorticity
are observed to be reducing drastically as the ﬂow expands into the
test section. The mean velocity ﬂow ﬁeld obtained at ROI-2, gives
the structure of the CRZ. This corner recirculation zone acts as a
secondary ﬂame stabilization ring around the central recirculation
zone. The RMS velocity magnitude contour plots (Fig. 11) show
high levels of turbulence. The mixing of the corner and central
recirculated air with the swirling jet issuing from the vane slots due to
Fig. 10
a)
Schematic
representation
of
the
ROI-1
and ROI-2
investigated; b) and c) instantaneous velocity vector and vorticity
contour plots obtained for ROI-1 and ROI-2 (respectively) in two
different planes downstream of the swirler. Reference vector: 20 m=s.
The vectors shown are undersampled by a factor 3 in both x and y
direction for clarity.
Fig. 11
RMS velocity magnitude contour plots obtained in a) ROI-1
and b) ROI-2 for various cross-sectional planes downstream of the
swirler for pressure drop of 0.1 bar test condition.
806
PANDURANGA REDDY, SUJITH, AND CHAKRAVARTHY


--- Page 8 ---

high turbulence can be illustrated from Fig. 11a. Comparatively low
levels of RMS velocity magnitude are observed in the ROI-2
[Fig. 11b]. As observed from the ﬁgure, the low velocity recirculated
ﬂuid in the corner gains the turbulence energy as the ﬂuid starts to
entrain into the jet issuing from the vanes. Thus the RMS velocity
magnitude in the CRZ increases as the ﬂow expands into the test
section until the reattachment point.
Turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) is obtained along a line (from
X=D  1:7 to 2.2) using the PIV data from the plane perpendicular to
the swirler and the cross-sectional plane at Z=D  0:125. The TKE is
normalized with the mean kinetic energy (	 u02  v02  w02
=
	 u2  v2  w2
) is shown in Fig. 12. A maximum value of normal-
ized TKE as high as three is observed on the inner and outer edges of
the annular jet, due to formation of the shear layer by CRZ and
CTRZ, respectively. The TKE attains a minimum value within the
jet, exiting from the vane passage.
IV.
Conclusions
This paper presents the experimental investigation performed to
measure the mean and turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations of a 3D
swirling ﬂow in a sudden expansion square geometry using PIV. The
measurements have been performed for the pressure drops of 0.1 and
0.05 bar across the swirler which corresponds to a Reynolds number
of 32,000 and 27,000, respectively, at the inlet to the swirler. The
swirling ﬂow features such as corner recirculation zone (CRZ),
precessing vortex core (PVC), and central toroidal recirculation zone
(CTRZ) were observed and characterized. The magnitudes of the
velocities inside the CTRZ are low. As the pressure drop across the
swirler was varied from 0.1 to 0.05, the length of the CTRZ has been
decreased from 4D to 3D and width from 2:25D to 1:87D. The
turbulence levels are observed to be very high in the near ﬁeld of the
swirler essentially due to two competing effects; that is, the
turbulence generated due to the ﬂow exiting from the swirler and the
ﬂow from the CRZ and CTRZ. The PVC effect appears to be
persisting for a long distance downstream, at Z=D  2:5, more than
normally reported values, presumably due to the conﬁnement. The
experiments performed in the very near ﬁeld of the swirler
(Z=D  0:125, 0.25, and 0.375), also indicates the complexity of the
swirl ﬂow ﬁeld in a sudden expansion geometry both qualitatively
and quantitatively.
RMS velocity and the vorticity contour plots obtained in several
cross-sectional planes illustrate the complexity of the swirl ﬂow ﬁeld.
The RMS velocity magnitude is observed to be as high as 15 m=s,
indicating the signiﬁcant level of the turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations
over the mean velocity (up to 27 m=s) ﬂow ﬁeld for pressure drop of
0.1 bar test condition. Pseudoturbulence energy spectrum plots have
been obtained on the basis of vortex core diameters and squared
circulations of the detected vortices. These plots show a negative
slope varying from 1.49 to 2.9 and 1.6 to 2.4 for 0.1 and 0.05 bar
pressure-drop test conditions, respectively. Further work would be
needed to investigate the relationship between the instantaneous
scales characterizing the eddy structures and the wavelengths at a
given location from a FFT based energy spectrum that is usually used
to characterize turbulent ﬂows.
This set of results can also be used to anchor CFD calculations
based on relatively simplistic Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes or
large eddy simulation.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the support of the Gas Turbine
Research Establishment (GTRE), Bangalore, India. The interest
taken by Venkataraman Shankar and Sampath Kumaran from GTRE
in this work is greatly appreciated.
References
[1] Gupta, A. K., Lilley, D. G., and Syred, N., Swirl Flows, Energy and
Engineering Science Series, Abacus Press, London, U.K., 1984.
[2] Vu, B. T., and Gouldin, F. C., “Flow Measurements in a Model Swirl
Combustor,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 20, No. 5, 1982, pp. 642–651.
[3] Rhode, D. L., Lilley, D. G., and McLaughlin, D. K., “Mean Flow Fields
in Axisymmetric Combustor Geometries With Swirl,” AIAA Journal,
Vol. 21, No. 4, 1983, pp. 593–600.
[4] Samimy, M., and Langenfeld, C.A., “Experimental Study ofIsothermal
Swirling Flows in a Dump Combustor,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 26, No. 12,
1988, pp. 1442–1449.
[5] Ahmed, S. A., “Velocity Measurements and Turbulence Statistics of a
Conﬁned Isothermal Swirling Flow,” Experimental Thermal and Fluid
Science, Vol. 17, No. 3, 1998, pp. 256–264.
[6] Al-Abdeli, Y. M., and Masri, A. R., “Precession and Recirculation in
Turbulent Swirling Isothermal Jets,” Combustion Science and
Technology, Vol. 176, No. 5–6, 2004 pp. 645–665.
[7] Al-Abdeli, Y. M., and Masri, A. R., “Recirculation and Flow Field
Regimes of Unconﬁned Non-Reacting Swirling Flows,” Experimental
Thermal and Fluid Science, Vol. 27, No. 5, 2003, pp. 655–665.
[8] Bharani, S., Singh, S. N., and Agrawal, D. P., “Effect of Swirl on the
Flow Characteristics in the Outer Annulus of a Prototype Reverse-Flow
Gas Turbine Combustor,” Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science,
Vol. 25, No. 6, June 2001, pp. 337–347.
[9] Mongia, H. C., Gore, J. P., Grinstein, F. F., Gutmark, E. J., Jengand, S.
M., McDonell, V. G., Menon, S., Samuelson, G. S., and Santoro, R. J.,
“Combustion Research Needs for Helping Development of Next-
Generation Advanced Combustors,” 37th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE
Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit, AIAA Paper 2001-3853,
July 2001.
[10] Kucukgokoglan, S., and Aroussi, A., “Isothermal Swirling Burner Flow
Measurements,” Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on
Particle Image Velocimetry, Paper 1074, Sept. 2001.
[11] Pruvost, J., Legrand, J., and Doubliez, L., “Particle Image Velocimetry
Investigation of the Flow-Field of a 3D Turbulent Annular Swirling
Decaying Flow Induced by Means of a Tangential Inlet,” Experiments
in Fluids, Vol. 29, 2000, pp. 291–301.
[12] Raffel, M., Willert, C. E., and Kompenhans, J., Particle Image
Velocimetry, A Practical Guide, Springler–Verlag, New York, 1998,
Chaps. 2, 4, 5, and 6.
[13] Westerweel, J., Draad, A. A., Th, J. G., Van der Hoeven, and Van Oord,
J., “Measurement of Fully-Developed Turbulent Pipe Flow with Digital
Particle Velocimetry,” Experiments in Fluids, Vol. 20, No. 3, 1996,
pp. 165–177.
[14] Li, G., and Gutmark, E. J., “Experimental Study of Large Coherent
Structures in a Swirl—Dump Combustor,” 42nd AIAA Science Meeting
and Exhibit., Jan. 2004
[15] Gallaire, F., Rott, S., and Chomaz, J. M., “Experimental Study of a Free
Swirling Jet,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 16, No. 8, 2004, pp. 2907–2917.
[16] German, A. E., and Mahmud, T., “Modelling of Non-Premixed Swirl
Burner Flows Using a Reynolds-Stress Turbulence Closure,” Fuel,
Vol. 84, No. 5, 2005, pp. 583–594.
[17] Yang, S. L., Siow, Y. K., Peschke, B. D., and Tacina, R. R., “Numerical
Study of Nonreacting Gas Turbine Combustor Swirl Flow Using
Reynolds Stress Model,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and
Power, Vol. 125, No. 3, July 2003, pp. 804–811.
[18] Mondal, S., Datta, A., and Sarkar, A., “Inﬂuence of Side Wall
Expansion Angle and Swirl Generator on Flow Pattern in a Model
Combustor Calculated with k-Epsilon Model,” International Journal of
Thermal Sciences, Vol. 43, No. 9, 2004, pp. 901–914.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
X/D 
TKE / KE 
Fig. 12
Turbulent kinetic energy normalized with mean kinetic energy
( u02  v02  w02= u2  v2  w2), obtained along a line in plane at
Z=D  0:125 downstream of the swirler.
PANDURANGA REDDY, SUJITH, AND CHAKRAVARTHY
807


--- Page 9 ---

[19] Wang, P., and Bai, X. S., “Large Eddy Simulations of Turbulent
Swirling Flows in a Dump Combustor: A Sensitivity Study,”
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, Vol. 47, No. 2,
2005, pp. 99–120.
[20] Wang, P., Bai, X. S., Wessman, M., and Klingmann, J., “Large Eddy
Simulation and Experimental Studies of a Conﬁned Turbulent Swirling
Flow,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 16, No. 9, 2004, pp. 3306–3324.
[21] Derksen, J. J., “Simulations of Conﬁned Turbulent Vortex Flow,”
Computers and Fluids, Vol. 34, No. 3, 2005, pp. 301–318.
[22] Grinstein, F. F., Young, T. R., Gutmark, E. J., Li, G., Hsiao, G., and
Mongia, H. C., “Flow Dynamics in a Swirl Combustor,” Journal of
Turbulence, Vol. 3, No. 30, 2002.
[23] Guo, B., Langrish, T. A. G., and Fletcher, D. F., “CFD Simulation of
Precession in Sudden Pipe Expansion Flows with Low Inlet Swirl,”
Applied Mathematical Modelling, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2002, pp. 1–15.
[24] Melling, A., “Tracer Particles and Seeding for Particle Image
Velocimetry,” Measurement Science and Technology, Vol. 8, No. 12,
1997, pp. 1406–1416.
[25] PivView2C, User Manual, Ver. 2.1, PIVTec GMBH, Germany.
[26] Beer, J. M., and Chigier, N. A., Combustion Aerodynamics, Applied
Science Publishers, Ltd., London, U.K., 1972, Chap. 5.
[27] Panduranga Reddy, A., “A Study of Swirler Flow Field Characteristics
in a Sudden Expansion Square Chamber Using PIV,” Masters Thesis,
Department of Aerospace Engineering, IIT Madras, India, 2004.
[28] Schram, C. F., “Aeroacoustics of Subsonic Jets: Prediction of the Sound
Produced by Vortex Pairing Based on Particle Image Velocimetry,” Ph.
D. Dissertation, Physics Department, Technical University Eindhoven,
The Netherlands, 2003.
[29] Tunnekes, H., and Lumley, J. L., A First Course in Turbulence, MIT
Press, Cambridge, 1972.
[30] Schram, C. F., Rambaud, P., and Riethmuller, M. L., “Wavelet Based
Eddy Structure Eduction from a Backward Facing Step Flow
Investigated Using Particle Image Velocimetry,” Experiments in
Fluids, Vol. 36, No. 2, 2004, pp. 233–245.
A. Gupta
Associate Editor
808
PANDURANGA REDDY, SUJITH, AND CHAKRAVARTHY
