
--- Page 1 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
LASER-BASED DIAGNOSTICS FOR CHARACTERIZING
PRACTICAL COMBUSTOR HARDWARE
James R. Gord,* Dale T. Shouse,f and W. M. Roquemore*
Propulsion Sciences and Advanced Concepts Division
Air Force Research Laboratory
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base OH
Abstract
The Propulsion Directorate of the Air Force Research
Laboratory exists to provide propulsion and power
solutions essential to achieving and maintaining Global
Engagement—the Air Force Strategic Vision for the
21st Century. Factors driving the Directorate's mission
include the need to design, develop, test, and field high-
performance, low-emissions propulsion systems, for
both air and space, that are reliable, affordable,
maintainable, and supportable. 
Many of the goals
defining these efforts 
are communicated in the
Integrated 
High-Performance 
Turbine 
Engine
Technology (IHPTET) Program and the Integrated
High-Payoff Rocket Propulsion Technology (IHPRPT)
Program. The Combustion Branch of the Directorate's
Propulsion Sciences and Advanced Concepts Division
supports such efforts, particularly as they relate to gas
turbine 
combustion, through 
the activity 
of 
a
multidisciplinary team of scientists and engineers
representing government, industry, and academia. This
paper highlights recent Combustion-Branch efforts to
develop advanced laser-based diagnostic techniques
and apply these to fundamental studies in the
laboratory. 
Case studies showcase the transition of
diagnostic techniques from the laboratory to realistic
engine-test facilities in which practical combustor
hardware is characterized.
Introduction
Global Engagement—the Air Force Strategic Vision
for the 21st Century—demands enabling propulsion and
power solutions such as those currently under
development in the Propulsion Directorate of the Air
Force Research Laboratory. This strategic vision
Senior Research Chemist, Member AIAA
'Mechanical Engineer, Member AIAA
^Principal Research Physicist, Associate Fellow AIAA
This paper is declared a work of the U.S. Government
and is not subject to copyright protection in the United
States.
requires high-performance systems designed to ensure
continued air and space superiority; however, signature-
reduction 
concerns 
and 
sensitivity 
to 
global
environmental 
issues 
demand 
low-emissions
performance of these propulsion systems as well. Often
the very conditions that yield high performance (such as
high-heat-release combustion) also contribute to the
formation of undesirable engine emissions (such as
nitric oxide, NO, and associated oxides of nitrogen,
NOX). 
Such challenges define the mission of the
Propulsion Directorate.
High-performance, affordability, and reliability goals
driving development of air-breathing gas turbine
engines 
are expressed 
in the Integrated High-
Performance Turbine Engine Technology (IHPTET)
Program. Established in 1988, this program teams the
Air Force, Army, Navy, DARPA, NASA, and industry
through 
cost-shared 
efforts 
designed 
to 
double
propulsion capability by around the turn of the century.
The three-phase IHPTET plan exploits advanced
materials development, innovative structural designs,
improved 
aerothermodynamics, 
and 
advanced
computational 
methods 
to 
achieve 
well-defined
performance and cost goals. 
Because the roots of
nearly all commercial turbine engines can be traced to a
Department of Defense weapon-system-development
effort, IHPTET technology is inherently dual-use as
well.
Specific IHPTET activity is underway to address
engine components including turbomachinery (fans,
compressors, and turbines), combustors, mechanical
systems, exhaust systems, and controls. 
Supporting
efforts 
include 
the 
development 
of 
diagnostic
instrumentation, improved manufacturing techniques,
innovative analysis and design methodologies, and
specialized test facilities.
Similar programs describe other aspects of the
Propulsion-Directorate mission. 
For example, the
Integrated High-Payoff Rocket Propulsion Technology
(IHPRPT) Program mirrors IHPTET in many ways and
promises to double U.S. rocket propulsion capability.
The JP-8+100 Fuel Program exists to provide enabling
thermal-management solutions for current and future
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 2 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
aircraft through the development of advanced thermally
stable fuels and fuel additives.
In 
addition 
to 
the 
high-performance 
drivers
represented by these programs, low-emissions goals
impact the continuing development of advanced
propulsion and power systems. 
The commercial
aviation industry is subject to restrictions on deleterious
engine emission such as NOX, carbon monoxide (CO),
unburned hydrocarbons (UHC's), volatile organic
compounds (VOC's), reactive organic gases (ROG's),
and particulate matter (PM). 
These regulations are
imposed at the state and federal level through the
Environmental 
Protection 
Agency 
(EPA) 
and
internationally through the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), for example. 
Maintaining the
dual-use characteristics of military propulsion solutions
demands Air Force sensitivity to these low-emissions
regulations.
While military aircraft and military bases are
typically exempt from such regulations, EPA rule
changes recently requested by the State of California
suggest reconsideration of the exempt status of military
aircraft. Furthermore, there exists a long-standing Air
Force policy (Attachment 3 to Air Force Regulation 19-
1) that states the Air Force will make a good-faith effort
to comply with EPA aircraft-emission regulations while
maintaining the high performance needed to ensure
flight safety and combat superiority. 
Air Force
signature-reduction 
goals 
associated 
with 
low-
observable-technology programs must be considered as
well during development of low-emissions gas turbine
engines.
All of these factors make up the framework in which
the Combustion Branch of the Directorate's Propulsion
Sciences and Advanced Concepts Division conducts its
day-to-day activity. High-performance, low-emissions
gas turbine combustion is pursued through efforts that
include laser-based 
diagnostics 
development 
and
application, simulation and modeling, fundamental
studies of aviation fuel and its combustion, and
associated engineering applications. Working hand-in-
hand with other Propulsion-Directorate elements,
particularly the Components Branch of the Turbine
Engine Division, Combustion-Branch scientists and
engineers seek to apply lessons learned during
fundamental studies to the design, development, and
testing of advanced combustor concepts consistent with
the IHPTET vision. 
Advanced propulsion concepts
extending beyond the IHPTET performance envelope
are explored as well.
The Combustion-Branch team includes Air-Force
scientists and engineers (both civil service and military
personnel), 
on- 
and 
off-site 
contractors, 
engine
manufacturers and subsystem/component suppliers, and
academicians who routinely participate in Branch
activity through sponsorship by the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research (AFOSR). 
Small businesses
responding to exploratory development needs through
the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Program also represent a vital component of this team.
Development 
and 
application 
of 
laser-based
diagnostic 
techniques 
are 
integrated 
throughout
Combustion-Branch programs. 
These techniques
represent powerful tools for non-invasive flowfield
visualization and quantification of fluid parameters and
key species concentrations. At a fundamental level,
diagnostics provide data essential to achieving a
detailed understanding of the chemistry and physics of
combusting flowfields. 
In addition, these data are
essential 
for 
validating combustion 
models 
and
combustor-design codes that promise to usher in a new
era in propulsion-system development. 
At a more
applied 
level, hardened 
diagnostics provide the
propulsion engineer with performance data critical to
the systems-engineering process. 
Diagnostics also
promise to play an important role in fielded propulsion
systems as elements in control and optimization
schemes.
These 
characteristics 
of 
laser-based 
diagnostic
techniques suggest a three-phase evolutionary process
for their development and application. In the initial
phase, emphasis is placed on the diagnostic technique
itself—on the chemistry and physics that define the
measurement and the hardware (sources, optics,
detectors, etc.) and software necessary to accomplish
that measurement. During this phase of the process, a
research-grade instrument is typically employed to
study a well-characterized flowfield in a laboratory
environment. 
While this phase of the diagnostics-
development process is certainly essential and exciting,
the ultimate utility of a diagnostic technique is
significantly limited if it is never applied beyond the
laboratory phase.
During the second phase of the process, a hardened
version of the research-grade instrument is applied to
achieving measurements in an engineering facility. The
emphasis in this phase shifts from the diagnostic
technique to the engineering application, such as gas
turbine engine development. This transition from the
laboratory to the facility is the subject of this session
and this paper. 
During the final phase of the
evolutionary process, a miniaturized 
and robust
diagnostic device might be incorporated into the final
product, such as an actual gas turbine engine, for on-
board sensing and control.
The transition from laboratory to facility is fraught
with significant challenges that must addressed. During
the laboratory phase of diagnostics development,
conditions are typically ideal and well-controlled. They
might involve vibrationally isolated laser tables,
humidity- and temperature-controlled environments,
and sufficient space to accommodate sources, optics,
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 3 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
mounts, and detectors required to achieve the desired
measurement. Test articles often feature ample optical
access and support clean-burning, laminar flames
operating 
under 
atmospheric 
or 
sub-atmospheric
conditions. In contrast, facilities applications involve
conditions 
characteristic 
of 
actual 
gas 
turbine
combustor hardware. 
Challenges include extreme
environmental conditions (heat, vibration, acoustics,
etc.), 
fully 
developed turbulence, high pressure,
collisional quenching and energy redistribution, optical
thickness, beam steering, high background luminosity,
soot formation, limited optical access, tight geometric
constraints, limited operational space, and scattering
and spectral interferences. Successful transition from
the laboratory to the facility requires thoughtful
attention to these issues.
This paper continues with a brief description of
ongoing Combustion-Branch efforts to develop novel
diagnostic 
techniques 
and 
supporting 
hardware.
Facilities applications are highlighted through a
collection of case studies. Atmospheric-pressure and
high-pressure applications at Wright-Patterson Air
Force Base are presented with emphasis on the
specialized facilities constructed to explore advanced
combustor concepts in cooperation with the Turbine
Engine Division's Components Branch. 
Facilities
construction and diagnostics applications underway
through Combustion-Branch SBIR programs with
Physical Sciences, Inc., and MetroLaser, Inc., complete
the paper.
Advanced Diagnostics Development
Developing 
advanced 
laser-based 
diagnostics
remains a mainstay of Combustion-Branch programs.
Current in-house and on-site-contract efforts have been
focused on exploiting the potential of high-repetition-
rate, 
modelocked 
laser 
sources 
for 
combustion
diagnostics applications. 
Continued development of
particle-image velocimetry (PIV) is underway as well.
In addition, SBIR programs are in place to explore new
diagnostics directions. Highlights of each of these
development efforts are briefly presented.
With the advent of modelocked titaniumrsapphire
lasers and associated regenerative amplifiers and optical
parametric devices, reliable sources of picosecond and
femtosecond 
laser 
pulses 
are 
now 
available.
Commercial off-the-shelf hardware can be configured
to provide relatively low-energy pulses (tens of
nanojoules per pulse) at repetition rates approaching
100 MHz or high-energy pulses with terawatts of peak
power at lower repetition rates (<10 Hz).
High-repetition-rate, picosecond sources are currently
being applied to fundamental studies in the Combustion
Branch. 
These sources provide sufficient data-
acquisition bandwidth to resolve even the fastest
turbulence timescales and to capture transient events of
interest such as detonation, ignition, and extinction.
Furthermore, pump-probe absorption measurements
achieved with these lasers can be utilized to quantify
key nonfluorescent combustion species. 
Because
measurements are achieved on a picosecond timescale,
sensitivity 
to 
collisional-quenching 
and 
energy-
redistribution effects can be mitigated. 
Imaging
applications are also being explored.1
Laboratory advances in particle-image velocimetry
include 
the 
development 
of 
digital, 
two-color
techniques designed to exploit the data-throughput and
processing advantages afforded 
by state-of-the-art
digital color cameras.2 
Three-dimensional velocity-
field mapping through holographic PIV is also currently
underway.
Small businesses operating under contract through
the 
SBIR 
program 
have been 
exploring 
other
diagnostics innovations. Southwest Sciences, Inc., is
involved in the effort to develop techniques based on
modelocked laser technology. Novel sources in the
mid-infrared and far-infrared are under development by
Aculight, Inc., and Picometrix, Inc., respectively.
Innovative Scientific Solutions, Inc., is constructing a
phase-sensitive demodulating camera in conjunction
with the Colorado School of Mines for advanced
imaging applications. 
Los 
Gatos Research 
is
investigating 
far-infrared 
(terahertz) 
imaging
applications. 
Diagnostics specifically designed for
condensed-phase 
fuels 
applications 
are 
under
development as well. These programs represent
diagnostic techniques "in the pipeline" for future
application in the laboratory and transition to the
facility.
Transitioning Diagnostics to the Test Facility
The preceding material suggests the kind of
advanced-diagnostics-development efforts underway in
the Combustion Branch. 
The examples that follow
document the transition of diagnostics capability from
the laboratory to the engine-test facility.
Pratt & Whitney Task 200 Combustor
As part of the Air Force Combustor Design Model
Evaluation (CDME) program, Combustion-Branch
scientists and engineers recently completed a series of
studies in conjunction with Pratt & Whitney to evaluate
flame stability and lean blowout in a generic gas turbine
combustor termed the Task 200.3 The Task 200 was
designed to simulate the flowfield and lean-blowout
(LBO) characteristics of an actual aircraft gas turbine
combustor while providing sufficient optical access and
variability of geometry and flow distribution to permit
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 4 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
detailed 
parametric 
studies 
for 
evaluation 
and
calibration of LBO models.
The Task 200 includes a planar array of four injectors
configured to represent a simplified-geometry version
of an actual Pratt & Whitney annular combustor. The
airblast-atomizing fuel injectors employed are actual
engine hardware, and the major combustor dimensions
(dome height, length, and injector spacing) are based on
those associated with the engine in which those
injectors operate. The combustor liners and cooling-air
scheme were carefully configured to reproduce realistic
engine conditions. Pratt & Whitney design practice
was incorporated throughout the aerothermodynamic
design of the test section. Optical access is provided
through fused-quartz side walls and via the base of the
rig through a fused-quartz liner. A photograph of the
Task 200 combustor is depicted in Fig. 1, and a
schematic diagram is provided in Fig. 2.
Figure 1. Task 200 combustor.
: : :H2QCoolK(
O 10 
Vi;,»Sx* tv+i
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of Task 200 combustor.
To accomplish LBO studies, the Task 200 combustor
was coupled to an air facility designed to provide up to
30 Ibm/s of air at ambient temperature and up to 23
Ibm/s of nonvitiated air at temperatures to 1200°F. Air
pressures to 750 psia are achievable in this facility;
however, the majority of the LBO study was conducted
at atmospheric pressure.
LBO studies with gaseous fuels were accomplished
with propane (available at 0.5 Ibm/min at 100 psig) and
methane (available at 0.4 Ibm/min at 150 psig), while
liquid-fuel studies were accomplished with ethanol
(available at 15 Ibm/hr at 200 psig). Bottled nitrogen
(available at 20 Ibm/min at 500 psig) was thoroughly
mixed with incoming air well upstream of the test
section during studies to simulate the effects of reduced
pressure on LBO characteristics.
Point measurements of velocity and temperature were
accomplished 
using 
a 
hardened 
laser-Doppler
velocimetry 
(LDV)/coherent 
anti-Stokes 
Raman
spectroscopy (CARS) system mounted around the test
section. The entire laser table supporting the hardened
LDV/CARS system was attached to a multi-axis
translation 
stage 
permitting 
spatially 
resolved
measurements in the Task 200 combustor in all three
spatial dimensions. Turbulence data obtained via LDV
and probability distribution functions (PDFs) for
temperature obtained via CARS are depicted in Fig. 3.
LBO studies conducted with the Task 200 combustor
and these hardened diagnostics over a wide range of
operating conditions reveal the complexity of the LBO
process. Based on these studies, it was suggested that
the classic representation of a gas turbine combustor as
a single, well-stirred reactor followed by a plug-flow
reactor is insufficient for predicting LBO behavior.
General Electric CFM56 Fuel Injector
Fuel injector/air swirler assemblies (i.e., "swirl
cups") are designed to provide good fuel-lean stability
during low-power operation and thorough fuel-air
mixing, efficient 
combustion, and 
low pollutant
emissions during high-power operation.4 To explore
swirl 
cup 
characteristics 
and 
expand 
current
understanding 
of 
important 
design 
parameters,
Combustion-Branch researchers and on-site contractors
recently studied the structure of an atmospheric-
pressure spray flame stabilized on a production-engine
combustor swirl cup. In actual practice, multiple swirl
cups are employed at substantially higher operating
temperatures and pressures; however, the current study
retains many of the characteristic features that define
swirl-cup operation.
In an effort to maintain this connection to real-world
operation, the study was accomplished using a single
swirl cup from a General Electric CFM56 production
engine. 
The swirl cup was mounted in a research
combustor and supplied with Jet-A fuel at a mass-flow
rate of 1.30 g/s and air at a mass-flow rate of 29.7 g/s.
A simplified schematic of the swirl cup and a
photograph of the Jet-A spray flame are depicted in Fig.
4.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 5 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
TEMPERATURE (K)
Figure 3. Temperature PDFs and turbulence data obtained through CARS/LDV studies of the Task 200 combustor.
The Jet-A spray flame was characterized using phase-
Doppler anenometry (PDA) and CARS. 
A Dan tec
Measurement 
Technology 
three-component 
PDA
provided 
droplet-size 
distributions 
and 
velocity
information 
to 
complement 
CARS 
temperature
measurements achieved with a broadband system
configured in a folded-BOXCARS arrangement.
Recently, this effort has been extended to study the
impact of an advanced combustor geometry on the
operation of the CFM56 single-cup research combustor.
This modified configuration is depicted in Fig. 5.
Details of this particular study can not be released due
to its proprietary nature.
Room 151: Atmospheric-Pressure Facility
The combustion research facility housed in Building
490 Room 151 at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base
(Area B) was designed for the experimental exploration
of advanced combustor concepts under atmospheric-
pressure conditions with elevated inlet-air temperatures
Several different combustor test sections can be
installed in the facility, and each provides generous
optical access to the combustion flowfield. 
Test
sections are designed to contain single-cup or dual-cup
Figure 4. GE CFM56 swirl cup and Jet-A spray flame.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 6 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
combustor-dome 
configurations. 
Three 
separate
metered, controlled, and heated air lines provide
combustion air to the test article. These three lines
supply dome or main air (20 Ibm/min at 700°F),
primary-zone air (7 Ibm/min at 700°F), and secondary-
zone or cooling air (7 Ibm/min at 700°F). 
A
photograph that includes the test section is depicted in
Fig 6.
Figure 5. Modified CFM56 combustor configured in
and advanced geometry.
Figure 6.
facility.
Atmospheric-pressure combustion research
Exhaust System: The facility is connected to an
external exhaust-duct system via a rectangular duct
located at the exit of the combustor. This duct, which
routes exhaust gases vertically through the test-cell
ceiling, provides optical access to the combustor exit.
Two video cameras are available to document
combustor operation. One provides images from the
side of the test section, while the other provides images
at the rear of the test section through the exhaust duct.
Fuel System: 
The facility has two identical fuel
systems that supply liquid fuels (e.g., JP-8, ethanol) at
rates of 0.6 gpm and pressures to 300 psig. The two
systems are configured to accommodate fuel staging for
staged combustor systems operating in the facility.
Fuel flows are metered with turbine flowmeters and
controlled via remotely located valves. A gaseous fuel
system also exists to deliver propane or methane to the
test article.
Instrumentation: 
The facility utilizes PC-based
LabView software for data acquisition. The system is
configured with 64 K-type thermocouple channels for
the facility and test article, as well as Type B channels
for water-cooled thermocouple rakes. Incorporated are
32 pressure channels connected to a variety of psia,
psid, and psig transducers. A Kulite dynamic-pressure-
transducer system is employed to investigate combustor
instabilities through data collected on-line with a 16-
channel high-density multiplex PCM data recorder and
analyzed post test. Gas-emission samples are analyzed
on-line through the LabView software using Horiba
instruments configured to measure NOX, CO, CO2,
UHC, and 02- Gas samples are analyzed in accordance
with Aerospace Recommended Practices (ARP).
Controls: Facilities controls include both process
and supervisory activities. The process controls utilize
PID controllers with feedback provided by standard
transmitters and computer control loops. 
The
supervisory controls utilize a Modicon Programmable
Logic Control (PLC) system. 
The PLC uses
preprogrammed logic to ensure that remotely actuated
valves and controls throughout the facility are never
improperly sequenced.
Room 20; High-Pressure Facility
The high-pressure combustion research 
facility
housed in Building 18 Room 20 at Wright-Patterson Air
Force Base (Area B) was designed for the experimental
exploration of advanced combustor concepts under
conditions simulating actual gas 
turbine engine
operation. 
The facility includes two flowpaths as
shown in Fig 7. 
One provides high-pressure
combustion testing at pressures to 45 atm (660 psig),
while the other provides testing to 20 atm (300 psig).
The 45-atm system houses a single-cup combustor but
currently provides no optical access to the combustion
flowfield. The 20-atm system, which houses a single-
or dual-dome combustor sector, 
incorporates a
rectangular test section with generous optical access
provided via windows at four sides. A photograph that
includes this test section is depicted in Fig. 8. With 2.5-
inch-thick optical-grade fused-silica windows installed
the maximum test-section operating pressure is derated
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 7 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
Air
Exit
Test Section
e
Test Section
CARS/LIF
Optical System
Figure 7. Schematic diagram of high-pressure combustion research facility.
Air
Inlet
Figure 8. High-pressure combustion research facility.
American Institute of Aeronutics and Astronautics


--- Page 8 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
to 15 atm. With stainless-steel blanks installed, the full
20-atm test-section capability is achievable.
The facility was designed to accommodate an optical
diagnostics system that encompasses the test section.
Diagnostics 
include 
CARS 
for 
temperature
measurements and planar laser-induced fluorescence
(PLIF) for flow visualization and quantification of key
combustion species. 
Encoded translations stages
controlling the transmitting and receiving optics permit
full three-dimensional spatial resolution of the test-
section flowfield.
Air-Supply System: 
Two Ingersoll-Rand air
compressors housed in the Test Air Facility located in
the lower level of the Building-18 complex furnish
combustion air to the Room-20 facility. Air mass-flow
rates to greater than 34 Ibm/s at pressures to 750 psig
are available. Air is routed through a natural-gas-fired,
non-vitiated heater that can deliver 34-lbm/s airflows to
the facility at temperatures to 1100°F. Flows to the
single-cup combustor system are maintained at 13
Ibm/s and 1100°F, while flows to the sector-combustor
system are maintained at 20 Ibm/s and 1100°F. In both
cases, combustor airflows are measured via a flow
venturi located in the inlet piping system.
Exhaust System: The facility is connected to four
Ingersoll-Rand exhausters that can achieve sub-
atmospheric pressures in the exhaust-piping header.
Exhaust gases are removed from the facility at a
sufficiently 
high rate to provide altitude-testing
capability. The facility can be configured to operate at
combustor-test-section pressures as low as 0.25 atm,
simulating altitudes beyond 30,000 ft.
Cooling-Water System: The facility requires large
amounts of cooling water to quench hot exhaust gases
and actively cool thermocouples and emission probes
located at the exit of the combustor. Water is delivered
to the combustor test section at flow rates in excess of
100 gpm and delivery pressures to 900 psig. Prior to
pressurization and delivery, the water is conditioned
with a reverse osmosis (RO) system. Large storage
tanks hold over 12,000 gallons of pre-treated water for
each test. With respect to the RO water system, the
facility operates in a blow-down mode with make-up
RO water supplied at a rate of 25 GPM during testing.
Fuel System: 
The facility has two identical fuel
systems that supply liquid fuel to each test section at
rates of 6 gpm and pressures to 1000 psig. The two
systems are configured to accommodate fuel staging for
staged combustor systems operating in the facility.
Fuel flows are metered with turbine flowmeters.
Instrumentation: 
The facility utilizes a Sun
Workstation coupled to a Camac system for data
acquisition. The system is configured with 108 K-type
thermocouple channels for the facility and test article,
as well as Type B channels for water-cooled
thermocouple rakes. 
Incorporated are 48 pressure
channels connected to a variety of psia, psid, and psig
transducers. 
A Kulite dynamic-pressure-transducer
system 
is 
employed 
to 
investigate 
combustor
instabilities through data collected on-line with a 16-
channel high-density multiplex PCM data recorder and
analyzed post test. Gas-emission samples are analyzed
on-line through the Sun Workstation using Beckman
instruments configured to measure NOX, CO, CO2,
UHC, and O2. Gas samples are analyzed in accordance
with Aerospace Recommended Practices (ARP).
Controls: Facilities controls include both process
and supervisory activities. The process controls utilize
Fisher Rosemount PID controllers with feedback
provided by standard transmitters and computer control
loops. 
The supervisory controls utilize a Modicon
Programmable Logic Control (PLC) system. The PLC
uses preprogrammed logic to ensure that remotely
actuated valves and controls throughout the facility are
never improperly sequenced. 
In addition, the PLC
system can act when notified of an emergency situation
by the Sun Workstation to shut the facility down safely
and avoid catastrophic failures which might otherwise
result during high-pressure combustion testing.
Activity at Physical Sciences, Inc.
Over the course of the past several years, researchers
at Physical Sciences, Inc., (PSI) have been working
with the Combustion Branch to explore diagnostics
applications under actual engine operating conditions.
Through a series of SBIR programs (both Phase I and
Phase II), the PSI research team has evaluated the
impact of high pressure, optical thickness, scattering
from liquid fuel sprays, and broadband spectral
interferences 
associated 
with 
polyaromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH) on PLIF measurements of key
combustion species and laser-induced incandescence
(LII) measurements of soot volume fraction.5'6
During initial studies, a PLIF/LII system based on an
excimer-pumped dye laser was assembled and applied
to measurements of OH, NO, ©2, hydrocarbons, and
soot volume fraction in the test section depicted in Fig.
9. This test section was configured to support model
spray flames fueled with heptane, methanol, and
ethanol over the range of pressures from 0.1 to 1.0
MPa. Detailed modeling of the PLIF-signal pressure
dependence produced quantitative measurements over
this pressure range. Optical thickness and broadband
PAH 
fluorescence 
posed 
the 
most 
significant
challenges.
Reasoning that PAH fluorescence might be largely
eliminated in a more realistic combustor geometry
designed to provide preheated inlet air, increased
airflows, 
and enhanced 
mixing, 
the 
PSI 
team
constructed the facility pictured schematically in Fig.
10. The spray-flame test section of Fig. 9 appears with
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 9 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
this second-generation system. In fact, that test section
has since been replaced with a high-pressure section
designed for operation to 50 atm that accommodates
actual engine hardware in the form of a General
Electric CFM56 swirl cup.
To Exhaust
Water-cooled
Contraction
Flame
Flame Stabilizer
Fuel Injector
Honeycomb
Section
Perforated
Plates
Concentric
Inlet Tubes
Air
Fuel 
c.6861
Figure 9. PSI high-pressure spray-flame combustor test
section.
The facility described by Fig. 10 is designed to
deliver a maximum airflow rate of 1 kg/s at 530 K and
50 atm. The system operates in a blow-down mode,
providing ten-minute run times at CFM56 design
specifications with currently available storage capacity.
A separate low-pressure air-supply system is available
for facility preheating and purging. 
A fuel system
designed to supply the fuel injector with 0.55 gpm at
1500 psi completes the facility.
: 
ASMS-
: 2500 psi, 9500 SCF;:
Compressor !
20 SCFM !
Figure 10.
facility.
PSI gas turbine combustor simulator
A PLIF system based on a Nd:YAG-pumped dye
laser and an intensified charge-coupled device (CCD)
camera was recently constructed at PSI. This system
will be used in conjunction with the high-pressure,
heated air-supply system and the optically accessible
combustor to study OH, NO, PAH, fuel vapor, O2, and
soot 
volume 
fraction 
in 
combusting 
flowfields
generated with the CFM56 fuel injector. A large format
(1024x256 pixels) ICCD camera with a multi-viewer
imaging system was selected for this diagnostics
application. With this camera, images of target-species
fluorescence and interfering fluorescence can be
simultaneously 
acquired, 
reducing 
interferences
associated with single-shot PLIF imaging in these high-
pressure spray flames. Now that facility construction
and PLIF-system assembly have been completed,
combustion testing will soon commence.
Activity at MetroLaser, Inc.
Through a recently completed Phase I SBIR effort
and a current Phase II SBIR, researchers at MetroLaser,
Inc., and North Carolina State University are pursuing
measurements 
of 
temperature, 
velocity, 
and
pressure/density in high-pressure, sooting flames via
nonresonant transient-grating spectroscopy (TGS).7'8
The technique involves coherent scattering of a
continuous-wave probe beam from a grating created in
the flowfield under study. Two pulsed pump beams are
crossed in the flowfield to generate an intensity grating
which is coupled to the flow through thermalization and
electrostriction. The resulting spatial modulation of the
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 10 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
local index of refraction is responsible for scattering the
probe beam. 
The optical geometry employed is
depicted schematically in Fig. 11.
This nonresonant TGS technique offers a number of
key advantages for measurements under engine-
488 run HIM filters
aprtal fitter
ilgnalpdii
Figure 11. Schematic of the TGS optical geometry.
Local temperature information can be extracted from
speed-of-sound measurements in the interaction volume
accomplished by monitoring the modulation frequency
of the time-resolved signal produced by the scattered
probe beam. A typical time-resolved signal and the
associated fit to obtain temperature/speed-of-sound
information are provided in Fig. 12.
Time (ns)
Figure 12. TGS signal (and associated fit) acquired in
the burnt gases of a rich ethylene/air flame.
By introducing a reference beam along the signal
path, heterodyne detection can be accomplished. Gas
velocities can be determined through analysis of
heterodyne-signal power spectra by measuring the
frequency shift of the heterodyne feature. 
Finally,
halfwidths of Rayleigh and Brillouin features in the
power spectrum provide pressure/density information.
A simulated heterodyne-mode power spectrum is
depicted in Fig. 13.
2
.£ 
0.8
10 
20 
30
Frequency (MHz)
Figure 13. TGS power spectrum with heterodyne
detection.
operating conditions. 
The signal amplitude grows
quadratically with pressure, and the technique does not
rely on the detection of 
electronically excited
molecules; therefore, TGS is enhanced with increasing
pressure 
and 
largely 
unaffected 
by 
collisional
quenching. 
Soot also enhances the TGS signal by
providing a means for coupling of the pump-induced
intensity grating to the surrounding medium via
thermalization. 
The spatially coherent signal beam
produced during TGS measurements is ideal for
working with test sections that offer limited optical
access. 
In addition, this signal beam is readily
separated from a highly luminous background through
spatial 
and 
spectral 
filtering. 
Because 
TGS
measurements are accomplished in the frequency
domain, the technique is relatively insensitive to signal-
amplitude fluctuations induced through the lasers
employed or through beam steering arising in high-
pressure, optically thick, turbulent environments.
Summary
This paper was designed to establish the motivation
for applying laser-based diagnostic techniques to the
continuing improvement of high-performance, low-
emissions gas turbine combustors. Ideally, diagnostics
should be involved throughout the process of designing,
developing, testing, and fielding practical combustor
hardware. 
In the laboratory phase of this process,
diagnostic techniques contribute to understanding of the
fundamental chemistry and physics at work in the gas
turbine combustor. 
These tools also provide data
essential to the development and 
validation of
combustion models and combustor-design codes. In the
facility phase, hardened diagnostic techniques provide
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 11 ---

Copyright© 1998, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
critical feedback to the engineer seeking to evaluate and
improve the performance of actual engine hardware.
Finally, miniaturized devices based on these diagnostic
techniques can be incorporated into the actual fielded
engine for on-board sensing and control. Case studies
presented 
in 
this 
paper 
document 
continuing
development 
of 
advanced 
laser-based 
diagnostic
techniques and transition of such techniques to the
facility for practical application.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the continuing
efforts of all those associated with the Combustion-
Branch research and development team, particularly the
on-site work force, which includes Air Force personnel
and the talented employees of Innovative Scientific
Solutions, Inc., (Dr. Larry Goss, Principal Investigator)
and the University of Dayton Research Institute (Dr.
Dilip Ballal, Principal Investigator). Mr. Jeff Stutrud,
Mr. Chuck Frayne, and Dr. Robert Hancock of the
Combustion Branch have contributed immeasurably to
the on-site efforts documented in this paper. Drs. Mark
Alien and Mike Miller (Physical Sciences, Inc.) and Dr.
Mike Brown (MetroLaser, Inc.), who continue to
support the Air Force through first-class SBIR efforts,
provided the authors with a number of figures that
appear with their permission. The authors also thank
Dr. Fumi Takahashi who provided figures for this paper
and the associated presentation.
References
1. 
M. A. Linne, D. C. Morse, J. L. Skilowitz, G. J.
Fiechtner, and J. R. Gord, "Two-Dimensional
Pump-Probe Imaging in Reacting Flows," Opt. Lett
20, 2414 (1995).
2. 
S. Gogineni, L. Goss, D. Pestian, and R. Rivir,
"Two-Color Digital PIV Employing a Single CCD
Camera," Exp. Fluids, in press.
3. 
G. J. Sturgess and D. Shouse, "Lean Blowout
Research in a Generic Gas Turbine Combustor
With High Optical Access," Trans. ASME 119,
108 (1997).
4. 
F. Takahashi, W. J. Schmoll, G. L. Switzer, and D.
T. Shouse, "Structure of a Spray Flame Stabilized
on a Production Engine Combustor Swirl Cup,"
Twenty-Fifth 
Symposium 
(International) 
on
Combustion, Pittsburgh PA, 183 (1994).
5. 
M. G. Alien, K. R. McManus, D. M. Sonnefroh,
and 
P. 
H. 
Paul, 
"Planar 
Laser-Induced-
Fluorescence Imaging Measurements of OH and
Hydrocarbon Fuel Fragments in High-Pressure
Spray-Flame Combustion," Appl. Opt. 34, 6287
(1995).
6. 
K. R. McManus, M. G. Alien, and W. T. Rawlins,
"Quantitative Detection and Imaging of Soot
Particles by Laser Induced Incandescence," AIAA
Paper No. 97-0117 (Reno, January 1997).
7. 
M. S. Brown and W. L. Roberts, "Diagnostics in
Reacting 
Flows 
Using 
Transient 
Grating
Spectroscopy," AIAA Paper No. 98-0235 (Reno,
January 1998).
8. 
M. S. Brown, W. L. Roberts, and P. A. DeBarber,
"Thermometry 
in 
High-Pressure 
Soot-Laden
Reacting Flows Via Non-Resonant Laser-Induced
Gratings," AIAA Paper No. 98-0309 (Reno,
January 1998).
11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
