
--- Page 1 ---

 
1 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo 2010: Power for Land, Sea and Air 
ASME Turbo Expo 2010 
July 14-18, 2010, Glasgow, UK 
GT2010-23083 
INFLUENCE OF THE PRIMARY JETS AND FUEL INJECTION ON THE 
AERODYNAMICS OF A PROTOTYPE ANNULAR GAS TURBINE COMBUSTOR 
SECTOR 
 
 
Bassam Mohammad and San-Mou Jeng  
Department of Aerospace Engineering University of Cincinnati 
Cincinnati, OH, USA 
 
 
M. Gurhan Andac 
General Electric Aviation 
Evendale, OH 45215, USA
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Transverse dilution jets are widely used in combustion 
systems.  The current research provides a detailed study of the 
primary jets of a realistic annular combustion chamber sector. 
The combustor sector comprises an aerodynamic diffuser, inlet 
cowl, combustion dome, primary dilution jets, secondary 
dilution jets and cooling strips to provide convective cooling to 
the liner. The chamber contracts toward the end to fit the 
turbine nozzle ring. 2D PIV is employed at an atmospheric 
pressure drop of 4% (isothermal) to delineate the flow field 
characteristics.  The laser is introduced to the sector through the 
exit flange. The interaction between the primary jets and the 
swirling flow as well as the sensitivity of the primary jets to 
perturbations is discussed. The perturbation study includes: 
effect of partially blocking the jets, one at a time, the effect of 
blocking the convective cooling holes, placed underneath the 
primary jets and shooting perpendicular to it. In addition, the 
effect of reducing the size of the primary jets as well as off-
centering the primary jets is explained. Moreover, PIV is 
employed to study the flow field with and without fuel injection 
at four different fuel flow rates. The results show that the flow 
field is very sensitive to perturbations. The cooling air interacts 
with the primary jet and influences the flow field although the 
momentum ratio has a 100:1 order of magnitude. The results 
also show that the big primary jets dictate the flow field in the 
primary zone as well as the secondary zone. However, 
relatively smaller jets mainly influence the primary combustion 
zone because most of the jet is recirculated back to the CRZ. 
Also, the jet penetration is reduced with 25% and 11.5 % 
corresponding to a 77% and 62% reduction of the jet’s area 
respectively. The study indicates the presence of a critical jet 
diameter beyond which the dilution jets have minimum impact 
on the secondary region. The jet off-centering shows significant 
effect on the flow field though it is in the order of 0.4 mm. The 
fuel injection is also shown to influence the flow field as well 
as the primary jets angle. High fuel flow rate is shown to have 
very strong impact on the flow field and thus results in a strong 
distortion of both the primary and secondary zones. The results 
provide useful methods to be used in the flow field structure 
control. Most of the effects shown are attributed to the 
difference in jet opposition. Hence, the results are applicable to 
reacting flow. 
 
1    INTRODUCTION 
Over the past decade, regulations on emissions increased 
drastically. New combustion concepts evolved to alleviate the 
emissions problem. Among the successful new concepts are the 
Lean Premixed (LP) [1-2] and Lean Direct Injection (LDI) [1-
4] concepts. However, a series problem with new and 
conventional combustion concepts is the generation of thermo-
acoustic instabilities (also known as combustion dynamics). It 
is a prominent problem in the case of LP combustors because of 
the loss of the damping mechanism that accompanies the 
diffusion process in non-premixed combustion.  
Aerodynamics significantly affects stability, emissions and 
dynamics of Gas Turbine Combustors (GTC). Usually flame 
anchoring is achieved by applying swirl to the incoming air 
which results in the generation of a Central Recircualtion zone 
(CRZ). Great deal of research has been conducted on the CRZ 
structure and size (for example: ref [5-10] ).   


--- Page 2 ---

 
2 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
Interaction between swirling flow and dilution jets has a 
strong impact on the flow field structure as well as dynamics 
and emissions. Primary dilution jets terminate the CRZ and 
complete the combustion process. It is a common practice to 
design the dilution jets to penetrate at least 40% of the primary 
zone width [11], [12]. Secondary dilution jets follow for 
trimming the exit temperature profile to match the turbine 
thermal loading requirements (also known as required pattern 
factor). Richards and Samuelsen reported that the location of 
the transverse jet is critical to the combustion process. They 
stated that a placement of the transverse primary jets 
downstream of the swirler exit with half to one duct diameter 
will results in optimum penetration [13-14]. 
 
 The current study is conducted on isothermal flow. The 
experimental setup is very challenging and reacting flow 
experiments are very expensive, if possible. The literature (for 
example references [15-21]) shows that the differences between 
isothermal and reacting flow are located in the primary zone 
close to the swirler exit. However, the secondary and dilution 
zones have several similarities. The turbulence levels in these 
regions are very similar. Also, in both modes the dilution jets 
dictate the combustor exit velocity profiles.  
This paper presents a first study of the transverse jets and 
their influence on the flow field structure through a set of 
experiments conducted using Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) 
on the flow field of a single cup fuel rich dome sector (also 
referred to as Single Annular Combustor or SAC). The flow 
field is studied under partial blocking of the primary jets as well 
as off centering the primary jets. In addition, the interaction of 
the convective cooling film with the primary jets is 
investigated. Also, the effect of the primary jet size on the flow 
field structure is presented. Finally, the effect of fuel injection 
on the flow field is discussed. The results provide useful 
methods to be used in the flow field structure control. Most of 
the effects shown are attributed to the difference in jet 
opposition. Hence, the results are applicable to reacting flow. 
2    NOMENCLATURE 
Va  
= Axial velocity component 
Vr  
= Radial velocity component 
V  
= Total velocity defined as 
2
2
V
(Va)
(Vr)


 
RMSR  
= Root mean square value of the radial velocity 
RMST  
= Root mean square value of the tangential velocity 
R  
= Flare exit radius 
CCD 
= Charge Coupled Device 
CFD 
= Computational Fluid Dynamics 
SAC  
= Single Annular Combustor 
pphr 
= flow rate in Pounds per hour 
PIV 
= Particle Image Velocimetry 
LDV 
= Laser Doppler Velocimetry 
LP 
= Lean Premixed Prevaporized 
O2 
= Oxygen 
N2 
= Nitrogen 
LDI 
= Lean Direct Injection 
GTC 
= Gas Turbine Combustor 
CRZ 
= Central Recirculation Zone 
DPSS 
= Diode Pumped Solid State 
X, Y, Z 
= Cartesian coordinate system with the origin 
defined at the flare center 
3     EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND TEST CONDITIONS: 
3.1 Swirl cup and test section: 
The counter rotating coaxial radial swirl cup arrangement 
used in this study is illustrated in Figure 1. The inner swirler is 
connected to a venturi tube. The area ratio of the secondary to 
the primary swirler is greater than 1. The secondary swirler is 
connected to a conical flare. The effective area of the swirler 
cup is 0.62 in2. The swirl cup has a splash plate and a 
combustion dome attached to the exit as depicted in Figure 2. 
The dome expansion angle is not symmetric. There is a 
difference of 9 degrees in the expansion angle of both sides of 
the dome. The SAC sector used is similar, in construction, to 
the one shown in Figure 3. The sector contains two side quartz 
windows, primary and secondary dilution jets, eight film 
cooling strips on each side, combustion dome with cooling 
slots, inlet cowl and inlet diffuser. 
A stainless steel probe is used to study the air/fuel mixing. 
The probe couldn’t be inserted from the exit flange because of 
the contraction that reduced the cross section significantly 
toward the SAC exit. As a result, the sampling probe is inserted 
through the side wall. However, to enable scanning the flow 
field in the X-Z plane, the side plate is designed as shown in 
Figure 4. 
The side plate is composed of aluminum strips that are 
assembled together using two aluminum holders. The sampling 
probe is then inserted through a hole in a relatively longer 
movable aluminum strip as depicted in Figure 4. The movable 
strip is attached to the computer-controlled traverse to enable 
scanning of the flow field in the X-direction. In other words, we 
had to scan a complete line in the X-direction and then switch 
the movable strip with the upper or lower strip to be able to 
scan the flow field at a different Z.  
3.2 Experimental facility: 
A schematic of the facility utilized is presented in Figure 5. 
The SAC sector is mounted on a flange above an 8 inch PVC 
pipe used as a manifold. A honeycomb inside the manifold 
provides uniform flow to the SAC diffuser inlet. Pressure 
sensor and thermocouples are mounted inside the manifold for 
monitoring of pressure and temperature at the SAC sector inlet.  
Air enters the manifold through a 2 inch pipe which can 
provide pressurized air up to 2lb/s at 100Psi. An atomizer 
generating olive oil seeding particles (1~5 μm) is connected to 
the manifold though a seeding port. A blower and an exhaust 
system are mounted above the SAC sector to collect aerosols 
from the combustor. 


--- Page 3 ---

 
3 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
3.3 Diagnostics: 
The flow field velocity measurements are conducted using 
PIV. The PIV system is provided by Lavision Inc. The system 
includes two 1376 x 1040 pixels 12 bit Lavision imager intense 
CCD cameras and two 120 mJ 15 Hz pulse Nd-Yag lasers 
which are synchronized with CCD cameras. A mirror is used to 
get the laser beam to the sheet optics and provide the laser sheet 
at the correct measurement plane as illustrated in Figure 6. Both 
cameras are placed on the top of one another to extend the 
measurement volume (see Figure 7). Both cameras are placed 
perpendicular to the laser sheet. The set up is a real challenge 
since the exit port of the SAC sector has reduced width to 
enable it to fit to the turbine nozzle ring. Figures 6 and 7 
illustrate how complex is the PIV setup. 
Fuel air mixing is studied using a sampling probe connected 
to an Oxygen (O2) paramagnetic analyzer for O2 measurement. 
2D PIV is used to delineate the flow field characteristics with 
and without fuel injection.  
3.4 Test conditions, data acquisition, measurement 
grid and uncertainty: 
The measurements coordinate system is defined such that 
the axial direction of the swirler is designated as the Z direction 
with the zero set at the flare exit. The X direction perpendicular 
to the Z and in the dilution air jet plane.  The origin of this 
coordinate system is located at the center of the swirler exit.  
The coordinate system is shown in Figure 2. Experiments are 
carried out for isothermal flow condition under ambient 
pressure and temperature of 70±1ºF.   
  PIV velocity measurements are conducted in the X-Z 
plane passing by the SAC center (Y=0) at a pressure drop of 
4.3%.  The corresponding air flow rate is approximately 1000 
pphr. The average flow field is obtained by averaging of 200 
PIV instantaneous images.  An interrogation area size of 32x32 
pixels with a window overlap of 50% is used for the image 
processing algorithm. 
The air fuel mixing measurements are undertaken at a fuel 
flow rate of 25 pphr. The SAC sector is scanned with a 
resolution of 3mm in the X direction. Measurements are 
conducted at Z/R= 0.2, 0.58, 0.96, 1.34, 1.72, 2.49 and 3.25 
respectively. 
 PIV is also employed to study the effect of fuel injection 
on the flow field. The measurements are conducted at fuel flow 
rates of 25, 35, 45 and 55 pphr.  
The authors used 50, 75, 100, 150 and 200 images in 
processing the PIV images. The best resolution and minimum 
change in average are noticed as the number of images 
approach 150 images. The error in average is known to be: 
(standard deviation/(number of images)^0.5. Consequently, the 
authors increased the number of images to 200 in order to bring 
the error to a minimum while maintaining reasonable time in 
acquiring and processing the data.  
The laser sheet is focused in the primary zone and close to 
the primary jets (region of high gradients). As reported in the 
literature, as long as a minimum of 10 seeding particles occur 
within the interrogation area then the removal of the Spurious 
vectors using the deviation from the local median (and 
replacing either by vectors corresponding to the 2nd, 3rd or 4th 
highest correlation peak) should result in a typical uncertainty 
of 5-10% [22]. 
4     RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
4.1 The effect of partially blocking the primary 
dilution jets strip: 
The SAC sector has two strips with holes that provide the 
primary dilution jets. There are two strips that oppose one 
another. Each strip is blocked, one at a time, and PIV is 
conducted on the SAC sector to study how the blockage 
process can be used to control the flow field structure. The 
blocking process is illustrated in Figure 8. 
The velocity contours and streamlines with and without 
blockage are illustrated in Figure 9. Figure 9 (a) shows the flow 
field that results when the left primary jet is partially blocked. 
Figure 9 (b) shows the flow field that corresponds to all jets 
fully open. Figure 9 (c) shows the flow field corresponding to 
the partially blocked right primary dilution jet strip.  
With the partially blocked left jet, we notice that the left jet 
becomes weak relative to the right jet and hence, the 
impingement point is shifted from the SAC centerline to the left 
half of the combustor as depicted in Figure 9 (a).  This 
corresponds to a reduction of 9.2% in the jet penetration. A 
strong asymmetry occurs in the SAC primary zone. As the right 
primary jet penetrates more in the primary zone it controls and 
dictates the structure of the SAC primary zone as illustrated in 
Figure 9 (a). It is important to note that as the left dilution jet 
becomes weaker, the pressure applied from the swirling flow 
results in a larger curvature of the left jet trajectory. In other 
words, with the partially blocked jet, the jet angle, with the 
horizontal, increases by 6.5. However, we notice that the size 
of the CRZ is roughly the same with or without blockage. 
It is interesting to also note that the effect of the partially 
blocked left dilution jet extends to the secondary region or to 
the post recirculation zone as shown in Figure 9 (a). This 
becomes obvious when we compare Figure 9 (a) and 9 (b). 
Without blockage, the swirling flow mixes with the primary 
jets and is almost shooting vertical in the secondary region in 
the vicinity of the SAC Sector centerline. However, with the 
partially blocked left jet, the flow in the secondary region tilts 
toward the left hand side of the SAC sector with an angle of -7 
 (relative to the original position). The –ve signs means in 
anticlockwise direction.  
All of the aforementioned effects might have a strong 
impact on the emissions, stability and dynamics of the SAC 
sector. However, reacting flow experiments are needed to 
quantify and study the effect in greater details. 
The effect of the partially blocked right dilution jet on the 
flow field could be explained in a similar manner and therefore, 
for reasons of brevity, we don’t reiterate the same discussion 
here. However, we report a quantification of the effect on the 
flow field: the right primary jet angle increases with 3.5, the 
left jet penetration increases by 7.5% and the jet impingement 


--- Page 4 ---

 
4 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
region tilts with an angle of +20  (relative to the original 
position). +ve refers to rotation in the clockwise direction. 
4.2 The effect of blocking the cooling holes 
underneath the primary dilution jets: 
The primary dilution jets are provided through holes drilled 
on the liner cooling strip. The cooling strip is a strip that is 
cooled by convective cooling. Holes with a diameter in the 
order of magnitude of 1 mm provide the cooling air necessary 
to protect the liner from melting. The diameter of the hole 
providing the primary jet is around 15 times the hole providing 
the cooling jet. The concern is raised about what kind of 
interaction that takes place between the primary jets and the 
cooling jet if any. This is of concern because the cooling jet is 
shooting perpendicular to the primary dilution jet at the point 
where it leaves the hole as demonstrated in Figure 10. Such a 
question is of immense importance especially in the combustor 
design process as well as flow modeling techniques. As a 
matter of fact the couple of holes placed right underneath the 
jets are useless from the point of view of liner cooling (see 
Figure 10). Simply there is no metal at this location due to the 
presence of the dilution hole. Then, the major importance of the 
holes underneath the jets lies in the possibility of them being 
used to control the flow field structure as we will show shortly. 
Figure 11 shows the velocity contours and streamlines with 
and without blockage of the cooling strip underneath the 
primary dilution jets. Figure 11 (a) shows the case with a 
blocked left cooling strip, while Figure 11 (b) shows the flow 
field without blockage and Figure 11 (c) shows the flow field 
with a blocked right cooling strip. 
Under normal running conditions and without blockage, 
the cooling air jet interacts with the primary jet and pushes 
against it resulting in a slight increase of the primary jet angle 
along the horizontal. As the left cooling jet is blocked, we 
notice a slight decrease in the jet angle and a corresponding 
change in the flow field in the primary as well as the secondary 
zone as depicted in Figure 11 (a). Without blockage, both 
primary jets impinge and a portion of the resulting flow is 
recirculated back in the CRZ while the other portion shoots up 
in the secondary region. With blockages, in the vicinity of the 
centerline, the CRZ centerline tilts with an angle of +8 relative 
to the original direction. The jet impingement region angle 
increases with + 6. The effect of blocking the right cooling 
strip can be explained in a similar manner. The associated 
change is manifested in an increase in the tilt of CRZ centerline 
with an angle of +14.5 relative to the original direction. Also, 
the jet impingement region angle increases with an angle of - 
8.4. The momentum of the primary jet is more than 100 times 
the momentum of the cooling jet. However, it still affects the 
flow field as discussed previously.  
4.3 The effect of off-centering the primary jets on the 
flow field. 
In the previous sections, it has been shown that the primary 
jets have a strong influence on the flow field structure. The aim 
of the current section is to study the effect of the slight primary 
jets off centering on the flow field. This study is useful for two 
reasons: First, it provides a method for flow control. Second, as 
engines age, such asymmetry in the geometry is inevitable due 
to factors like thermal stresses and liner oxidation.  
The off-centering is achieved by initially reducing the 
primary jet hole diameter from 0.65 to 0.4 and then we off 
center the jets asymmetrically such that the inner hole is placed 
off center by 1.4 mm and the outer hole is placed off center by 
1.0 mm as illustrated in Figure 12. 
The off centering results are presented in Figure 13. The 
figure shows the total velocity contours with the jets centered 
and off centered. With the jets centered, we notice that the flow 
field is fairly symmetric. However, with the jets off centered, 
the right jet is slightly larger in diameter than the left jet in the 
measurements plane (recall the off centering is not symmetric). 
It is very interesting to see that the higher strength of the right 
jet is pronounced in more jet penetration and more influence on 
the flow field as depicted in Figure 13. The right jet penetration 
increases with 11% while the left jet penetration decreases by 
8.5%. There is not much opposition from the left jet, hence the 
flow field in the primary zone is dictated by the right jet. This is 
manifested an increases in the CRZ centerline tilt with an angle 
of +27.5 relative to the original location. Also, the Jet 
impingement region tilts with an angle of +21.5 relative to the 
original direction.  
4.4 The effect of primary jet size on the flow field 
The original size of the primary jet holes were 0.65 inch. 
We conduct the measurements using jets with diameters of 0.4 
and 0.31 inch to study the effect of the primary jet size on the 
SAC flow field. The jet area reduction that associates the 
diameter reduction is 62% and 77% respectively. The total 
velocity contours and streamlines for all three cases are shown 
in Figure 14.  As the jet diameter decreases, the momentum 
decreases significantly. Consequently, the jet penetration 
decreases by 11.5 and 25 % corresponding to the 62 and 77% 
reduction in the jet area. 
 For the big jets, a small percentage of the jet is recirculated 
back to the CRZ while a larger percentage of the jets mix in the 
secondary region and dictate the flow field structure therein. 
The SAC sector cross sectional area starts to decrease toward 
the outlet after approximately 4R. However, this contraction in 
the area doesn’t seem to affect the flow field in the vicinity of 
the combustor centerline in the secondary region (for the big 
jet’s).  We can see that the flow resulting from the jet impinge 
is almost shooting up vertical in the case of the big jet.  
As the jet size is reduced, we notice that the unrecirculated 
portion of the primary jets decreases significantly and so does 
the influence on the primary jets on the secondary region. The 
62% reduction in area (0.4 inch jets) results in a tilt in the CRZ 
with +7 and a tilt in the jet impingement region with +6. On 
the other hand, the 77% reduction in the jet area (0.31 jets) 
results in a tilt in the CRZ with +16.5 and a tilt in the jet 
impingement region with +16 as illustrated in Figure 14.  


--- Page 5 ---

 
5 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
For the 0.31 diameter jets, the tilting of the flow field to the 
right hand side appears to be the effect of the chamber 
contraction which now has more influence on the flow field in 
the secondary region than the primary. 
These results emphasize the importance of the careful 
selection of the dilution jet’s size. Not only is the location of 
the jet is of high importance, but also the size has significant 
effects on the flow structure and behavior in the primary as well 
as the secondary zone. It appears that for every configuration, a 
critical diameter of the dilution jets exists. By critical we mean 
the diameter below which the influence of the primary jets will 
be restricted to the primary zone.  
4.5 The effect of fuel injection on the flow field 
The profiles of fuel to air ratio by mass (F/A) at different 
downstream distances are presented in Figure 15. The 
measurements are done at 25pphr (Global F/A is 0.025).  
The fuel concentration profile close to the flare exit 
(Z/R=0.2) shows sharp double humped profile as presented in 
Figure 15.  At the same axial distance (Z/R=0.2), the 
measurements extend on the X direction from -1.2R to 1.2R 
(physical domain boundaries). In other words, beyond ±1.2R 
the dome surface is present. We also observe that at this axial 
location, the minimum F/A ratio is 0.05 (twice the global ratio). 
The concentration peaks and reach 0.12 (5 times the global 
ratio) at a radial distance of around 0.7R indicating the 
attainment of maximum fuel concentration. As we proceed 
downstream to an axial distance of 0.581R, the fuel spreads 
over the cross-section and peaks at a radial distance of ±1.2R as 
demonstrated in Figure 12. At the same location, Z=0.581R, the 
minimum F/A is still 0.05. The maximum F/A is around 0.09 
(3.5 times of the global ratio).   
The F/A profiles flatten at a downstream distance of 0.962R 
and show weak peaks at radial distances of -1.8R and 2.0R 
respectively. This asymmetry may be attributed to the 
asymmetry of the combustion dome expansion angle. We 
notice that the profiles are similar at distances of 0.96, 1.34 and 
1.72 as shown in Figure 15. This indicates that most of the 
mixing takes place in a downstream distance of around 1.0R 
(similar conclusions are deduced from the F/A mixing profiles 
at fuel flow rate of 55 pphr, not shown here).  However, as the 
dilution jets are encountered (Z/R=2.49 and 3.25), the F/A 
profiles drops significantly as tremendous amount of air is 
admitted through the holes. 
Figure 16 shows the contours of the local equivalence ratio 
(
l) normalized by the global equivalence ratio (
g
) imposed 
on the flow field velocity vectors. The black contours represent 
the edge of the CRZ and the primary jets wake regions 
respectively. This figure is of prime importance as it helps 
determine the stability characteristic of the combustor [23]. We 
notice that the fuel spreads in the vicinity of the edge of the 
CRZ with an angle of 45 (with the horizontal). The authors 
expect that a smaller spreading angle of 50 to 60  will result in 
higher concentration of the fuel inside the CRZ and since the 
velocities are lower, a highly sustained flame is highly 
probable. This might result in damping the oscillations 
observed during the reacting flow experiments [24].  
It is important to study the impact of the fuel injection on 
the aerodynamics of the combustor. In the previous sections, 
we discussed the sensitivity of the primary jets to perturbations. 
We drew the general conclusion that the flow field is sensitive 
especially when it comes to perturbations that directly affect the 
primary jets. It is critical to keep in mind that this might not be 
a universal behavior because the size of the jets is relatively big 
in the combustor under study.  This is illustrated in the study 
we conducted on the effect of the jet size on the flow field.  
 Figure 17 shows the velocity vectors and streamlines for 
the primary region with and without fuel injection. The fuel 
flow rate is 25 pphr. We observe that there is a change in the 
flow field structure with fuel injection. The total air flow rate at 
pressure drop of 4.3% is approximately 1000 pphr. Usually 
Fuel Rich Dome Combustors are designed such that 30% of the 
total air flow rate flows through the combustion dome (roughly 
350 pphr). If the fuel flow rate is 25 pphr then the percentage of 
the fuel flow rate represents around 7% of the air flow rate. 
To be able to provide a better explanation of the effect of 
fuel injection on the flow field, we construct a plot of the 
difference in velocity magnitudes with and without fuel 
injection. Figure 18 shows the value of V (with injection) -V
without injection. We notice that the velocity increases in the 
swirling jet region because most of the fuel is present in this 
region as depicted in Figure 15. The velocity decreases in the 
vicinity of the primary jets upstream region and increases in the 
vicinity of the primary jets downstream region. This is due to 
the change in the primary jets angle (-3 relative to original 
location). It is clear from Figures 17, 18 and 19 that the jet 
angle increases continuously with fuel injection.  
Figure 19 shows the velocity vectors and streamlines with 
and without fuel injection at fuel flow rate of 55 pphr. The edge 
of the CRZ and the primary jets are regions of high turbulence 
activities. Hence, once instabilities are generated, they usually 
occur at such regions. Indeed, such instabilities were observed 
while conducting reacting flow experiments on the same SAC 
sector [24]. The low frequency instabilities were attributed to 
the swirling flow in the primary region. The authors wanted to 
study the effect of fuel injection on the size of the CRZ because 
the CRZ is the source of ignition, any parameter that affects the 
CRZ (especially the upstream portion) may be significantly 
contributing to the generation of instabilities. The primary jets 
wake regions should be thought of in a similar fashion.  In other 
words, the primary jet edges are zones of fuel reaction, if 
enough fuel is provided. This is evident from the reacting flow 
experiments that were conducted on the same SAC sector [24].  
Figure 20 shows the size of the CRZ as well as the jet wake 
regions at different fuel flow rates. We can see that the size of 
the CRZ is approximately constant with a slight variation in the 
upstream region close to the flare exit. However, significant 
reduction of the jets wake regions takes place with fuel 
injection as presented in Figure 20. It also seems that the left 
primary jet wake region change continuously in size with the 
increase in the fuel flow rate. It is worth mentioning that a very 


--- Page 6 ---

 
6 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
similar behavior was observed in reacting flow experiments. 
Also, this behavior of the left jet wake region provides one 
possible explanation for the generation of instabilities that 
occurred in the primary jet regions at high power conditions. 
Thermo-acoustic instabilities studies on this SAC sector are 
discussed elsewhere [24].  
5     CONCLUSIONS 
Complex interaction takes place between the primary 
dilution jets and the swirling flow in GTC. The diameter of the 
jets is a critical parameter that dictates the degree of influence 
that the primary jets impose on the flow structure. Larger jets 
appear to influence both the primary and secondary regions. 
The influence of the smaller jets is limited to the primary 
region. The process appears to be related to, mainly, the portion 
of the jet recirculated back to the CRZ as well as the jet 
penetration. 
Introducing perturbations with high amplitude (like partially 
blocking the jets or off-centering the jets) strongly influences 
the flow field structure mainly because of the reduction of the 
jet opposition as well as the change in the jet angle. 
Perturbations of small magnitude (like blocking the cooling jets 
underneath the primary jets) still affect the flow field, but only 
slightly. 
 Transverse jets contribute to the generation of instabilities 
(at high power) because the fuel flow influences the jet wake 
region and the heat release that occurs at this location. The 
effect is more pronounced at high fuel flow rate.  
The results presented in the current research provide the 
industry as well as researchers in the field of GT combustion 
with the following: 
 Methods to effectively control the flow field structure. 
 Factors to be considered during the design process. 
 Expected characteristics with combustor wear and aging. 
6     REFERENCES 
[1] Alkabie, H. S., Andrews, G. E., and Ahmad, N. T., 1988., 
"Lean Low Nox Primary Zones Using Radial Swirlers," ASME 
Paper 88-GT-245, Amsterdam. 
[2] Anderson, D. N., 1981, "Ultra Lean Combustion at High 
Inlet Temperatures," ASME Paper 81-GT-44, Houston, TX. 
[3] H.S., A., and Andrews, G. E., 1989, "Ultra Low Nox 
Emissions for Gas and Liquid Fuels Using Radial Swirlers," 
ASME Paper 89-GT-322. 
[4] Tacina, R., 1990, "Low Nox Potential of Gas Turbine 
Engines," AIAA Paper, 90-0550, Reno, NV. 
[5] Beer, J. M., and Chigier, N., 1972, Combustion 
Aerodynamics, Applied Science Publishers LTD, London. 
[6] Elkady, A. M., 2005, "Experimental Investigation of 
Aerodynamics, Combustion, and Emissions Characteristics 
within the Primary Zone of a Gas Turbine Combustor," Ph.D. 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati. 
[7] Gupta, A. K., Lilley, D. G., and Syred, N., 1984, Swirl 
Flows, Abacus Press. 
[8] Ji, J., and Gore, J. P., 2002, "Flow Structure in Lean 
Premixed Swirling Combustion," Twenty-Nineth Symposium on 
Combustion, 29(1), pp. 861-867. 
[9] Sadanandan, R., and Stöhr, M. M., W., 2008, "Simultaneous 
Oh-Plif and Piv Measurements in a Gas Turbine Model 
Combustor," Applied Physics B, 90(3-4), pp. 609-618. 
[10] Syred, N., and Beér, J. M., 1974, "Combustion in Swirling 
Flows: A Review," Combustion and Flame, 23(1), pp. 143-201. 
[11] Mellor, A. M., 1990, Design of Modern Turbine 
Combustors, Academic Press, London ; San Diego. 
[12] Lefebvre, A. H., 1999, Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor & 
Francis, Philadelphia. 
[13] Richards, C. D., and Samuelsen, G. S., 1990, "The Role of 
Primary Jet Injection on Mixing in Gas Turbine Combustion," 
Proc. Twenty-third Symposium on Combustion, pp. 1071-1077. 
[14] Richards, C. D., and Samuelsen, G. S., 1992, "The Role of 
Primary Jets in the Dome Region Aerodynamics of a Model 
Can Combustor," Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and 
Power-Transactions of the Asme, 114(1), pp. 20-26. 
[15] Stevens, S. J., and Carrotte, J. F., 1990, "Experimental 
Studies of Combustor Dilution Zone Aerodynamics, Part Ii: Jet 
Development," Journal of Propulsion, 6(4), pp. 504- 511. 
[16] Goebel, S., Abuaf, N., Lovett, J., and Lee, C., 1993, 
"Measurements of Combustor Velocity and Turbulence 
Profiles," ASME Paper No. 93-GT-228. 
[17] Holdeman, J. D., 1993, "Mixing of Multiple Jets with a 
Confined Subsonic Crossflow," Progress in Energy and 
Combustion Science, 19(1), pp. 31-70. 
[18] Gulati, A., Tolpadi, A., Vandeusen, G., and Burrus, D., 
1995, "Effect of Dilution Air on the Scalar Flowfield at 
Combustor Sector Exit," Journal of Propulsion and Power, 
11(6), pp. 1162-1169. 
[19] Anacleto, P., Heitor, M., and Moreira, A., 1996, "The Mean 
and Turbulent Flowfields in a Model Rql Gas-Turbine 
Combustor," Experiments in Fluids, 22(2), pp. 153-164. 
[20] Doerr, T., Blomeyer, M., and Hennecke, D., 1997, 
"Optimization of Multiple Jets Mixing with a Confined 
Crossflow," Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and 
Power, 119(315-321). 
[21] Gritsch, M., Martiny, M., Schulz, A., Kim, S., Wittig, S., 
and . August 23-28, 1998, "Gas Turbine Heat Transfer: Newest 
Developments in Components Performance," Proc. Heat 
Transfer 1998: Proceedings of the 11th International Heat 
Transfer Conference (IHTC), Kyongju, Korea. 
[22] Keane, R. D., and Adrian, R. J., 1992, "Theory of Cross-
Correlation Analysis of Piv Images " Applied Scientific 
Research, 49(3). 
[23] Weigand, P., Meier, W., Duan, X. R., Stricker, W., and 
Aigner, M., 2006, "Investigations of Swirl Flames in a Gas 
Turbine Model Combustor I. Flow Field, Structures, 
Temperature, and Species Distributions," Combustion and 
Flame, 144(1), pp. 205-224. 
[24] Cai, J., Ichihasi, F., Mohammad, B. S., Tambe, S. B., Kao, 
Y.-H., and Jeng, S. M., 2010, "Gas Turbine Single Annular 
Combustor Sector: Combustion Dynamics," Orlando, Florida. 
 


--- Page 7 ---

 
7 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Typical SAC Sector. 
 
Figure 2.  Swirl cup exit configuration and 
coordinate system illustration. 
 
Figure 1. Typical swirl cup arrangement with 
counter rotating radial swirlers. 


--- Page 8 ---

 
8 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 4. Side plate designed to enable insertion of the sampling probe and scanning of the SAC flow field. 
 
 
Figure 5. Schematic of the experimental facility. 


--- Page 9 ---

 
9 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Optics arrangement to get the laser sheet inside the SAC sector 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. PIV setup on the rig. 
 


--- Page 10 ---

 
10 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
 
Figure 8. Illustration of the primary jets partial blocking. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. The effect of partially blocking the primary dilution jets on the flow field. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 


--- Page 11 ---

 
 
Figure 10. Illustration of primary jets and cooling jets interaction 
 
 
Figure 11. The effect of blocking the cooling strip underneath the primary jets. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 


--- Page 12 ---

 
12 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 12. Illustration of primary jet holes off centering. 
 
Figure 13. The effect of off-centering the primary jets on the SAC flow field 
 
 


--- Page 13 ---

 
13 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 14.  The effect of primary jet size on the flow field. 
 
FA ratio by mass (FA global=0.025)
X/R
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
FA ratio by mass
-0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Z/R=0.2
Z/R=0.962
Z/R=1.724
Z/R=2.486
Z/R=3.248
Z/R=0.581
Z/R=1.343
 
Figure 15.  Profiles of F/A ratio by mass at fuel flow rate of 25pphr at different axial stations. 
 


--- Page 14 ---

 
14 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 16. Normalized equivalence ratio contours imposed on velocity vectors at fuel flow rate of 25 pphr. 
 
 
Figure 17. Velocity vectors and streamlines with and without fuel injection (fuel flow rate of 25 pphr).
 
Figure 18. Difference in velocity magnitudes with and without fuel injection at fuel flow rate of 25 pphr. 
X/R
Z/R
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
FI)Norm
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
X/R
Z/R
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
Delta V
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10


--- Page 15 ---

 
15 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Fuel injection effect on the flow field structure at fuel flow rate of 55 pphr. 
 
Figure 20. Effect of the fuel injection on the edges of the CRZ and Jets wake regions. 
X/R
Z/R
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
Fuel = 0
Fuel = 25 pphr
Fuel = 35 pphr
Fuel = 45 pphr
Fuel = 55 pphr
