
--- Page 1 ---

 
1 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo 2010: Power for Land, Sea and Air 
ASME Turbo Expo 2010 
July 14-18, 2010, Glasgow, UK 
GT2010-23082 
THE EFFECT OF GEOMETRY ON THE AERODYNAMICS OF A PROTOTYPE GAS 
TURBINE COMBUSTOR 
 
 
Bassam Mohammad and San-Mou Jeng 
Department of Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics 
University of Cincinnati 
Cincinnati, OH 
USA 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The method of admission of the swirling flow to the 
combustion chamber has a strong influence on the flow field 
structure in Gas Turbine Combustors (GTC).  Two different exit 
configurations are studied. The first configuration is that of a 
swirl cup that ends only with a splash plate such that there is a 
sudden unguided expansion as the flow emanates from the swirl 
cup. The second is a swirl cup that ends with a splash plate and 
an asymmetric combustion dome. Laser Doppler Velocimetry 
(LDV) measurements are conducted in the horizontal plane (X-
Y), for both configurations, 5mm from the flare exit. Also, 
LDV measurements are conducted in two vertical planes 
passing by the combustor centerline (X-Z and Y-Z). The results 
reveal a significant difference in the flow structure for both 
configurations. The combustion dome appears to reduce the 
turbulence activities close to the exit of the swirl cup. In 
addition, the presence of the combustion dome eliminates the 
corner recirculation zone and the low velocity region close to 
the combustor walls. It is interesting to see that the asymmetry 
of the combustion dome (9° difference in the expansion angle 
on both sides) results in a significant asymmetry in the velocity 
magnitude as well as the turbulence activities. Moreover, the 
asymmetry in the combustion dome results in a tilting of the 
CRZ toward the surface with the higher expansion angle. The 
results highlight the importance of the proper and careful 
design of the GTC front section. The experiments are 
conducted in a dump combustor (rectangular cross section). To 
study the effect of the chamber geometry on the flow field,   the 
base configuration is installed in an annular combustor sector 
and LDV measurements are conducted in the axial radial plane 
(X-Z). The flow field as well as the shape of the CRZ are 
significantly different in both cases. The CRZ height reduced 
by 40% with the swirl cup installed to the SAC sector. The 
results emphasize the strong influence of the confinement on 
the flow structure. 
 
1    INTRODUCTION 
The requirements of low emissions and stable combustion 
are among the first priorities in the development and design of 
Gas Turbine Combustors (GTC).  Aerodynamics play a vital 
role in stability, emissions as well as dynamics issues related to 
GTC. 
Researchers 
have 
been 
studying, 
for 
decades, 
aerodynamics in reacting and non-reacting flow fields. 
Significance of the aerodynamics in the combustion process is 
evident even in a simple process like igniting a cigarette lighter 
or even a match.  
 
Swirling flow is commonly utilized in GTC. The idea 
depends on the generation of a Central Recirculation Zone 
(CRZ) which, as the name implies, recirculates a portion of the 
hot gases back to ignite the fresh coming mixture. The flow 
structure, factors affecting the size of the CRZ and different 
methods of swirl generation for simple swirlers are well 
documented (for example, ref [1-3]).   
 
The CRZ has a highly periodic asymmetric instantaneous 
structure (ref [4-10]).   The research conducted by Sadanandan, 
R. [11] showed that the small scale instantaneous eddies that 
develop in the flow field have very strong influence on the 
orientation of the reaction zone.  
 
Few years ago, the swirl cup was introduced as a unique 
device to prepare the air fuel mixture. Many studies were 
conducted on counter-rotating swirl cup. The flow field has 
been studied by Mehta et al. [12]. The empirical design 
approaches as well as the Computational Fluid Dynamics 
(CFD) were conducted by Mongia et al. [13-19].  The Reynolds 
number effect on the flow structure of a counter rotating swirl 
cup was studied by Yongqiang Fu et al. [20]. The effect of fuel 
and equivalence ratio on spray was also studied by Yongqiang 


--- Page 2 ---

 
2 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
Fu et al. [21]. In addition, Yongqiang Fu, et al. studied the 
Confinement effect on the flow field [22]. Mongia [23] 
discussed in great detail, the benchmark experiments that were 
conducted on the swirl cup and compared the measurements to 
the CFD results. Unfortunately, according to Mongai [23], there 
is still a gap between CFD and measurements. 
 
2    NOMENCLATURE 
Va  
= Axial velocity component 
Vr  
= Radial velocity component 
Vt  
= Tangential velocity component 
RMSA  = Root mean square value of the axial velocity 
RMSR  
= Root mean square value of the radial velocity 
RMST  
= Root mean square value of the tangential velocity 
R  
= Flare exit radius 
CFD  
= Computational Fluid Dynamics 
SAC  
= Single Annular Combustor 
PIV 
= Particle Image Velocimetry 
LDV 
= Laser Doppler Velocimetry 
GTC 
= Gas Turbine Combustor 
CRZ 
= Central Recirculation Zone 
DPSS 
= Diode Pumped Solid State 
X, Y, Z 
= Cartesian coordinate system with the origin 
defined at the flare center 
3     EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND TEST CONDITIONS: 
3.1 Swirl cup and test sections: 
The counter rotating coaxial radial swirlecup arrangement 
used in this study is illustrated in Figure 1. The inner swirler is 
connected to a venturi tube as depicted in Figure 1. The area 
ratio of the secondary to primary swirler is greater than 1. The 
secondary swirler is connected to a conical flare. The effective 
area of the swirl cup is 0.62 in2. Two exit configurations are 
being tested. We refer to them as the base configuration and 
configuration 1. The base configuration has a splash plate and a 
combustion dome attached to the exit as depicted in Figure 2 
The dome expansion angle is not symmetric. There is a 
difference of 9 degrees in the expansion angle of both sides of 
the dome. Configuration 1 is also shown in Figure 2. It is only 
equipped with a splash plate. The hardware is tested within a 
rectangular plexi-glass chamber (dump combustor). The 
dimensions are 133.6 x 114.3 x 330.2 mm respectively. The 
thickness of the plexi-glass test section is 1.6 mm. In order to 
study the confinement effect, the base configuration is also 
installed in a Single Annular Combustor (SAC) sector. All the 
SAC dilution holes are blocked to limit the study to the effect 
of the geometry on the flow field. The boundaries of the SAC 
sector are shown in Figures 25 and 26. The sector has a 
trapezoidal cross section (it is a sector of an engine). The width 
to breadth ratio of the SAC sector is the same width to breadth 
ratio of the rectangular chamber (85%). The SAC sector ends 
with a contraction toward the exit (usually combustor are 
designed in a way to enable attachment to the turbine nozzle 
ring). However, the geometrical details of the SAC are 
discussed elsewhere [24]. 
3.2 Experimental facility: 
A schematic of the facility utilized is presented in Figure 3. 
A 203 mm PVC pipe is used as a manifold. A honeycomb 
inside the manifold provides uniform flow to the test section.  
Pressure sensor and thermocouples are mounted inside the 
manifold for monitoring of pressure and temperature at the test 
section inlet.  Air enters the manifold through a 50 mm pipe 
which can provide pressurized air up to 1 kg/s at 6.8 bars. An 
atomizer generating olive oil seeding particles (1~5 μm) is 
connected to the manifold through a seeding port. A blower and 
an exhaust system are mounted above the test section to collect 
aerosols. To enable testing in the rectangular plexi-glass 
chamber, the swirl cup is mounted on a flange attached to the 
manifold and the plexi-glass chamber is installed on the flange. 
Later, the swirl cup is assembled to the SAC sector and 
measurements are repeated. 
3.3 Diagnostics: 
The two component LDV measurements are conducted 
using an Artium Technologies Inc. system. The system uses 
two diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers as the light source 
which doesn’t require air or water cooling. The system 
comprises a transmitter, a receiver, two ASA signal processors 
and a computer. The 500 mm focal length transmitter and 300 
mm focal length receiver are mounted on a computer controlled 
traverse. 
3.4 Test conditions, data acquisition, measurement 
grid and uncertainty: 
Experiments are conducted for isothermal flow conditions 
under ambient pressure and a temperature of 70±1ºF.  LDV 
measurements are conducted at a total pressure drop (or total 
pressure loss) of 4.9%.  
The data count is typically more than 7000 for the green 
laser and 3000 for the blue laser. The uncertainty in the mean 
velocity is within 0.1-0.3 m/s. 
The measurements coordinate system is defined such that 
the axial direction of the swirler is designated as the Z direction 
with the zero set at the flare exit. The X direction is 
perpendicular to the Z and in the expanding dome plane.  The Y 
direction is perpendicular to both Z and X. The coordinate 
system for both configurations under investigation is illustrated 
in Figure 4. 
Measurements are conducted in the axial radial plan (X-Z), 
the tangential radial plan (Y-Z) plane as well as the horizontal 
plane (X-Y). Both vertical measurements planes pass by the 
swirler centerline.  
The horizontal measurement plane is located 5mm from 
the flare. The measurement grid has a resolution of 2mm in 
both the X and Y directions. The vertical plane measurements 
are conducted at axial locations (Z/R) of 0.2, 0.4, 0.8, 1.6, 2, 4, 
6, 6.68 and 8. The measurement grid has a fine resolution of 
1mm in both the radial and tangential directions.  


--- Page 3 ---

 
3 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
The SAC sector vertical plane measurements are 
conducted with a resolution of 2mm in both the axial and radial 
direction.   
4     RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
4.1 Horizontal plane (X-Y) measurements for both 
configurations: 
The axial velocity contours for configuration 1 and the 
base configuration are presented in Figure 5 and 6 respectively. 
The results are non-dimensionalized by the flare radius (R). 
There are two black contours. The inner one shows the edge of 
the CRZ (contour of zero axial velocity). The outer one shows 
the edge of the flare. The axial velocity magnitude within the 
CRZ is typically 10 m/s. Outside of the CRZ, we notice high 
velocities indicating the presence of the annular high speed jet 
emanating from the swirl cup.  
The effect of the splash plate edge on the flow field is 
considerable. Figure 5 shows that the flow field is axi-
symmetric only in the central region and up to the axial velocity 
contour of 25 m/s. The region outside the 25 m/s contour is not 
axi-symmetric because of the presence of the splash plate lip 
(see Figure 4). The lip of the splash plate has a height of 5mm 
yet, it affects the velocity magnitude significantly as depicted in 
Figure 5. The velocity in the bounded portion of the splash 
plate (X-Z plane) reaches roughly 20 m/s. However, the 
unbounded region (Y-Z plane) reaches velocities up to 30 m/s.  
The dome effect on the flow field is apparent as shown in 
Figure 6. The asymmetry in the axial velocity magnitude is 
attributed to the gradual expansion in the X-Z plane compared 
to the abrupt expansion in the Y-Z plane. In addition, we notice 
that the velocities are higher along the +ve X-direction than the 
-ve X direction. This is due to the slightly higher expansion on 
the +ve X direction. This effect will be further illustrated when 
the measurements in the axial radial plane are presented. 
The contours of the root mean square (rms) value of the 
axial velocity (RMSA) in the horizontal plane for configuration 
1 and the base configuration are presented in Figures 7 and 8 
respectively. It is of prime importance to delineate regions with 
high turbulence for they become candidates for the 
development of periodic oscillations. The velocity oscillations 
in the vicinity of the flame zone strongly influence the flame 
response.  The core of the CRZ is a region of low turbulence 
fluctuations as illustrated in Figures 7 and 8. However, the edge 
of the CRZ is a region of high turbulence activities. The 
turbulence activities are maximized in the annular jet region. 
Also, both figures show that the turbulence activity is relatively 
higher on the unbounded regions than the bounded regions. We 
already showed that the velocities follow the same trend. The 
presence of the dome damps the oscillations as depicted in 
Figure 8. In addition, the dome reduces the sensitivity of the 
flow to induced oscillations by eliminating the Outer 
Recircualtion Zone (also known as corner recirculation zone). 
This highlights the importance of gradually expanding the 
swirling flow to achieve higher flame stability. 
4.2 Vertical plane (X-Z) measurements for both 
configurations: 
4.2.1 
Axial 
velocity 
and 
turbulent 
fluctuating 
component: 
The axial velocity profiles for configuration 1 and the base 
configuration are presented in Figure 9 and 10 respectively. 
Figure 9 shows typical double humped axial velocity profiles 
near the swirler exit. As the flow proceeds downstream, the 
humps move away from the centerline indicating the growth of 
the CRZ (profiles from Z/R=0.2 to 1.6). A point is reached at 
which the maximum velocity occurs close to the dump 
combustor wall (Z/R=2). Further downstream, the CRZ starts 
closing and it eventually disappears at Z/R=6. A better 
representation of the results is obtained by plotting the contours 
of axial velocities as presented in Figure 11 (configuration 1). 
The contour plot shows that the flow field is fairly symmetric. 
This is also illustrated by plotting the streamlines in Figure 11. 
The black contour represents the edge of the CRZ. We observe 
that the CRZ extends up to 6.5R. Only the flow field near the 
swirl cup exit (roughly up to 3R) is of importance (roughly the 
location of the primary jets). In a real combustor, this is what 
we refer to as the primary zone or the dome region. In this 
region the swirling flow is the dominant flow. The CRZ reaches 
a maximum width of 2R at a downstream distance of 1.8R.  
Figure 10 shows the axial velocity profiles for the base 
configuration.  The effect of the dome on the flow field is 
enormous. We noticed that the profiles show no double humps 
along the expanding surfaces of the combustion dome. In other 
words, the combustion dome eliminates the regions of low 
velocity close to the combustor wall. Also, the velocity profiles 
show that the combustion dome eliminates the corner 
recirculation zone (compare Figures 11 and 12).  
Figure 12 shows the contours of the axial velocities for the 
base configuration in the X-Z plane. The contour plot shows 
that the flow field is not symmetric. The velocities on the right 
hand side of the chamber are relatively higher than the left hand 
side. Recall that the right hand side is the one with higher 
expansion angle. In other words, the asymmetry of the dome 
plays a major rule in the asymmetry of the flow field. The CRZ 
appears to be tilted toward the left hand side as shown in Figure 
12. It is really interesting that only 9° difference results in such 
impact. It is even more interesting that the effect is convected 
downstream up to the end of the combustor (see the velocity 
profile at Z/R=8).  
The RMSA contours in the X-Z plan for configuration 1 are 
presented in Figure 13. The turbulence activities are high close 
to the swirler exit at the expanding annular jet region. Also, the 
turbulence activities are high in vicinity of the edge of the CRZ. 
There is no doubt that the edge of the CRZ is a very critical 
region as the flow is switching direction.  However, the 
turbulence decays downstream as the flow becomes fully 
developed. The high turbulence activities are essential in 
improving the mixing and enhancing the fuel air reaction. 
Figure 14 demonstrates the RMSA contours in the X-Z for 
the base configuration. We notice that the dome presence 


--- Page 4 ---

 
4 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
results in a decrease of the amplitude of oscillations close to the 
swirler exit. However, the turbulence decays downstream at a 
distance of 7R (it decays around 4R for configuration 1).   
4.2.2 Radial velocity and turbulent fluctuating 
component: 
The radial velocity profiles corresponding to the axial 
velocity profiles discussed previously are presented for 
configuration 1 and the base configuration in Figures 15 and 16 
respectively.   
Figure 15 shows that as the flow emanates from the flare, it 
suddenly expands and there is a tremendous increase in the 
radial velocity. However, the radial velocity diminishes in the 
vicinity of the combustor centerline. As the flow proceeds 
downstream, the radial velocity peaks starts moving away from 
the centerline. This is accompanied by a decrease in the 
velocity magnitude as the flow spreads over the cross section. 
At a downstream distance of 20mm the expanding jet reaches 
the combustor walls. The jet impinges and bounces off the wall 
at a distance of around 40mm as shown in Figure 15 (radial 
velocity profiles switch direction). Toward the end of the 
combustor, the radial velocity vanishes indicating that the flow 
becomes fully developed. 
The base configuration radial velocity profiles, illustrated in 
Figure 16, show similar behavior to that of configuration 1. 
However, the radial velocity is slightly higher on the dome side 
with the higher expansion angle (right hand side). We also 
notice that there are almost no radial velocity humps in the 
region close to the swirler exit. In other words, the expanding 
jet reaches its maximum velocity at the expanding surface of 
the dome. This is a major difference between both 
configurations. Unlike configuration 1, at Z/R=8 the radial 
velocity doesn’t vanish.  
The radial velocity rms contours (RMSR) for configuration 
1 and the base configuration are presented in Figures 17 and 18 
respectively.  The difference between the rms values of the 
axial and radial velocity components is significant in the 
vicinity of the swirler exit especially in the expanding jet 
region. The high anisotropy of turbulence in that region may be 
the reason that existing turbulence models fail to predict the 
swirling flow close to the swirler exit.  
4.3 Vertical plane (Y-Z) measurements for both 
configurations: 
4.3.1 
Axial 
velocity 
and 
turbulent 
fluctuating 
component: 
The axial velocity profiles for configuration 1 and the base 
configuration are presented in Figures 19 and 20 respectively. 
It is interesting to find out that both configurations have 
very similar axial velocity profiles in the Y-Z plane which is 
attributed to the fact that both configurations have no restriction 
on the flow in the Y-Z plane.  As a result of this similarity, the 
discussion in the current section is limited to configuration 1. 
 We notice that up to a distance of 4R the velocity inside 
the CRZ is still 10 m/s (similar to the X-Z results).  It is 
attention-grabbing that the velocity magnitude is similar even 
though the chamber has a rectangular cross section. In other 
words, along the short side or the long side the velocity inside 
the CRZ is still the same (10 m/s). However, the jet velocity is 
relatively higher (comparing the Y-Z to the X-Z) as illustrated 
by the contours of axial velocity in Figure 21 which might be 
attributed to two factors. First, the chamber doesn’t have a 
square cross section. It has a rectangular cross section with the 
short side in the Y-Z plane. In other words, the increase in 
velocity occurs due to the relative reduction in the forward flow 
area. Second, the presence of the splash plate lip in the Y-Z 
direction only. The CRZ maximum width in the Y-Z plane is 
around 3.2Rwhile the maximum width in the X-Z plane is 
around 3.8R and so the ratio is around 0.85. It is appealing that 
the chamber rectangular cross section also has a width to 
breadth ratio of 0.85 which highlights the strong influence of 
the confinement on the shape of the CRZ. 
4.3.2 Tangential velocity and turbulent fluctuating 
component: 
The tangential velocity profiles for configuration 1 and the 
base configuration are presented in Figures 22 and 23 
respectively. Since both configurations show similar behavior, 
we will focus only on configuration 1. 
The swirl cup has two radial swirlers with counter-rotating 
vanes arrangement. However, the primary swirler has a larger 
effective area than the secondary swirler. It is interesting to see 
that at 5mm the central region of the combustor has almost zero 
tangential velocity as shown in Figure 22. This is an indication 
of the fact that the mixing occurred between the primary and 
secondary flow inside the venturi and before the flow reached 
the 5mm downstream distance. However, we can still see that 
there is a small portion (from y/R=0.4 to 0.8) of the curve that 
has a counter rotation to the rest of the flow.  The tangential 
velocity profile at Y/R=0.2 also shows a typical Rankin vortex 
behavior (a forced or body vortex followed by a free vortex). 
As we proceed downstream, we can see that the flow field 
is entirely rotating in the counter clockwise direction as shown 
in Figure 22. We can see that up to Y/R=0.8 the tangential 
velocity profiles are not smooth. This is expected because of 
the highly 3D unsteady complex flow close to the swirler exit. 
This is the region that CFD fails to capture. The tangential 
velocity profiles continue to show a Rankin vortex behavior up 
to a downstream distance of Y/R=1.6. However, as we proceed 
downstream, the swirling flow becomes fully developed and the 
tangential velocity profiles become smooth and follow a forced 
vortex behavior. 
Figure 24 shows the tangential velocity contours and the 
corresponding rms values (RMST) for configuration 1. The 
swirling flow is fairly symmetric around the combustor 
centerline. We can see that in the vicinity of the combustor 
centerline, no swirl is present. High swirling velocities are 
present in the jet region and extend downstream up to a 
distance of 1R. High turbulence activities occur in the jet region 


--- Page 5 ---

 
5 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
and around the edge of the CRZ as depicted in Figure 24. In 
addition, we still notice high anisotropy in the turbulence 
stresses (compare the axial and tangential rms). 
4.4 Confinement effect on the flow field: 
The axial and radial velocity contours of the base 
configuration installed in the SAC sector are shown in Figure 
25. The CRZ shape is strongly influenced by the confinement 
as we notice that the CRZ height reduces from 8R (rectangular 
chamber) to 4.8R (SAC sector). The maximum width is almost 
the same. However, the CRZ is much fatter. The variation of 
the size of the CRZ will have a significant influence on the 
reacting flow characteristics. Despite the fact that the size of the 
CRZ is directly related to the amount of mass being 
recirculated back and consequently to the heat release rate, 
reacting flow measurements are needed to verify such 
statements. The axial velocity inside the CRZ in both 
confinements is around 10 m/s up to 3R. The expanding 
swirling jet radial velocity is similar in both confinements up to 
1R.  
Usually real combustion chambers are designed with a 
contraction toward the combustor end such that the combustor 
exit will fit the turbine nozzle ring. The effect of the contraction 
on the flow field is apparent from the streamlines as illustrated 
in Figure 25. The flow field is tilted in the same direction of the 
inclined wall and that effect extends further away from the 
inclined way. It almost extends up to the other chamber wall as 
shown in Figure 25. Radial velocity is high at the expanding jet 
region. It diminishes in all other regions but the area affected by 
the contracting combustor wall.  
The axial and radial rms contours for the same 
configuration are illustrated in Figure 26.  The highest 
turbulence activities are limited to the expanding jet region. It 
extends downstream up to a distance of 1.5R. As we proceed 
downstream, the rms value drops by about 50% in the vicinity 
of the CRZ edge. 
The rms values of the velocities for the base configuration 
are different with different confinements. Figures 26 and 14 
show noticeable differences in the rms contours in the 
expanding jet region, that fact emphasizes the importance of 
testing the hardware in geometries as close as possible to the 
real geometries.    
5     CONCLUSIONS 
The expanding annular swirling jet region emanating from 
the flare is shown to be a region of high amplitude oscillations. 
Thus, such a region becomes very sensitive and even a short lip 
is shown to have a considerable effect on the flow field.  
The dome damps the velocity fluctuations in the expanding 
jet region. Hence, the sensitivity of the flow field to generation 
of periodic oscillations is expected to reduce significantly and 
therefore, more stable combustion could be achieved.  
Oscillations in the axial, radial and tangential velocities are 
shown to have different magnitudes. This is noticeable in the 
annular expanding jet region.  
The confinement and the method of admission of the 
swirling flow to the combustion chamber are shown to have 
significant effects on the shape of the CRZ.  The SAC sector 
has similar dimensions to the rectangular chamber. However, 
the contraction toward the exit results in a reduction of the 
height of the CRZ by 40% even though the same swirl cup is 
used in both cases. Also, a rectangular chamber with width to 
breadth ratio of 0.85 resulted in a CRZ with approximately the 
same diameter ratio.  
The contraction in the combustion chamber results in a 
flow field that is tilted in the same direction of the wall.  
The presence of lips, combustion dome, asymmetry in the 
dome expansion angle and the shape of the confinement all 
result in an asymmetric CRZ which questions the CFD codes 
that assume symmetric CRZ in the simulation process. 
6     REFRENCES 
 
[1] Beer, J. M., and Chigier, N., 1972, Combustion 
Aerodynamics, Applied Science Publishers LTD, London. 
[2] Gupta, A. K., Lilley, D. G., and Syred, N., 1984, Swirl 
Flows, Abacus Press. 
[3] Syred, N., and Beér, J. M., 1974, "Combustion in Swirling 
Flows: A Review," Combustion and Flame, 23(1), pp. 143-201. 
[4] Roquemore, W. M., and Tankin, R. S., 1986, "A Study of a 
Bluff-Body 
Combustor 
Using 
Laser 
Sheet 
Lighting," 
Experiments in Fluids, 4(4), pp. 205-213. 
[5] Froud, D., O'doherty, T., and Syred, N., 1995, "Phase 
Averaging of the Precessing Vortex Core in a Swirl Burner 
under 
Piloted 
and 
Premixed 
Combustion 
Conditions," 
Combustion and Flame, 100(3), pp. 407-412. 
[6] Ji, J., and Gore, J. P., 2002, "Flow Structure in Lean 
Premixed Swirling Combustion," Twenty-Nineth Symposium on 
Combustion, 29(1), pp. 861-867. 
[7] Johnson, M. R., Littlejohn, D., Nazeer, W. A., Smith, K. O., 
and Cheng, R. K., 2005, "A Comparison of the Flowfields and 
Emissions of High-Swirl Injectors and Low-Swirl Injectors for 
Lean Premixed Gas Turbines," Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute, 30(2), pp. 2867-2874. 
[8] Wicksall, D. M., and Agrawal, A. K., 2005, "Influence of 
Hydrogen Addition on Flow Structure in Confined Swirling 
Methane Flame," Journal of Propulsion and Power, 21(1), pp. 
16-24. 
[9] Wicksall, D. M., Agrawal, A. K., Schefer, R. W., and Keller, 
J. O., 2005, "The Interaction of Flame and Flow Field in a Lean 
Premixed 
Swirl-Stabilized 
Combustor 
Operated 
on 
H2/Ch4/Air," Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 30(2), 
pp. 2875-2883. 
[10] Elkady, A. M., 2005, "Experimental Investigation of 
Aerodynamics, Combustion, and Emissions Characteristics 
within the Primary Zone of a Gas Turbine Combustor," Ph.D. 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati. 
[11] Sadanandan, R., and Stöhr, M. M., W., 2008, 
"Simultaneous Oh-Plif and Piv Measurements in a Gas Turbine 
Model Combustor," Applied Physics B, 90(3-4), pp. 609-618. 


--- Page 6 ---

 
6 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
[12] Mehta, J. M., Shin, H.-W., and Wisler, D. C., 1989, "Mean 
Velocity and Turbulent Flow-Field Characteristics inside an 
Advanced Combustor Swirl Cup," AIAA, Reno, NV. 
[13] Mongia, H. C., Al-Roub, M., Danis, A. E.-L., D., Johnson, 
A., Vise, S., Jeng, S. M., Mcdonell, V., and Samuelsen, G. S., 
2001, "Swirl Cup Modeling Part 1," Salt Lake City, UT. 
[14] Hsiao, G., Mongia, H. C., and Atul, V., 2003, "Swirl Cup 
Modeling Part Ii: Inlet Boundary Conditions," AIAA, Reno, 
Nevada. 
[15] Hsiao, G., and Mongia, H. C., 2003, "Swirl Cup Modeling 
Part 3: Grid Independent Solution with Different Turbulence 
Models," Reno, Nevada. 
[16] Cai, J., Fu, Y., Elkadi, A., Jeng, S., and Mongia, H., 2003, 
"Swirl Cup Modeling Part 6: Effect of Confinement on Flow 
Characteristics,." 
[17] Wang, S., Yang, V., Mongia, H., Hsieh, S., and Hsiao, G., 
2003, "Modeling of Gas Turbine Swirl Cup Dynamics, Part V: 
Large Eddy Simulation of Cold Flow," Reno, Nevada. 
[18] Stevens, E. J., Held, T. J., and Mongia, H. C., 2003, "Swirl 
Cup Modeling Part Vii: Partially-Premixed Laminar Flamelet 
Model Validation and Simulation of a Single-Cup Combustor 
with Gaseous N-Heptane," Proc. 41st Aerospace Sciences 
Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada. 
[19] Stevens, E. J., Held, T. J., and Mongia, H. C., 2003, "Swirl 
Cup Modeling Part Viii: Spray Combustion in Cfm-56 Single 
Cup Flame Tube," Reno, Nevada. 
[20] Fu, Y., Cai, J., Jeng, S.-M., and Mongia, H., 2007, 
"Characteristics of the Swirling Flow Generated by a Counter-
Rotating Swirler," Proc. 43rd AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint 
Propulsion Conference & Exhibit, Cincinnati, OH. 
[21] Fu, Y., Cai, J., Elkady, A. M., Jeng, S.-M., and Mongia, H., 
2005, "Fuel and Equivalence Ratio Effects on Spray 
Combustion of a Counter-Rotating Swirler," Reno, Nevada. 
[22] Fu, Y., Cai, J., Jeng, S.-M., and Mongia, H., 2005, 
"Confinement Effects on the Swirling Flow of a Counter-
Rotating Swirl Cup," ASME, Reno-Tahoe, Nevada  
[23] Mongia, H., 2004, "Perspective of Combustion Modeling 
for Gas Turbine Combustors," Reno, Nevada. 
[24] Mohammad, B., Cai, J., and Jeng, S., 2010, "Gas Turbine 
Single Annular Combustor Sector Aerodynamics," FLORIDA, 
USA. 
[25] Cai, J., Fu, Y., Flhore, N., Jeng, S.-M., and Mongia, H., 
2007, "Experimental Study on Coherent Structures of a 
Counter-Rotating Multi-Swirler Cup," AIAA, Cincinnati Duke 
Energy Convention Center , Cincinnati, OH. 
 
 
 


--- Page 7 ---

 
7 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 1. Typical swirl cup arrangement with counter rotating radial swirlers. 
 
Figure 2.  Configurations of the swirl cup under investigation. 
 


--- Page 8 ---

 
8 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 3. Schematic of the experimental facility to study the dump combustor aerodynamics 
 
 
Figure 4. Measurements coordinate system for both configurations 
 
 
Figure 5. Axial velocity contours in the horizontal plane 
(configuration 1) 
 
Figure 6. Axial velocity contours in the horizontal plane 
(base configuration) 
X/R
Y/R
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Va (m/s)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
X/R
Y/R
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Va (m/s)
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8


--- Page 9 ---

 
9 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 7. Contours of the root mean square of the axial 
velocity in the horizontal plane (configuration 1). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Axial velocity profiles in the x-z plane 
(Configuration 1) 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Contours of the root mean square of the axial 
velocity in the horizontal plane (base configuration). 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Axial velocity profiles in the x-z plane (base 
configuration) 
X/R
Y/R
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
RMSA (m/s)
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
X/R
Y/R
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
RMSA (m/s)
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4


--- Page 10 ---

 
10 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 11. Axial velocity contours in the x-z plane 
(configuration 1) 
 
 
 
Figure 13. RMSA contours in the x-z plane (configuration 
1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Axial velocity contours in the x-z plane (base 
configuration) 
 
 
 
Figure 14. RMSA contours in the x-z plane (base 
configuration) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 11 ---

 
11 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 15. Radial velocity profiles in the x-z plane 
(configuration 1) 
 
Figure 17. RMSR contours in the y-z plane (configuration 
1) 
 
 
Figure 16. radial velocity profiles in the x-z plane (base 
configuration) 
 
Figure 18. RMSR contours in the y-z plane (base 
configuration) 


--- Page 12 ---

 
12 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
 
Figure 19. Axial velocity profiles in the y-z plane 
(configuration 1) 
 
 
 
Figure 20. Axial velocity profiles in the y-z plane (base 
configuration) 
 
Figure 21. Axial velocity and RMSA contours in the x-z plane (Configuration 1) 


--- Page 13 ---

 
13 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
Figure 22. Tangential velocity profiles in the y-z plane 
(configuration 1) 
 
 
 
Figure 23. Tangential velocity profiles in the y-z plane 
(Base configuration) 
 
Figure 24. Tangential velocity and RMST contours in the y-z plane (configuration 1) 


--- Page 14 ---

 
14 
Copyright © 2010 by ASME 
 
 
 
Figure 25. Axial and radial velocity contours of the base configuration installed in the SAC sector. 
 
 
Figure 26. Axial and radial rms contours of the base configuration installed in the SAC sector. 
 
