
--- Page 1 ---

Experiments in Fluids 26 (1999) 335—339 ( Springer-Verlag 1999
Flow visualization using fluorescence from locally seeded I2 excited
by an ArF excimer laser
R. J. Exton, R. J. Balla, B. Shirinzadeh, M. E. Hillard, G. J. Brauckmann
Abstract A new concept for ﬂow visualization is demon-
strated in which ﬂuorescence from locally seeded iodine is
viewed in the wake of simple aerodynamic models at Mach 6.
Localized seeding is performed by painting a small area of
a ceramic model with a tincture of iodine. When the model is
injected into the ﬂow, the adsorbed iodine is entrained into the
boundary layer, follows the model contour, and ultimately
mixes into the wake region. Planar ‘‘snapshots’’ of the wake
ﬂow are taken by exciting the iodine with an ArF excimer
laser sheet at 193 nm and observing the ﬂuorescence in the
210—600 nm region with an intensiﬁed CCD camera.
1
Introduction
In aerodynamics research, the study of ﬂuid motion in the free
stream, boundary layer, and wake of a model is of central
importance in understanding complex ﬂows. Merzkirch (1987)
surveys the traditional ﬂow visualization techniques, such as
schlieren photography and shadowgraphy, which are em-
ployed almost universally to provide two dimensional (2-D)
cross-sectional information about model ﬂow ﬁelds. More
recently, focused schlieren techniques have been developed by
Gartenberg et al. (1994) to enhance the line-of-sightresolution.
A revolution in ﬂow diagnostics with laser spectroscopy has
also greatly enhanced the spatial and temporal resolution as
applied to aerodynamic ﬂows. Planar Rayleigh scattering, for
example, has been employed by Shirinzadeh et al. (1992) to
study the mixing of helium into air at Mach 6 as part of a study
of hypersonic scramjet combustion efﬁciency. In addition,
laser-induced ﬂuorescence (LIF) has been employed to visual-
ize and measure the distribution of speciﬁc species in the ﬂow.
In many cases, these species occur naturally in the ﬂow, such as
OH in combustion products as discussed by Dyer and Crosley
Received: 17 July 1997/Accepted: 12 August 1998
R. J. Exton, R. J. Balla, B. Shirinzadeh, M. E. Hillard
Measurement Science and Technology Branch, M/S 493
NASA Langley Research Center
Hampton, VA 23681-2199 USA
G. J. Brauckmann
Aerothermodynamics Branch, M/S 408A
NASA Langley Research Center
Hampton, VA 23681-2199 USA
Correspondence to : R. J. Exton
(1982) or they are seeded into the ﬂow to enhance the visibility.
Miles et al. (1978) employed Na to view the ﬂow of hypersonic
He; McDaniel et al. (1982) employed seeded I2 for quantitative
(off-resonant) measurements using visible ﬂuorescence; and
Kychakoff et al. (1984) monitored the ﬂuorescence from
combustion gases seeded with NO. The LIF techniques are of
particular importance in supersonic and hypersonic ﬂows,
where the low densities that are encountered limit the
usefulness of many traditional optical methods. This paper
describes the initial results of ﬂow-visualization experiments in
a Mach 6 ﬂow ﬁeld in which locally seeded I2 is excited by an
ArF excimer laser at 193 nm. Localized seeding refers to the
introduction of trace amounts of I2, which are adsorbed in
a thin surface layer of a ceramic model. In this manner, the
model has a built-in, ﬁnite source of I2 that can be entrained
into the boundary layer; the I2 then follows the model contour
and, ultimately, enters the model wake. The wake region is
then illuminated by a thin laser sheet, and the resulting
I2 ﬂuorescence is viewed at 90° by a charge-coupled-device
(CCD) array. Strong absorption of I2 at 193 nm yields ﬂuores-
cence in the 210—600 nm region, which is sufﬁciently intense to
allow planar LIF ‘‘snapshots’’ to be taken in the low-density
Mach 6 wake ﬂow.
2
Characteristics of ultraviolet (UV) excited I2 fluorescence
Molecular iodine exhibits large absorption cross section in the
Cordes bands (D1R`k ^X1R`g ) from 175 to 200 nm, as reported
by Myer and Samson (1970). This broad absorption band
conveniently overlaps the 193 nm emission of the ArF excimer
laser. Tellinghuisen and Phillips (1986), in survey of the
literature, point out that the cross section at 193 nm
(2]10~17cm2) is approximately 30 times greater than the
cross section in the visible portion of the spectrum. The
ﬂuorescence that results from excitation in the Cordes bands
appears in the discrete (bound-bound) emission below 250 nm
and in the adjoining McLennan bands, which form a highly
structured (bound-free) continuum in the 250 to 500 nm
region, as analyzed by Tellinghuisen (1974, 1984). Figure 1
shows the UV ﬂuorescence spectrum, over the range of 180 to
340 nm, obtained in our lab for pure I2 excited at 193 nm. An
increase in buffer gas pressure causes the discrete emission and
the McLennan bands to decrease and additional ﬂuorescence
to appear; this additional ﬂuorescence consists of a strong
band at 340 nm and several weaker visible bands, as shown by
Martin et al. (1981). This interesting collisional phenomenon
can be understood in terms of the potential energy levels of
335


--- Page 2 ---

Fig. 1. The UV spectrum of pure I2 excited at 193 nm in a 1 cm square
cell at 300 K. The spectrum is recorded with an optical multichannel
analyzer (OMA) with a S-20 detector response. Spectral response of
the system is calibrated with a deuterium lamp in place of the cell,
which results in a signiﬁcant correction (approximately a factor of 40)
to the strength of the discrete spectrum relative to the McLennan
bands. Neither the discrete spectrum nor the McLennan bands are
resolved here
I2, as discussed by Hemmati and Collins (1980); collisions
with the buffer gas molecules transfer the population from
a molecular state that is responsible for the discrete and
McLennan bands to a different state, which produces the
340 nm band. The emerging ﬂuorescence at 340 nm partially
compensates for the loss of ﬂuorescence in the discrete and
McLennan bands. For example, preliminary measurements in
our lab with air as the buffer gas indicate that at 10 Torr the
discrete and McLennan bands have decreased by 75 percent,
but the integrated ﬂuorescence over the 193—600 nm region has
decreased by only 45 percent. Thus, the use of integrated
ﬂuorescence is an important requirement for ﬂow visualization
at higher pressures.
3
Experimental arrangement
The aerodynamic testing of this concept is performed in
a Mach 6 facility by using ceramic models. The apparatus
and conﬁguration are similar to those employed earlier by
Shirinzadeh et al. (1996) and are discussed brieﬂy. An overview
of the arrangement is shown in Fig. 2. A narrowband ArF
excimer laser beam, which is shaped into a ‘‘ribbon’’, enters the
facility test section from above through a suprasil quartz
window and is dumped at the bottom of the test section. An
intensiﬁed CCD camera views the laser ribbon at 90° through
a recessed suprasil window. After the laser beam is positioned
and the camera is focused, these components are ﬁxed for
a given test sequence. Different ﬂow regions about the model
are then viewed by translating the model along the ﬂow
direction.
Fig. 2. Experimental arrangement in the test section of the Mach
6 wind tunnel. The Laser ‘‘ribbon’’ enters the test section from above
and is approximately 1 mm thick and 20 mm wide in the model wake.
Different regions of the wake are sampled, in successive runs, by
translating the model in the ﬂow direction
3.1
Mach 6 wind tunnel
The tests are performed in the Langley 15 in. Mach 6 High-
Temperature Tunnel, which is a conventional blowdown-to-
vacuum wind tunnel that uses dry air as the test gas. The air
is electrically heated prior to expansion through the Mach
6 nozzle. The test section is an open jet section with a test cabin
that is approximately 1.8 m long and an internal diameter of
1.5 m. The ﬂow from the Mach 6 axisymmetric, contoured
nozzle exhausts into the test cabin, traverses the model test
region, and is collected by the diffuser. Models can be injected
into the ﬂow in 1 to 2 s with typical test runs lasting from 30 to
60 s. The facility can operate with stagnation pressures from
0.35 to 2.07 Mpa (50—300 psia) and a stagnation temperature
up to 700 K (800°F). The unit Reynolds number ranges from
1.6—19.7]106 m~1. Typical run conditions for the models
tested here are 2.07 MPa (300psia) and 589 K (600°F). Free-
stream velocity is 1020 m/s.
3.2
Excimer laser
The ArF excimer laser is operated in a narrowband mode at
193 nm and is mounted directly above the test section. The
laser is tuned between the rotational transitions of the (4,0)
vibrational band of the O2 Schumann—Runge system near
the peak of the laser gain proﬁle. This setting minimizes
laser-beam absorption through room air. The laser bandwidth
of 1 cm~1 allows the I2 absorption spectrum to be treated as
a continuum. The laser typically operates at a pulse repetition
rate of 10 Hz; each pulse generates approximately 100 mJ
over a pulse duration of 15 ns. The laser beam is shaped by
cylindrical lenses and apertures and is directed down into the
test section through a suprasil window. In the model ﬂow ﬁeld,
this ribbon beam is approximately 0.5 mm thick and 20 mm
wide and contains about 50 mJ/pulse. The short pulse duration
effectively ‘‘freezes’’ the motion of the ﬂow; thus, single pulse
‘‘snapshots’’ can be obtained.
336


--- Page 3 ---

Fig. 3. Composite view of the wake of a truncated cylinder model at
Mach 6. The view at laser beam positions A and B are averages of 44
individual frames. A single frame is shown at position C to illustrate
the unsteady nature of the ﬂow at this location
3.3
CCD camera
The electronic camera is a gated, single-stage intensiﬁed, CCD
camera with a two-dimensional (768]488) pixel array and
a S-20Q photocathode (185—600 nm). The camera views the
ﬂow through a side window that is recessed into the test section
for better light gathering. A Cassegrain lens with 90 mm focal
length ( f /1.1) is used with the camera; thus, an effective
resolution of approximately 1 mm in the plane of the laser
ribbon is obtained. A Schott BG-24 ﬁlter is used to reject
scattered light at 193 nm and to transmit the ﬂuorescence from
210 to 600 nm. For the aerodynamic tests described here,
an intensiﬁer gate width of 400 ns is employed to reject
extraneous light. The video signal from the camera is digitized
by a frame grabber and is stored in a computer for later
analysis. The video signal is also sent to a video cassette
recorder (VCR) to record the entire wind-tunnel run.
3.4
Models and seeding
The majority of the models designed for these proof-of-concept
tests are constructed of ceramic (fused silica) which is
routinely employed at Langley Research Center for phosphur
coating measurements of global surface temperature. A simple
seeding technique is used for these initial tests and consists of
painting a small area of the model at the stagnation point with
a tincture of I2. The tincture consists of 1 gm of crystalline
iodine that is dissolved in 12.5 ml of ethanol (a saturated
solution). For a given test run, several drops of this solution are
painted on the surface; this solution typically covers an area of
1]4 cm2, which is much larger than necessary but easily
ensures overlap of the seeded ﬂow with the laser beam. After
the solution is applied to the model, the ethanol evaporates,
which leaves the I2 adsorbed in a thin (\0.5 mm) surface layer
of the ceramic model. The evaporation process is completed
during facility pumpdown prior to each run.
Toxicity and corrosion are major concerns in dealing with
I2. In the past, the use of I2 as a diagnostic tracer required
specially designed facilities, as outlined by Hiller and Hanson
(1990). These precautions resulted from the inefﬁciency
inherent in the visible absorption and ﬂuorescence process and
the need for a continuous ﬂow of I2 seeded into the regions of
interest. The advantage of the UV excitation process employed
here is that only trace amounts of iodine are required. For
these initial tests. the localized seeding added less than 0.01 g of
iodine to the facility per run.
4
Aerodynamic test results
Several simple aerodynamic models are constructed in order to
demonstrate the technique. The primary purpose of these tests
is to show that trace amounts of I2, entrained into the ﬂow from
localized and ﬁnite seeding, are sufﬁcient for visualization of
the low-density ﬂow in the model wake. Earlier measurements
in this facility by Shirinzadeh et al. (1996) reveal, with the
use of Rayleigh scattering on similar models, that the wake
densities are approximately 1.8]1017 cm~3.
Figure 3 shows a composite view of the wake of a truncated
cylinder model at Mach 6. The model is positioned, during
sequential runs, so that the laser ribbon intercepts three
overlapping positions (A, B, and C) in the model wake. The
leading edge of the laser beam at position A is located
approximately 25 mm from the center of the model. The three
images (A, B, and C) are cropped according to their positions
as measured prior to each run and superimposed to illustrate
the overall character of the wake. Due to temperature sensitive
movement of the model support from run to run, the position
of the laser sheets relative to the model are only known to
^2 mm. When the model is initially injected into the ﬂow, the
337


--- Page 4 ---

iodine ﬂuorescence is bright but erratic. Thus, our procedure is
to wait for approximately 10 s, during which the I2 ﬂuorescence
decreases by more than an order of magnitude and stabilizes.
Following this period, ﬂow-visualization data are acquired
for approximately 10—20 s. Seeding at the stagnation point
enhances both the upper and lower shear layers, as can be seen
at laser position A. The individual frames show that unsteadi-
ness in the ﬂow increases signiﬁcantly from position A to C.
The visualizations at laser positions A and B are shown as
averages of 44 frames. In contrast, a single frame is shown for
position C because each individual frame exhibits a signiﬁ-
cantly different picture of the breakup of the ﬂow in this
region. These results show that simple trace seeding is
sufﬁcient for obtaining ﬂow visualization for the laser, model,
and camera geometry described here. This optical system was
also used prior to seeding with I2, with the identical geometry,
to measure the Rayleigh scattering signal under the same
facility conditions. In this way, the I2 LIF signals in the wake
region were determined to be approximately 60 times greater
than the Rayleigh signal. Subsequent laboratory measure-
ments, taken with a quartz cell in the same geometry, indicate
that the density of I2 in the model wake is approximately
3]1012 cm~3. Fluorescence measurements in this cell were also
taken using an optical multichannel analyzer (OMA) while
attenuating the excitation beam at 193 nm with calibrated
neutral density ﬁlters. These results, shown in Fig. 4, illustrate
the onset of optical saturation for the strongest peak of the
McLennan band at 325 nm when air at 1 Torr is used as the
buffer gas. The ﬂuorescence signal is linear up to a laser power
density of approximately 0.1 MW/cm2. The Mach 6 tunnel
measurements were conducted at approximately 30 MW/cm2,
implying that a wider laser sheet could have been used to
extend the spatial coverage with no loss of performance (i.e.,
regions A, B, and C in Fig. 3 could be captured simultaneously
with a single laser pulse).
Several other seeding conﬁgurations are also tested in this
initial tunnel entry. Cylindrical ceramic model wakes are
observed in which the seeding is applied at 90°, 180°, and 270°
(measured clockwise from the stagnation point located at 0°).
Fluorescence from the wake in region A appears to be uniform
for each case. Seeding at 90° or 270°, however, only enhances
the upper or lower shear layers, respectively. Neither shear
layer is enhanced when seeding is applied in the wake region
(180°).
Another ceramic, cylindrical model is constructed with
a small (0.01 mm) hole drilled through the 38 mm diameter
from the stagnation point to the wake region. With seeding
applied at the stagnation point, ﬂow through the hole is
apparent as a collimated jet of I2-seeded air ﬂowing into the
wake.
An all-aluminum, cylindrical model is also tested. In this
case, the iodine could not be adsorbed by the model; thus, the
generation of a reservoir of I2 is impossible. A modiﬁcation to
this model is successful, however; a slot (1]1]5 mm3) is
milled into the model at the stagnation point, and a piece of
ceramic is cemented into the slot. Seeding of the ceramic
produces ﬂuorescence patterns in the wake that are similar to
those observed with the all-ceramic models and illustrates an
alternate fabrication technique for providing a localized
reservoir of I2.
Fig. 4. Region of linearity and onset of optical saturation for the
325 nm McLennan band. Buffer gas is air at a pressure of 1 Torr
5
Discussion and summary
Laser-induced ﬂuorescence (LIF), excited with an ArF excimer
laser, from localized seeding of I2 in air has been demonstrated
to be sufﬁciently intense to visualize the wake region behind
a cylinder model in a Mach 6 ﬂow with a single laser pulse.
Seeding was performed by painting a small portion of
a ceramic model with a trace amount of I2 contained in
a tincture of iodine. When the model is injected into the ﬂow,
the I2 adsorbed into the model surface is entrained into the
boundary layer, follows the model contour, and then mixes
into the wake. Based on laboratory measurements at low
pressures, the ﬂuorescence of the I2 in the wake, excited at
193 nm, consists of discrete emission, the diffuse McLennan
bands, and the emerging collisionally induced band at 340 nm.
The seeding technique employed in this study is simple and
easy to implement. More reﬁned and innovative techniques are
being developed that can help to elucidate different aspects of
the ﬂow. For example, small pieces of crystalline iodine can be
heated and located just beneath the surface for better control of
source location and concentration. Judicious location of these
sources might allow I2 to be entrained into off-surface ﬂow
features, such as vortices and recirculation regions. Seeding of
metallic models might also be considered in which the iodine is
injected through small holes in the surface or through holes or
plugs capped with sintered metal. Localized seeding offers the
following advantages: (1) the location of the seed source can be
judiciously chosen to emphasize selected regions of the ﬂow,
(2) laser-beam absorption and ﬂuorescence trapping are
minimized, and (3) the use of trace amounts of I2 limits the
safety and corrosion concerns normally encountered with the
use of this molecule. In addition, the large absorption cross
section for I2 near 193 nm generates intense ﬂuorescence for
trace amounts of I2, which minimizes the effect of I2 on the
observed ﬂow ﬁeld. It is also instructive to compare the UV
iodine technique with a similar application of sodium seeding
to a Mach 8 ﬂowﬁeld by Yalin et al. (1996). In this application,
sodium was seeded into helium using a heated, stainless steel
chamber, then injected into the hypersonic ﬂow by way of
a small hole in a ﬂat plate model. The injected jet of sodium
338


--- Page 5 ---

seeded helium was excited by a pulsed, tunable dye laser at
590 nm. The resulting sodium ﬂuorescence was then viewed at
the same wavelength as the excitation, requiring extreme care
with scattered and reﬂected light. Helium was employed since
it is nonreactive with sodium and collisional quenching is
minimal. The use of sodium in air, however, may be impossible
since sodium is oxidized by air, and also reacts rapidly with
water. In addition, the sodium/helium jet, in contrast with the
entrainment scheme employed here with iodine, was also
responsible for occasional, injection generated, bow shocks
which perturbed the boundary layer. Operation in the UV has
the additional advantage over visible techniques in that the
larger Rayleigh cross-section allows a complementary, quantit-
ative view of the entire ﬂowﬁeld using Rayleigh scattering.
The technique outlined here also offers exciting potential for
global visualization of near-surface ﬂow features. By expanding
the laser beam in two dimensions for greater areal coverage,
ﬁltering of the ﬂuorescence, fast gating the CCD camera, and
judiciously selecting the model material, we have demonstrated
in the lab that light scattering and model ﬂuorescence can be
rejected even when the laser directly illuminates the model
surface. In this manner, the CCD camera sees the ﬂuorescence
from I2 entrained in the ﬂow, and boundary layer features such
as turbulent spots, streaks, and vortices may become visible.
Together, these scenarios point to the visualization of near-
body ﬂow streamlines and global visualization of the transition
from laminar to turbulent ﬂow. In the opinion of Bogdonov
(1991), the most critical test in computational ﬂuid dynamics
validation would be ‘‘the experimental determination of
speciﬁc streamlines in complex three-dimensional ﬂows, and
a comparison of these streamline paths to computation’’. The
ArF laser excitation of locally seeded I2 may provide the
experimental aspect of this validation.
References
Bogdanov SM (1991) Comments on experiments for computational
validation for ﬂuid dynamic predictions. In: Hypersonic ﬂows for
reentry problems. eds De´ side´ ri JA; Glowinski R; Pe´ riaux J. Vol. 1, pp
12—17, Berlin: Springer-Verlag
Dyer MJ; Crosley DR (1982) Two-dimensional imaging of OH laser
induced ﬂuorescence in a ﬂame. Opt Lett 7: 382—384
Gartenberg E; Weinstein LM; Lee EE (1994) Aerodynamic investiga-
tion with focusing schlieren in a cryogenic wind tunnel. AIAA J 32:
1242—1249
Hemmati H; Collins GJ (1980) Laser excited ﬂuorescence of I2. Chem
Phys Lett 75: 488—493
Hiller B; Hanson RK (1990) Properties of the iodine molecule relevant
to laser-induced ﬂuorescence experiments in gas ﬂows. Exp Fluids
10: 1—11
Kychakoff G; Knapp K; Howe RD; Hanson RK (1984) Flow visualiz-
ation in combustion gases using nitric oxide ﬂuorescence. AIAA
J 22: 153—154
Martin M; Fotakis C; Donovan RJ; Shaw MJ (1981) Optical pumping
and collisional quenching of I2 (D1R`k ). Nuovo Cimento B 63:
300—308
Merzkirch W (1987) Flow visualization. 2 ed. London: Academic Press
McDaniel JC; Baganoff D; Byer RL (1982) Density measurement in
compressible ﬂows using off-resonant laser-induced ﬂuorescence.
Phys Fluids 25: 1105—1107
Miles RB; Udd E; Zimmerman M (1978) Quantitative ﬂow visualiz-
ation in sodium vapor seeded hypersonic helium. Appl Phys Lett 32:
317—319
Myer JA; Samson JAR (1970) Absorption cross section and photo
ionization yield of I2 between 1050 and 2200 A. J Chem Phys 52:
716—718
Shirinzadeh B; Hillard ME; Balla RJ; Waitz IA; Anders JB; Exton RJ
(1992) Planar Rayleigh scattering results in helium-air mixing
experiments in a Mach 6 wind tunnel. Appl Opt 31: 6529—6534
Shirinzadeh B; Balla RJ; Hillard ME (1996) Rayleigh scattering
measurements in supersonic facilities. AIAA paper no. 96-2187
Tellinghuisen J (1974) The McLennan bands of I2: A highly structured
continuum. Chem Phys Lett 29: 359—363
Tellinghuisen J (1984) The D (O`k ) state of I2: Analysis by quantum
simulations of bound-free D-X ﬂuorescence. Can J Phys 62:
1933—1940
Tellinghuisen J; Phillips LF (1986) Kinetics of I2 following photolysis
at 1930 As : Temperature dependence of A-state quenching. J Phys
Chem 90: 5108—5120
Yalin AP; Lempert WR; Etz MR; Erbland PJ; Smits AJ; Miles RB
(1996) Planar Imaging in a Mach 8 Flow Using Sodium Laser
Fluorescence. AIAA paper 96-2270 19th AIAA Advanced Measure-
ment and Ground Testing Technology Conference 17—20 June, 1996
New Orleans, LA
339
