
--- Page 1 ---

G. R. Price
K. K. Botros
NOVA Research & Technology Centre,
Calgary, Canada
G. M. Goldin
Fluent Inc.,
Lebanon, NH 03766
CFD Predictions and Field
Measurements of NOx Emissions
From LM1600 Gas Turbine
During Part Load Operation
CFD simulations of the combustion process and formation of emissions in an industrial
GE LM1600 gas turbine have been performed over a range of unit loads. Two combustion
models were considered here to characterize the combustion process, the chemical equi-
librium model and the nonequilibrium laminar ﬂamelet model. The ﬂamelet model pre-
dictions of nitric oxide concentration demonstrated much closer agreement with ﬁeld
measurements of continuous emission monitoring systems, due to accurate modeling of
the oxygen radial concentration. The predictions made with this model are within 15
percent at maximum load and considerably better at lower loads. Field measurements
also showed that nitric oxide constitutes about 95 percent of the total NOx measured.
Unburnt hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide emissions are signiﬁcantly overpredicted,
however, arguably as a result of neglecting their oxidation in the high temperature, fuel-
lean environment of the turbine and exhaust stack downstream of the combustor.
@DOI: 10.1115/1.1413769#
Introduction
Air pollution control programs in the United States increasingly
require industry to continuously monitor and report emissions of
pollutants, speciﬁcally oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and sulfur
(SOx). These components are generally acknowledged as the ma-
jor contributors to acid rain, while NOx also contributes along
with volatile organic compounds to the photochemical generation
of ground level ozone or smog.
Current U.S. monitoring requirements are generally biased to-
wards continuous emissions monitoring systems ~CEMS! based
on calibrated measurement devices. For example, the regional
clean air incentives program ~RECLAIM! ~@1#! in southern Cali-
fornia imposes stringent CEMS and reporting requirements for
NOx and SOx emissions, particularly for large NOx sources. On a
federal level, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency stipulates
CEMS for installations speciﬁed under the acid rain program
~@2#!.
The situation is quite different in Canada, where predictive
models or one-time site measurements are employed to character-
ize these emissions as part of the initial licensing application to
the provincially based environmental regulatory bodies. Continu-
ous monitoring of emissions is generally not a licensing require-
ment. Some proactive initiatives have been introduced in recent
years including the Voluntary Challenge and Registry Program
~@3#!, which encourages private and public sector organizations
across Canada to voluntarily limit and disclose their net green-
house gas emissions. However, further regulatory changes with
some form of ongoing emission monitoring could be tabled in the
near future in order to meet Canada’s Kyoto commitment to re-
duce greenhouse gases to 3 percent below 1990 levels by the year
2010.
TransCanada Transmission ~@4#!, which operates numerous in-
dustrial gas turbines as part of its natural gas transmission pipe-
line, has sponsored a program of predictive emissions monitoring
systems ~PEMS! in anticipation of future regulatory changes.
PEMS are often based on semi-empirical expressions or one-
dimensional models in an attempt to correlate emission rates to
operating parameters for a given gas turbine ~@5–7#!. Sufﬁce it to
say, PEMS offer a very cost-effective means for estimating con-
tinuous emission levels with minimal operational and mainte-
nance requirements, i.e., no calibration gases or expensive analyz-
ers. A good account of the beneﬁts of PEMS over CEMS is given
by Hung ~@5#!, where a quantitative comparison between the two
methods is provided.
As a part of this larger PEMS program, this study focuses on
the ability of more sophisticated tools such as computational ﬂuid
dynamics ~CFD! to accurately predict NOx emissions. Clearly, due
to the complexity and large computational requirements, CFD is
not feasible for direct application as a PEMS. However, it can be
used to provide some valuable data that can be implemented in
PEM models.
In this paper, CFD predictions of the nitric oxide ~NO! emis-
sions from a stationary General Electric LM1600 gas turbine en-
gine are presented. We begin with a brief review of related CFD
studies of gas turbine ~GT! combustion chambers. This is fol-
lowed by details of the CFD modeling effort with particular em-
phasis on the combustion process and NO models along with the
combustor geometry, grid generation, and prescribed boundary
conditions. Two popular combustion models were considered in
the simulations, both based on the mixture fraction probability
density function ~PDF! approach. The ﬁrst model assumes chemi-
cal equilibrium, whereas the second laminar ﬂamelet based model
accounts for nonequilibrium effects. The results of the CFD simu-
lations are compared with ﬁeld measurements of the unit emis-
sions taken over a range of part load operating conditions on two
separate occasions.
Related CFD Studies
Many researchers have used CFD simulations to study the fun-
damental combustion process and heat transfer characteristics in
gas turbine combustors ~@8–10#!. In fact, aeroengine manufactur-
ers now commonly apply CFD during the design of new combus-
tion chambers. Mongia ~@10#! provides an excellent review of
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute ~IGTI! of THE AMERICAN
SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS for publication in the ASME JOURNAL OF
ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Paper presented at the Interna-
tional Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition, Munich, Germany, May
8–11, 2000; Paper 00-GT-350. Manuscript received by IGTI Nov. 1999; ﬁnal revi-
sion received by ASME Headquarters Feb. 2000. Associate Editor: D. Wisler.
276 Õ Vol. 124, APRIL 2002
Copyright © 2002 by ASME
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 18 Dec 2009 to 129.137.95.89. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

the application of CFD to gas turbine combustors along with
some recommendations for future research from an industry
perspective.
Some noteworthy CFD related NOx studies include a series of
papers with detailed experimental and numerical results for a
propane-ﬁred laboratory-scale can combustor ~@11–14#!. Isother-
mal ﬂow simulations by Koutmos and McGuirk ~@13#! demon-
strated that the standard k-« turbulence model was acceptable for
predicting the velocity ﬁeld despite some deﬁciencies in the jet-
on-jet impingement region. More recently, Mueller and Knill
~@14#! compared the effect of two different combustion models;
namely the eddy dissipation model ~@15#! and the laminar ﬂamelet
model ~@16#!, on predicted temperature ﬁeld, species concentra-
tion and NO emissions. Their NOx model was based on the ex-
tended Zeldovich mechanism to describe thermal NO formation
along with an empirical expression by De Soete ~@17#! to account
for the prompt NO formation. They concluded that simple com-
bustion models like the eddy dissipation model tend to overpredict
the temperature ﬁeld and NO concentrations, denoted by @NO#,
due to the lack of intermediate species. Conversely, the ﬂamelet
model, which better accounts for nonequilibrium effects, was
much more accurate.
Further advances in CFD modeling of pollutant formation in
gas turbine combustors are reported by Barths et al. ~@18#!. These
authors introduced a series of unsteady ﬂamelets based on a com-
plex reaction mechanism involving 106 reactions and 14 species
to describe the thermal, prompt and nitrous oxide contributions to
NOx formation and account for NOx reburn. For n-hexane fuel,
the agreement between predicted and measured NO values was
excellent, within 12 percent. An analysis of the reaction paths
showed that the thermal NO contributes 67 percent to the total
production with the remaining 33 percent formed via the prompt
mechanism. NO was globally consumed by a reburn mechanism
~22 percent! and the nitrous oxide path ~8 percent!.
Description of CFD Model
Numerical simulations of the time-averaged turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld
in the combustion chamber of the LM1600 were conducted using
FLUENT 5.1 ~@19#!, a commercial CFD package. Calculations of
the Reynolds number for the fuel, primary and secondary air in-
jection indicate the ﬂow conditions are fully turbulent. FLUENT
solves the incompressible time-averaged governing equations for
mass and momentum using a conservative control volume formu-
lation. Closure of the Reynolds stress terms is achieved using the
standard k-« turbulence model. In spite of its inherent assump-
tions, i.e., isotropy, the k-« model has been widely utilized in
combustor simulations and generally yields acceptable results
~@10,13,14,18#!.
Mixture Fraction Approach.
The mixture fraction approach
was developed to model turbulent nonpremixed ﬂames. The mix-
ture fraction, commonly denoted by f, is deﬁned as the atomic
mass fraction that originated from the fuel stream. Under the as-
sumptions of uniform pressure ~which is valid for low speed
ﬂames!, and equal turbulent species diffusivities ~which is valid at
high Reynolds number!, the species equations can be reduced to a
single equation for f. Since atomic elements are conserved during
chemical reactions, the mixture fraction equation does not have a
source term.
In turbulent combustion, all ﬂow variables at a point ﬂuctuate
in time due to turbulent eddies. Turbulence is modeled in this
simulation by Reynolds averaging, which may be considered as a
time average of the ﬂuctuating quantities at a point. The effects of
this time varying turbulent ﬁeld on the mixture fraction are ac-
counted for by using an assumed shape for the PDF. The PDF,
denoted by P, describes the proportion of time spent at each tur-
bulent state. Hence, mean quantities, such as the mean tempera-
ture ~means are denoted by a ‘‘;’’ overbar! are determined by a
PDF weighted integration over all states,
T˜ 5E
0
1
T~ f !P~ f !df.
(1)
Here, a beta PDF is used, which is speciﬁed by its ﬁrst two mo-
ments, namely the mean of f and its variance. The CFD code
solves equations for these ﬁrst two moments, from which the
mean temperatures and species can be computed according to ~1!!.
In order to avoid the computational expense of evaluating these
integrals, they are calculated a priori, tabulated and then interpo-
lated from the table during the actual CFD simulations.
Equilibrium Model.
When chemical reactions are fast rela-
tive to turbulent mixing, the chemistry may be approximated as
being in chemical equilibrium. For adiabatic ﬂames, the entire
temperature and species ﬁelds are completely determined by the
mixture fraction; nonadiabatic ﬂames also depend on the enthalpy.
As the residence time in the combustor decreases, however, the
turbulent mixing time-scales become competitive with the chemi-
cal reaction time-scales and the chemistry deviates from thermo-
dynamic equilibrium. The ﬂamelet model relaxes this assumption
to cases of moderate nonequilibrium.
Flamelet Model.
The laminar ﬂamelet model approximates a
turbulent ﬂame brush as an ensemble of laminar ﬂames. Each
ﬂamelet is assumed to have the same structure as the stretched
laminar ﬂame that occurs between opposing fuel and air nozzles.
For this conﬁguration, the species and temperature in the ﬂame
can be completely described by two parameters, namely the mix-
ture fraction, f and the scalar dissipation rate, x. The scalar dissi-
pation rate is a measure of the strain on the ﬂame, and hence the
extent that it departs from chemical equilibrium ~@19#!,
x52DS
df
dxD
2
.
(2)
Individual laminar ﬂamelets can be calculated from equations
governing individual species transport and an overall energy
balance,
r
]Y j
]t 5
1
2 rx
]2Y j
]f 2 1w˙ i2
1
2Frx
1
Lej
2
]Lej
]f 1
1
2 ~12Lej!
3S
]rx
]f 1rx
cp
l
]
]f
l
cpDG
]Y j
]f
(3)
r
]T
]t 5
1
2 rx
]2T
]f 2 1
1
2 rxF
]cp
]f 1(
j
1
Lej
cp j
]Y j
]f G
2
1
cp (
j
w˙ jh j2
1
cpF4sp(
j
X ja j~T42Tb
4!G.
(4)
Note that the last term in the energy Eq. ~4! represents heat loss
from the ﬂamelet due to radiation in the optically thin limit. The
ﬂamelet Eqs. ~3! and ~4! are solved over the range of scalar dis-
sipation rates, integrated over the beta PDF according to Eq. ~1!
and tabulated to relate mean scalar quantities to the mixture frac-
tion, its variance, and the scalar dissipation rate.
NOx Model.
Since NOx occurs in trace quantities, it does not
inﬂuence the ﬂow ﬁeld, and is accordingly post-processed. In this
study, only NO is considered. The governing equation for the
transport of NO is given by
]
]t ~rY NO!1
]
]xi
~ruiY NO!5
]
]xiS rDeff
]Y NO
]xi D 1wNO
g
(5)
where
ui
is
the
ﬂuid
velocity
and
Deff
is
the
effective
(turbulent1laminar) diffusivity. The last term in Eq. ~5!, the mean
NO source term, is computed via Eq. ~1! based on the instanta-
neous NO reaction rate and an assumed beta PDF. The instanta-
neous NO reaction rate has contributions from thermal and
prompt sources. The thermal pathway is modeled by the extended
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2002, Vol. 124 Õ 277
Downloaded 18 Dec 2009 to 129.137.95.89. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

Zeldovich mechanism with the steady-state assumption for the
nitrogen radical. The prompt pathway is modeled via the empiri-
cal De Soete mechanism ~@17#!. Owing to the relatively high tem-
peratures in the combustor, the thermal pathway is the predomi-
nant mechanism for NO formation.
Geometry, Grid Generation, and Boundary Conditions.
The LM1600 gas turbine installed at the TransCanada compressor
station is rated for 13.6 MW at standard site conditions. The an-
nular combustion module consists of 18 fuel injection nozzles
equally spaced about the periphery. The inherent geometric sym-
metry of the combustor was exploited by considering a 20-deg
sector with a single fuel injection nozzle for the computational
domain and employing periodic boundary conditions. The fuel
port consists of a tube capped by a conical head with six small
holes. Primary air enters the combustion chamber through a con-
centric annulus surrounding the fuel port. The primary air is
swirled by twelve, 30 deg swirl vanes in the annulus before pass-
ing through a venturi nozzle and subsequently mixing with the
natural gas jets. Dilution air is introduced further downstream
through a series of holes and slots located along the top and bot-
tom wall of the combustion liner. The combusted gases exit
through an annular outlet, which leads to the multistaged high-
pressure turbine. An overview of the 20-deg section of combus-
tion chamber geometry is shown in Fig. 1. A close up front view
of the fuel injection nozzle assembly, i.e., fuel injection port, pri-
mary air swirl vanes and venturi nozzle, is shown in Fig. 2.
A block-structured grid consisting of about 286,000 hexahedral
control volumes with body-ﬁtted coordinates was generated for
the three-dimensional computational geometry. The boundary sur-
faces were uniquely identiﬁed during this process for later speci-
ﬁcation of boundary conditions. Second-order upwind differenc-
ing was employed for the convective terms in the discretized
conservation equations in order to minimize numerical diffusion
and achieve reasonably accurate solutions for this mesh size. Al-
though a comprehensive grid reﬁnement study was not performed,
tests with coarser and slightly ﬁner meshes showed only minor
changes in predicted results. Unfortunately, complete grid inde-
pendence is generally beyond available computing resources for
most three-dimensional combustion problems.
The boundary conditions for the CFD simulations include peri-
odic boundaries to connect the azimuthally rotated side planes, a
constant pressure outlet, thin walls for the swirl vanes, and ﬁnally
adiabatic, hydraulically smooth walls for the external surfaces
such as the combustion liner and venturi nozzle. The mass ﬂow
rate of fuel, which varies with unit load, was speciﬁed from direct
measurements with a conventional oriﬁce meter.
Speciﬁcation of the airﬂow boundary conditions requires some
additional explanation, however, because the ﬂow rate of air is not
directly measured by the on-line data acquisition system that
monitors the engine performance. Single point measurements of
the exhaust gas velocity with a Pitot tube during the ﬁeld tests did
not provide reasonable estimates of the airﬂow. Instead, the air
ﬂow rate was indirectly determined by dividing the reported
power output by the enthalpy change across the power turbine; the
enthalpy change being derived from the measured pressure and
temperature at the unit inlet and outlet. The actual breakdown of
the total air ﬂow rate into prescribed mass ﬂow rates at the pri-
mary air inlet and the various secondary air slots and holes, shown
in Fig. 1, was based on proprietary information supplied by
General Electric.
Field Measurements
Field measurements were taken in order to determine the varia-
tion of emission levels from an LM1600 at various loads, i.e.,
engine power output. The tests were performed at the same Tran-
sCanada compressor station on two occasions, separated by al-
most one year. The ambient conditions at the site on these dates
were quite similar: the air temperature for the ﬁrst test ranged
from 6–9°C compared to 11–13°C for the second test, while the
barometric pressures remained within 1 percent.
The levels of NOx, NO, CO, CO2, O2 and moisture in the
exhaust stack were measured by a CEMS using instruments and
on-site calibration techniques approved by U.S. EPA. For ex-
ample, the NOx measurements were made with an approved
chemiluminescent continuous analyzer. Pertinent engine perfor-
mance parameters such as the unit power output, fuel ﬂow rate,
turbine stage pressures and temperatures, and ambient conditions
at the site were recorded by the data acquisition system at the
station. Gas samples were also taken in order to determine the
composition of the fuel gas. The results of the gas analysis are
summarized below in Table I.
At each operating point, the unit speed was adjusted to reach
the desired power output. Then the unit was allowed to stabilize
before the CEMS measurements were taken over a 20-minute pe-
Fig. 2
Close up of the fuel injection port, primary air swirl
vanes, and venturi nozzle details
Table 1
Natural gas composition
Component
Field Test #1
Mole %
Field Test #2
Mole %
CH4
96.92
96.75
C2H6
0.86
0.80
C3H81
0.30
0.38
N2
1.03
1.12
CO2
0.89
0.95
Fig. 1
Computational domain—20 deg annular secton of
LM1600 combustion chamber
278 Õ Vol. 124, APRIL 2002
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 18 Dec 2009 to 129.137.95.89. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

riod. The unit load was varied from roughly 40 percent to maxi-
mum load to give eight operating points on each test date, for a
total of 16 points.
Results and Discussion
CFD simulations were performed at each of the 16 operating
points corresponding to the ﬁeld measurements. At each operating
point, multiple laminar ﬂamelet ﬁles were generated to cover the
range of strain rates in the combustor. Property look-up tables
were also generated for both combustion models at each operating
point. This was necessary because the absolute pressure and in-
coming compressed air temperature vary directly with the air
compression ratio, which declines with decreasing unit load. Due
to the extremely high methane content of the fuel gas, ;97 per-
Fig. 3
Comparison of predicted „NO… with ﬁrst set of CEMS based ﬁeld
measurements
Fig. 4
Contours of the local Damkohler number on the central plane
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2002, Vol. 124 Õ 279
Downloaded 18 Dec 2009 to 129.137.95.89. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

Fig. 5
Contours of static temperature on the central plane
Fig. 6
Contours of oxygen radical concentration on the central plane
280 Õ Vol. 124, APRIL 2002
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 18 Dec 2009 to 129.137.95.89. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

Fig. 7
Comparison of predicted „NO… with second set of CEMS based ﬁeld
measurements
Fig. 8
Comparison of predicted „CO… and „UHC… with second set of CEMS based ﬁeld
measurements
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2002, Vol. 124 Õ 281
Downloaded 18 Dec 2009 to 129.137.95.89. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

cent in Table 1, the reduced GRI-MECH 1.22 combustion mecha-
nism ~@20#! was implemented in the present analysis. This simpli-
ﬁed methane mechanism considers 104 reactions and 22 species.
The predicted concentrations of NO from CFD were obtained
by dividing the integrated volumetric ﬂow rate of NO by the total
integrated volumetric ﬂow rate over the combustor outlet plane
for the two different combustion models. The predicted concen-
trations were subsequently corrected to account for additional
cooling air that bypasses the combustion chamber. These predic-
tions are compared with the ﬁrst set of CEMS measurements in
Fig. 3. Note that NO was also measured during this ﬁrst test along
with the total NOx to allow direct comparison with the CFD re-
sults. With the exception of two points in Fig. 3, NO accounts for
about 95 percent of the total NOx produced. The ﬂamelet model
results are clearly superior to the chemical equilibrium model,
which under predicts the NO concentrations by an order of mag-
nitude. The ﬂamelet model only under predicts the NO concentra-
tions by 15 percent at full load. Although this discrepancy dimin-
ishes at part loads, the rate of increase for the measured NO with
increasing load is somewhat steeper than the predicted trend. The
overall trend of increasing NO with increasing load is due to the
higher temperatures in the combustor, which leads to additional
NO via the thermal mechanism. Note these higher combustor tem-
peratures result from higher compressed air temperatures and
lower air-to-fuel ratios as the unit load is increased.
The inadequacy of the equilibrium based CFD model in this
situation can be elucidated by considering the deviation from
chemical equilibrium as measured by the Damkohler number, Da,
which is deﬁned as the ratio of characteristic turbulent time scale,
k/«, to chemical time scale, 1/bs . Here bs is the laminar strain
rate of a methane ﬂame at extinction, bs511,700 s21. Contours of
the local Damkohler number are plotted on the central plane, i.e.,
vertical plane dissecting the computational domain, in Fig. 4. Ide-
ally, this dimensionless parameter should be much greater than
unity, or in other words the turbulent time scale should be much
longer than the chemical time scale, for chemical equilibrium to
be valid. This is clearly not the case in Fig. 4, where 5,Da
,20 over a majority of the combustion chamber. Hence, there is
insufﬁcient time for chemical equilibrium to prevail.
Further insight into this problem is gained by comparing the
temperature and oxygen radical concentrations for these two com-
bustion models. In Fig. 5, contours of temperature on the central
plane show only slight deviations between the two cases, although
the high temperature region is larger for the ﬂamelet model. The
primary difference lies in the predicted concentration of oxygen
radical @O# as shown in Fig. 6. Here, the ﬂamelet model yields
signiﬁcantly higher @O# than predicted by equilibrium chemistry,
particularly in the thin ﬂame region near the injection nozzle.
Higher @O# increase the thermal NO formation rate, which is di-
rectly proportional to the concentration of oxygen radial as shown
by Mueller and Knill ~@14#!.
CFD simulations based on the second set of ﬁeld measurements
were performed only with the ﬂamelet model. The integrated
@NO# at the combustor outlet are compared with the average
CEMS measurements in Fig. 7. Unfortunately, nitric oxide mea-
surements were unavailable for this set of tests, so the reported
@NO# in Fig. 7 was estimated at 95 percent of the measured NOx
based on the results of our previous set of ﬁeld tests. Again,
ﬂamelet based CFD results slightly underpredict the measured
trend but it is within 10 percent of the measured NOx and within
5 percent of the estimated NO. This level of agreement is surpris-
ingly good and the discrepancy can easily be attributed to addi-
tional NO formation via residence time during the time the gas
leaves the combustion chamber and its subsequent expansion in
the high-pressure turbine stage.
We also compared the CFD predictions of the unburned hydro-
carbons ~UHC! and carbon monoxide at the combustor outlet with
the CEMS ﬁeld measurements for the second set of tests in Fig. 8.
Clearly the agreement between the predicted and measured values
of UHC and CO is poor, particular for CO where the predicted
levels are almost three orders of magnitude higher than the mea-
surements. The inability of CFD to accurately predict these com-
ponents was recognized by Nicol et al. ~@21#!.
Direct measurements of the @CO# and @UHC# at the outlet of a
laboratory combustor chamber were reasonably well predicted by
a ﬂamelet-based model in Ref. @14#. Hence, we offer that these
order of magnitude discrepancies can be explained by the discrep-
ancy in the locations from which the CFD and measured values
are derived. From Fig. 9, which shows the CO mole fraction, it
appears that CO is produced in the fuel rich region of the ﬂame.
Further downstream in the fuel lean zone where the temperatures
are higher ~refer to Fig. 5! it is oxidized into CO2. This oxidiza-
Fig. 9
Contours of CO mole fraction on the central plane
282 Õ Vol. 124, APRIL 2002
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 18 Dec 2009 to 129.137.95.89. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

tion process is relatively slow and will continue beyond the com-
bustor, through the downstream turbine and even into the exhaust
stack, where the pressure is atmospheric and the temperature
ranges from 420–492°C depending on the unit load. Chemical
equilibrium calculations show that negligible amounts of CO
would be present under these conditions and the residence time to
reach the measurement location on the exhaust stack is on the
order of several seconds versus milliseconds in the combustor. Of
course, better mixing could also reduce the UHC and CO emis-
sions in the actual unit.
One last comment, the mass ﬂow rate of air is an important
parameter in the NO predictions but the indirect calculation
method used to derive it is prone to inaccuracies due to uncertain-
ties in the temperature measurements across the turbine. This is
particularly true for an engine with a single turbine because the
Turbine Inlet Temperature ~TIT! is notoriously difﬁcult to mea-
sure accurately due to hot/cold streaks in the ﬂow from the com-
bustion chamber. The LM1600 consists of two separate turbines: a
high-pressure turbine to drive the air compression and a low-
pressure turbine for power generation. Fortunately, the tempera-
ture measurements across the low-pressure turbine are signiﬁ-
cantly more accurate than the TIT and these are used in the air
ﬂow calculation. An additional CFD simulation at full load con-
ditions revealed that a 10 percent increase in the total air ﬂow rate
reduced the predicted @NO# by 13 percent. This decrease is largely
due to effect of increased air dilution along with slightly enhanced
mixing in the combustion chamber. The sensitivity analysis also
provides a gross estimate of the uncertainty in @NO# associated
with the inaccuracy in the calculated ﬂow rate of air through the
combustion chamber.
Concluding Remarks
The following conclusions can be drawn from the present
study:
1 The predicted @NO# with the ﬂamelet model was in much
closer agreement with CEMS ﬁeld measurements than the chemi-
cal equilibrium model. This is likely because it more accurately
predicts the @O# within the combustor, which is an important fac-
tor in thermal NO mechanism.
2 Even with all the extra details and efforts incorporated in the
ﬂamelet model, the best CFD predictions were shown to be within
15 percent at maximum load.
3 The ﬁeld measurements showed that NO constitutes about 95
percent of the total NOx measured in this type of engine.
4 UHC and CO emissions were greatly overpredicted, arguably
as a result of neglecting their post-combustor oxidation in the
high-temperature fuel-lean environment of the turbine and exhaust
stack.
Acknowledgments
This work was conducted as part of a research program spon-
sored by TransCanada Pipeline Ltd. ~TCPL! and permission to
publish it is gratefully acknowledged. We would also like to ac-
knowledge Entect Environmental Services led by Mrs. Jackie
Hudson and Conor Paciﬁc Environmental Technologies Inc., par-
ticularly Mr. Sean Miner and Mr. Francis Lucas, for the CEMS
measurements. Thanks are also due to Dr. Golam Kibrya and Mr.
Gene Bayrock, both of TCPL, for their assistance in coordinating
and monitoring the ﬁeld tests.
Nomenclature
a 5 absorption coefﬁcient
bs 5 laminar ﬂamelet strain rate at extinction
cp 5 speciﬁc heat
D 5 diffusion coefﬁcient
Da 5 Damkohler number, Da5bsk/«
f 5 mixture fraction
k 5 turbulent kinetic energy
Le 5 Lewis number, Le5rcpD/l
p 5 static pressure
P 5 probability density function
T 5 static temperature
ui 5 velocity components, i51,2,3
w˙ 5 reaction rate
X 5 mole fraction
Y 5 mass fraction
Greek Symbols
x 5 scalar dissipation rate
« 5 turbulence dissipation rate
l 5 thermal conductivity
r 5 ﬂuid density
s 5 Stefan-Boltzmann constant
Subscripts
b 5 background conditions
j 5 current species
References
@1# South Coast Air Quality Management District, details of RECLAIM program
at web site, http://www.aqmd.gov/
@2# Environment Protection Agency—Acid Rain Program, details at web site,
http://www.epa.gov/acidrain/
@3# Voluntary Challenge and Registry Program, details at ofﬁcial web site, http://
www.vcr-mvr.ca/
@4# TransCanada
Transmission
Ltd,
details
at
ofﬁcial
web
site,
http://
www.transcanada.com/
@5# Hung, W. S., 1991, ‘‘A Predictive NOx Monitoring System for Gas Turbines,’’
ASME Paper No. 91-GT-306.
@6# Hung, W. S., 1995, ‘‘Predictive Emission Monitoring System ~PEMS!: The
Established NOx Monitoring System for Industrial Gas Turbines,’’Air & Waste
Management Association Paper No. 95-MP16A.01.
@7# Sullivan, D. A., 1997, ‘‘A Simple Gas Turbine Combustor NOx Correlation
Including the Effect of Vitiated Air,’’ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 119,
pp. 145–152.
@8# Tolpadi, A. K., Hu, I. Z., Correa, S. M., and Burrus, D. L., 1997, ‘‘Coupled
Lagrangian Monte Carlo PDF-CFD Computation of Gas Turbine Combustor
Flowﬁelds With Finite-Rate Chemistry,’’ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power,
119, pp. 519–526.
@9# Danis, A. M., Burrus, D. L., and Mongia, H. C., 1997, ‘‘Anchored CCD for
Gas Turbine Combustor Design and Data Correlation,’’ ASME J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power, 119, pp. 535–545.
@10# Mongia, H. C., 1994, ‘‘Combustor Modeling in Design Process: Applications
and Future Directions,’’ AIAA Paper No. 94-0466.
@11# Jones, W. P., and Toral, H., 1983, ‘‘Temperature and Composition Measure-
ments in a Research Gas Turbine Combustion Chamber,’’ Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol., 31, pp. 249–275.
@12# Heitor, M. V., and Whitelaw, J. H., 1986, ‘‘Velocity, Temperature and Species
Characteristics of the Flow in a Gas Turbine Combustor,’’ Combust. Flame,
64, pp. 1–32.
@13# Koutmos, P., and McGuirk, J. J., 1991, ‘‘Isothermal Modeling of Gas Turbine
Combustors: Computational Study,’’ J. Propul. Power, 7, No. 6, pp. 1064–
1071.
@14# Mueller, C. M., and Knill, K. J., 1996, ‘‘Numerical Simulation of Emissions in
a Gas Turbine Combustor,’’ Proceedings of Combustion Canada ‘96, National
Resources Canada, Environment Canada, and National Research Council
Canada, Ottawa, Canada.
@15# Magnussen, B. F., and Hjertager, B. H., 1976, ‘‘On Mathematical Models of
Turbulent Combustion With Special Emphasis on Soot Formation and Com-
bustion,’’ 16th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, pp. 719–729.
@16# Peters, N., 1984, ‘‘Laminar Diffusion Flamelet Models in Non-Premixed Tur-
bulent Combustion,’’ Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 10, pp. 319–339.
@17# De Soete, G. G., 1975, ‘‘Overall Reaction Rates of NO and N2 Formation
From Fuel Nitrogen’’ 15th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, pp. 1093–1102.
@18# Barths, H., et al., 1998, ‘‘Simulation of Pollutant Formation in a Gas-Turbine
Combustor Using Unsteady Flamelets,’’ 27th Symposium (International) on
Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, pp. 1841–1847.
@19# FLUENT™Release 5.1, 1999, Fluent Inc., Lebanon, N.H.
@20# Kazakov, A., and Frenklach, M., ‘‘A Simpliﬁed 19 Species Methane Oxidation
Mechanism,’’ please refer to website at http://www.me.berkeley.edu/drm/
for further details.
@21# Nicol, D. G., et al., 1999, ‘‘Development of a Five-Step Global Methane
Oxidation—NO Formation Mechanism for Lean-Premixed Gas Turbine Com-
bustion,’’ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 121, pp. 272–280.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2002, Vol. 124 Õ 283
Downloaded 18 Dec 2009 to 129.137.95.89. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
