Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
www.elsevier.com/locate/combustﬂame
Effect of pressure and fuel–air unmixedness on NOx
emissions from industrial gas turbine burners
Fernando Biagioli ∗, Felix Güthe
ALSTOM Switzerland, Brown Boveri Strasse 7, Baden, CH-5401, Switzerland
Received 23 November 2006; received in revised form 5 April 2007; accepted 25 April 2007
Available online 11 June 2007
Abstract
The effect of fuel–air unmixedness on NOx emissions from industrial lean premixed gas turbine burners fueled
with natural gas is analyzed in the pressure range from 1 to 30 bar. The analysis is based on a model where
NOx production is split, according to a Damköhler number criterion, into a “prompt” (fast) contribution generated
within the very narrow instantaneous heat release region (ﬂamelet) and a “postﬂame” (slow) one, generated in
the combustion products. Using GRI3.0 chemical kinetics, it is found that (a) the prompt NOx contribution is
approximately a factor of 3 less sensitive to adiabatic ﬂame temperature variations than postﬂame NOx and (b)
prompt and postﬂame NOx change with pressure respectively according to an exponent αPR ≃−0.45 and αPF ≃
0.67. It is shown that total NOx emissions change from being mostly of prompt type at 1 bar to being mostly
of postﬂame type at 30 bar, so that the effect of fuel–air unmixedness on NOx emissions signiﬁcantly increases
with increasing pressure. The combination of these ﬁndings yields a negative NOx pressure exponent under fully
premixed conditions across a rather large range of equivalence ratios but a positive one for levels of fuel–air
unmixedness typical of industrial burners. This result is conﬁrmed by the application of the NOx model in the
large eddy simulation of the ALSTOM EV double cone burner, which gives, in line with experimental data, an
NOx pressure exponent growing, with equivalence ratio, from ≃0.1 to ≃0.67.
© 2007 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Turbulent partially premixed combustion; NOx formation; Large eddy simulation
1. Introduction
Developing lean premixed industrial gas turbine
burners is a complex and expensive task. Additionally
to high pressure testing, in order to keep development
costs to a reasonable level, gas turbine manufactur-
ers also make signiﬁcant use of atmospheric tests.
The direct extension of atmospheric data to the high-
* Corresponding author. Fax: +41 (0) 56 2057713.
E-mail address: fernando.biagioli@power.alstom.com
(F. Biagioli).
pressure range (15–30 bar) in gas turbine combustors
fueled with natural gas (NG) seems reasonable for
all those aspects related to ﬂame position. NG is in
fact mostly composed of methane, a fuel component
that, when premixed with air at the high Damköh-
ler and Reynolds numbers usually found in gas tur-
bine combustors, gives ﬂames whose turbulent burn-
ing rate Ut does not strongly depend on the operating
pressure p. For example, Bunsen burner experiments
reported in [1] have shown a Ut ≃p0 dependency.
The situation is less clear for nitric oxides (NOx)
emissions, whose formation has in the past been the
0010-2180/$ – see front matter © 2007 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2007.04.007
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
275
Nomenclature
A
constant in TFC model
A0
mean ﬂame cross-sectional area
c
reaction progress variable
D
molecular diffusion coefﬁcient
Da = τm/(λ/s2
L) Damköhler number
Dt
turbulent diffusion coefﬁcient
Dt,F
turbulent diffusion coefﬁcient within
ﬂamelet thickness
f
mixture fraction
lK
characteristic length scale across turbu-
lent spectrum
lt
integral length scale of turbulence
nPR
prompt NOx [kmol/kg]
n⋆
PR(f )
prompt
NOx
from
CHEMKIN–
PREMIX
n(d)
PR
prompt NOx correction
n(ref)
PR (f ) reference prompt NOx
p
pressure
p0
reference pressure
P(f )
mixture
fraction
probability
density
function
sL
laminar ﬂame speed
S
NOx sensitivity to temperature
t
time
T
temperature of combustion products
Ta
activation temperature used in the Ar-
rhenius type approximation of the NOx
concentration
Treac
temperature of reactants
TREF = 1800 K reference temperature used for
nondimensionalization
uK
characteristic velocity across turbulent
spectrum
u′
turbulent velocity ﬂuctuation
u′
F
turbulent
velocity
ﬂuctuation
within
thickened ﬂamelet
U
fuel–air unmixedness factor
Ut
turbulent burning rate
wPR
prompt NOx source
w(d)
PR
source of prompt NOx correction
wPF
source of postﬂame NOx
X
nondimensional concentration
X0
NOx concentration at reference condi-
tions
X
coordinate on ﬂamelet surface
Yj
mass fraction of species j
Greek letters
α
NOx pressure exponent
δF
size of thickened ﬂamelet
ϵf
mixture fraction scalar dissipation rate
λ
molecular conductivity
ξ
mixture fraction in composition space
ρ
density
τm
turbulent mixing time
τHR = λ/s2
L heat release time scale
Symbols
( )b
value in products stream
( )u
value in reactants stream
( )
Reynolds averaging
˜( )
Favre averaging
( )′′ = ( ) −
( ) Favre ﬂuctuation
subject of several experimental and analytical studies
[2–10]. A very common assumption for NOx pres-
sure scaling is the ≃p0.5 dependency [2]. In this case,
extrapolation from 1 bar to high pressure would be
possible on the basis of just a universal pressure scal-
ing exponent. Other investigators have, however, re-
ported a more complicated situation, sometimes even
with a negative pressure exponent dependency (NOx
decreasing with pressure). For example, a reduction
of NOx emissions with pressure has been observed
in the experiments performed in [3–5]. The experi-
ments in a high-pressure jet-stirred reactor performed
in [3] have shown that, at a combustion tempera-
ture of 1800 K and a residence time around 2 ms,
NOx emissions decrease with pressure and this re-
duction is more pronounced in the range up to 5 bar
than in the range above it. Similar NOx behavior was
observed in the experiments performed in [4,5] for
the same kind of burner, with [5] reporting a neg-
ative pressure scaling exponent equal to −0.2. In a
review paper [6], it was suggested that NOx emis-
sions scale with pressure ([NOx]/[NOx]1 bar = pα)
with an exponent α that increases from α = 0 under
very lean premixed conditions to α = 0.5 for higher
equivalence ratios. It was instead concluded in [7],
on the basis of experiments, that NOx emissions in
well premixed ﬂames are independent of pressure and
suggested that, in well-designed lean premixed burn-
ers, it is possible to operate a combustor from 1 to
30 bar without any signiﬁcant change in NOx emis-
sions. In these experiments the pressure dependency
was found to increase only slightly with increasing
equivalence ratio. This conclusion was also reached
in [8], where experiments indicated that NOx emis-
sions are independent of pressure at an equivalence
ratio of 0.5 but that pressure dependency increases as
soon as the fuel–air unmixedness level is increased.
Given these results from previous experimental inves-
tigations, the primary scope of the present work is to
shed additional light on the combined effect of pres-
276
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
sure and unmixedness on NOx emissions, especially
from industrial gas turbine burners.
Turbulent combustion in industrial lean premixed
burners takes place at high Reynolds and, for fuels
like natural gas, moderately high Damköhler (Da)
numbers. Under these conditions, heat is released in
regions that are much smaller than the integral length
scale of turbulence; i.e., combustion takes place in
the so-called ﬂamelet regime. However, typical values
of the Karlovitz (Ka) number, i.e., the ratio between
the heat release and the Kolmogorov time scales, are
usually still larger than unity, meaning that the small-
est turbulent eddies can penetrate the preheating re-
gion, which therefore becomes subject to an increase
of thickness until a new equilibrium between turbu-
lent internal diffusion and heat release is reached.
The problem of turbulent premixed combustion un-
der Da > 1, Ka > 1 conditions was ﬁrst investigated
in [11] where the ﬁnal size δF of the ﬂamelet broad-
ened by small-scale turbulence (from which comes
the name of thickened ﬂamelet combustion regime)
was estimated from the turbulent diffusion law as
δF = Dt,FτHR, where Dt,F is the diffusion coef-
ﬁcient due to vortices of size equal and smaller to
the ﬂamelet thickness δF, i.e., Dt,F ≃u′
FδF. The tur-
bulence intensity associated with these vortices can
be estimated from the equilibrium of turbulence ki-
netic energy ﬂux across the turbulent spectrum (i.e.,
u′3/lt = u′3
k /lk) as u′
F ≃u′(δF/lt)1/3, which, used
within the expression for δF, gives, after some alge-
braic manipulation, the ﬁnal value of δF ≃ltDa−3/2.
This expression shows that the thickened ﬂamelet has
a size that is a Da−3/2 fraction of the integral length
scale of turbulence. In the case of Da > 1, small-scale
turbulence with size larger than δF has the effect of
wrinkling the ﬂamelet, increasing its area and there-
fore the mean total burning rate.
For consistency with the above ﬂamelet structure
of the preheating and heat release regions, NOx for-
mation is split in this work into two contributions ac-
cording to a Damköhler number criterion: a fast one
(called here “prompt”), which is the NOx part formed
within the ﬂamelet region, and a slow-forming part
(called here “postﬂame”), which takes place in the hot
gases downstream of the instantaneous heat release
region. A detailed study of the turbulence–chemistry
interaction effects inside the thickened ﬂamelet struc-
ture would be too demanding for the scope of the
present investigation. The analysis has therefore been
carried out assuming an instantaneous turbulent pre-
mixed ﬂamelet with a structure like that of a lam-
inar freely propagating ﬂame. This assumption is
partially justiﬁed by the fact that combustion reac-
tions are characterized by high activation energy. In
this case the thickness of the heat-release region is
much smaller than the thickness of the preheating
one, this last, for Da > 1, Ka > 1, broadened by
small-scale turbulence. It can therefore be reason-
ably assumed that the instantaneous-heat-release re-
gion, where prompt NOx formation takes place, has
a size smaller than that of the Kolmogorov vortices
and therefore remains laminar. The strain effect pro-
duced by the Kolmogorov vortices on the laminar heat
release region is also neglected. This could eventu-
ally be accounted for replacing the freely propagating
ﬂame structure with one of counterﬂowing laminar
ﬂames where the strain rate is an independent para-
meter to match to the Kolmogorov strain rate.
The present work is organized as follows. In
Section 2, NOx formation is analyzed under typi-
cal conditions of gas turbine combustors and in the
case of fully premixed reactants, with the CHEMKIN
II–PREMIX module [12] and GRI3.0 [13] chemi-
cal kinetics. The analysis is supported via experi-
mental data in a fully premixed, strongly adiabatic
dump combustor that was already used in previ-
ous experimental investigations of turbulent premixed
ﬂames [14].
In Section 3, a computational model to account for
the combined effect of unmixedness and pressure on
NOx emissions is developed. The model is developed
for CFD simulations of industrial low-NOx burners.
In this section the model is used according to a simple
1D formulation in order to obtain a preliminary idea
of the effect of unmixedness and pressure on NOx
emissions from industrial gas turbine burners.
In Section 4, the NOx model is used in a large
eddy simulation of the combusting ﬂow generated by
a prototype version of the low-emissions ALSTOM
EnVironmental (EV) double cone burner to conﬁrm
ﬁndings from the simple 1D analysis. CFD results are
in this case validated with experimental data at 1 and
15 bar.
2. NOx formation under perfectly premixed
conditions
Fig. 1 shows results from CHEMKIN II–PREMIX
[12] and GRI3.0 mechanisms [13] at 1 and 30 bar
for an adiabatic temperature of combustion prod-
ucts within typical values found in gas turbines,
i.e., 1700 K < T < 1900 K (NOx and temperature
nondimensionalized hereafter with reference values
TREF = 1800 K, NOx reference concentration = 2
ppmv dry at 15% O2). These results indicate that NOx
formation is characterized by an initial step within the
narrow heat-release region and a more slowly grow-
ing contribution in the postﬂame region.
NOx formation is usually studied in terms of
chemical kinetics pathways. From this point of view
NOx formation is decomposed, see [15], into four
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
277
Fig. 1. NOx distribution from the CHEMKIN II–PREMIX
module, GRI3.0 chemistry versus time for 1D freely propa-
gating NG–air premixed ﬂame at two different pressures and
a given adiabatic ﬂame temperature.
contributions: (a) Zeldovich slow reaction N2 + O
⇒NO + N, which forms two NO molecules, one
directly and the second indirectly from the fast oxida-
tion of the N atom via the second Zeldovich reactions
N + O2 ⇒NO + O, (b) N2O, where the N2O formed
by the three-body reaction N2 + O + M ⇒N2O +
M is attacked by the O-atom to give two molecules
of NO and by the H-atom, leading to a molecule of
NO and a molecule of NH, which is then rapidly ox-
idized to NO, (c) the Fenimore contribution, where,
within the ﬂame zone, N2 is attacked by the CH radi-
cal, N2 + CH ⇒HCN + N, and the HCN, N radicals
are rapidly converted to NO, (d) NNH pathway, where
the reaction NNH + O ⇒NO + NH gives two mole-
cules of NO (one directly and one indirectly via fast
oxidation of the NH radical).
In the present study, a different point of view is
adopted. NOx formation is split here into two contri-
butions according to a Damköhler number criterion:
a fast one (called here “prompt”) that is the NOx part
formed within the heat-release region and a slow-
forming part (called here “postﬂame”) that takes place
in the hot gases downstream of the instantaneous-
heat-release region. This decomposition of NOx
formation is dictated by the idea that turbulence–
chemistry interaction effects must be modeled consis-
tently with their characteristic Damköhler numbers.
Each species that is (promptly) produced or consumed
within the ﬂamelet, from initial mass fraction Yj,u to
ﬁnal value Yj,b, is released by the mean ﬂame el-
ement of area dA0 at a rate (mass/time) given by
ρuUt(Yj,b −Yj,u)dA0. This point of view leads to a
modeling concept based on the turbulent burning rate
(see for example [11,16]) that accounts at the same
Fig. 2. Sensitivity of the prompt NOx level to the choice of
the progress variable threshold value.
time for the mean ﬂame and also for any species that
is produced within the ﬂamelet sheet. Quantities that
are instead more slowly (volumetrically) produced
in the postﬂame region can be accounted for via a
plug ﬂow reactor approach coupled, if fuel–air un-
mixedness is still present, with a model to account for
turbulent ﬂuctuations in the fuel mixture fractions.
As mentioned already in the Introduction, prompt
NOx emissions are determined assuming a ﬂamelet
sheet with structure equal to that of the freely prop-
agating laminar ﬂame. Prompt NOx is therefore de-
ﬁned as the NOx concentration in the laminar freely
propagating ﬂame at the location where combustion is
close to equilibrium, i.e., where the progress variable
c (giving the degree of conversion of the fuel–air mix-
ture into its products) is sufﬁciently large so that heat
release has almost completed. A prompt NOx cutoff
value for the progress variable equal to unity would,
however, be inadequate because it includes also the
full region of combustion products, where also the
postﬂame NOx contribution is produced. A suitable
value of the progress variable to detect the level of
prompt NOx has been determined here from the plot
of NOx concentration across the laminar ﬂame ver-
sus the reaction progress variable shown in Fig. 2 for
two ﬂame temperatures and two values of the oper-
ating pressure (0.97 < c < 1.0). The plot shows that
for c > 0.99 the heat release is almost completed in
all cases (all heat release rates are below 7% of their
maximum value) and also that the prompt NOx level
does not change by more than 10–20% of the value
at c = 0.99, which is the threshold value used in this
work. Values higher than this threshold one can also
be used (but not c = 1), but this would not alter the
ﬁnal conclusions signiﬁcantly.
Postﬂame NOx is instead estimated from the for-
mation rate in the products region. In general, at ﬂame
temperatures and residence times that are typical of
278
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
Fig. 3. Postﬂame (left) and prompt (right) NOx from CHEMKIN II, GRI3.0 mechanism versus adiabatic ﬂame temperature for
NG/air premixed mixture.
gas turbine burners, this formation rate is constant
(Fig. 1); i.e., there is a negligible effect of backward
reactions, which cause the total NOx production rate
to decrease to zero.
Prompt NOx and postﬂame NOx concentrations
are plotted here as functions of the adiabatic tempera-
ture of the combustion products T at different values
of the operating pressure. It has been preferred to plot
the NOx concentrations versus the temperature T of
the combustion products because of the direct link
between this variable and NOx formation rates via
the exponential Arrhenius term ≃exp(−Ta/T ). The
equivalence ratio φ does not instead link unequivo-
cally to the adiabatic ﬂame temperature because of the
offset given by the initial temperature of the reactants.
All experimental data shown in this work refer to fuel-
lean conditions (φ < 1) and a nondimensional initial
temperature of reactants Treact/TREF = 0.4. Results
from CHEMKIN are given as symbols in Fig. 3 in log-
arithmic scale versus TREF/T (postﬂame NOx given
for 1 ms residence time).
Approximating these data with the Arrhenius-type
expression (shown with lines in Fig. 3)
(1)
XNOx = X0
 p
p0
α
exp

−Ta/TREF(TREF/T −1)

,
where Ta has the role of activation temperature, yields
the coefﬁcients given in Table 1 (p0 = 15 bar; X0
is the NOx concentration at p0 and TREF). Fig. 4
shows instead the approximation of the postﬂame and
prompt NOx at T = TREF with the pressure scaling
(p/p0)α.
These NOx trends lead to the following conclu-
sions:
• Within the range of ﬂame temperatures in which
gas turbine burners operate, nondimensional acti-
vation temperatures Ta/TREF used in the approx-
Table 1
Parameters for the approximation of prompt and postﬂame
NOx distributions given by relation (1) (p0 = 15 bar)
Postﬂame
Prompt
X0
0.0264
0.42
α
0.67
−0.45
Ta/TREF
32
10–13
Fig. 4. Postﬂame and prompt NOx variation with pressure at
T = TREF.
imation (1) of prompt and postﬂame NOx are
respectively equal to ≃10–13 and 32 and rather
independent of pressure (a mild increase with
pressure is observed for the prompt NOx above
10 bar). Postﬂame NOx is therefore character-
ized by a sensitivity to ﬂame temperature vari-
ations (and therefore unmixedness) that is much
higher than the sensitivity of prompt NOx.
• While postﬂame NOx increases with pressure
according to the pressure exponent α ≃0.67,
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
279
Fig. 5. Comparison of NOx from CHEMKIN II–PREMIX with experiments under complete fuel–air premixing for NG/air. Left:
total NOx. Right: postﬂame and prompt NOx individual contributions.
prompt NOx decreases according to the pressure
exponent α ≃−0.45.
Introducing the following parameter S, which
gives the sensitivity of NOx emissions to tempera-
ture,
(2)
S =
1
XNOx
dXNOx
d(T /TREF),
we have that
(3)
SPF
SPR
= dln(XNOx,PF)
d(T /TREF)
dln(XNOx,PR)
d(T /TREF)
≃2.5–3;
i.e., postﬂame NOx emissions are approximately
three times more sensitive to unmixedness than
prompt NOx.
The NOx emissions estimated via the CHEMKIN
II–PREMIX module are compared here with exper-
imental data from burners where reactants are com-
pletely premixed prior to combustion (zero unmixed-
ness at the ﬂame). Three pressure levels have been
considered: 1, 20, and 30 bar. The 1-bar experimental
data are from a fully premixed ALSTOM EV double-
cone burner that has in the past been the subject of
several experimental [17] and analytical [18–20] in-
vestigations, while the 20- and 30-bar are from a fully
premixed, strongly adiabatic dump combustor with a
characteristic residence time of ≃20 ms. This dump
combustor, available to the ALSTOM Combustion
development, is based on a modular design consist-
ing of an electric heating unit, a mixing tube that ends
in a sudden area expansion in a cylindrical combus-
tor, and a cooling/exhaust pipe. Three 30-kW electric
heaters preheat the air stream to the desired tempera-
ture (0–650 ◦C). A 30-cm-long series of static mixers
allow high levels of fuel/air premixing before the re-
actants reach the dump combustor. The mixing tube
and the combustor are lined with ceramic insulation
to promote near-adiabatic operation. Tests can be run
with a maximum mass ﬂow rate of 250 g/s. The max-
imum achievable pressure is 35 bar. Full details of this
experimental setup can be found in [14].
It must be noticed that, under perfect fuel–air pre-
mixing and adiabatic conditions, the only relevant
parameter in the formation of postﬂame NOx is the
product residence time. The combustor, in fact, acts
as a plug ﬂow reactor where the reacting volume V is
bounded by the ﬂame on one side and the combustor
exit on the other. Products ﬂow through this volume
with a volumetric ﬂow rate F such that the ﬁnal res-
idence time is V/F . The volume where prompt NOx
formation (and heat release) takes place is considered
here small with respect to the hot gas postﬂame vol-
ume, consistent with the hypothesis of ﬂamelet com-
bustion. This hypothesis loses validity in the very-
low-ﬂame-temperature range, which, however, is not
of large interest for gas turbines.
The comparison between calculated and measured
NOx emissions is shown in Fig. 5. Postﬂame NOx
is calculated for a residence time of 18 ms, approx-
imately the residence time in the combustors. The
right part of the ﬁgure shows a comparison of experi-
mental NOx emissions with the prompt and postﬂame
contributions from CHEMKIN–PREMIX at the three
pressures versus TREF/T . These results clearly indi-
cates that, in the intermediate and high-temperature
range, approximately for TREF/T < 1, high pressure
(20- and 30-bar) experimental NOx are well approx-
imated just by the calculated postﬂame contribution.
On the other hand, the prompt contribution alone is
sufﬁcient to give a reasonable estimate of the 1-bar
NOx emissions (slightly underestimated), especially
in the intermediate and low-temperature range, ap-
prox for TREF/T > 1.
280
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
Fig. 6. Left: total NOx emissions from CHEMKIN–PREMIX under full NG/air premixing versus adiabatic ﬂame temperature at
different pressures and residence times. Right: temperature where NOx at given pressure p is equal to 1-bar NOx.
At high pressure and in the low-temperature range,
a better estimate of the experimental NOx emissions
is obtained by adding the prompt contribution (see
Fig. 5, left). At low temperature and high pressure,
in fact, both prompt and postﬂame NOx are small
and comparable. The situation is reversed for the 1-
bar case, where postﬂame NOx become comparable
to prompt NOx only in the high-temperature range
and then, accounting for both of them, helps to im-
prove here the agreement with experimental data.
When added together, prompt and postﬂame NOx
yield a total NOx pressure exponent that goes from
a negative value of ≃−0.4 at TREF/T = 1.07 to
a positive value of ≃0.6 at TREF/T = 0.94. In the
low-temperature range, in fact, postﬂame plus prompt
NOx at high pressure is much lower than the prompt
NOx contribution dominating total NOx emissions at
1 bar. Postﬂame NOx, however, rises with temper-
ature much more quickly than prompt NOx (due to
higher activation temperature), so that the situation is
reversed at TREF/T ≃0.99, where the high-pressure
postﬂame contribution becomes equal to the 1-bar
prompt one. Finally, at TREF/T = 0.94, the postﬂame
high-pressure NOx contribution dominates above the
1-bar total NOx, giving a positive pressure exponent
of ≃0.6.
The characteristic temperature at which the 1- and
30-bar total NOx emissions become equal decreases
with increasing residence time. While, in fact, prompt
NOx does not change with residence time (it is a ﬁxed
offset), high-pressure postﬂame NOx increases faster
than under atmospheric conditions, leading to a re-
duction of the temperature at which the 1- and 30-bar
NOx are equal (see Fig. 6, left). A similar situation
occurs with the increase in pressure. The ﬂame tem-
perature at which NOx concentration at a pressure p
becomes equal to NOx at 1 bar (for a given value of
the residence time) in fact decreases with pressure p.
This result, shown in Fig. 6, is due to postﬂame NOx
increasing with pressure faster than the reduction in
prompt NOx, as reported in Table 1. This is also con-
ﬁrmed by experiments shown in Fig. 5, where the
temperature at which NOx emissions at pressure p
become equal to NOx emissions at 1 bar has a small
decrease from p = 20 bar to p = 30 bar. Finally,
Fig. 6 right shows the variation of the NOx inter-
section temperature (temperature where NOx(p) =
NOx(p = 1 bar)) with pressure at different residence
times.
3. Effect of unmixedness on NOx emissions
3.1. Modeling
The experimental data presented in the previous
section for the case of perfectly premixed ﬂames indi-
cate that the sensitivity of NOx emissions to temper-
ature increases with pressure. It has been shown that
NOx emissions behave in this way due to the increase
in the postﬂame NOx contribution and decrease of
prompt (ﬂamelet) NOx with increasing pressure, the
former much more sensitive to temperature variations
than the latter.
This result suggests also that, the higher the pres-
sure, the higher should be the effect of fuel–air un-
mixedness on NOx emissions. In this section a CFD
model able to account for postﬂame and prompt NOx
under partially premixed conditions is developed. The
model is therefore applied here in a simple one-
dimensional form in order to get a preliminary as-
sessment on how fuel–air unmixedness and pressure
affect NOx emissions.
Under fully premixed conditions, the rate of
prompt NOx production for a unit of mean ﬂame
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
281
Fig. 7. Sketch of prompt NOx release and downstream micromixing from partially premixed ﬂamelet.
cross-sectional area can be estimated as ρuUtn⋆
PR,
where n⋆
PR represents moles of NOx per unit of mass
released by the narrow ﬂamelets. This last quantity,
which is a function of the fuel mixture fraction f , is
obtained here from the CHEMKIN II–PREMIX mod-
ule as described in the previous section.
In industrial burners, some degree of unmixedness
(partially premixed reactants) at the ﬂame is usually
necessary in order to have good ﬂame stabilization
properties. Under partially premixed conditions, the
estimation of NOx emissions becomes a more com-
plicated issue. It is assumed here that, also in pres-
ence of partial premixing, the ﬂamelet sheet preserves
the structure of a 1D unstrained freely propagating
laminar ﬂame at the instantaneous local value of the
equivalence ratio. In this case, the equivalence ratio
at the ﬂamelet sheet and thus also the concentration
of released prompt NOx are functions of time and
space. This situation is accounted for with a model de-
scribing the release of prompt NOx from the ﬂamelet
surface with concentration depending on the local in-
stantaneous equivalence ratio and then the successive
downstream micromixing of these concentrations.
The model developed here for prompt NOx orig-
inates from the fact that molecular mixing is a lin-
ear process, while the distribution of prompt NOx
released from the ﬂamelet (see Fig. 7, left) with con-
centration n⋆
PR(f ) from CHEMKIN II–PREMIX cal-
culations is nonlinear (Fig. 7, right). The ﬁnal con-
centration of prompt NOx at the outlet of the combus-
tor, where complete fuel–air premixing is achieved, is
therefore different from the one obtained from a 1D
premixed ﬂame calculation at the bulk equivalence ra-
tio in the combustor.
The effect of unmixedness on the ﬁnal prompt
NOx concentration at the combustor exit is here ac-
counted for using n⋆
PR(f ) as a boundary condition
on the ﬂuctuating instantaneous ﬂamelet sheet for a
conservation equation that describes the downstream
micromixing of prompt NOx.
Extending this idea to a Reynolds or LES (large
eddy simulation) Navier–Stokes averaging frame-
work, however, implies some difﬁculties. In fact, the
boundary condition nPR = n⋆
PR[f (X,t)], where X
indicates points on the ﬂamelet sheet, spreads volu-
metrically over the mean ﬂame brush thickness and
also involves the introduction of the probability den-
sity function for the mixture fraction f .
These difﬁculties are overcome by solving for a
quantity n(d)
PR that gives the local deviation (called
hereafter the prompt NOx correction) of the prompt
NOx concentration nPR from a reference value
n(ref)
PR (f ), a function only of the mixture fraction f ;
i.e. nPR = n(ref)
PR (f ) + n(d)
PR.
Replacing nPR = n(ref)
PR (f ) + n(d)
PR into the instan-
taneous transport equation for the prompt NOx con-
centration,
(4)
ρ ∂nPR
∂t
+ ρu · ∇nPR = ∇· (ρD∇nPR) + ρwPR,
yields the following equation:
ρ ∂n(d)
PR
∂t
+ ρu · ∇n(d)
PR
= ∇·
	
ρD∇n(d)
PR

+ ρwPR + ∇·

ρD∇n(ref)
PR (f )

(5)
−ρ ∂n(ref)
PR
∂t
−ρu · ∇n(ref)
PR .
Assuming ρD = const and using the algebraic trans-
formations
∂n⋆
PR
∂t
= dn⋆
PR
df
∂f
∂t ;
∇n⋆
PR = dn⋆
PR
df ∇f ;
(6)
∇2n⋆
PR = dn⋆
PR
df ∇2f + d2n⋆
PR
df 2 |∇f |2
282
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
plus the transport equation for the mixture fraction f ,
(7)
ρ ∂f
∂t + ρu · ∇f = ρD∇2f,
the last three terms in (5) reduce to
(8)
ρw(d)
PR = ρD|∇f |2 d2n(ref)
PR
df 2
.
The ﬁnal equation for n(d)
PR becomes
ρ ∂n(d)
PR
∂t
+ ρu · ∇n(d)
PR
(9)
= ∇·
	
ρD∇n(d)
PR

+ ρwPR + ρD|∇f |2 d2n(ref)
PR
df 2
.
To specify the reference prompt NOx distribution
n(ref)
PR (f ), the computational domain is divided into
three regions: (a) region of reactants, (b) region of
heat release, (c) region of products. In the region of re-
actants, we have nPR = 0. This result is obtained with
(9) by using n(ref)
PR (f ) = 0 in the computational do-
main and n(d)
PR = 0 on the air and fuel inlet boundaries.
The same equation can be used with little error in
the instantaneous ﬂame region, i.e., the region where
the progress variable c assumes values between zero
and unity. In fact, the probability of ﬁnding 0 < c < 1
(within the mean ﬂame brush) is very low because the
instantaneous ﬂame is very narrow at ﬂamelet com-
bustion conditions. Therefore, is calculating the local
mean concentration of prompt NOx from the contri-
butions given by the three regions, little error is made
if the value of prompt NOx within the reaction re-
gion is set to zero. In the products region, the refer-
ence prompt NOx concentration n(ref)
PR (f ) is instead
set equal to the prompt NOx concentration n⋆
PR(f )
obtained from CHEMKIN calculations as described
in Section 2. In this case, Eq. (9) shows that the local
prompt NOx concentration in the products deviates
from n⋆
PR(f ) by an amount that depends on the non-
linearity versus f of the n⋆
PR(f ) distribution. The
boundary condition on the ﬂuctuating ﬂamelet sur-
face for the prompt NOx conservation (4) equation is
then transformed in the present approach to a source
term that can be more easily handled in terms of mean
quantities.
Taking ﬁnally the average of Eq. (9) yields
(10)
ρ ∂˜n(d)
PR
∂t
+ ρ ˜u · ∇˜n(d)
PR = ∇·

ρDt∇˜n(d)
PR

+ ρ ˜w(d)
PR,
where turbulent transport is modeled according to an
eddy diffusivity assumption. Assuming statistical in-
dependence between the progress variable c, the mix-
ture fraction f , and the mixture fraction dissipation
rate ϵf = D | ∇f |2, the Favre average of w(d), which
is different from zero only in the region of combustion
products, is given by
ρ ˜w(d) = ρw(d)
(11)
= Prob[c = 1]ϵf
1

0
ρb(ξ)P(ξ)d2n⋆
PR
dξ2
dξ,
where ξ represents the fuel mixture fraction in the
scalar space and Prob[c = 1] the probability of ﬁnd-
ing products. In case of ﬂamelet combustion, where
the local probability of ﬁnding 0 < c < 1 is negligi-
ble, we have c = Prob[c = 0] × 0 + Prob[c = 1] ×
1 = Prob[c = 1]. It can also be shown that ρbc =
ρ ˜c. Introducing the Favre probability density func-
tion for the mixture fraction ˜P(f ) = ρb(f )P(f )/ρb,
Eq. (11) becomes
(12)
ρ ˜w(d) = ρ ˜cϵf
1

0
˜P(ξ)d2n⋆
PR
dξ2
dξ = ρ ˜cϵf

d2n⋆
PR
df 2 .
The scalar dissipation rate is modeled here as ϵf =

f ′′2/τm, where τm is the turbulent mixing time. In a
Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) approach
based on k–ϵ transport, this is given by τm ≃k/ϵ. The
average concentration of prompt NOx in the hot gas
volume is therefore given by ˜nPR = ˜n(ref)
PR + ˜n(d) with
(13)
˜n(ref)
PR = ˜c
1

0
n⋆
PR(ξ) ˜P(ξ)dξ.
As shown in Fig. 1, postﬂame NOx under lean
fully premixed conditions is formed at a constant rate,
hence still far from equilibrium conditions, where for-
ward formation reactions are balanced by the back-
ward ones. The following transport equation is there-
fore used here to account for postﬂame NOx forma-
tion,
ρ ∂˜nPF
∂t
+ ρ ˜u∇˜nPF = ∇· (ρDt∇˜nPF) + ρ ˜wPF,
(14)
˜wPF = ˜c

w⋆
PF(ξ) ˜P(ξ)dξ,
where w⋆
PF(f ) is the constant postﬂame NOx pro-
duction rate function of the fuel mixture fraction f
obtained in the postﬂame region from the calcula-
tion of 1D freely propagating ﬂames with CHEMKIN
II–PREMIX. This model has the advantage, over the
more usual Zeldovich closure, of accounting also for
additional signiﬁcant postﬂame NOx contributions
such as the one from the N2O pathway. The prob-
ability density function ˜P(f ) is assumed here with
the shape of the beta-function and parameterized with
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
283
Fig. 8. Left: NOx versus TREF/T at 1 and 30 bar at different levels of unmixedness. Right: temperature where NOx concentra-
tions are equal to 1-bar NOx levels versus fuel–air unmixedness (NOx estimated over 5 ms).
respect to the mean ˜f and variance 
f ′′2 of the fuel
mixture fraction [21].
The sources for the prompt NOx correction and
postﬂame NOx, respectively in Eqs. (10) and (14),
are subject, within the mean ﬂame brush, to modu-
lation by the mean reaction progress variable ˜c. The
distribution of the mean progress variable ˜c, which
deﬁnes the shape and position of the mean turbulent
ﬂame, depends of the turbulent burning rate Ut (see
for example [22] for a detailed description of current
state-of-the-art modeling of Ut) and on the convec-
tive and turbulent inﬂow of reactants into the mean
ﬂame. The ﬂame, in fact, once anchored at a ﬁxed
location via some sort of piloting (e.g., recirculation
of products), assumes a shape that ensures a local in-
ﬂow of reactants equal to the turbulent burning rate.
This condition is expressed analytically by the trans-
port equation for the mean progress variable based on
a turbulent burning rate closure [23],
(15)
ρ ∂˜c
∂t + ρ ˜u · ∇˜c = ∇· (ρDt∇˜c) + ρuUt|∇˜c|.
The turbulent burning rate Ut is modeled using the
turbulent ﬂame-speed closure (TFC) model developed
in [11],
(16)
Ut = Au′Da1/4,
with Da = τm/τHR and τHR = λ/s2
L. In this expres-
sion A is a proportionality constant whose optimal
value of 0.5 has been found in the past [24] by com-
paring predictions obtained with the standard k–ϵ
model with turbulent burning rate experimental data
in a stirred spherical vessel.
3.2. Combined effect of unmixedness and operating
pressure: one-dimensional analysis
The model given by Eqs. (10) and (14) is applied
in a simple one-dimensional form in order to make
a preliminary assessment of the effect of unmixed-
ness and pressure on NOx emissions. In gas turbine
combustors, fuel–air unmixedness decreases rapidly
on moving from inside the burner toward the combus-
tor. Average hot gas temperatures are also subject to
a fast drop in the combustor due to heat losses and
mixing with liner cooling air. For these reasons NOx
production rates are signiﬁcant only in the burner and
in a small hot core in front of it. In this simple analy-
sis, it is assumed that fuel–air unmixedness decays
over a characteristic time τm that is comparable to the
residence time in the hot core just in front of the exit
of the burner. In the case of the EV burner variant con-
sidered here, this time is on the order of 5–10 ms. The
mean ﬂame is assumed to be narrow and ﬂat so that
1D equations solved in the postﬂame region (follow-
ing the ﬂuid particles, i.e., according to a Lagrangian
approach) are
D ˜nPF
Dt
= ˜wPF,
D ˜n(d)
PR
Dt
=

f ′′2
τm

d2n⋆
PR
df 2 ,
(17)
D 
f ′′2
Dt
= −

f ′′2
τm
.
The mean sources are calculated according to rela-
tions (12) and (14) with the beta-shaped probability
density function ˜P(f ).
Fig. 8 left shows the total NOx emissions cal-
culated for a residence time of 5 ms vs TREF/T at
pressures of 1 and 30 bar for different initial val-
ues of the fuel–air unmixedness U, deﬁned as U =

f ′′2/ ˜f /(1 −˜f ). Fig. 8 right shows instead the tem-
perature at which 20- and 30-bar NOx are equal to
284
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
Fig. 9. Sketch of the ALSTOM EV burner and mesh in a longitudinal section used for the CFD calculations.
1-bar NOx plotted versus unmixedness. In line with
the discussion in the previous section, the character-
istic ﬂame temperature at which high-pressure and
atmospheric NOx become equal decreases with in-
creasing unmixedness. This is a consequence of the
fact that atmospheric NOx is mostly of prompt type
and therefore much less sensitive to unmixedness
than 30-bar NOx, which is mostly of postﬂame type.
The increase of atmospheric NOx with unmixedness
is therefore considerably lower than the increase of
high-pressure NOx, a situation that leads to the shift
of the NOx intersection temperature (indicated with
circles in Fig. 8, left) to lower value of adiabatic ﬂame
temperature.
The simple analysis performed here gives the op-
portunity to justify on a qualitative basis different
NOx pressure exponents reported in the literature.
A detailed evaluation of the NOx emissions from the
experimental devices used in those investigations is
outside the scope of the present work. The present
work, however, suggests that the difference in the
measured NOx pressure exponents is due to the par-
ticular combination of residence times, equivalence
ratio, and unmixedness effects characterizing those
devices. For example, the experiments performed in
a jet-stirred perfectly premixed reactor cavity over
residence times up to 4 ms in [3,4] gave a signif-
icant reduction of NOx emissions with pressure, in
line with the present simple analysis under the same
conditions. Higher levels of unmixedness and/or res-
idence times might have instead characterized those
experiments where a positive pressure exponent was
detected (e.g., [8]).
4. CFD analysis of NOx emissions in the
ALSTOM EV double cone burner
Industrial dry low-NOx burners usually stabilize
the ﬂame at a central recirculation zone (CRZ) ob-
tained via the phenomenon of vortex breakdown. This
phenomenon is brieﬂy explained here for the case
of the ALSTOM EnVironmental (EV) double cone
burner sketched in Fig. 9. This burner, which has been
the subject of previous experimental [17] and compu-
tational investigations [18–20], is obtained by shifting
two halves of a cone in opposite directions, orthogo-
nal to the cone axis, so that two inlet slots of constant
width are produced. The air stream, when ﬂowing
through the burner slots, is given a strong swirl com-
ponent. At the same time, fuel is injected through
holes uniformly distributed along the burner slots, or-
thogonal to the stream of air. This ensures that all
air streamlines through the slots are equally fed with
fuel; i.e., it ensures good (but not perfect) fuel–air pre-
mixing prior to combustion. When the swirling ﬂow
reaches the expansion area between burner and com-
bustor, the ﬂuid particles radially diverge and slow
down in the azimuthal direction due to the constraint
imposed by the conservation of circulation Γ = wr.
The vorticity vector ω rotates with the streamlines in
the azimuthal direction so that part of the axial vortic-
ity is converted to azimuthal vorticity, which, accord-
ing to the Biot–Savart law, induces a negative axial
velocity at the axis [25]. If the negative axial veloc-
ity induced at the axis is sufﬁciently large, breakdown
of the axial vortex takes place and a CRZ at the axis
is created. The ﬂame anchors at the axis, in proximity
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
285
Fig. 10. Mean axial velocity in a longitudinal cross section of the EV burner. Nonreacting conditions. Left: RANS k–ϵ model.
Center: experimental data. Right: LES model.
to the front stagnation point of the CRZ, where axial
convective velocities are sufﬁciently low.
From a pure NOx emissions point of view, the op-
timal situation is that reactants reach the ﬂame com-
pletely premixed. However, during the burner devel-
opment process, fuel–air unmixedness at the ﬂame is
used as an additional degree of freedom that helps
to provide good ﬂame-anchoring properties, i.e., suf-
ﬁciently high margin from lean blow out and low-
pressure pulsations due to thermoacoustic combustion
instabilities (these are notoriously related to ﬂame po-
sition by fuel injection–ﬂame time lag effects). Fuel
injection is therefore optimized for emissions and
ﬂame stability simultaneously; i.e., industrial “pre-
mixed” burners are in general always characterized
by some residual fuel–air unmixedness at the ﬂame.
The CFD model for prompt and postﬂame NOx
presented in the previous section is applied here to
the ALSTOM EV double-cone burner. All CFD cal-
culations have been performed using a commercial
unstructured CFD ﬁnite-volumes solver (FLUENT
version 6.2.16). All geometric quantities and veloci-
ties are nondimensionalized with the burner diameter
D and burner bulk velocity U0. The combustor has
a circular cross section with nondimensional diame-
ter and length respectively equal to 2 and 7. To im-
prove numerical accuracy and overcome difﬁculties
connected with the complexity of the geometry, the
computational domain has been meshed with a mixed
tetrahedral–hexahedral mesh of approx. 400,000 ele-
ments, with the hexahedrals concentrated in the cen-
tral region of the burner and in the combustor. The
ﬁnite-volume elements inside the burner and in the
combustor close to the burner exit have an average
nondimensional size of 0.025. A longitudinal cross
section of the burner–combustor domain showing the
computational mesh is presented in Fig. 9. The RANS
calculations have been run with the realizable version
[26] of the k–ϵ transport model and with numerics
based on the QUICK scheme [27]. The LES simula-
tions are based instead on the standard Smagorinsky
subgrid model, with central differencing used for all
variables with the exception of the transport equation
for the fuel mixture fraction, which is discretized with
the QUICK scheme [27]. All LES simulations have
been run using second-order discretization in time and
a nondimensional time step t/(D/U0) = 0.014. The
calculations have been performed on four nodes of a
LINUX cluster. The LES calculations have ﬁrst been
run for a time sufﬁciently long to yield a statistically
steady solution. Final averaging has then been per-
formed over a total time t/(D/U0) ≃10, i.e., approx
700 time steps, which required around 12 h of CPU
time for each case.
The combusting ﬂow is calculated using the TFC
combustion model according to its standard formula-
tion based on Eq. (15). In the case of the LES cal-
culations, the model constant A has been taken equal
to 0.9, higher than the standard RANS value of 0.5.
A discussion explaining the reasons for this higher
value of the constant in LES simulations is given
in [20]. Previous work [20] has shown that RANS
methods are not suitable for correctly reproducing
the ﬂame anchoring properties of this burner. It was
in fact found that RANS methods based on the k–ϵ
transport model do not correctly reproduce the char-
acteristics of the CRZ produced by the vortex break-
down phenomenon, which are very important in de-
termining the anchoring location of the turbulent pre-
mixed ﬂame at the axis. Accurate results have instead
been obtained via LES. This issue is documented in
Fig. 10, which shows a comparison of the mean axial
velocity ﬂowﬁeld obtained from the RANS and LES
calculations with experimental data from a water rig
facility. While the position of the apex of the CRZ
is correctly predicted with the realizable k–ϵ method
(deep in the burner), the radial size is not. Much bet-
ter agreement with experiments, in terms of both the
position and the radial size of the CRZ (see Fig. 10,
right), is instead obtained via LES.
It has been shown in [20] that the radial size of
the CRZ has a strong effect on the anchoring posi-
tion at the axis of the turbulent premixed ﬂame. The
turbulent premixed ﬂame stabilized at a CRZ, in fact,
286
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
Fig. 11. Mean axial velocity (contours) and mean progress variable (isolines) in a longitudinal cross section of the EV burner at
T = TREF. Fully premixed conditions. Left: RANS k–ϵ model. Center: experiments. Right: LES model.
is not ﬂat like the one stabilized in a ﬂow impinging
against a ﬂat wall but, as shown in [20], it is charac-
terized by a curvature radius RF at the axis, which is
inversely proportionally to the radial variation of the
mean axial velocity, this last measured via the fac-
tor d2 ˜u/dr2. In this case, the turbulent ﬂame does not
receive reactants at the axis only in the form of mean
axial convective ﬂux but also as a radial turbulent ﬂux,
which in cylindrical coordinates can be expressed as
−2(Dt/RF)d˜c/dr. Assuming a velocity ﬂowﬁeld like
the experimental nonreacting one, a ﬂame placed in-
side the burner would have very small curvature ra-
dius RF due to the very narrow CRZ (high d2 ˜u/dr2)
and therefore would be subject to a very high radial
turbulent inﬂow of reactants, which was estimated
in [20] to be much larger than typical values of the
turbulent burning rate. Using a simple 1D method,
it has been shown in [20] that, in this case, the bal-
ance between the inﬂow of reactants to the ﬂame and
the turbulent burning rate, takes place at a position in-
side the CRZ close to the burner exit where the CRZ
starts increasing in thickness in downstream direction
and therefore the estimated RF is not too small; i.e.,
the ﬂame anchors in a intermediate position, com-
pletely intersecting the CRZ. Using the standard def-
inition of turbulent ﬂame speed as the component of
the ﬂow velocity orthogonal to the ﬂame, this means
that the ﬂame in the EV burner has negative speed at
the axis. In case of RANS methods, due to the sig-
niﬁcant overestimation of radial size of the CRZ (see
Fig. 10, left), the radial ﬂux of reactants into a ﬂame
placed inside the burner would be much less than in
the case of LES and therefore the ﬂame mass balance
is satisﬁed much deeper in the burner. These estimates
on the ﬂame position are conﬁrmed by the combust-
ing CFD calculations under fully premixed conditions
at T = TREF shown, together with the experimen-
tal data, in Fig. 11. The RANS method gives in fact
a ﬂame that anchors deeply inside the burner, while
LES gives a ﬂame that anchors in the combustor, in-
tersecting the CRZ just downstream of the mixing
tube exit, in line with the experimental data. Given
these results, it was decided here to perform the NOx
emission analysis with the LES method.
In order to limit the CPU time, postﬂame and
prompt NOx emissions have not been determined via
the solution of their transport equations but instead via
the volumetric integration of their production rates. In
fact, integrating Eqs. (12) and (14) over the computa-
tional domain yields the net ﬂux (kmol/s) of prompt
NOx correction and postﬂame NOx as
(18)
FluxPR =

Exit
ρ ˜u˜n(d)
PR dA =

V
ρ ˜w(d)
PR dV,
(19)
FluxPF =

Exit
ρ ˜u˜nPF dA =

V
ρ ˜wPF dV.
The total prompt NOx emissions at the combustor exit
are obtained by adding to the prompt NOx correction
estimated from relation (18), the prompt NOx concen-
tration calculated with CHEMKIN–PREMIX at the
bulk equivalence ratio in the combustor. NOx experi-
mental data are available at 1 and 15 bar for variations
of the bulk adiabatic temperature and a ﬁxed value
of the burner bulk velocity U0 (i.e., ﬁxed residence
time).
NOx emissions obtained from the LES simula-
tions are compared with experiments in Fig. 12 as
functions of the adiabatic temperature of the combus-
tion products. Fig. 12 left shows that the calculated
NOx emissions underestimate the experimental val-
ues and, not surprisingly, the error is higher at 15 bar
then at 1 bar. Given in fact the higher sensitivity
to temperature of high-pressure NOx emissions, er-
rors in the estimation of fuel–air unmixedness have
a larger impact on NOx at 15 bar than at 1 bar. The
calculated NOx emissions show, however, a pressure
exponent that increases with TREF/T from ≃0.1 to
≃0.67, consistent with the experimental data, where
the NOx pressure exponent increases from approxi-
mately 0.1 to approximately 0.76. Both the numerical
and experimental data do not show any intersection
between the 15- and 1-bar NOx curves (no temper-
ature range where the pressure exponent is below
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
287
Fig. 12. Comparison of NOx emissions from LES with experiments in the EV burner. Left: total NOx. Right: split into postﬂame
and prompt NOx contributions.
zero). In line with the 1D results, the right part of
Fig. 12 shows that in the 15-bar case, most of the
NOx is of postﬂame type (especially in the high-
temperature range), while in the 1-bar case, most of
the NOx is of prompt type (especially in the low-
temperature range, where postﬂame NOx is negligi-
ble at all pressures). Finally, the prompt NOx correc-
tion ˜n(d)
PR at 1-bar accounts for approx 10% of the total
prompt NOx contribution.
LES has also been run under fully premixed con-
ditions, in order to evaluate the theoretical NOx po-
tential of the burner. The results, shown in Fig. 12 left
for this case, indicate that, in the absence of fuel–air
unmixedness and in line with the 1D analysis, high-
pressure NOx is lower than atmospheric NOx over
a rather large range of ﬂame temperature. Such low
NOx emissions are, however, not easy to achieve in
an industrial combustor due to the fact that a given
level of fuel–air unmixedness is usually necessary to
ensure ﬂame stability. In other words, the problem of
achieving single-digit NOx emissions from industrial
burners is a pure ﬂame stability one.
5. Conclusions
The effect of pressure and fuel–air unmixedness
on NOx emissions from industrial gas turbines burn-
ers has been analyzed here using results from the
CHEMKIN II premix module with GRI3.0 mecha-
nisms and a model where the total NOx formation is
decomposed, according to a Damköhler number crite-
rion, to a fast “prompt” contribution produced within
the heat release region and a slow “postﬂame” one.
The analysis shows that (a) the ﬂamelet “prompt”
contribution is around a factor of 3 less sensitive
to fuel–air unmixedness than the “postﬂame” one,
(b) the sensitivity to unmixedness of “prompt” and
“postﬂame” NOx does not strongly depends on pres-
sure, and (c) the “prompt” and “postﬂame” contri-
butions change with pressure respectively with expo-
nents ≃−0.45 and ≃0.67.
A preliminary analysis has been carried out using
a simple 1D approach and a model for NOx emis-
sions developed here that separately accounts for the
prompt and postﬂame contributions. Based on this
analysis, the combination of the NOx emissions prop-
erties from CHEMKIN II–GRI3.0 chemistry, under
fully premixed conditions and typical hot gas resi-
dence times in industrial burners, shows that high-
pressure (e.g., 20-bar) NOx emissions can in principle
be lower than atmospheric ones (negative pressure
exponent of total NOx). Given, however, that post-
ﬂame NOx represents the dominant contribution at
high-pressure and given its highest sensitivity to ﬂame
temperature variations, in the presence of even a small
amount of fuel–air unmixedness or high residence
times, the situation can easily be reversed in favor of
atmospheric NOx emissions. The problem of reduc-
ing NOx emissions to single-digit values in industrial
gas turbines is therefore a problem of sorting out those
ﬂame stability issues that imply keeping some degree
of fuel–air unmixedness at the ﬂame.
The results from the simple 1D analysis are ﬁnally
conﬁrmed by LES simulations of the combusting ﬂow
in the ALSTOM industrial EV burner. These, in line
with experiments, give a positive NOx pressure ex-
ponent increasing with equivalence ratio from ≃0.1
to ≃0.67 under standard fuel injection, but a nega-
tive pressure exponent could be obtained over a large
range of the equivalence ratio under ideal fully pre-
mixed conditions.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank D. Winkler and R. Carroni from
the ALSTOM Technology Center in Birr, Switzerland
288
F. Biagioli, F. Güthe / Combustion and Flame 151 (2007) 274–288
for providing perfectly premixed experimental NOx
data at high-pressure and H. Lübcke from the AL-
STOM Base Technology in Baden, Switzerland for
providing the computational CFD mesh for the EV
burner calculations.
References
[1] H. Kobayashi, T. Tamura, T. Takashi, F. Williams, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 26 (1996) 389–396.
[2] D.A. Sullivan, J. Eng. Power Trans. ASME 99 (1977)
145–152.
[3] K.U.M. Bengtsson, P. Benz, R. Schaeren, C.E. Frouza-
kis, Proc. Combust. Inst. 27 (1998) 1393–1401.
[4] T. Rutar, P.C. Malte, in: Proc. of the ASME: TURBO
EXPO 2001, June 4–7, 2001, New Orleans, LA, USA.
[5] R.C. Steele, J.H. Tonouchi, D.G. Nicol, D.C. Horn-
ing, P.C. Malte, D.T. Pratt, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power
Trans. ASME 120 (1998) 303–310.
[6] S.M. Correa, Combust. Sci. Technol. 87 (1992) 329–
362.
[7] G. Leonard, J. Stegmaier, ASME Paper 93-GT-288
(1993), ASME, New York.
[8] R.K. Mongia, E. Tomita, F.K. Hsu, L. Talbot, R.W. Dib-
ble, Proc. Combust. Inst. 26 (1996) 2749–2755.
[9] T.F. Fric, J. Propulsion Power 9 (1993) 708–713.
[10] J.C. Barnes, A.M. Mellor, J. Propulsion Power 14
(1998) 974–980.
[11] V.L. Zimont, Combust. Explos. Shock Waves 15 (1979)
305–311.
[12] R.J. Kee, F.M. Rumpley, J.A. Miller, CHEMKIN-II:
A Fortran Chemical Kinetics Package for the Analysis
of Gas Phase Chemical Kinetics Gov. Pub. SAND89-
9009B, September, 1989.
[13] Available
at
http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri_mech/,
accessed 28 May 2007.
[14] R. Carroni, T. Grifﬁn, J. Mantzaras, M. Reinke, Catal.
Today 83 (2003) 157–170.
[15] D.G. Nicol, R.C. Steele, N.M. Marinov, P.C. Malte, J.
Eng. Gas Turbines Power Trans. ASME 117 (1995)
100–111.
[16] N. Peters, J. Fluid Mech. 384 (1999) 107–132.
[17] F. Dinkelacker, A. Soika, D. Most, D. Hofmann, A.
Leipertz, W. Polifke, K. Döbbeling, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 27 (1971) 857–865.
[18] V.L. Zimont, W. Polifke, M. Bettelini, W. Weisenstein,
J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power Trans. ASME 120 (1992)
526–532.
[19] P. Flohr, in: R. Friedrich, B. Geurts, O. Métais (Eds.),
Proc. of the 5th Int. ERCOFTAC Workshop on Di-
rect and Large-Eddy Simulation, Munich University of
Technology, 2003.
[20] F. Biagioli, Combust. Theory Modeling 10 (3) (2006)
389–412.
[21] V. Eswaran, S.B. Pope, Phys. Fluids 31 (1988) 506.
[22] A.N. Lipatnikov, J. Chomiak, Prog. Energy Combust.
Sci. 28 (2002) 1–74.
[23] V.L. Zimont, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 21 (2000) 179–
186.
[24] V.L. Zimont, A.N. Lipatnikov, Chem. Phys. Reports
14 (7) (1995) 993–1025.
[25] G.K. Batchelor, An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics,
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1967.
[26] T.-H. Shih, W.W. Liou, A. Shabbir, Z. Yang, J. Zhu,
Comp. Fluids 3 (1995) 227–238.
[27] P. Leonard, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 19
(1979) 58–98.
