
--- Page 1 ---

Predicting combustor performance for hydrogen-propane fuel blends in gas 
turbines: A coupled thermofluid and chemical reactor network model
Chaz Fenner *
, Johan Van der Spuy
, Ryno Laubscher
Department of Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, Stellenbosch University, South Africa
A B S T R A C T
The transition to carbon-neutral energy has renewed interest in hydrogen as a gas turbine fuel in the form of fuel blends with hydrocarbons. However, the distinct 
fluid properties and chemical kinetics of hydrogen and hydrocarbon blends necessitate redeveloped combustor designs. While conventional combustor design and 
emissions estimation through computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is preferred, it is computationally intensive and impractical for system-level simulations. To 
alleviate this, a thermofluid network model was developed to predict the performance of a MGT combustor operating on pure and fuel blends of propane and 
hydrogen. It incorporates sub-component pressure losses and heat transfer, and presents the first implementation of well-stirred and plug-flow reactors into Flownex 
SE. A 3-D CFD study of the combustor revealed that hydrogen addition improved combustion efficiency and reduced wall temperatures. However, although it 
produces less CO2, it leads to 70 % more CO, and 80 % more NO than for propane-only operation. Validated against the 3-D CFD data, the network model predicted 
the combustor outlet total temperature and pressure within 0.55 % and 0.26 %, respectively. The change in total pressure across subcomponents (<6 %) and the mass 
flow distribution showed similarly strong agreement. Major species mass fractions, CO2 and H2O, were predicted accurately. However, by assuming that the tem­
perature and composition are uniform within combustion zones, zone and wall temperatures and pollutant predictions deviated considerably. NO was overpredicted 
by a factor of 8.2–10.7, and CO was overpredicted for propane-only, but underpredicted for blended cases. The network model achieved this performance 420 times 
faster than CFD, making it suitable for rapid design exploration.
1. Introduction
Low-emissions combustors, powered by fossil fuels, are a well- 
developed component of gas turbines. The advent of renewable fuels 
and a drive towards carbon neutral power generation has revived in­
terest in hydrogen as a fuel [1]. Currently, 98 % of the available 
hydrogen is produced from fossil fuels [2]. To achieve carbon-neutral 
power production using hydrogen, it must be produced from a carbon 
free feedstock and renewable energy, commonly termed Green 
Hydrogen. However, the low availability and high cost of green 
hydrogen has led to increased interest in hydrogen-hydrocarbon fuel 
mixtures as a transitional solution, enabling partial decarbonization 
while maintaining fuel supply security [3].
Hydrogen enrichment in gas turbine combustors is a promising near- 
term decarbonization strategy. It has been shown to reduce CO and CO2 
emissions [4], improve combustor pattern factors [5], enhance flame 
stability, and widen combustor operating limits [3]. These benefits stem 
from hydrogen’s higher flame speed and improved mixture reaction rate 
resulting from the increased oxygen (O) and hydrogen (H) radical pool 
[6,7]. Broader combustion literature indicates that the effect of 
hydrogen on flame speed in fuel blend combustion depends on the 
hydrocarbon being enriched [8]. Most studies on gas turbine combustor 
performance 
with 
hydrogen 
blended fuels 
typically consider 
methane-hydrogen blends. By contrast, relatively few studies have 
conducted 
numerical 
or 
experimental 
investigations 
into 
propane-hydrogen blend firing in gas turbine combustors. This gap is 
significant as methane exhibits a larger increase in flame speed with 
hydrogen addition when compared to propane [8], which may alter the 
formation of pollutant species such as CO and NO.
While hydrogen enrichment offers clear benefits, it also introduces 
significant challenges which include a higher likelihood of flashback, 
increased NOx production and higher flame temperatures. These effects 
may lead to pollution and increased thermal stresses that require careful 
consideration. As such, the disparate fluid properties and chemical ki­
netics of hydrogen and mixture fuels when compared to pure hydro­
carbons, may require that combustors be redeveloped.
Typically, the preliminary aerodynamic design of gas turbine com­
bustors begins with the work of Mongia [9], Melor and Fritskyk [10] and 
Lefebvre and Ballal [11]. This is an empirical approach using correla­
tions derived from experimental data. Despite its simplicity, a design 
process using empirical correlations can be implemented to reduce a 
combustor’s pressure losses and pollutant formation and optimise its 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: fenner@sun.ac.za (C. Fenner). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/he
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2025.152511
Received 26 August 2025; Received in revised form 17 October 2025; Accepted 8 November 2025  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
Available online 12 November 2025 
0360-3199/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 


--- Page 2 ---

mass flow distribution in a timely manner. Moreover, these correlations 
can also be utilized to investigate off-design performance of the 
combustor. However, due to the data-driven nature of the correlations, 
working outside of the intended operating conditions may produce un­
reliable results and may be a limiting factor of this modelling method.
A brief review of literature pertaining to semi-empirical modelling of 
gas turbine combustors. Despierre et al. [12] demonstrated the versa­
tility of the network method by optimising an annular combustor with a 
genetic algorithm. Gouws [13] developed an empirical and network 
model to reverse engineer and predict the performance and wall tem­
peratures of a can combustor from a T56 Rolls Royce engine. The 
empirical model, which the estimated discharge coefficients for 
combustor flow components, produced mass flow distribution errors of 
11.8–35.7 % compared to experimental data. Calibrating these co­
efficients reduced errors but made components non-generalisable. Exit 
temperatures differed from CFD results by less than 13 % and wall 
temperatures agreed well. du Toit and Theron [14] developed a conju­
gate flow and heat transfer network model of the NASA E3 development 
combustor. Validation of the network model focused on combustor wall 
temperatures where an error range relative to 3-D CFD data was 1 %–13 
%. Mahto and Chakravarthy [15] presented a hybrid approach by 
coupling a network model and a CFD simulation. The mass flow distri­
bution through the combustor was determined by the network model 
and the CFD resolved the 3-D reacting flow in the flame tube. This 
significantly reduced the mesh size and time taken for the CFD simula­
tion to reach convergence. The researchers then performed a complex 
multi-objective optimisation to improve combustion efficiency, total 
pressure drop and pattern factor. In these studies, researchers utilized 
empirical pressure loss correlations for diffusers, holes and swirlers to 
account for the aerodynamic behavior of the combustor. Similarly, the 
heat transfer rate to the liner and casing is determined using empirical 
correlations for fluid radiation, convection and surface radiation 
pathways.
Estimating pollutant emissions during combustor design relies 
heavily on CFD due to the high cost of experimental combustion char­
acterization tests. Furthermore, the computational resources and time 
required for transient system-wide CFD modelling is also prohibitive. 
Consequently, gas turbine designers resort to low-fidelity models that 
represent combustors as networks of zero and one-dimensional (1D) 
chemical reactors, known as chemical reactor networks (CRNs) when 
performing system-wide simulations. With a reduced requirement for 
computational resources, implementing CRNs enables the use of com­
plex reaction mechanisms and the timeous exploration of a design space 
[16].
Several studies, Park et al. [17]; Colorado and McDonell [18]; Kaluri 
et al. [19] and Romano et al. [20] show that CRNs in the study of gas 
turbine combustors achieve comparable levels of accuracy when 
compared to CFD in the prediction of combustion completeness and 
pollutants. A wide error range of 0–250 % is shown in Kaluri et al. [19] 
for manually and automatically extracted networks. A similar result was 
found in Romano et al. [20] where NO estimations were up to 5 times 
larger than the experimental data prior to calibration. Park et al. [17] 
found that the error of the CRN, relative to experimental data, increased 
at high combustor loading. For all simulated cases in Park et al. [17], the 
CRN was able to closely replicate the trends for CO though substantial 
errors were recorded, and NO was estimated to within 4 ppm. Grimm 
[21] automatically extracted reactor networks from CFD data and 
evaluated the effect of network fidelity on accuracy. It was found that 
networks with at least four reactors were required to reliably predict NO 
emissions and increasing the network size did not produce substantial 
improvements. Importantly, it was shown that accounting for reactor 
heat loss had a more substantial impact on the accuracy of predicted NO 
concentrations. When co-firing hydrogen and ammonia, the extracted 
reactor network of Gubbi et al. [22] that modelled premixed combus­
tion, estimated NO to within 3 % of experimental data. In a similar 
study, NO estimates were within 10 % of the experimental data in 
Mazzotta et al. [23].
Most CRN studies focus solely on chemical reactor configuration and 
neglect momentum transport within the combustor. Aerodynamic ef­
fects (modelled via flow networks) and combustion (modelled via CRN) 
are typically treated separately. This separation represents a key limi­
tation because combustors are coupled to turbomachines, where 
changes in mass flow rate and operating pressure can significantly affect 
combustor performance and pollutant formation. Many of the previous 
researchers who investigated the aerodynamic performance of gas tur­
bine combustors using the 1-D network modelling approach included 
combustion modelling (Despierre et al. [12], Gouws [13] and du Toit 
and Theron [14]). While the techniques implemented by these authors 
(chemical equilibrium and constrained adiabatic combustion) produced 
satisfactory outcomes, they are unsuitable for estimating pollutant 
emissions.
Accurate emissions prediction requires complex techniques such as 
chemical reactor networks (CRNs) or computational fluid dynamics 
(CFD) modelling. Limited research literature exists that attempts to 
integrate both 1D aerodynamic networks and combustion kinetics 
through CRNs into a unified model capable of capturing sufficient detail 
for system-wide investigation of fuel mixture effects on gas turbine 
performance. Haytaysal and Yozgatligil [24] attempted to integrate 
chemical reactors into a flow network. However, the study primarily 
focused on the solution methods for network models, providing only a 
limited discussion of results. Specifically, it reported total pressure 
changes and outlet combustor temperature predictions, which showed 
good correlation with benchmark CFD data.
Current literature reveals three key gaps: limited investigation of 
hydrogen-propane mixtures in gas turbine combustors; 1-D thermofluid 
network studies lacking generalizability due to oversimplified pressure 
loss treatment; and CRNs are rarely integrated with 1-D flow networks to 
account for aerodynamic changes, limiting model applicability across 
combustor operating ranges required for system-wide design and off- 
design performance simulations. Furthermore, considering the chal­
lenges inherent to combustor design using CFD and empirical methods, 
the following problem statement is presented: Due to the high compu­
tational expense of CFD and the limited flexibility of the empirical 
design methods, there is a need for an integrated and generalisable 
modelling framework that combines 1-D aerodynamic networks with 
detailed chemical reactor networks to provide reliable predictions of 
performance and emissions in gas turbines for pure and mixed fuels 
across a wide range of conditions.
In the present work, the capability of a 1-D thermofluid network 
model to predict the performance of a can combustor is assessed for fuel 
mixtures of propane and hydrogen. The network model is constructed in 
Flownex SE using flow elements to estimate heat transfer and total 
pressure changes. Well-established pressure loss correlations specific to 
combustor components are implemented via custom user-defined 
scripts. For the first time in Flownex SE, Cantera-based well-stirred re­
actors (WSR) and plug flow reactors (PFR) elements are integrated to 
account for chemical kinetics within the combustion zones. The per­
formance of the integrated thermofluid network model is validated 
using both CFD simulation results and experimental data for propane- 
only firing, thereafter both the CFD and thermofluid network models 
are used to estimate combustor performance when firing various degrees 
of hydrogen mixing with the propane. The novelty of the present work 
lies in four key contributions: CFD analysis of hydrogen-propane fuel 
mixture combustion within a gas turbine can combustor, detailed pre­
sentation of network modelling methodology and applicable loss 
models, integration of Cantera-based reactors within Flownex SE, 
comprehensive validation for propane-only operation, and extension of 
this validation to both pure and blended fuel mixtures. The present study 
focuses on developing a standalone combustor network model within 
Flownex SE, with the objective of future integration into a full-cycle gas 
turbine model. The resulting unified gas turbine system model will 
feature a fully generalisable combustor network capable of predicting 
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
2 


--- Page 3 ---

engine performance and emissions across a wide range of operating 
conditions.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Case study gas turbine
The analysis of combustor performance is conducted for its operation 
within a twin-shaft Brayton cycle gas turbine with a layout as shown in 
Fig. 1. This is an experimental system currently at the Mechanical and 
Mechatronic Engineering Department of Stellenbosch University that 
was developed by Ssebabi [25]. In Fig. 1, the alphanumeric labels 
demarcate the measurement stations and the control valves.
The gas-generator and power turbine configuration comprises two 
Borg Warner turbochargers, the model K31 and K44, as the high and low 
pressure machines. At a HP turbine rotational speed of 73000 revolu­
tions per minute (rpm), it operates at a compressor total-to-total pres­
sure ratio of 2.1 and a combustor outlet total temperature is 840 ◦C. 
With the LP compressor as the load, at the above operating conditions, 
the machine was estimated to produce 6.5 kW at a thermal efficiency of 
3 % [25]. The system is designed for propane-only operation, and work 
is currently underway to evaluate its performance experimentally with 
hydrogen and propane fuel mixtures. This study forms part of that 
investigation. The combustor boundary conditions used to evaluate the 
network model are based on experimental data from Ssebabi [25], 
presented in Table 1. In this work, MGT1 to MGT3 correspond to system 
operating points as shown in Table 1. These operating points will be 
simulated for both the mixed and pure fuel cases.
2.2. Thermofluid network modelling theory
In a system modelled by the finite volume method (FVM) thermo­
fluid network approach, components are represented as 1-D flow ele­
ments connected to 0-D nodes to form a network, an example of which is 
shown below in Fig. 2 (left). This discretization is analogous to the 
traditional 3-D CFD approach where the domain is discretised into cells 
with faces and cell centroids (Fig. 2 [right]). In the thermofluid network 
approach, the mass and energy balance equations are solved at nodes, 
and the momentum balance equations are solved at flow elements, 
creating a semi-staggered grid type numerical approach [27]. Closure of 
the mass, energy and momentum balances are through semi-empirical or 
empirical 
component 
characteristic 
models 
for 
friction 
(e.g. 
Darcy-Weisbach correlations), heat transfer (e.g. Dittus-Boelter internal 
convection correlations) and work (e.g. Euler turbomachine equation). 
All thermofluid properties such as pressure and temperature are stored 
at nodes while source terms such as heat transfer rates and pressure 
losses are stored at elements, along with mass flow rates.
Shown below in equations (1)–(3) are the differential forms for the 
steady-state 1-D conservation equations for mass, energy, and mo­
mentum, respectively. 
∂(ρu) / ∂x = 0
(1) 
∂
(
ρu
(
h + 1
2u2 + gz
))
∂x
= qʹʹʹ −wʹʹʹ
(2) 
∂(ρuu)
∂x
= −∂p
∂x −ρg ∂z
∂x + ∂p0,W
∂x
−∂p0,L
∂x
(3) 
In the above equations, ρ [kg/m3] is the fluid density, and x [m] is the 
spatial dimension. On the left-hand-side (LHS) of the energy equation, u 
[m/s] is the fluid velocity, h [J/kg] is static enthalpy, g [m/s2] and z [m] 
are the gravitational acceleration constant and the elevation of the 
system, respectively. On the right-hand-side (RHS), the volumetric heat 
transfer rate to the fluid and the volumetric work done by the fluid 
interacting with its surroundings is represented by qʹʹʹ [W/m3] and wʹʹʹ 
[W/m3], respectively. Finally, on the RHS of the momentum balance, p 
[Pa] is the fluid static pressure, p0,W [Pa] is the total pressure rise due to 
work interactions, and p0,L [Pa] is the total pressure loss across the fluid 
element due to friction or secondary losses.
Through the volume integration of the differential equations and 
applying the above-mentioned discretization approaches, the steady- 
state mass and energy balance equations for fictitious node i are equa­
tions (4) and (5). In these equations, ∑˙mi→s [kg/s] represents the mass 
flow rates from nodes i to the successor (downstream) nodes s, along that 
edge between these nodes. Similarly, ∑˙mp→i represents the mass flow 
rates along the edges between the predecessor nodes p and the node i. In 
the discretised integral-form energy balance equation, h0,i [J/kg] is the 
Fig. 1. MGT engine layout [26].
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
3 


--- Page 4 ---

stagnation enthalpy of node i and h0,p [J/kg] is the stagnation enthalpy 
of the predecessor nodes p connected via edge p→i. ˙Qp→i [W] is the heat 
transfer rates calculated along edge p→i and similarly ˙Wp→i [W] is the 
work transfer rate along edges p→i. 
∑
˙mi→s −
∑
˙mp→i = 0
(4) 
∑
˙mi→sh0,i −
∑
˙mp→ih0,p =
∑˙Qp→i −
∑˙Wp→i
(5) 
To correctly account for the compressible nature of the flow in the 
combustor, the differential momentum equation should be treated 
accordingly. As a first step, the derivative on the LHS of equation (3) is 
expanded using the product rule as shown in equation (6). The second 
term on the LHS of the below equation is zero for steady-state flow due 
to the divergence-free condition from the mass conservation equation. 
ρu ∂u
∂x + u ∂ρu
∂x = −∂p
∂x −ρg ∂z
∂x + ∂p0,W
∂x
−∂p0,L
∂x
(6) 
The momentum equation for compressible flow is written in terms of 
total pressure (p0) [Pa] and temperature (T0) [K]. To do so, the theorem 
in equation (7) is substituted into equation (6) [28]. 
ρu ∂u
∂x + ∂p
∂x = p
p0
∂p0
∂x + pu2
2T0
∂T0
∂x
(7) 
The result is the momentum equation for compressible flow shown in 
equation (8). 
p
p0
∂p0
∂x + pu2
2T0
∂T0
∂x = −ρg ∂z
∂x + ∂p0,W
∂x
−∂p0,L
∂x
(8) 
Finally, the discretised differential equation for compressible mo­
mentum is written as shown in the equation below, where j and i sub­
scripts indicate the downstream and upstream nodes, respectively. p0 is 
the stagnation nodal pressure, T0 the nodal stagnation temperature, Δ 
p0,W,i→j work input along edge i→j and Δp0,L,i→j pressure loss along edge 
i→j. The remaining overbar properties are the average properties 
calculated at edge i→j, using a linear averaging approach based on the 
properties at the upstream and downstream nodes. 
pi→j
p0i→j
(
p0,j −p0,i
)
+ ρu2i→j
2T0i→j
(
T0,j −T0,i
)
+ ρi→jg
(
zj −zi
)
= Δp0,W,i→j −Δp0,L,i→j
(9) 
Equations (4), (5) and (9) are the generalised form of the discretised 
difference equations that are solved in a network modelling approach to 
determine changes in a system’s pressure, enthalpy, and mass flow rate. 
These are coupled with the necessary fluid properties and characteristic 
models for friction, heat transfer and work which will be discussed in the 
next sections.
2.2.1. Combustor aerodynamic loss models
A can RQL combustor is shown in Fig. 3. It is comprised of multiple 
aerodynamic features, highlighted in the upper portion of the diagram. 
These are the inlet pre-diffuser (1), snout (2), annular passage (3), axial 
swirler (4), annular passage (5), primary holes (6), secondary holes (7), 
flame tube (8) and the outlet diffuser (9).
In the current work, unless stated otherwise, we will use the loss 
models of Lefebvre [29] and Lefebvre and Ballal [11] to determine the 
pressure losses through the pre-diffuser, snout, swirler and dilution jets, 
and the recirculation mass flow rates due to swirl and dilution jets. The 
changes in pressure for the rest of the combustor can be modelled by 
existing components within Flownex SE. The total pressure loss through 
a pre-diffuser is calculated through equation (10) [30]. 
Δp0,L,PD = 1.75P3Ra
(m3
̅̅̅̅̅
T3
√
P3
)2tan1.22(ϕPD)
A2
3
(
1 −A3
Ao
)2
(10) 
A similar equation is used, shown below in equation (11), for the 
pressure loss through the snout: 
Δp0,L,SN = 1.75P3Ra
(mS
̅̅̅̅̅
T3
√
PSin
)2tan1.22(ϕsn)
A2
S
(
1 −
AS
Aos
)2
(11) 
For a straight bladed axial flow swirler the total pressure drop is 
calculated using equation (12). 
Δp0,L,SW = ˙m2
sw
Ksw
((
sec(θ)
ASW
)2
−
1
A2
l
)
2ρ
(12) 
In the previous equation, Ksw is a constant that differs based on the vane 
shape (flat or curved) and θ is the vane angle. For the flat vaned swirler 
used in this study it is 1.3, for curved vanes it is 1.15. The total pressure 
drop is dependent on the liner cross sectional area, Al [m2], and the 
swirler annulus area, ASW [m2]. The swirling flow will cause flow 
reversal i.e., flow recirculation known as the entrainment mass flow ˙me 
[kg/s]. As shown in equation (13), from Lefebvre [29], the average 
entrainment mass flow in the primary zone is dependent on the swirl 
number (Sn in equation (14)) which is a geometric indicator of the swirl 
Table 1 
Experimental data from Ssebabi (2020).
Case
Air
Fuel
Outlet static pressure (kPa)
Outlet total temperature (K)
Mass flow rate (kg/s)
Temperature (K)
Mass flow rate (kg/s)
Temperature (K)
Station
1
2
G1
G1
3
3
MGT1
0.2035
351
0.0034
287
155.6
1091
MGT2
0.2374
376
0.0039
288
173.2
1121
MGT3
0.2614
393
0.0045
289
189.5
1142
Fig. 2. Left: A sample network of node (i and j) and edges (E1-4). Right: 2-D 
CFD equivalent with faces (E, S, W and N) and cell centroids (i and j).
Fig. 3. Section view of the RQL combustor designed by Ssebabi (2020).
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
4 


--- Page 5 ---

intensity and the length of the primary zone, lpz [m]. 
˙me =
˙
msw(0.35 + 1.4SN)
l2
pz
2
(
D2
sw −D2
hub
)
(13) 
Sn = 2
3
1 −
(
Dhub
DSW
)3
1 −
(
Dhub
DSW
)2 tan(θ)
(14) 
For the current combustor, the recirculation of mass flow rate into 
the primary and secondary zone may also be induced through opposing 
jet flow as shown in Fig. 4.
The mass flow recirculated by opposing jets, ˙mr [kg/s], is a function 
of the jet’s angle of entry into the combustion zone, and the temperature 
ratio between the jet inlet and the respective combustion zone. To es­
timate the angle of entry, firstly, the jet’s loss coefficient is calculated as 
in equation (15). 
Cd =
1.25(K −1)
(
4K2 −K(2 −α)2)0.5
(15) 
Here, K is the ratio of the jet’s dynamic pressure to the dynamic pressure 
in the annular passage just upstream of the jet. Similarly, α is a ratio of a 
single jet’s mass flow rate to the mass flow of the annular passage up­
stream of the jet. The asymptotic discharge coefficient, Cd,n, is deter­
mined based on equation (15) as K approaches infinity. Finally, the rate 
of recirculated mass flow is calculated as shown in equation (16). 
˙mr,pz = 0.5 ˙mh sin
(
asin
(
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Cd
Cd,n
√
) )(Tjet
Tz
)−0.5
(16) 
˙mh is the mass flow rate of a single jet and θjet = asin
(
√
(
Cd /Cd,n
))
is the 
jet’s angle of entry into the combustor’s flame tube. Tr is the tempera­
ture ratio between the jet inlet (Tjet) [K] and the respective combustion 
zone (Tz) [K].
2.2.2. Chemical reactor network models
Chemical reactor models couple the equations describing the 
chemical, thermodynamic and fluid dynamic processes within a chem­
ically reacting system [31]. There are numerous formulations for 
chemical reactors, each with assumptions that characterise specific 
operating conditions. Reactor zones within a conventional combustor 
can be considered as constant volume and pressure processes that may 
be modelled by a WSR and PFR [11,31,32]. The conditions assumed 
within the reactors are that the oxidant and fuel are fed constantly and 
mix rapidly. Under these conditions the reactions occur uniformly, 
resulting in a homogeneous reactor temperature and composition. The 
following discussion will present the equations used in Cantera [33] for 
the simulation of combustion in a WSR and PFR.
Equation (17) presents the unsteady form of the mass conservation 
equation written for a single chemical species, k, in a WSR. It states that 
the change in mass of a species depends on the mass generation or 
consumption of the species by chemical reaction through the term 
˙mk,gen = V ˙ωkMWk, where ˙ωk [mol/m3s] is the net reaction rate per unit 
volume, V [m3] is the reactor volume and MWk [kg/mol] is the molec­
ular mass of the species. The formulation also considers multiple inlet 
(∑
in ˙min) and outlet (∑
out ˙mout) mass flow streams, where Yk,in is the mass 
fraction of species k at the inlet and Yk,out is the mass fraction of said 
species leaving the reactor.
The energy conservation equation (18) is written in terms of tem­
perature where ˙Q [W] is the net rate of heat addition to the reactor from 
external sources. Term ∑
khk ˙mk,gen [W], describes the combustion heat 
release of the mixture as a sum of products of specific enthalpy (hk) and 
the rate of mass consumption/generation ( ˙mk,gen) of the species resulting 
from the chemical reactions. 
d(mYk)
dt
=
∑
in
˙minYk,in −
∑
out
˙moutYk.out + ˙mk,gen
(17) 
mcp
dT
dt = ˙Q −
∑
k
hk ˙mk,gen +
∑
in
˙min
(
hin −
∑
k
hkYk,in
)
(18) 
In a PFR, reactants and products flow axially under ideal frictionless 
conditions. The gas mixture is an ideal gas, and the composition is 
considered uniform perpendicular to the flow, reducing the problem to a 
one-dimensional analysis. Although the PFR is a steady-state system, it 
captures the effect of residence time on chemical kinetics by integrating 
the species’ net production rates over the flow-through time through the 
reactor. The governing differential equation for the evolution of a spe­
cies mass fraction through a 1-D domain, in a PFR, is given in equation 
(19). 
ρu dYk
dz = ˙ωkMWk
(19) 
In the above equation, the change in species mass fraction, Yk, is 
determined along the flow path in direction z [m] at a velocity u [m/s]. 
Similarly, the energy equation (20) is formulated to estimate the change 
in temperature (T) [K] where cp and ρ are the mixture specific heat and 
density, respectively. The term −∑
k̂hk ˙ωk is the heat released due to 
combustion. ̂hk is the species molar enthalpy and ˙ωk the net reaction rate 
per unit volume as discussed earlier. 
ρucp
dT
dz = −
∑
k
̂hk ˙ωk
(20) 
A generalised and compact form of the net reaction rate is shown below 
in equation (21). This form accounts for L elementary reactions and N 
species that contribute to the reaction rate of a single species (j). This 
form is required when implementing large reaction mechanisms like the 
GRI-Mech 3.0 [34] for hydrocarbons.
vʹ
ji and vʹʹ
ji are matrices of the stoichiometric coefficients for the re­
actants and products, respectively. The term 
∏
N
j=1
[
Xj
]vij is the product of 
terms of the molar concentration 
[
Xj
]
of each species in the reaction 
mechanism raised to its stoichiometric coefficient vij. 
˙ωj =
∑
L
i=0
(
vʹʹ
ji −vʹ
ji
) (
kfi
∏
N
j=1
[
Xj
]vʹ
ji −kri
∏
N
j=1
[
Xj
]vʹʹ
ji
)
(21) 
In equation (21), the rate coefficient k is in the modified Arrhenius form, 
Fig. 4. An illustration of the recirculation flows due to swirl and opposing jets 
in a RQL combustor.
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
5 


--- Page 6 ---

equation (22), where the subscripts f and r are for the forward and 
reverse reaction, respectively. 
k = ATb exp
(
−
Ea
RuT
)
(22) 
The magnitude of the rate coefficient is determined by the pre- 
exponential factor (A), static temperature of the reactants (T) and the 
activation energy (Ea). The temperature exponent (b), pre-exponential 
factor and activation energy are empirical constants specific to the re­
action mechanism, and Ru is the universal gas constant.
2.2.3. Heat transfer modelling
In this study, heat transfer is considered within the flame-tube, 
annular passage of the casing, and to the environment only.
Convective heat transfer between the fluid and solid in the 
combustor is modelled using the Dittus and Boelter heat transfer coef­
ficient calculated in equation (23). Here, k [W/mK] is the fluid con­
ductivity, Dh [m] is the hydraulic diameter, Re is the Reynolds number 
and Pr is the Prandtl number. The constant n is 0.4 if the fluid is being 
heated and 0.3 if the fluid is being cooled. Despite being formulated for 
inner tube heat transfer, equation (23) can be applied to an annular 
passage by using the annulus’ hydraulic diameter (Dout - Din) [35]. 
hc = 0.023
( k
Dh
)
Re0.8 Prn
(23) 
Fourier’s Law determines the rate of heat transfer through solid 
objects while equation (24) is used to model the radiation heat transfer 
rate. ε is the surface emissivity, σ [W/(m2⋅K4)] is the Stefan-Boltzmann 
constant, T [K] is the temperature of radiating (i) and receiving (j) 
surfaces. 
˙Qrad = εσA
(
T4
i −T4
j
)
(24) 
The emissivity of luminous flames (εf) from Lefebvre and Ballal [11] 
is utilized to estimate gas-to-solid radiation as shown in equation (25). 
This expression considers the effects of fluid pressure (p), and air ( ˙ma) 
and fuel ( ˙mf) mass flow rates on radiation. It accounts for the effect of 
water vapour on luminosity (L = 336
H2 ) by including the fuel hydrogen 
mass fraction (H). The mean beam length in the combustion zone is 
calculated as lb = 3.4V
As where V [m3] is the reactor volume and As [m2] is 
the area of the reactor. T [K] is the temperature of the fluid (f) and the 
wall (w) 
εf = 1 −exp
(
−290P 336
H2
( ˙mf
˙ma
3.4V
As
)0.5
T−1.5
f
)
(25) 
Fluid absorptivity (αf) is related to the emissivity through the tem­
perature ratio between the fluid and the wall, as shown in equation (26). 
αf
εf
=
(Tf
Tw
)1.5
(26) 
2.3. CFD modelling theory
To simulate steady-state turbulent flow in a combustor, the Reynolds 
Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations are utilized. In numerical 
studies of similar combustors, RANS simulations using the Realizable k-ε 
turbulence closure are often employed to predict hydrogen and mixed 
fuel combustion accurately when compared to experimental results 
[36–39]. The Realizable k-ε formulation is more computationally 
economical than the k-ω Shear Stress Transport (SST) model and 
comparably capable of modelling flows with adverse pressure gradients, 
separation and reverse flow caused by swirl as seen in a combustor [40,
41].Therefore, in the present work, turbulence closure is accomplished 
using the Realizable k-ε turbulence model with non-equilibrium wall 
treatment.
The RANS continuity, momentum and energy balance equations 
solved by Ansys Fluent version 24R2 are shown in equations (27), (28) 
and (30) respectively. 
∂
∂xi
(ρui) = 0
(27) 
∂
∂xj
( ρuiuj
)
= −∂p
∂xi
+ ∂
∂xj
[
μ
(∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
−2
3δij∂ui
∂xi
)]
+ ∂
∂xj
(
−ρuʹ
iuʹ
j
)
(28) 
−ρuʹ
iuʹ
j = μt
(∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
)
−2
3
(
ρk + μt
∂uk
∂xk
)
δij
(29) 
In the above equations, ρ is the mean density of the fluid which is, for an 
ideal gas mixture, based on the mass fraction weighted sum of the spe­
cies molecular weight. ui and xi are the velocity and spatial dimension in 
direction i, respectively. In the momentum equation (28), p is the static 
pressure, k is the turbulence kinetic energy and −ρuʹ
iuʹ
j is the Reynolds 
stress term which, through the Boussinesq hypothesis, is modelled using 
equation (29). The turbulent viscosity, μt, introduced by equation (29) is 
calculated as μt = ρCμk2
ε where ε is the turbulence dissipation rate. In the 
Realizable formulation, Cμ is a function of the mean strain and rotation 
rates, the angular velocity of the system rotation, and k and ε [42].
When using the partially premixed combustion model in Ansys 
Fluent (discussed later), the total enthalpy (H) formulation of the energy 
equation is implemented as shown in equation (30) [42]. Total enthalpy 
includes the species enthalpy of formation and therefore accounts for the 
heat released during combustion. As such, the heat released due to 
combustion is not included in the source term, Sh, of equation (30). 
∂
∂xi
[ρuiH] = ∂
∂xj
( keff
cp
∂H
∂xj
)
+ Sh
(30) 
Turbulent viscosity is used to determine the effective thermal con­
ductivity (keff) of the fluid seen in equation (30), keff = k + cpμt
Prt . Here, k is 
the fluid thermal conductivity and the turbulent Prandtl number, Prt, is a 
constant value of 0.85.
The heat transfer interaction between fluid and solid material is 
considered in this study. A Conjugate Heat Transfer approach is imple­
mented where the fluid and solid media form a single and continuous 
mesh. Equation (31) is the energy balance equation for the solid media 
only. It accounts for convective heat transfer due to moving walls (first 
term on RHS), conduction (first term on LHS) and a volumetric heat 
source term. v→is the velocity vector of the wall, h is the sensible 
enthalpy, k is the conductivity of the solid and Sh is the volumetric heat 
source term. 
∇⋅( v→ρh) = ∇⋅(k∇T) + Sh
(31) 
Convective heat transfer between the solid and fluid domain is 
modelled using the law-of-the-wall for non-dimensional temperature as 
seen in equation (32) [42]. Here, on the LHS, Tw is the wall temperature, 
Tp is the temperature of the wall adjacent cell-centroid, u* is calculated 
as u* = C
1
4μk
1
2p. The first term on the RHS 
(
T*
c) determines the 
convective-conductive heat transfer through equation (33). The equa­
tions available to calculate T*
c are implemented based on the height of 
the viscous (y*) and the thermal sublayer (y*
t ) where E is an empirical 
and K is the von K´arm´an constant. P is a function that accounts for the 
influence of roughness and the Prandtl number on heat transfer in the 
laminar sublayer.
The second and third terms on the RHS of equation (32) are included 
to account for compressibility effects when using pressure-based solvers. 
kp and Up are the turbulent kinetic energy and mean velocity at the wall 
adjacent cell-centroid. 
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
6 


--- Page 7 ---

T* =
(
Tw −Tp
)ρcpu*
˙q
= T*
c + 1
2 ρ Pr C
1
4μk
1
2p
˙q U2
p
+ 1
2 ρ C
1
4μk
1
2p
˙q
(
PrtU2
p + (Pr −Prt)U2
c
)
(32) 
T*
c =
⎧
⎨
⎩
Pr y*, y* < y*
T
Prt
[1
K ln(Ey*) + P
]
, y* > y*
T
(33) 
2.4. Model development
In the following section the above thermofluid network theories 
(flow equations, pressure losses, CRNs and heat transfer) will be applied 
to model the case-study gas turbine combustor. Furthermore, the 3-D 
CFD model setup of the combustor will also be detailed. Firstly, the 
three experimental operating points that will be simulated are discussed 
along with the propane-hydrogen mixture simulation boundary 
conditions.
2.4.1. Simulation cases
Initial validation of the CFD and network models will be performed 
for propane-only operation. To this end, the experimental results of [25] 
are used as simulation boundary conditions. 3 engine operating points 
have been chosen across the system’s operating curve resulting in 3 
simulation cases. Running point MGT3 is considered the primary oper­
ating point as it is closest to the design point of the system.
Once the CFD and network models are validated using the propane- 
only experimental data, the effect of hydrogen blending is investigated. 
Since there is no experimental data available for the hydrogen-blending 
operating points, the CFD simulations will be used as the ground truth 
when evaluating the network model accuracy. In this work, the terms 
’mixture’ and ’blend’ both refer to the combined propane-hydrogen fuel 
stream.
The pure hydrogen mass flow rates were iteratively determined to 
achieve outlet combustor temperatures similar to that of pure propane 
combustion for the three operating points. Table 2 below shows the mass 
flow rates for pure propane and pure hydrogen operation.
The blending ratios were defined based on the nominal fuel mass 
flow rates for the pure fuel cases, as shown in Table 2. Each fuel blend 
was determined by summing the respective blending proportions of the 
nominal mass flow rates from the pure fuel cases. For example, for the 
75-25 ratio (propane-hydrogen), the fuel flow rate for MGT3 is 75 % of 
the nominal mass flow rate of propane (0.0045 kg/s from Table 2) and 
25 % of the nominal hydrogen mass flow rate (0.0018 kg/s from 
Table 2). For input simplicity in CFD, a total fuel mass flow rate is 
specified as 0.0033 kg/s together with a 0.883 mass fraction of propane 
and 0.117 mass fraction of hydrogen.
Table 3 summarizes the fuel mass flow rates and corresponding 
species mass fractions for all mixture operating points. This method of 
blending fuels ensures matched outlet temperatures across cases. Doing 
so will allow a direct comparison of the CFD data for all fuel composi­
tions to determine the effect of hydrogen addition on combustor 
performance.
2.4.2. 3-D CFD model setup
The domain used in the 3-D CFD simulation is shown in Fig. 5. As 
illustrated, the inlet boundary conditions are the air and fuel mass flow 
rates and the static temperatures of each stream. The compositions of the 
fuel and air are specified in the setup of the FGM model as mass fractions 
of the species in the fuel and oxidiser streams. Therefore, for each 
boundary condition, a mixture fraction is specified which is 1 for the fuel 
and 0 for the air (oxidiser). A static pressure outlet boundary condition is 
specified at the outlet of the combustor.
Fig. 5 (bottom) shows an isometric view of the combustor high­
lighting the segmented volumes corresponding to the combustion zones 
and outlet transition duct (nozzle). These zones are present in the 
generated mesh and thus available in Ansys Fluent for post-processing 
purposes. The segmentation enables the extraction of mass-weighted 
average quantities from each zone for direct comparison with the 
network model.
The FGM model is implemented using the non-adiabatic diffusion 
flamelet formulation. The full GRI-Mech 3.0 reaction mechanism and 
the accompanying thermodynamic and transport properties are used for 
pure and blended combustion. It was shown in Zettervall et al. [43] that 
the difference between large chemical kinetic mechanisms for hydro­
carbons, at similar operating pressures found in this study (2 bar), was 
not considerable when estimating flame speed and ignition delays in 
Herzler and Naumann [44]. Therefore, and considering that the level of 
accuracy in the CFD results for the chemical kinetics cannot be verified 
by experimental data, the choice of the reaction mechanism is flexible 
between best performing mechanisms found in Zettervall et al. [43], and 
Herzler and Naumann [44] which include the GRI-Mech 3.0 mechanism.
The Zimont turbulent flame speed model is implemented for pre­
mixed combustion, and the progress variable variance is treated as a 
transported scalar. To account for mixing and chemical timescales, the 
turbulent flame speed setting is selected for turbulence-chemistry in­
teractions. Laminar flame speed is estimated using the Metghalchi-Keck 
law [45] for propane, and the precomputed PDF values are used for 
hydrogen and fuel mixtures.
In ANSYS Fluent, only the mass fractions of CO and CO2 are 
considered for the progress variable in hydrocarbon combustion. These 
have a weighting of unity and ensure that the progress variable increases 
through the flame [42]. Since CO exists in small quantities relative to 
CO2 within a combustor, the mass fraction of CO2 will bias the progress 
variable towards 1. This may cause non-physical behaviour since the 
FGM model will regard a mixture as burnt when the progress variable is 
close to or equal to 1 (high CO2 concentrations), causing reaction 
progress to slow or stop. Therefore, in the standard FGM model, when 
combustion is only mapped using the progress variable, the estimation 
of slower evolving species like NO and the post-flame burnout of CO is 
inaccurate [46,47]. To remedy this, as suggested by Klarmann et al. [46] 
Table 2 
Operating conditions for pure hydrogen and pure propane.
Case
Air
Fuel
Outlet static pressure 
(kPa)
Outlet total temperature 
(K)
Mass flow rate 
(kg/s)
Temperature 
(K)
Mass flow rate H2 
(kg/s)
Mass flow rate C3H8 
(kg/s)
Temperature 
(K)
MGT1
0.2035
351
0.0014
0.0034
287
155.6
1027
MGT2
0.2374
376
0.0016
0.0039
288
173.2
1030
MGT3
0.2614
393
0.0018
0.0045
289
189.5
1070
Table 3 
Fuel mixture parameters for each operating point.
Mixture
Total fuel mass flow rate (kg/s)
Mass fraction
MGT1
MGT2
MGT3
C3H8
H2
75–25
0.0029
0.0033
0.0038
0.883
0.117
50–50
0.0024
0.0027
0.0031
0.714
0.286
25–75
0.0019
0.0021
0.0024
0.454
0.546
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
7 


--- Page 8 ---

and Efimov et al. [47], transport equations for CO and NO mass fractions 
are solved and their net reaction rates are corrected based on the 
transported values.
The fuel and oxidiser were specified as mass fractions corresponding 
to each operating point and fuel mixture in Tables 2 and 3, with the inlet 
temperatures defined accordingly. The outlet static pressure of the 
combustor is the operating pressure for the generation of the flamelet 
and PDF table. This pressure corresponds to the value specified in the 
operating conditions of the simulation, and consequently the combustor 
outlet gauge pressure is 0 Pa for all cases.
As suggested in ANSYS [42], for large chemical mechanisms, the 
absolute error tolerance in the Flamelet generation process was reduced 
to 1e-20 and the relative error tolerance to 1e-05. The Automated Grid 
Refinement of the Flamelet table was implemented with a maximum 
change in value ratio of 0.35. The initial scalar dissipation value was 
reduced to 0.001. The maximum number of flamelets was increased to 
400, and the number of grid points in the table was increased to 64 in the 
mixture and reaction space which improved simulation stability. In the 
PDF table parameters, the minimum temperature of 260 K was set well 
below the lowest temperature provided in the boundary conditions, and 
the number of species in the PDF table is 20.
To model heat transfer, the solid components of the combustor seen 
in the isometric view of Fig. 5 were included in the mesh for a CHT 
simulation. The solid-fluid wall interfaces of the mesh are therefore 
coupled to the energy solution, and the exterior wall of the casing is 
allowed to radiate to the surroundings. Radiation within the combustor 
is modelled using the DO method with four angular divisions and three 
pixels in both the azimuthal (phi) and polar (theta) directions. The ab­
sorption coefficient is determined using the WSSG method where the 
beam length is based on the domain, and only the tri-atomic molecules 
of CO2 and H2O are considered. Radiation scattering is negligible and, 
therefore, neglected since the radiating medium is gaseous.
Pressure and velocity are coupled, with spatial gradients calculated 
using the cell-based least squares method. Pressure is discretised using 
the PRESTO! Approach, and all equations are discretised using a second- 
order upwind formulation, except radiation, which uses first-order up­
wind. The pseudo-time method is implemented with a global time step 
to enhance simulation stability. An absolute residual value with a 
magnitude of 10−6 for energy and of 10−3 for the rest of the equations is 
considered satisfactory to deem the simulation as converged.
2.4.3. Mesh independence study
The 3-D domain was discretised into a poly-hexcore mesh. Care was 
taken to ensure that the y-plus values were between 30 and 300 for the 
non-equilibrium wall treatment. Two mesh refinements were performed 
and evaluated for a grid-independent solution. In Fig. 6, the static 
temperature and velocity magnitude along the axis of the combustor for 
the coarse, medium and fine mesh are plotted for MGT3. The results 
show that minor differences in temperature and velocity predictions are 
observed between the medium and fine mesh.
To further demonstrate that the solution of the medium mesh is mesh 
independent, the Grid Convergence Index (GCI) values for outlet total 
temperature and inlet total pressure were calculated. The results are 
shown in Table 4.
For both temperature and pressure, low GCI values are estimated 
with a range of 0.00 %–0.12 % showing a high degree of numerical 
precision for the medium and fine mesh. The refinement ratio is 1.3 or 
greater, indicating adequate mesh refinement [48]. In addition, despite 
having significantly fewer cells, the results of the medium mesh deviate 
only slightly from the fine mesh. Consequently, the medium mesh was 
selected for further use in this study due to the lower computational cost 
and levels of precision and accuracy comparable to the fine mesh.
2.4.4. Thermofluid network model setup
A 1-D network model, as shown in Fig. 7, has been constructed in 
Flownex SE. The model was developed with an emphasis on simplicity, 
while being informed qualitatively by 3-D CFD results. A reactor 
network extracted from CFD increases workflow complexity and would 
require additional simulation time and computational resources. The 
intent of the current methodology is to demonstrate the effectiveness of 
a simplified and generalisable approach to reliably predict combustor 
performance in the absence of CFD. Furthermore, a preliminary analysis 
of the reactor network shape for extracted networks showed that the 
reactor layout and shape would change across fuel mixtures. Therefore, 
to emphasise the generalizability of the proposed methodology and the 
effectiveness of a simplified reactor network for mixed fuel applications, 
the network model layout closely represents the layout introduced by 
Bragg [49], where the primary combustion zone is assumed to be a WSR 
and post-flame burnout is modelled using PFRs.
Standard flow elements are used to model heat transfer and all flow 
passages. Jets (holes) are modelled as restrictors with discharge co­
efficients; other sub-components are modelled using pipe elements with 
loss coefficients for frictional and obstruction losses. The recirculation 
Fig. 5. CFD domain as seen on the y-z plane (top) and an isometric partial section view of the domain highlighting the combustion zones.
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
8 


--- Page 9 ---

effects within the combustor, discussed later, are approximated by 
redirecting mass flow through flow resistance elements with prescribed 
mass flow rates. Discharge and loss coefficients, as well as recirculation 
mass flow rates, are determined by the correlations in Section 2.2.1. The 
calculations are performed by embedded MathCad user-defined scripts, 
which are executed after each iteration and update the corresponding 
flow element parameters until convergence is achieved. Implementing 
the loss models in Flownex SE and the use of standard components re­
sults in a geometrically generalisable model as the dimensions of each 
component, and the configuration of the network is fully customizable.
Flownex SE can execute Python scripts within its C# scripting 
components through PythonNET. This facilitates the use of Cantera 
WSRs and PFRs in Flownex SE. In this network model, a C# script is 
executed within a compound component which is illustrated in Fig. 8. 
The C# script is shown as the container of the Python script denoted by 
the dashed rectangle. It obtains the reactants (subscript R) mass flow 
rate ( ˙m), inlet temperature (T), pressure (P), and list of reactant mass 
fractions (Y) from the reactor node (labelled R) and sends it to the Py­
thon script that executes the Cantera reactor calculations for a WSR or 
PFR. An exit temperature and a list of product (subscript P) mass frac­
tions are then returned to Flownex SE and written to the outlet node 
(node P) of the pipe element that approximates the combustion zone in 
the compound component. The nodes labelled a and b are open nodes 
that connect to the greater network model.
The results of the 3-D simulation informed the shape of the network. 
In Fig. 9 are streamline traces initiated from the PZ jets (left) and the SZ 
jets (right). It is evident that there is recirculation into the PZ from the 
flow entering through the PZ jets. This flow phenomenon is not present 
in the SZ. The magnitude of the recirculation mass flow is estimated 
using equation (13) from Lefebvre [29] instead of being informed by the 
CFD. This is, of course, a crude estimation as the correlation does not 
account for swirl flow within the flame tube and the recirculation zone 
upstream of the opposed PZ jets. Furthermore, consistent with the 
mechanism described in Lefebvre [29], recirculation flow induced by 
swirl is approximated in the network model. This is achieved by 
returning products at the outlet of the PZ to its inlet at a rate determined 
by equation (13). Mass flow entrainment due to swirl is critical for flame 
holding in this combustor as entrained hot reaction products mix with 
incoming unburnt reactants in the primary zone to sustain combustion.
A sensitivity analysis was conducted to determine the effect of 
excluding the PZ recirculation flows on the network model outputs 
measured at the PZ and combustor outlet. The combustor outlet 
Fig. 6. Static temperature (left) and velocity magnitude (right) along the combustor’s axis for MGT3.
Table 4 
Grid Convergence Index parameters.
Outlet Total Temperature
Mesh
φ
Ncells
r
GCI
Fine
1088.71 K
10526216
1.6
0.00 %
Medium
1089.69 K
2500099
1.3
0.11 %
Coarse
1105.58 K
1143823
​
​
Inlet Total Gauge Pressure
Mesh
φ
Ncells
r
GCI
Fine
14368.92 Pa
10526216
1.6
0.01 %
Medium
14381.83 Pa
2500099
1.3
0.12 %
Coarse
14435.86 Pa
1143823
​
​
Fig. 7. Network model of the combustor with reactors and MathCad scripts.
Fig. 8. Compound component in Flownex SE.
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
9 


--- Page 10 ---

temperature and major species mass fractions (CO2 and H2O) were not 
sensitive to the recirculation flows with deviations of less than 0.54 %. 
However, excluding swirl recirculation changed the CO mass fraction by 
−5.69 % (MGT3) to −23.26 % (MGT2). The opposed jet recirculation 
had a reduced effect and increased the CO mass fraction by 1.18 %.
A reduced CO mass fraction when excluding swirl recirculation is an 
expected outcome. The function of swirl recirculation is to return hot 
combustion products to the unburnt reactants thereby increasing the 
reaction rate to sustain combustion. The hot reactants in swirl recircu­
lation flow include CO and increase the mass fraction of CO in the PZ. 
Opposed jet recirculation returns unburnt reactants to the PZ combus­
tion zone which increases the O2 available for reactions to proceed. 
When opposed jet recirculation is omitted, reaction progress reduces 
and results in an increased CO mass fraction.
The effect of the recirculation flows on the PZ is more pronounced 
and supports the above discussion. The accompanying data shown in 
Table 5 is for MGT3 only as the observed trends are prevalent for all 
operating points. It is clear from the above discussion that the swirl and 
opposed jet recirculation flow, as estimated in equations (13) and (16), 
have considerable effects on the PZ that propagate to the outlet, most 
notably observed for the CO mass fraction. As such, the sensitivity study 
and the phenomenological evidence shown in Fig. 9 motivate the in­
clusion of the recirculation flows in the network model.
The type of reactor used to model each reaction zone was informed 
by the average Damk¨ohler (Da) number of each combustion zone 
calculated from CFD data. Using the definition of Kuo [50], the Da 
number was calculated as a ratio of the combustion zone’s average 
Kolmogorov mixing time scale (τk = (v/ϵ)1/2) to the chemical time scale 
(τc = 1/k). The rate coefficient (k) is that of the slowest reaction in a 
WSR at the average combustion zone inlet temperature and composi­
tion. v and ϵ are the mass averaged kinematic viscosity and the turbulent 
kinetic energy dissipation rate, respectively.
A large Da number indicates that mixing is slow, which limits the 
overall reaction rate. If the Da number is much smaller than unity, the 
mixing rate is sufficiently high to promote combustion, and the chemical 
kinetics will limit reaction rates.
In Fig. 10 are three plots for each operating point. The plots mark the 
Damk¨ohler number of each combustion zone for three trends that 
represent three fuel compositions, namely: propane-only (100-0), 
hydrogen-only (0–100) and a 50 % share of each fuel (50-50).
Notably, the Da number is much less than 1 for all zones in each data 
set. This indicates that each zone is mixed sufficiently such that the re­
action rates will be chemically limited. Therefore, for the combustor in 
this study, the selection of WSRs to approximate the PZ and SZ is 
justified. The DZ also exhibits chemically limited combustion, but it is 
modelled as a PFR to account for the effect of an increased residence 
time on reaction kinetics.
3. Results and discussion
This section presents the results of the 3-D numerical model and 
network model. Firstly, 3-D CFD results for combustor operation using 
propane, hydrogen and propane-hydrogen fuel mixtures are presented. 
The intent is to develop an understanding of how hydrogen supple­
mentation may augment combustor operation. Secondly, a detailed 
validation of the network model is conducted for propane-only opera­
tion. Finally, the network model is validated for operation on fuel 
mixtures of hydrogen and propane.
3.1. 3-D numerical model
The experimental data available to validate the CFD model is limited 
to the combustor outlet total temperature for propane-only operation at 
the operating points recorded in Ssebabi [25] (see Table 1). Although 
the validation dataset is limited, an agreement with the outlet total 
temperature is considered sufficient for this study as the CFD results will 
be used to validate a system-level thermofluid network model. A 
detailed validation of the internal flow structure and flame dynamics is 
beyond the scope of this work since the network model’s predictive 
accuracy at the outlet of the combustor is of primary importance.
The CFD and experimental results for the combustor outlet total 
temperature are presented in Table 6. The CFD model is shown to predict 
a combustor outlet total temperature 64 K–85 K lower than the experi­
mental results of Ssebabi [25]. This represents a 5.9 % (MGT1) to 7.6 % 
(MGT2) difference which is within the typical error range of approxi­
mately 5 % and 7 % found in the CFD validation studies of combustors in 
Cam et al. [51] and Benaissa et al. [52], respectively. The close agree­
ment in the outlet total temperature suggests that the combustion and 
heat transfer processes are captured reasonably well by the numerical 
model for its intended application.
Kairu [53] determined that when placed in a laboratory flame, ra­
diation heat loss from a thermocouple was predominant. This resulted in 
a measured temperature lower than the true temperature with a 
maximum error of −117.6 K. In contrast, the measured combustor outlet 
temperature in the current work is higher than the estimates of the CFD 
simulations, indicating heat gain. Based on this, it is reasoned that the 
discrepancy between the experimental and CFD results is primarily due 
to the systematic and precision uncertainties in the experimental data.
To increase the rigour and confidence in the CFD model validation, a 
sensitivity study was conducted for operating point MGT3 to assess how 
experimental measurement uncertainties propagate through the inlet 
boundary conditions and affect the simulation results. As the operating 
point closest to the design point, operating point MGT3 was chosen for 
this analysis.
Through the total uncertainty values reported in Ssebabi [25], a set 
Fig. 9. Pathlines, coloured by velocity magnitude, initiated from the PZ jets (left) and the SZ jets (right) for MGT3.
Table 5 
Sensitivity of outlet temperature and key species mass fractions at the outlet of 
the PZ to the implementation of empirically estimated recirculation flows.
Recirculation flow
Parameter error (%)
TOTPZ
CO2
H2O
CO
Swirl
−0.40
6.30
10.93
−1.19
Opposed jet
−8.45
−41.44
−57.67
4.29
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
10 


--- Page 11 ---

of minimum and maximum inlet conditions for the chosen parameters 
were determined as shown in Table 7. In Ssebabi [25], the total uncer­
tainty was estimated to a confidence level of 95 % using the method­
ology reported in ASME [54]. The sensitivity study only varied the inlet 
air and fuel mass flow rate since these would significantly affect the 
combustor outlet temperature, and a considerable total uncertainty 
value is reported for both. Table 8 presents the sensitivity results of the 
combinations of fuel and air mass flow rates, categorized as follows. 
• Min and Max: the minimum or maximum fuel and air mass flow rate 
is simultaneously applied.
• Min-Fuel and Max-Fuel: the nominal MGT3 conditions for all inlet 
conditions are applied while the fuel mass flow rate varied to its 
minimum or maximum value.
• Min-Air and Max-Air: uses nominal MGT3 conditions for all inlet 
conditions while varying only the air mass flow rate to its minimum 
or maximum value.
• Min-Fuel-Max-Air and Min-Air-Max-Fuel: uses nominal MGT3 con­
ditions with alternating combinations of minimum or maximum fuel 
and air mass flow rates.
In Table 8 the combustor total outlet temperature is estimated in the 
sensitivity study. The largest range of deviation from the nominal CFD 
results is for the alternating combinations of minimum or maximum fuel 
and air mass flow rates. Relative to the nominal CFD value, the deviation 
range is −7.76 %–8.69 %. When compared to the experimental value, 
the deviation range is −13.57 %–1.84 %. The large range of deviation 
shows that the simulation and experiment are considerably affected by 
the measurement uncertainty reported in Ssebabi [25].
When accounting for the experimental uncertainty, the CFD results 
of the sensitivity study estimate a range of combustor outlet 
temperatures sufficiently large to include the experimental value. This 
suggests that the discrepancy between the CFD model and the experi­
mental data may arise from measurement limitation rather than 
fundamental modelling deficiencies. Therefore, while this result does 
not directly validate the CFD model, it provides reasonable justification 
for the suitability of the model for the current purpose of validating a 
reduced order network model.
Fig. 11 is a compound figure that displays the change in key 
combustor parameters with the increase in hydrogen fuel content for 
each operating point. Figs. 11–1a is the PZ equivalence ratio and 1b is 
the global equivalence ratio. Figs. 11–2a and 2b are plots for the change 
in total inlet air and fuel pressure, respectively, normalized to the data 
for propane-only. Figs. 11–2c shows the combustor efficiency as a 
function of blending ratio.
Because hydrogen has a higher mass energy density compared to 
propane, it is observed that the equivalence ratios are reduced as the 
blending ratio is increased. Despite common operating conditions for 
each fuel mixture, the change in total pressure across the combustor 
varies with changes in fuel blending ratios as seen in Figs. 11–2a. The 
trends for MGT2 and MGT3 are similar, initially decreasing, then 
increasing from blending ratio 50-50 to pure hydrogen operation. When 
compared to propane-only, the change in total pressure across the 
combustor is at most 3.5 % and 2.1 % higher for MGT2 and MGT3, 
respectively. The change in total pressure for MGT1 is less than the 
propane-only data points for all blending ratios. Expectedly, and due to 
hydrogen’s lower density, increasing its share in the fuel mixture in­
creases the fuel’s total inlet pressure (Figs. 11–2b). Notably, the 
maximum inlet total fuel pressure is for the 25–75 mixture for all 
operating points, and not for hydrogen-only operation.
Data for combustion efficiency, presented in Figs. 11–2c, is estimated 
as a ratio of the total outlet enthalpy of the CFD simulations to the values 
estimated by a well-stirred reactor for the same boundary conditions. A 
well-stirred reactor is chemically limited and provides a realistic yet 
ideal ceiling for the reaction progress in a combustor. As such, the total 
enthalpy of the well-stirred reactor is used as the basis for the combus­
tor’s efficiency. Operating point MGT3 is closest to the design point and 
has the highest combustion efficiency of 89 % for propane-only opera­
tion. It is followed by MGT2 and MGT1 with values of 79 % and 66 %, 
respectively.
For the fuel blends, when compared to propane-only operation, there 
is an increase in efficiency for all operating points. In the data for the 
Fig. 10. Mass averaged Damk¨ohler number of each combustion zone for varying fuel mixtures of H2 and C3H8.
Table 6 
Total outlet temperature results for the CFD model and experimental data.
Value
Outlet total temperature (K)
MGT1
MGT2
MGT3
CFD
1027
1036
1070
Experiment
1091
1121
1142
Abs error (%)
5.9
7.6
6.3
Table 7 
Sensitivity study confidence intervals for propane-only operating point MGT3 
from Ssebabi [25].
Uncertainty
Parameter
T02
T03
˙ma
˙mf
Random (%)
1.11
0.21
2.05
5.18
Systematic (%)
0.75
0.75
0.12
0.05
Total (%)
±2.26
±1.56
±4.11
±10.36
Min
384.1 K
1124.2 K
0.251 kg/s
0.00403 kg/s
Max
401.9 K
1159.8 K
0.272 kg/s
0.00497 kg/s
Table 8 
The effect of boundary condition uncertainty on combustor total outlet tem­
perature. OTT corresponds to the Outlet Total Temperature.
Uncertainty category
Min
Max
Min- 
Fuel
Max- 
Fuel
Min- 
Air
Max- 
Air
Min- 
Fuel- 
Max- 
Air
Min- 
Air- 
Max- 
Fuel
OTT 
(K)
1024
1120
1008
1140
1093
1043
987
1163
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
11 


--- Page 12 ---

first blending ratio 75-25, when compared to pure propane, MGT1 dis­
played the largest increase of 22 % followed by MGT2 with 14 %, and 4 
% for MGT3. In addition, there is a narrow combustion efficiency range 
for the fuel blends where MGT2 and MGT3 have a similar range of be­
tween 89 % and 93 %, and MGT1 is between 88 % and 90 %. For pure 
hydrogen operation, the combustion efficiency of MGT1 and MGT2 is 
increased to 89 % from 66 % to 79 %; the efficiency of MGT3 is un­
changed from propane-only operation at 89 %.
It is clear from the above observation that fuel blending with 
hydrogen improves combustion efficiency, especially at off-design 
operating points. This is attributed to the enhanced chemical kinetics 
of the H2–O2 reaction mechanisms. However, for the current combustor, 
the combustion efficiency is not improved when operating close to the 
design point on pure-hydrogen. With the global effects of fuel blending 
on combustor aerodynamics and overall efficiency established, the in­
fluence on combustion progress and completeness can now be 
examined.
Fig. 12 is a compound figure. It presents mass average data (static 
temperature and species mass flow rate) calculated at the inlet and 
outlet planes of each combustion zone. The planes at the interfaces of 
Fig. 11. Combustor performance metrics for each fuel mixture.
Fig. 12. Spatial variation of key combustion parameters across the planes of combustor zones for different fuel mixtures.
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
12 


--- Page 13 ---

zones are labelled with the abbreviations of both zones. All plots are 
concerned with operating point MGT3 only.
Similar to the work of Tamang and Park (2023), the CFD data shows 
that increasing the share of hydrogen reduces the mass fraction of CO2 
(Fig. 12-c) and increases NO (Fig. 12-b) at the outlet of the combustor. 
CO2 decreases with increasing hydrogen content due to the reduced 
carbon mass in the fuel mixture, as hydrogen blending is optimised to 
maintain outlet gas temperatures equivalent to pure propane 
combustion.
There is no fuel-bound nitrogen available to form NO, and the for­
mation of Prompt-NO is suppressed due to limited CxHy radicals in the 
current combustor under the fuel-lean conditions. Therefore, the 
Thermal-Zeldovich route is the dominant NO formation pathway as 
temperatures in the PZ and SZ exceed 1500 ◦C [55]. This verifies the 
increased net formation of NO with increasing hydrogen as the effective 
flame temperature is simultaneously increased due to reduced flame 
radiation [56]. In Fig. 12-b for the mass flow rate of NO, the 
hydrogen-only case is shown to produce 80 % more NO than the 
propane-only case, similar error margins to those reported in Benaissa 
et al. [52] and Tamang and Park [5]. Hydrogen addition causes the mass 
of NO to peak in the SZ before sharply declining in the DZ which is a shift 
upstream relative to the results for pure-propane operation. It occurs 
because hydrogen’s enhanced combustion kinetics, driven by increased 
OH, H, and O radical concentrations, accelerate NO formation through 
thermal, NNH, and N2O pathways compared to propane combustion 
[57].
For propane-only operation, NO formation in the PZ and SZ occurs at 
a lower rate when compared to fuel blend and pure hydrogen operation 
(Fig. 12-b) despite similar zone temperatures (Fig. 12-a). A fuel rich PZ 
and SZ, for pure propane firing, increases the presence of CxHy radicals 
necessary for NO reburn, and a high temperature would promote 
Thermal NO formation [55]. These are competing mechanisms and 
would explain the reduced NO formation rate. As CxHy radicals are 
consumed in the SZ and DZ of the combustor, the NO reburn rate will 
decrease, thereby increasing the dominance of the thermal pathway. 
However, since dilution air entering the DZ at plane SZ-DZ lowers fluid 
temperatures below the threshold for Thermal NO formation, other NO 
formation pathways like the Prompt, N2O and NNH will be prominent.
Less CO2 is formed for blended fuels (Fig. 12-c), however, an 
increased share of hydrogen in the fuel is found to reduce conversion 
rates of CO to CO2 in the DZ. This is evident in Fig. 12-d, where the outlet 
CO mass flow rate for mixture fuels is found to be 38 % (25–75) to 70 % 
(50-50) more than the propane-only case. This finding is contrary to the 
reviewed literature in gas turbine combustor performance on mixed 
fuels, as these studies consider mainly methane-hydrogen mixture 
combustion. However, it is coherent with broader combustion literature 
that the effect of hydrogen on flame speed in fuel blend combustion is 
dependent on the enriched hydrocarbon [8,58]. Methane exhibits the 
largest increase in flame speed with hydrogen addition, whereas there is 
a reduced effect on propane [8,58]. The following discussion, supported 
by Fig. 13, will provide an analysis of the mechanisms that result in a 
reduced conversion of CO to CO2.
Fig. 13 is a compound figure. It presents mass averaged data calcu­
lated at the inlet and outlet planes of each zone. The planes at the in­
terfaces of zones are labelled with the abbreviations of both zones, and 
all plots are concerned with operating point MGT3 only. Figures in the 
top row display data for propane-only operation, and the bottom row is 
for the 50-50 blending ratio. Figs. 13–1a shows the major and minor 
species, 1b contains data for the O and H radicals and 1c depicts trends 
for fuel intermediates across the combustor. Similar data are plotted for 
the 50-50 fuel blend in Figs. 13–2a to 2c.
A steady decrease in the fuel mass flow rate (Figs. 13–1a) and an 
increased presence of fuel intermediates (Figs. 13–1c) between the PZ 
and DZ inlet is an indication of incomplete combustion. Due to the 
radical reformation of light to heavy hydrocarbons, there is a consid­
erable quantity of larger hydrocarbons (C2H4 and C2H6) in the PZ and 
SZ. Evidence for this is the reduced quantities of CH3 as it is radically 
reformed into C2H6.
The formation of an O and H radical pool may increase the overall 
reaction rate by radical multiplication through the oxidation of the H 
radical. However, at high temperatures in the PZ and SZ, the availability 
of the H radical is limited through the kinetically favoured H abstraction 
reactions with heavy hydrocarbons to form lighter compounds and H2 
[59]. This is evident in the large quantity and steady increase of H2 
Fig. 13. Spatial variation of key species across the planes of combustor zones for different fuel mixtures.
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
13 


--- Page 14 ---

shown in Figs. 13–1b and the comparatively low amounts of the H 
radical.
At the SZ inlet, fuel intermediate mass flow rates begin to decrease 
while O and H radicals continue to increase. Here, high temperatures 
favour the thermal decomposition of hydrocarbons, reducing the H 
abstraction rate. Subsequently, the H-atom availability is increased, 
promoting the consumption of H2 via chain branching radical multi­
plication reactions, thereby increasing the overall reaction rate [59]. 
High temperatures in the SZ (>1500 K) reduce CO conversion into CO2 
as the reverse water-gas-shift is kinetically favoured [60], and CO to CO2 
formation pathways via fuel intermediates are limited [31].
The elevated temperature at the exit of the SZ, plane SZ-DZ, is rapidly 
reduced by air dilution. At lower temperatures (<1500 K), more reac­
tion pathways are available for the conversion of fuel intermediates by O 
and H radicals which increases the CO2 formation rate [31]. As the 
concentration of fuel intermediates diminishes, more O and H radicals 
are available to participate in the conversion of CO to CO2. Lower 
temperatures in DZ promote CO consumption via the water-gas shift 
which further increases the formation of CO2. Therefore, as seen in 
Figs. 13–1a and 1c, there is a sharp decline in CO and fuel intermediate 
mass flow rates with a simultaneous increase in CO2 between plane 
SZ-DZ and DZ-out.
Hydrogen supplementation increases the concentration of O and H 
radicals in the PZ and SZ which bears significance for the fuel inter­
mediate composition shown in Figs. 13–2c for the 50-50 blending ratio. 
Since H radicals’ abstract hydrogen from hydrocarbons forming smaller 
hydrocarbons and H2, a larger H radical pool will increase the abstrac­
tion rate in fuel blend combustion. This is evident in Figs. 13–2c where 
only CH4 is shown to exist in considerable quantities in any combustion 
zone. Further abstraction of CH4 is hindered at the high temperatures in 
the PZ and SZ, as the methyl recombination pathways to larger hydro­
carbons are favoured [59]. However, these larger hydrocarbons are 
subsequently and rapidly abstracted to form CH4. This balance is then 
shifted at the exit of the DZ. Similar to propane-only combustion, when 
the temperature of the gas is reduced, the radical attack and conversion 
of CH4 into CO2 is enabled. As a result, the reduced concentration of CH4 
makes H radicals available for the completion of the H2–O2 reacting 
system.
Although indicative of incomplete combustion, the large variation 
and high concentration of fuel intermediates in propane-only combus­
tion enhance CO to CO2 conversion. At low temperatures, alongside O 
and H radicals, these hydrocarbons provide indirect CO to CO2 con­
version pathways [31]. In contrast, a larger O and H radical pool in fuel 
mixture combustion increases the hydrogen abstraction rate, forming 
fewer and lighter hydrocarbons which limit the reaction pathways from 
CO to CO2 in low temperature combustion zones.
Fig. 14 shows the area-averaged wall temperatures for pure-propane 
(top), and the mixture firing cases per operating point (bottom). Wall 
temperatures for propane operation show a monotonic upward trend. 
The PZ and SZ wall temperatures average between 734 and 754 K, and 
DZ wall temperatures range between 1031 and 1038 K across all oper­
ating points. Both hydrogen mixtures and pure-hydrogen reduce zonal 
wall temperatures compared to propane. The most significant reduction 
occurs in the PZ of the 50-50 mixture for MGT1 (29 %), while the 
smallest reduction is in the SZ of the 75-25 and 25–75 mixtures for 
MGT3 (22 %).
The DZ wall is highlighted by the rectangles in Fig. 15. Static tem­
perature contours reveal that propane-only operation exhibits active 
combustion along the DZ wall due to fuel accumulation in this region. 
Hydrogen introduction increases fuel velocity through the flame tube 
centre, preventing wall-bound fuel accumulation and combustion. This 
change, combined with reduced flame radiation from increased water 
vapour content in hydrogen combustion products [56,61], successfully 
lowers PZ and SZ wall temperatures under blended firing configurations.
3.2. Thermofluid network model validation using CFD results for 
propane-only firing
In this section the network model is validated by benchmarking it 
against CFD results for propane-only operation using the operating 
points found in Table 1. Validation is achieved through a comparison of 
the mass flow rate distribution, outlet total temperature, change in 
Fig. 14. Combustion zone wall temperature for propane-only operation (top), and the wall temperature for mixture fuel operation of each operating point (bottom).
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
14 


--- Page 15 ---

absolute total pressure and the mass fractions of major and minor spe­
cies at the combustor outlet. Subsequently, the network model’s ability 
to predict combustor performance on mixed fuels is determined by 
comparison with the CFD data presented in the previous section.
The CFD and network model results for outlet total temperature 
(OTT) and absolute pressure (OTP) are shown in Fig. 16 for each oper­
ating point. The network model predicts higher outlet temperatures than 
CFD but maintains consistent trends, showing temperature increases 
from MGT1 to MGT3 with less than 0.5 % relative error. Outlet tem­
peratures differ by an average of 5.7 K ± 0.3 K across all operating 
points. Inlet pressure predictions show excellent agreement with CFD, 
with relative errors ranging from 0.14 % (MGT1) to 0.26 % (MGT3).
Fig. 17 presents the mass flow rates for each combustor flow path 
from both CFD and network model simulations, along with the corre­
sponding total pressure drops per flow path. The total pressure drop 
across each component, and the resulting mass flow rate are determined 
by the loss models presented in section 2.2. The network model un­
derestimates the total combustor pressure drop by 3–4 % compared to 
CFD. While cooling holes and the pre-diffuser show the largest de­
viations (6 % and 8 %, respectively), they contribute only 6.3 % of the 
total pressure drop. The major pressure drop components (snout, SZ jets, 
and PZ jets) show better agreement with maximum deviations of 3 %, 3 
%, and 6 %, respectively. Despite the difference in the change in total 
pressure across each sub-component, the mass flow distribution pre­
dicted by the network model strongly agrees with the CFD results. A 
summary of the errors between the network and CFD model is shown in 
Tables 9 and 10 for the total pressure drop and mass flow rate, 
respectively.
Averaged inner wall temperatures (left) and zone temperatures 
(right), as estimated by the CFD, are shown in the top row of compound 
Fig. 18. The bottom row shows the errors of the network model relative 
to the CFD.
The average combustion zone temperature estimated by the network 
model displays a similar trend to the CFD. Zone temperatures increase 
from the PZ to the SZ and subsequently decreases in the DZ. This 
behaviour is expected as the PZ jets supply air to complete combustion 
in the secondary zone increasing its temperature. Subsequently, cool air 
is supplied through DZ jet to quench the gas as it enters the DZ from SZ. 
Despite similar trends to the CFD data, the network model estimates 
lower average zone temperatures for all operating points. The network 
model underpredicts the PZ temperature with a percentage error range 
of −9.6 % to −18.3 %, and a temperature difference of −109 K to −238 
K. The SZ has an error range between −11.8 % (−197.5 K) and 1.2 % 
(19.2 K). The DZ is well predicted with an error of −3.4 % or −36.4 K.
There is good agreement between the CFD and network model for the 
inner wall temperatures of the PZ and SZ for MGT1 and MGT2, with 
errors between −2.5 % and 7.3 %. For MGT3, the SZ wall temperature 
correlates well with an error of 6.4 %, however the PZ wall temperature 
is underpredicted by 15.5 %. Large errors are observed for the DZ wall 
temperature of all operating points with an error range between −16.2 
% and −21.13 %.
The configuration of the current network model estimates convec­
tion heat transfer between a lumped combustion zone, represented as a 
single flow element, and the solid node of the conduction heat transfer 
element. As such the difference between the average combustion zone 
temperature and the temperature of the solid node is used to estimate 
convection heat transfer. In contrast, considering a FVM CFD simulation, 
convective heat transfer is determined between the wall and the 
neighboring cell(s) only. Therefore, CFD simulations can account for 
localized changes in the flow field and combustion, and their effects on 
gas temperatures and heat transfer. This explains why, despite the low 
errors in the estimates for the DZ temperatures, there is a large error in 
the wall temperature estimates.
The network model has demonstrated satisfactory agreement with 
Fig. 15. Static temperature contours for three fuel cases: propane-only (left), 50-50 propane-hydrogen mixture (middle), and hydrogen-only (right). The dilution 
zone (DZ) wall region is highlighted by black rectangles.
Fig. 16. Network model versus CFD for combustor outlet total temperature and total pressure.
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
15 


--- Page 16 ---

the CFD model in predicting the global operating conditions, internal 
aerodynamics, and heat transfer within a can combustor. The dis­
tinguishing feature of the network model in this study is the coupling of 
the aerodynamics with the chemical reactors. The following section of 
the validation is performed to show that by including chemical reactor 
models, the network model can predict changes in major and minor 
combustion species, and the pollutant NO across a system operating 
curve. Doing so positions the network model as a tool to improve 
combustion efficiency and pollutant emissions.
The top row of Fig. 19 shows plots of CFD data only for the major 
species mass fraction (left), and the minor and pollutant species mass 
fraction (right). The data shown is for each operating point, measured as 
a mass average across the combustor outlet plane. The bottom row is the 
corresponding plots for the error of the network model relative to the 
CFD (left) and the normalized mass fractions (right).
For the major species, CO2 and H2O, there is good agreement be­
tween the network model and the CFD. CO2 is underpredicted within a 
range of −1.1 % to −2.4 %. The error for H2O mass fraction is negligible 
and less than 0.03 %. A low degree of error for the major species in­
dicates that similar degrees of combustion completeness are predicted.
There is a considerable difference in the NO mass fraction as seen in 
the right-hand plots of Fig. 19. Despite having a similar trend, a mass 
fraction of 8.2 (MGT3) to 10.7 (MGT1) times higher than the CFD is 
estimated by the network model. This difference is attributed to the 
approximation of PZ and SZ as well-stirred reactors. As a result, by 
assuming that combustion proceeds uniformly, the reactor temperature 
is homogeneous and elevated which increases the volumetric thermal 
NO formation rate. In 3-D CFD, combustion models like the FGM used in 
this study account for the influence of local turbulence-chemistry in­
teractions on combustion rates and may result in reduced NO formation 
rates when compared to a well-stirred reactor.
NO was overpredicted by a factor of 4–5 in Grimm [21] and Romano 
et al. [20] when implementing reactor networks extracted from CFD 
Fig. 17. The change in total pressure across (top) and the mass flow rate (bottom) through each sub-component.
Table 9 
A summary of the error between the network and CFD model for the component total pressure drop relative to the CFD total pressure change across the combustor.
OP
Component error (%)
Pre-diffuser
Snout
Swirler
Annular passage
Cooling holes
PZ jets
SZ jets
Inlet
MGT1
8
3
4
4
5
3
1
3
MGT2
7
2
4
3
7
6
2
3
MGT3
8
1
4
3
6
5
3
4
Table 10 
A summary of the error between the network and CFD model for the component 
mass flow rate relative to the total mass flow rate across the combustor.
OP
Component error (%)
Snout
Swirler
Annular 
passage
Cooling 
holes
PZ jets
SZ jets
MGT1
0.08
0.26
0.34
−0.18
−0.15
−0.16
MGT2
−0.02
0.30
0.36
−0.32
−0.14
−0.13
MGT3
0.05
0.15
0.51
−0.09
−0.15
0.06
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
16 


--- Page 17 ---

data. Despite the use of a reactor network only informed by CFD data 
and empirical correlation, a comparable error margin is observed in this 
study. The consistency with prior work supports the validity of the 
model’s predictions and highlights the inherent difficulty in accurately 
estimating NO using simplified reactor networks.
The CO mass fraction of the network model is 1.8–4.2 times larger 
than the CFD value, which is consistent with the prior work of Colorado 
and McDonell [18] and Kaluri et al. [19], and more recently in Grimm 
[21] and Villette et al. [62]. Estimating higher levels of CO for each 
operating point is consistent with the network model’s underprediction 
of CO2. As with the result of NO, the discrepancy in CO is primarily 
attributed to the well-stirred reactor assumption.
Despite overpredicting the NO and CO mass fraction, the network 
model trend is consistent with the CFD data, and the magnitude of the 
network model error is consistent with prior work [18–21,62]. There­
fore, the model demonstrates suitability for preliminary combustor 
studies that require trend predictions, stronger predictive capability for 
CO, and qualitative insights for NO.
3.3. Comparison between thermofluid network and CFD model results for 
blended firing
In the previous section, the network model was validated against 
CFD results for propane-only operation and demonstrated the network 
model’s capability to predict combustor performance using a fuel it was 
designed for. In this section, the predictive capability of the network 
model will be assessed. It will examine the model’s capacity to extrap­
olate combustor performance for fuel blends of propane (C3H8) and 
hydrogen (H2), by validating once more against CFD results. The vali­
dation will be executed for each operating point and fuel composition 
discussed in section 2.4.1. This validation will focus on the global per­
formance of the combustor.
With data for all operating points and fuel mixtures, Fig. 20 is a 
compound figure displaying the following: labelled 1a is the total outlet 
Fig. 18. Combustion zone inner wall temperature (top-left), average combustion zone total temperature (top-right) and the respective relative error (bottom).
Fig. 19. Outlet CO2 and H2O mass fraction (top left), outlet CO and NO mass fraction (top right). The relative error for CO2 and H2O (bottom left) is also shown 
together with the normalized CO and NO mass fractions (bottom right).
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
17 


--- Page 18 ---

temperature for the CFD simulation and 1b is the relative error of the 
network model, 2a and 2b are plots of the major species mass fractions 
for CO2 and H2O at the combustor outlet with the corresponding relative 
error for each plot shown in 3a and 3b, respectively.
For the outlet total temperature, a close agreement is observed be­
tween the network model and the CFD simulation for all operating 
points and fuel mixtures. The error relative to the CFD is within ±0.55 
%. This result is expected as Fig. 10 showed that the Damk¨ohler number 
is much less than 1 for each combustion zone and fuel mixture indicating 
that reactions are chemically limited, similar to a WSR and PFR.
For all fuel mixtures, as shown in Figs. 20–2a and 2b, the major 
species mass fractions (CO2 and H2O) estimated by the network model 
correspond well with the CFD results. For CO2, the error is within a 
range of −2.4 %–2.1 %. The H2O mass fraction correlates well and has 
an error range of −0.6 %–1.3 %. This close correlation indicates similar 
degrees of combustion completeness and heat release, verifying the 
agreement in total outlet temperature.
In Fig. 21, the results for the minor species mass fraction CO (left) 
and NO (right) are presented as determined at the outlet of the 
combustor. The data labelled with the suffix F denotes the network 
model, and the data without are from the CFD model.
The CO mass fraction estimated by the network model has a similar 
magnitude and trend when compared to the CFD data, decreasing with 
an increase in hydrogen. The network model CO mass fraction deviates 
by similar margins to those observed in the results for propane-only, 
though it predicts lower levels of CO for blended fuel firing. Similar to 
the propane-only case, NO is overpredicted for blended fuel firing. 
However, there is a reduced error range and NO is 5.1–6.9 times higher 
than the CFD results. In addition, the trend of increasing NO mass 
fraction with an increase in H2 is captured by the network model for all 
operating points.
Under an assumption of an evenly distributed species composition in 
the chemical reactors, the fuel, O and H radical pool and intermediate 
hydrocarbons are mixed at a molecular level and reactions can proceed 
rapidly. Therefore, the reactions that are kinetically favoured at the 
reactor conditions will dominate. As such, the intermediate hydrocar­
bons are rapidly oxidised and are found to have a near zero concentra­
tion within all the network’s reactors. Subsequently, in the DZ of the 
network model, there are insufficient intermediate hydrocarbons pre­
sent to promote the low temperature conversion of CO to CO2 observed 
in the CFD results for propane-only operation. The result is a reduced 
conversion rate of CO to CO2 for propane-only operation for the network 
model when compared to the CFD results.
By contrast, in blended fuel firing, the rate of H2–O2 combustion is 
Fig. 20. CFD models outlet total temperature (top left) and the network models relative error (top right). Similarly, the CO2 (middle left) and H2O mass fraction 
(middle right) with the corresponding relative errors (bottom).
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
18 


--- Page 19 ---

not limited by the kinetically favoured H abstraction reactions with 
intermediates. Therefore, the radicals produced by the H2–O2 system are 
free to increase the CO conversion rate. This is evident in the CO mass 
fraction being less than the CFD value for all fuel mixtures and operating 
points, except at the 75-25 mixture for MGT3 and 25–75 mixture for 
MGT1.
The observed trends of decreasing CO and increasing NO with 
hydrogen addition agree with the findings of Farrokhi et al. [63] and 
Zhao et al. [64]. Moreover, blended fuel firing predicted by the network 
model displays a similar deviation (for CO) or a reduced deviation (for 
NO) from the CFD data when compared to propane-only case. These 
findings demonstrate that the applicability of the network model ex­
tends to forecasting combustor performance and emissions on pro­
pane–hydrogen fuel mixtures.
Fig. 22-1a and 2a are plots for the CFD wall and zone temperatures, 
respectively. In a similar order and presentation, the data for the 
network model is presented in Figs. 22–1b and 2b.
The PZ average temperature is shown to rise with hydrogen addition, 
which results in an increase in the average wall temperature. This 
contrasts with the CFD where there is an increase in average PZ tem­
perature but a reduction in wall temperature. Despite predicting similar 
SZ temperatures, the network model estimates for the SZ wall temper­
ature are 1.3–1.4 times larger than the CFD results for mixture fuels. As 
with the PZ, the trend of the SZ wall temperature is opposite to the CFD 
results. The DZ zone temperatures are, however, well predicted (<7 %) 
and wall temperatures are within 16 % of the CFD values for blended 
fuel operation.
Similar to the results for propane-only in the previous section, there 
is considerable difference between the CFD and network model. This is 
attributed to the localised wall effects that a 3-D FVM CFD simulation 
can resolve. The difference is intensified by the introduction of hydrogen 
as the fuel’s high inlet velocity promotes combustion through the core of 
the combustor. Therefore, the flow along the walls is cooler as the in­
tensity of the wall-bound combustion is diminished, which reduces the 
convective heat transfer rate. Moreover, the impact of the well-stirred 
assumption is evident in the network model’s PZ temperature 
Fig. 21. CO mass fraction (left) and NO mass fraction (right) for varying fuel mixtures of H2 and C3H8.
Fig. 22. CFD (left) and network (right) average zone (top) and wall temperatures (bottom) for each combustion zone and blending ratio.
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
19 


--- Page 20 ---

estimate. From propane to hydrogen-only operation, the average tem­
perature of the PZ estimated by the network model increases steadily 
from 1046 K to 1661 K. This results in an elevated PZ wall temperature 
that is two times greater than the CFD value for hydrogen-only 
operation.
3.4. Comparison between CFD and thermofluid network model computing 
resources
The principal benefit of using a network model is the significant 
reduction in time. Table 11 presents the hardware used for each type of 
simulation and the average compute time for a single simulation to 
achieve convergence. These results highlight the benefits, specifically 
for system-wide simulations that the thermofluid network modelling 
approach offers.
4. Conclusion
This study details the development of a thermofluid network model 
employed to predict the performance of a MGT can combustor operating 
on pure and fuel blends of propane and hydrogen. It presents the 
treatment of sub-component pressure losses and heat transfer. In addi­
tion, it describes the first implementation of well-stirred and plug-flow 
reactors into Flownex SE to model combustion to form a coupled 
thermofluid-reactor network model.
The CFD data showed that blended and pure hydrogen operation 
increases combustion efficiency and reduces the flame-tube wall tem­
peratures. However, it boosts pollutant formation when compared to 
propane-only operation with an 80 % increase in NO. Most notably, the 
CFD results show a 70 % increase in CO. This is attributed to the reduced 
CO conversion pathways resulting from diminished concentrations of 
fuel intermediates due to H-atom abstraction. This finding contrasts 
with the prevailing gas turbine literature where studies typically 
consider methane-hydrogen blends.
The network model accurately predicts bulk flow distribution and 
pressure changes throughout the combustor. In addition, major species 
mass fractions and total temperature at the outlet of the combustor are 
predicted well for blended and pure fuels. Nevertheless, the network 
model struggles to predict pollutant species (CO and NO) although error 
predictions are comparable to recent studies. The network model’s error 
for pollutant species and flame-tube inner wall temperatures is predicted 
with varying levels of accuracy due to the simplifying assumption of 
uniform combustion zones. This highlights the need for increased fi­
delity in the reactor network to predict temperature distributions that 
better represent the 3-D case. Despite this, the network model is shown 
to accurately predict the overall aerodynamic and thermodynamic 
changes in the combustor and does so 420x faster than the CFD model.
The model in Flownex SE is geometrically generalisable and shown 
to significantly reduce computational time while accurately predicting 
combustor performance. Therefore, it is considered well-suited for rapid 
and accurate design space exploration using both pure and blended fuels 
to improve combustion efficiency, reduce aerodynamic losses and pro­
vide a qualitative indication of heat transfer intensity.
Future work will involve implementing models to improve the pre­
diction of pollutant emissions. Moreover, the influence of increasing the 
size of the reactor network on the accuracy of predicted flame-tube wall 
temperatures will be investigated. The network models application to 
other fuels will also be analysed. Furthermore, the successful develop­
ment of the combustor network model in Flownex SE renders it suitable 
for integration into a full-system MGT model, enabling investigations 
into the effect of blended fuel firing on overall engine performance.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chaz Fenner: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Johan van Der Spuy: Writing – review & editing, 
Supervision, Conceptualization. Ryno Laubscher: Writing – review & 
editing, Supervision, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] Valera-Medina A, Morris S, Runyon J, Pugh D, Marsh R, Beasley P, Hughes T. 
Ammonia, methane and hydrogen for gas turbines. Energy Proc 2015;75:118–23.
[2] Ochu ER, Braverman S, Smith G, Friedmann J. Hydrogen fact sheet: production of 
low-carbon hydrogen. Center on Global Energy Policy, Columbia; 2021.
[3] Cecere D, Giacomazzi E, Di Nardo A, Calchetti G. Gas turbine combustion 
technologies for hydrogen blends. Energies 2023;16:6829.
[4] Wang K, Li F, Zhou T, Ao Y. Numerical study of combustion and emission 
characteristics for hydrogen mixed fuel in the methane-fueled gas turbine 
combustor. Aerospace 2023;10:72.
[5] Tamang S, Park H. An investigation on the thermal emission of hydrogen 
enrichment fuel in a gas turbine combustor. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2023;48: 
40071–87.
[6] Jachimowski CJ. Chemical kinetic reaction mechanism for the combustion of 
propane. Combust Flame 1984;55:213–24.
[7] Jowkar S, Shen X, Olyaei G, Morad MR. Hydrogen-enriched propane combustion in 
a lean premixed burner: LES study on flashback, emissions, and combustion 
instability. Fuel 2025;381:133377.
[8] Nilsson EJ, van Sprang A, Larfeldt J, Konnov AA. The comparative and combined 
effects of hydrogen addition on the laminar burning velocities of methane and its 
blends with ethane and propane. Fuel 2017;189:369–76.
[9] Mongia HG. An empirical/analytical design methodology for gas turbine 
combustors. In: 14th joint propulsion conference, Phoenix, Arizona; 1978.
[10] Melor AM, Fritskyk J. Turbine combustor preliminary design approach. J Propul 
Power 1990;6(3):334–43.
[11] Lefebvre AH, Ballal DR. In: Gas turbine combustion: alternative fuels and 
emissions. 3 ed. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2010.
[12] Despierre A, Stuttaford PJ, Rubini PA. Preliminary gas turbine combustor design 
using a genetic algorithm. In: International gas turbine and Aeroengine Congress 
and exhibition, Orlando, Florida; 1997.
[13] Gouws JJ. Combining a one-dimensional empirical and network solver with 
computational fluid dynamics to investigate possible modifications to a 
commercial gas turbine combustor. Pretoria: Fac. of Mechanical/Aeronautical 
Engineering, Univ. of Pretoria; 2008. M.Eng. thesis.
[14] du Toit B, Theron S. Rapid preliminary combustor design using a flow network 
approach. In: ASME Turbo expo, Seoul, South Korea; 2016.
[15] Mahto N, Chakravarthy SR. Response surface methodology for design of gas 
turbine combustor. Appl Therm Eng 2022;211:118449.
[16] Savarese M, Cuoci A, De Paepe W, Parente A. Automatic extraction of chemical 
reactor networks from CFD data via advanced clustering algorithms. In: 
Proceedings of global power and propulsion Society, Xi’an; 2022.
[17] Park J, Nguyen TH, Joung D, Huh KY, Lee MC. Prediction of NOx and CO emissions 
from an industrial lean premixed gas turbine combustor using a chemical reactor 
network. Energy Fuels 2013;27:1643–51.
[18] Colorado A, McDonell V. Reactor network analysis to assess fuel composition 
effects on NOx emissions from a recuperated gas turbine. In: Proceedings of the 
ASME turbo expo 2014: turbine technical conference and exposition, 4B; 2014.
[19] Kaluri A, Malte P, Novosselov I. Real-time prediction of lean blowout using 
chemical reactor network. Fuel 2018;234:797–808.
[20] Romano C, Cerutti M, Babazzi G, Miris L, Lamioni R, Galletti C, Mazzotta L, 
Borello D. Ammonia blends for gas-turbines: preliminary test and CFD-CRN 
modelling. Proc Combust Inst 2024;40(1–4):105494.
[21] Grimm F. Low-order reactor-network-based prediction of pollutant emission 
applied to FLOX® combustion. Energies 2022;15(5):1740.
Table 11 
Details of the machines used for simulations.
Simulation
Solver
Location
CPU
# of 
CPUs
RAM
Average 
compute 
time
3-D CFD
ANSYS 
Fluent 
V242
HPC
Intel(R) 
Xeon(R) 
E5-2690 
v3
240
1.28 
TB
approx. 
420 min
1-D 
Network
Flownex 
SE 2022
Local PC
intel i9- 
12900K
1
64 
GB
approx. 1 
min
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
20 


--- Page 21 ---

[22] Gubbi S, Sun W, Choi N, Park S, Park J, Lee S, Harper J, Steele R, Noble D. 
Development of a reactor network model for a practical gas turbine combustor. 
2024. London.
[23] Mazzotta L, Meloni R, Lamioni R, Romano C, Galletti C, Borello D. Numerical 
Investigation of NOx emissions in a gas turbine burner using hydrogen-ammonia 
and partially cracked ammonia fuel blends: a combined LES and CRN approach. 
Appl Therm Eng 2025;278(D):127330.
[24] Haytaysal SE, Yozgatligil A. A coupled flow and chemical reactor network model 
for predicting gas turbine combustor performance. Therm Sci 2020;24:1977–89.
[25] Ssebabi B. Development of a micro gas turbine for central receiver concentrating 
solar power systems. 2020.
[26] Fenner CC. Improved modeling of a micro gas turbine for solar-hybrid application. 
2022.
[27] Malalasekera W, Versteeg HK. An introduction to computational fluid dynamics: 
the finite volume method. Pearson Education; 2007.
[28] Flownex SE. Flownex theory manual. 2023.
[29] Lefebvre A. Gas turbine combustion. New York: Taylor & Francis; 1983.
[30] Conrado AC, Lacava PT, Filho ACP, Sanches MdS. Basic design principles for gas 
turbine combustor. In: Proceedings of the 10th Brazilian congress of thermal 
sciences and engineering. Rio de Janeiro; 2004.
[31] Turns S. In: An introduction to combustion concepts and applications. third ed. ed. 
New York: McGraw Hill; 2012.
[32] Mattingly JD, Heiser WH, Pratt DT. In: Aircraft engine design. second ed. Reston: 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics; 2002.
[33] Goodwin DG, Moffat HK, Schoegl I, Speth RL, Weber BW. Cantera: an object- 
oriented software toolkit for chemical kinetics, thermodynamics, and transport 
processes [Online]. Available: https://www.cantera.org. [Accessed 25 January 
2025].
[34] Smith GP, Golden DM, Frenklach M, Moriarty NW, Eiteneer B, Goldenberg M, 
Bowman CT, Hanson RK, Song S, Gardiner WC, Lissianski VV, Qin Z. GRI-Mech 3.0 
[Online]. Available: http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri_mech/. [Accessed 24 
January 2025].
[35] Gnielinski V. Turbulent heat transfer in annular spaces- A new comprehensive 
correlation. Heat Transf Eng 2015;36:787–9.
[36] Karam M, Gheshlaghi G, Tahsini AM. Numerical investigation of hydrogen addition 
effects to a methane-fueled high-pressure combustion chamber. Int J Hydrogen 
Energy 2023;48:33732–45.
[37] Liu H, Zeng Z, Guo K. Numerical analysis on hydrogen swirl combustion and flow 
characteristics of a micro gas turbine combustor with axial air/fuel staged 
technology. Appl Therm Eng 2023;219:119460.
[38] Ouali S. Numerical simulation of H2 addition effect to CH4 premixed turbulent 
flames for gas turbine burner. J Appl Fluid Mech 2024;17:1749–58.
[39] Filomeno G, Capurso T, Torresi M, Pascazio G. Numerical study of the lean 
premixed PRECCINSTA burner with hydrogen enrichment. In: E3S web of 
conferences: 76◦ATI National Congress, Rome; 2021.
[40] Cellek MS, Pinarbasi A, Coskun G, Demir U. The impact of turbulence and 
combustion models on flames and emissions. Fuel 2023;343:127905.
[41] Cheng J, Zong C, Zhu T. A comparative study of combustion models for simulating 
partially premixed swirling natural gas flames. Therm Sci Eng Prog 2024;47: 
102310.
[42] ANSYS, Inc. In: Ansys fluent theory guide, release R2. R2 ed. Canonsburg, 
Pennsylvania: ANSYS, Inc; 2022.
[43] Zettervall N, Fureby C, Nilsson EJ. Evaluation of chemical kinetic mechanisms for 
methane combustion: a review from a CFD perspective. fuels 2021;2:20–240.
[44] Herzler J, Naumann C. Shock-tube study of the ignition of methane/ethane/ 
hydrogen mixtures with hydrogen contents from 0% to 100% at different 
pressures. Proc Combust Inst 2009;32(1):213–20.
[45] Metghalchi M, Keck JC. Laminar burning velocity of propane-air mixtures at high 
temperature and pressure. Combust Flame 1980;38:143154.
[46] Klarmann N, Zoller B, Sattelmayer T. Numerical modeling of CO-emissions for gas 
turbine combustors operating at part-load conditions. Journal of the Global Power 
and Propulsion Society 2018;2:367–87.
[47] Efimov D, de Goey P, van Oijen JA. QFM: quenching flamelet-generated manifold 
for modelling offlame–wall interactions. Combust Theor Model 2020;24:72–104.
[48] Celik I, Ghia U, Roache PJ, Freitas C, Coloman H, Raad P. Procedure of estimation 
and reporting of uncertainty due to discretization in CFD applications. J Fluid Eng 
2008;130:078001.
[49] Bragg SL. Application of reaction rate theory to combustion chamber analysis. 
London: Aeronautical Research Council; 1953.
[50] Kuo KK. Principles of combustion. Wiley; 1986.
[51] Cam O, Yilmaz H, Tangoz S, Yilmaz I. A numerical study on combustion and 
emission characteristics of premixed hydrogen air flames. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2017;42(40):25801–11.
[52] Benaissa S, Adouane B, Ali SM, Rahswan SS, Aouachria Z. Investigation on 
combustion characteristics and emissions of biogas/hydrogen blends in gas turbine 
combustors. Therm Sci Eng Prog 2022;27:101178.
[53] Kairu J, Zhenyu T. Effect of thermal radiation heat transfer on the temperature 
measurement by the thermocouple in premixed laminar flames. J Therm Sci 2022; 
31(2):541–51.
[54] ASME. Test uncertainty. New York: The American Society of Mechanical Engineers; 
2006.
[55] Glarborg P, Miller JA, Ruscic B, Klippenstein SJ. Modeling nitrogen chemistry in 
combustion. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;67:31–68.
[56] Choudhuri AR, Gollahalli SR. Combustion characteristics of 
hydrogen–hydrocarbon hybrid fuels. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2000;25(5):451–62.
[57] Messaoudania Zl, Hamida MD, Hassana CRC, Wu Y. The effects of hydrogen 
addition on the chemical kinetics of hydrogen- hydrocarbon flames: a 
computational study. S Afr J Chem Eng 2020;33:1–28.
[58] Li Z, Cheng X, Wei W, Qu L, Wu H. Effects of hydrogen addition on laminar flame 
speeds of methane, ethane and propane: experimental and numerical analysis. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2017;42(38):24055–66.
[59] Westbrook CK, Dryer FL. Chemical kinetic modeling of hydrocarbon combustion. 
Prog Energy Combust Sci 1984;10:1–57.
[60] Shekari A, Labrecque R, Larocque G, Vienneau M, Simoneau M, Schulz R. 
Conversion of CO2 by reverse water gas shift (RWGS) reaction using a hydrogen 
oxyflame. Fuel 2023;344:127947.
[61] Cepeda F, Demarco R, Escudero F, Liu F, Fuentes A. Impact of water-vapor addition 
to oxidizer on the thermal radiation characteristics of non-premixed laminar 
coflow ethylene flames under oxygen-deficient conditions. Fire Saf J 2021;120: 
103032.
[62] Villette S, Adam D, Alexiou A, Aretakis N, Mathioudakis K. A simplified chemical 
reactor network approach for aeroengine combustion chamber modeling and 
preliminary design. Aerospace 2023;11(1).
[63] Farrokhi FY, Piscopo A, Pappa A, Parente A, De Paepe W. Emissions and flame 
stability assessment of hydrogen addition and air dilution in a microgas turbine 
combustor using zero-dimensional/one-dimensional modeling by chemical reactor 
network. ASME Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 2024;147(7): 
071002.
[64] Zhao Q, Liu X, Jiao A, Xu H, Liu F. A simplified mechanism of hydrogen addition to 
methane combustion for the pollutant emission characteristics of a gas-fired boiler. 
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2024;49:1376–90.
C. Fenner et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 195 (2025) 152511 
21 
