
--- Page 1 ---

J. Fritz
M. Kro¨ner1
T. Sattelmayer
Lehrstuhl fu¨r Thermodynamik,
Technische Universita¨t Mu¨nchen,
85748 Garching, Germany
Flashback in a Swirl Burner With
Cylindrical Premixing Zone
Flame ﬂashback from the combustion chamber into the mixing zone is one of the inherent
problems of lean premixed combustion and essentially determines the reliability of low
NOx burners. Generally, ﬂashback can be initiated by one of the following four phenom-
ena: ﬂashback due to the conditions in the boundary layer, ﬂashback due to turbulent
ﬂame propagation in the core ﬂow, ﬂashback induced by combustion instabilities and
ﬂashback caused by combustion induced vortex breakdown. In this study, ﬂashback in a
swirling tubular ﬂow was investigated. In order to draw maximum beneﬁt from the tests
with respect to the application in gas turbines, the radial distribution of the axial and
circumferential momentum in the tube was selected such that the typical character of a
ﬂow in mixing zones of premix burners without centerbody was obtained. A single burner
test rig has been designed to provoke ﬂashback with the preheating temperature, the
equivalence ratio and the mean ﬂow rate being the inﬂuencing parameters. The ﬂame
position within the mixing section is detected by a special optical ﬂame sensor array,
which allows the control of the experiment and furthermore the triggering of the mea-
surement techniques. The burning velocity of the fuel has been varied by using natural gas
or hydrogen. The characteristics of the ﬂashback, the unsteady swirling ﬂow during the
ﬂame propagation, the ﬂame dynamics and the reaction zones have been investigated by
applying high-speed video recordings, the laser Doppler anemometry and the laser in-
duced ﬂuorescence. The presented results show that a combustion induced vortex break-
down is the dominating mechanism of the observed ﬂashback. This mechanism is very
sensitive to the momentum distribution in the vortex core. By adding axial momentum
around the mixing tube axis, the circumferential velocity gradient is reduced and ﬂash-
back can be prevented. @DOI: 10.1115/1.1473155#
Flashback in Premixed Combustion Systems
In order to achieve low NOx emissions, the lean premixed com-
bustion is often used in stationary gas turbines. Because of their
excellent ﬂameholding, burnout and emission characteristics
swirling ﬂames are almost exclusively used in gas turbine com-
bustion systems. The superior performance of swirling ﬂames
stems from the high turbulence level in the mixing zone and the
generation of a radial pressure gradient in the burner exit, which
leads to a stable recirculation zone with strong backﬂow of hot
gases. Since both effects depend upon the swirl intensity, gas tur-
bine burners are usually high swirl designs. An important upper
limit for the aerodynamic design of the swirl generator is given by
the transition of the vortex breakdown from the combustion cham-
ber into the burner with the formation of recirculation zones in the
mixing chamber. According to the usual design practice, the swirl
number and the radial swirl distribution is selected such that for
the nonreacting ﬂow a sufﬁcient margin against the propagation of
the vortex breakdown in the core ﬂow into the burner is obtained.
The feedback of the chemical reaction on the ﬂow ﬁeld is usually
not considered in the basic aerodynamic phase of the design pro-
cedure.
First of all, the reliability of swirl burners is determined by its
capability to prevent ﬂashback in normal operation. In addition,
fail safe designs must be able to recover from ﬂashback without
damage due to thermal overheat. To date, a detailed understanding
of the governing mechanisms for ﬂashback in turbulent swirling
ﬂows has not been established, although the precise description of
the limits is a prerequisite for the design of reliable premix burn-
ers operating under severe pressure and temperature.
In general, four ﬂashback causes can be distinguished:
• ﬂashback in the boundary layer,
• turbulent ﬂame propagation in the core ﬂow,
• ﬂashback due to combustion instabilities, and
• combustion induced vortex breakdown.
Flashback in the Boundary Layer.
Low ﬂow velocities in
the boundary layer promote the upstream ﬂame propagation
whereas the heat loss to the wall can cause ﬂame quenching. For
laminar ﬂows, Lewis and von Elbe @1# balance the velocity gra-
dient g at the wall with the laminar ﬂame speed SL divided by the
quenching distance dq as the ﬂashback criterion.
g52
]u
]rU
R
5
SL
dq
(1)
According to Eq. ~1! a critical velocity gradient g,SL /dq leads
to upstream ﬂame propagation near the wall. In order to general-
ize the experimental results, a dimensionless relation was pro-
posed as a ﬂashback criterion ~@2#!. In this framework, the balance
of the downstream convective transport and the upstream ﬂame
propagation with heat loss to the wall is expressed in terms of
Peclet numbers. The velocity gradient is replaced by an average
velocity and a characteristic length scale. Although the theories
can also be formally applied to turbulent boundary layers, it is
known that the same criteria do not apply in the turbulent case.
The critical velocity gradient is much higher than the laminar one
~@3#!, since the axial turbulent diffusion above the laminar sub-
layer increases the ﬂame speed.
This type of ﬂashback is often predominant in nonswirling low-
turbulence ﬂows.
Turbulent Flame Propagation in the Core Flow.
If the tur-
bulent burning velocity exceeds the local ﬂow velocity in the core
1Current address: THERMOTEL, E$ngineering Services GmbH, 85748 Garching,
Germany.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute ~IGTI! of THE AMERICAN
SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS for publication in the ASME JOURNAL OF
ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Paper presented at the Interna-
tional Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition, New Orleans, LA, June
4–7, 2001; Paper 01-GT-054. Manuscript received by IGTI, December 2000, ﬁnal
revision, March 2001. Associate Editor: R. Natole.
276 Õ Vol. 126, APRIL 2004
Copyright © 2004 by ASME
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

ﬂow, ﬂashback is the consequence. The turbulent burning velocity
depends on the chemical kinetics and the turbulence structure, i.e.,
the length scales and the local velocity ﬂuctuations. Many studies
on the correlation of the turbulent burning velocity with the tur-
bulent velocity ﬂuctuations in the ﬂow have been published ~e.g.,
@4–7#!. However, the results obtained from different correlations
scatter widely and the proper determination of turbulent ﬂame
velocities remains a challenging task because of the complex in-
teraction of turbulence and chemistry.
Swirling ﬂames have a highly wrinkled and corrugated struc-
ture, which increases the ﬂame surface considerably above the
surface of a laminar ﬂame. Mainly this effect is responsible for the
increase of the turbulent ﬂame speed above the laminar value.
Whether distributed reaction zones or even well stirred local
zones are of strong signiﬁcance under gas turbine conditions
could not be demonstrated yet. If these effects exist, they have an
additional effect on the turbulent ﬂame propagation. Turbulent
burning velocities show a correlation with the laminar ﬂame
speed. This implies that, while burning fuels with high laminar
burning velocities, burners with a low turbulence level are more
appropriate than high swirl designs in order to receive a sufﬁcient
margin against ﬂashback ~@8#!.
For stable fuels like natural gas at moderate mixture tempera-
tures, ﬂashback in the core ﬂow is less critical even in highly
turbulent ﬂows due to the low laminar ﬂame speed. A simple
design rule for the optimum safety against ﬂame propagation in
the main ﬂow is to avoid local zones of low axial ﬂow velocity
and wake regions ~@2#! in the mixing zone.
Flashback due to Combustion Instabilities.
Combustion in-
stabilities can be responsible for the upstream ﬂame propagation,
both in the boundary layer ~@9#! and in the core ﬂow. The driving
force for noise and pulsations in gas turbine combustion systems
is the ﬂuctuating heat release of the reacting mixture in the pri-
mary zone. Four different mechanisms can contribute to the noise
spectrum peaks ~@10#!. First of all, the turbulent noise produces a
background noise level. This broad-band excitation can be consid-
erably ampliﬁed at the eigenfrequencies of the combustion system
so that they produce distinct pulsation. Swirling ﬂows particularly
tend to form natural coherent ﬂow structures like precessing vor-
tex cores ~@11#! or vortices generated near the transition from the
mixing section into the combustion chamber. This second physical
phenomenon can result in ﬂow oscillations at speciﬁc Strouhal
numbers even in the isothermal ﬂow and leads to an ampliﬁcation
of the combustion noise if the excitation meets an eigenfrequency
of the system. The third driving mechanism are forced coherent
ﬂow structures. They are observed if the ﬂow instabilities respond
to the triggering by velocity perturbations with subsequent phase-
locking. The classical mode of unstable self-excitation is the
fourth potential cause of pulsations.
High amplitudes of periodic ﬂow velocity ﬂuctuations at the
burner exit, as a result of the mentioned instability mechanisms,
lead to a periodic displacement of the reaction zone. The conse-
quence is a periodic variation of the burner pressure loss, which
again incites the oscillations. This feedback loop ﬁnally leads to
periodic ﬂashbacks. Pulsation initiated ﬂashback requires a high
pulsation level to occur, which is far beyond the acceptable noise
levels of combustion systems. This kind of ﬂashback can be in-
terpreted as the ﬁnal terminating step of a highly unstable com-
bustion process after sufﬁcient ampliﬁcation.
Combustion-Induced Vortex Breakdown.
Many gas turbine
burner designs follow the basic philosophy to stabilize the ﬂame
in the combustion chamber and to avoid reaction within the
burner. Burners with a centerbody or fuel lance provide a recircu-
lation zone on the axis even without swirl. However, imposing
swirl on the main ﬂow leads to a strong ampliﬁcation of the back-
ﬂow of hot gases and a better ﬂame stabilization. An advantage of
designs with centerbody is that the swirl can be selected in a wide
window, which is primarily limited by the propagation of the vor-
tex breakdown upstream and the formation of a recirculation zone
around the centerbody.
The experimental ﬂashback study is focused on burners without
fuel lance in the center of the mixing zone. The design of swirlers
without centerbody requires a thorough tailoring of the swirling
ﬂow, since the ﬂameholding capability depends entirely on the
vortex breakdown without the aid of a bluff body. It can be shown
that in tubular ﬂows axial proﬁles with a jet on the axis are re-
quired for a stable transition of the vortex ﬂow into its annular
form in the combustion chamber. It is well known that a reduction
of the swirl around the vortex core by friction or an abrupt change
in the cross section leads to a pressure rise on the axis. The posi-
tive pressure gradient reduces the axial velocity in the vortex core,
which at the same time effects an radial transport of angular mo-
mentum. Therefore the vortex core grows and again supports the
positive pressure gradient ~@12#!. These effects govern the transi-
tion of the vortex from its closed into its annular form.
The formation of the vortex breakdown strongly depends on the
geometry and the distribution of the axial and circumferential ve-
locity. If the swirl number exceeds a critical value, the recircula-
tion zone is able to extend itself throughout the entire mixing
section. It is shown subsequently for the ﬁrst time that even if the
swirl number is well adapted to prevent this effect in the isother-
mal ﬂow, the chemical reaction can nevertheless lead to a break-
down of the ﬂow, combined with an upstream ﬂame propagation.
This effect could be observed in the present work as a character-
istic ﬂashback mechanism in swirling ﬂows and henceforth will
be called combustion-induced vortex breakdown.
Experimental Facility
The experimental facility, as sketched in Fig. 1, is essentially
made up by three parts, the fuel/air premixing section ~A!, the
swirl generator followed by a mixing tube ~swirl burner B!, and
the combustion chamber ~C!.
The combustion air is preheated by electrical air heaters. To
avoid any inﬂuence of equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations or the fuel/air
mixing quality on the ﬂashback behavior, a multistage premixing
section has been installed. Gaseous fuel, natural gas or hydrogen,
is added to the air in a swirl mixer and the mixture subsequently
passes a static mixer for ﬁne scale mixing. For the laser Doppler
anemometry, scattering particles (TiO2) can be added upstream of
the fuel injector, in order to achieve an optimum dispersion of the
seeding in the ﬂow.
A swirler generates the desired ﬂow proﬁle with an axial jet.
The actual object of interest, the cylindrical fused silica quartz
glass mixing tube, is ﬁxed between the swirler and the combustion
chamber. The optical access to the mixing tube exit zone is pro-
Fig.
1
Premixing
section,
swirl
burner,
and
combustion
chamber
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2004, Vol. 126 Õ 277
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

vided by quartz windows. The combustion chamber itself is wa-
tercooled and protected by ceramic ﬂame tubes inside.
The rating of the experimental facility is as follows:
air mass ﬂow:
0.15 kg/s
pressure:
atmospheric
mixture temperature:
30°C–500°C
rated thermal power:
200 kW
fuel:
natural gas, hydrogen
In the tests, ﬂashback was initiated by a continuous increase of
the fuel mass ﬂow at a constant air mass ﬂow, starting from a
stable operating point. The increase of the equivalence ratio al-
lows for the control of the density ratio over the ﬂame front.
Moreover, the turbulent burning velocity is inﬂuenced indirectly
via the increase of the laminar ﬂame speed. Both effects are of
importance for the ﬂashback limits of gas turbine burners. The
position of the ﬂame in the mixing tube is detected by an optical
ﬂame sensor which is described in detail below. After the ﬂash-
back has propagated through the entire mixing tube, the sensor
shuts off the fuel supply. With natural gas as the fuel, ﬂashback
could not be observed as long as the ﬂow speed and the equiva-
lence ratio were selected in the typical range of gas turbine burn-
ers. For this reason, the equivalence ratio in the tests had to be
considerably increased over engine values in order to provoke
ﬂashback.
Optical Measurement Techniques
To classify the observed phenomena with respect to the mecha-
nisms listed above, it is of prime importance to obtain simulta-
neously experimental data of the ﬂow ﬁeld and the ﬂame front
position. In addition, to avoid any impact on the ﬂow and the
reaction in the mixing tube during the ﬂashback non intrusive
optical methods were applied.
Laser Doppler Anemometry „LDA….
The laser Doppler an-
emometer used in the present experiments ~two-dimensional Dan-
tec LDA with BSA enhanced processors, 6 W Coherent Innova 90
argon ion laser, three-dimensional traverse system!, was set up to
measure coincidently the axial and circumferential velocity com-
ponents in a horizontal plane through the mixing tube axis with
high spatial and temporal resolution. To reach a high ﬂexibility, it
was employed in its off-axis forward-scattering arrangement. The
receiving optics could be adapted to the refraction conditions at
the cylindrical interfaces dependant on the radial measuring point
and a small effective measuring volume as well as a sufﬁciently
high signal to noise ratio could be achieved. Unlike the laser
beams, for the axial velocity component, the refraction of the laser
beams for the circumferential velocity component depends on the
radial position of the measuring volume. Both, the fringe spacing
and the real measuring volume position are altered. To take this
into account, a correction factor published by Broadway and
Karahan @13# can be applied. With the described setup the station-
ary ﬂow ﬁelds as well as the unsteady ﬂow behavior during the
ﬂashback were obtained from the LDA measurements.
High Speed Video.
A Kodak Ektapro Motion Analyzer 4540
high speed video camera was applied to visualize the unsteady
ﬂame propagation and to get the current ﬂame front position
and shape. The recordings have been made at a frame rate of 4500
pictures per second. In case of ﬁring natural gas, the natural
ﬂuorescence, mainly emitted by the CH radicals in the ﬂame
front ~blue-violet range!, produce sufﬁcient light for CCD chip
recordings.
When combined with LDA measurements, the strong scattered
laser light from the scattering particles deposited at the mixing
tube wall makes the precise evaluation of the video sequences
very difﬁcult. For this reason it was necessary to improve the
imaging technique. A major improvement was achieved through
ﬁltering the visible light using a Schott UG11 ﬁlter. In addition, a
two-stage image intensiﬁer ~Proxitronic! was attached to the high
speed Camera. With this approach, effects of the scattered laser
light and seeding could be completely eliminated and the natural
ﬂame ﬂuorescence from the OH radicals could be recorded.
A software was developed to identify the ﬂame front position
automatically. Different digital image processing ﬁlters generate a
binary picture from each video picture. For further data analysis,
the ﬂame front is identiﬁed and stored both as a function of the
radial coordinate and time ~@14#!.
Optical Flame Sensor.
The high speed video recordings give
detailed information about the ﬂame propagation, but unfortu-
nately only over a limited time range of about 225 ms. For this
reason, an optical ﬂame sensor was developed for the observation
of the ﬂame dynamics over a longer measurement cycle with data
rates up to 100 kHz ~Fig. 2!.
A row of photodiodes is placed along the mixing tube. The
chosen photodiode is sensitive to radiation from the near UV to
the blue-violet visible light. The analog output signals of all di-
odes are summed up to an analog signal, which is a measure for
the current ﬂame position. The sensor is calibrated by means of
simultaneous recorded high speed video sequences. Furthermore
the signal of each diode can be separately used to trigger other
measurement techniques.
Laser-Induced Fluorescence „OH-LIF….
The information
provided by the high speed video recordings subsequently pre-
sented is always integrated over the depth of the mixing tube and
this integration leads to a loss of the local ﬂame structure. In order
to obtain a better insight into the local structure of the ﬂame
during ﬂashback, a triggered light sheet technique was applied in
addition, which offers a spatially high resolution in two dimen-
sions. The planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence of the OH radicals in
the reaction zone was selected to characterize the reaction zones
of the ﬂashback in great detail. The radicals were excited by a
XeCl-excimer pumped dye laser ~Lambda Physics EMG 201 and
Scanmate 2 with Coumarin 153 dye! tuned to the Q1(6) line ~283
nm! using the A2S1←X2P(1,0) transition. This excitation has a
better signal to noise ratio in comparison with the excitation in the
region of 248 nm ~KrF-excimer laser!. This is of particular impor-
tance, since laser light scattering at the cylindrical mixing tube
surface is difﬁcult to avoid. The LIF images are recorded by an
intensiﬁed CCD camera ~LaVision Flamestar II!. Laser light is cut
off by a band pass mirror ﬁlter adjusted to 310 nm. During the
OH-LIF measurements subsequently presented, the light sheet
was located at an axial position of 21.45Di,z,21.9Di . There-
fore, a section of the ﬂame front is depicted with a high optical
resolution.
In the tests, either LDA or LIF have been combined with the
optical ﬂame sensor and the high speed camera in order to inves-
Fig. 2
Optical ﬂame sensor for ﬂashback detection
278 Õ Vol. 126, APRIL 2004
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

tigate the interaction between the ﬂow ﬁeld and the ﬂame or be-
tween the structure of the ﬂame front and the ﬂame propagation,
respectively.
Results and Discussion
Steady Swirling Flow Field.
As will be shown later, it is
advantageous to transfer the pressure loss of the swirler into a
high axial velocity on the burner axis in order to prevent ﬂash-
back. A special swirling ﬂow with this attribute and a high cir-
cumferential velocity gradient in the vortex core has been used
~burner conﬁguration BC I, reference geometry!. Figure 3 shows
an example for the mean axial and circumferential velocity proﬁle
within the mixing tube ~coordinate system see Fig. 1!. The swirl
generator is equipped with a variable oriﬁce on the centerline,
which allows the injection of an axial jet. As it is shown in Fig. 3,
the axial and swirl momentum distribution near the axis can be
inﬂuenced by opening the oriﬁce ~burner conﬁguration BC II!.
This conﬁguration leads to a lower mean circumferential velocity
gradient in the vortex core. Simultaneously the axial momentum
becomes slight higher at the axial position z520.59 Di . The
r.m.s. values of the velocity ﬂuctuations u8 and w8, normalized
with the average velocity u¯ a , show the high intensity of the tur-
bulence in the swirling ﬂow ~Fig. 4!. The abrupt increase of the
velocity ﬂuctuations towards the axis cannot be directly inter-
preted as turbulent ﬂuctuations because of other inﬂuences such as
the precessing vortex core. In the tests, the ﬂashback limits of
both conﬁgurations were investigated.
The velocity ﬁeld was measured at different axial locations in
the mixing tube. Figure 5 reveals a common characteristic prop-
erty of tubular swirling ﬂows: The changes of the velocity proﬁles
in longitudinal direction is relatively weak, although a deteriora-
tion of the axial jet due to friction is clearly visible. From the axial
velocity proﬁle data, it can be seen in addition that the vortex
breakdown in the isothermal ﬂow is exactly located in the exit
plane of the mixing tube.
Flashback Characteristics.
Subsequently, the ﬂashback be-
havior of burner conﬁguration BC I will be discussed ﬁrst. The
data acquired by the simultaneous application of the optical ﬂame
sensor and the high speed video camera is especially qualiﬁed for
illustrating the ﬂame propagation process. The sensor signal in
Fig. 6 shows the development of the ﬂame position over a period
of 900 ms. Obviously not a single ﬂashback but rather numerous
shiftings of the ﬂame front characterize the ﬂashback behavior.
The extracted video sequences, presented in Figs. 7, 8, and 9 ~cf.
ﬁgure 6! show the ﬂame propagation in the core ﬂow with a high
temporal resolution.
The propagation of the ﬂame against the main ﬂow direction
starts with the formation of a ﬂame needle near the axis. This
needle penetrates the counterﬂow with a precessing motion ~Figs.
7 B, C, D and 8 B, C!. In some cases, vortices in the ﬂow passing
slightly off axis form a mushroom shaped ﬂame tip ~Fig. 8 D!.
This vortex interaction with the ﬂame can lead to a separation of
the ﬂame tip from the downstream reaction zone ~Fig. 8 E!.
During the following ﬂame evolution, a hot plug ﬁlled with
combusting media is formed ~Figs. 7 G, H and 8 G, H! and the
ﬂame propagation upstream either comes to rest or undergoes a
further transition to a wedge shaped ﬂame, which then propagates
further upstream ~Fig. 9!. In the case of stagnation, the further
process is not fully predetermined. The ﬁrst mode is the repetition
of the described process, which ﬁnally leads to a ﬂashback
through the entire tube. In contrast to this process, the second
mode leads to the quenching of the reaction by the ﬂow and to a
Fig. 3
Nondimensional mean axial and circumferential veloci-
ties u¯ Õu¯ a and w¯ Õu¯ a at zÄÀ0.59Di
Fig. 4
Nondimensional r.m.s. of ﬂuctuating axial and circum-
ferential velocities u8Õu¯ a and w8Õu¯ a at zÄÀ0.59Di
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2004, Vol. 126 Õ 279
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

Fig. 5
Mean axial and circumferential velocity ﬁeld u¯ Õu¯ a and w¯ Õu¯ a „BC I…
Fig. 6
Optical ﬂame sensor signal during a ﬂashback experiment. Methane-air mix-
ture, fÄ0.83, TÄ300°C, ReÄ54763.
Fig. 7
UV-intensiﬁed high speed video sequence. Upstream
ﬂame acceleration by forming a ﬂame needle „cf. Fig. 6…
Fig.
8
UV-intensiﬁed
high
speed
video
sequence.
A
mushroom-shaped ﬂame tip evolves a separated reaction zone
„cf. Fig. 6….
280 Õ Vol. 126, APRIL 2004
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

subsequent shift of the ﬂame back into the combustion chamber.
This again leads to a recurrent ﬂashback process as depicted in
Fig. 6.
Due to the complicated dynamics of the ﬂashback, it is insufﬁ-
cient to deﬁne the ﬂashback limits as the point at which the ﬂame
propagates through the entire mixing tube. A statistical analysis of
the signal of the optical ﬂame sensor provides a better insight into
the nature of the process. In Fig. 10 the histogram shows the
inﬂuence of the equivalence ratio f on the probability of the ﬂame
position. Starting with f<0.718 the ﬂame is stabilized at the
combustion chamber inlet. For higher equivalence ratios f, the
probability of the ﬂame appearing further upstream in the mixing
tube increases. At f'0.83 the ﬂashback can partially propagate
through the mixing tube up to z522.25 Di . The lower probabili-
ties of ﬂame tip positions for the same case at z.20.25 Di indi-
cate that there is the tendency of a ﬂame stabilization in the mix-
ing tube. A further increase of the equivalence ratio leads to a ﬁnal
ﬂashback throughout the entire mixing tube.
The experimental ﬁnding that the direct ﬂashback through the
entire mixing tube can be prevented within a very small window
of the equivalence ratio can be explained by the higher jet velocity
near the swirler ~cf. Fig. 5!.
The OH concentration distributions measured by LIF for se-
lected cases fully support the ﬁndings obtained from the high
speed video sequences. Of particular interest is the detailed infor-
mation concerning the ﬂame structure and the distribution of re-
active species. An upstream propagating ﬂame forms a sharp
wedge or mushroom-shaped ﬂame front ~Figs. 11 and 12!. The
measurements reveal zones of high OH concentrations without
distinct structures in the combusting sections downstream of the
ﬂame front. From the measurement it can be concluded that these
zones are intensely stirred and represent a volume reaction zone.
At the outer envelope of the ﬂame, vortex structures are clearly
visible. In some cases the ﬂame tip almost completely detaches
itself from its body ~Figs. 13 A, confer 8 E!. The transition from a
fast upstream propagation into a temporarily constant ﬂame posi-
tion or even a reversal to a downstream propagation is mostly
characterized by the breakdown of the volumetric reaction zone
~Fig. 13!. At the same time, ﬂame structures suddenly appear, the
ﬂame becomes increasingly corrugated and quenched.
Unsteady Flow During Flashback.
High speed sequences
have shown that the upstream propagating ﬂame tip is restricted
to a region near the mixing tube axis. On the other hand, the
proﬁles of the mean axial velocity ~Fig. 3! show the highest values
on the centerline and the velocity ﬂuctuations are not high enough
to explain the upstream ﬂame propagation in the vortex core. Ob-
viously, a feedback between the reaction and the velocity ﬁeld
must be present, in order to explain the observed phenomena
qualitatively.
In this context, the unsteady ﬂow near the mixing tube axis is of
special interest and might provide the key for a better understand-
ing of the ﬂow-chemistry interaction. Hence, the high speed cam-
era, the laser Doppler anemometer, and the optical ﬂame sensor
have been simultaneously applied in the ﬂashback study to corre-
late the velocity data with the ﬂame position data.
The right part of Fig. 14 shows a 900 ms sequence of the
optical ﬂame sensor signal, which was extracted from a longer 5 s
measuring interval, in order to capture one single ﬂashback. The
sudden upstream ﬂame propagation is clearly visible. The left part
shows a magniﬁed view of the ﬂame position data during the
ﬂashback at t56002640 ms as well as the transient velocity data
for one location slightly off the axis. An additional LDV measure-
Fig. 9
UV-intensiﬁed high speed video sequence. Fast up-
stream moving wedge shaped ﬂame „cf. Fig. 6….
Fig. 10
Probability for ﬂame position with equivalence ratio f as parameter.
Histogram at TÄ250°C, ReÄ73031.
Fig. 11
OH concentration distribution during upstream ﬂame
propagation-wedge
shaped
ﬂame.
fÄ0.83,
TÄ300°C,
ReÄ54763.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2004, Vol. 126 Õ 281
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

ment ~Fig. 15! provides data concerning the relationship between
the velocity right on the axis and the ﬂashback position. From the
velocity data, it can be clearly seen that the upstream ﬂame propa-
gation is associated with a signiﬁcant reduction of the axial veloc-
ity and with a distinct reverse ﬂow on the axis. According to Fig.
15, the axial ﬂow on the axis totally breaks down, before the ﬂame
tip reaches the LDA measuring volume. The location where the
axial jet on the axis breaks down moves in counterﬂow direction,
while the ﬂame propagates upstream. It is of particular interest to
note that the breakdown point is near to the position of the ﬂame
tip.
In the example shown in Fig. 15, the strong forward ﬂow
breaks down within approximately 2 ms. Within this extremely
short time a signiﬁcant reverse ﬂow in the order of 1.5u¯ a is de-
veloped. This leads to a very quick upstream transport of reaction
products and intermediates. Since the characteristic time for this
process is of the order of the characteristic time for the chemical
reaction, the recirculation zone in the mixing tube appears as a
highly stirred region ~Fig. 11!. Further LDA measurements at
higher radii show that the extremely strong breakdown can only
be observed near the mixing tube axis. At an off axis position of
r50.13Di ~Fig. 14! for example, the decrease of the axial velocity
is much weaker and does not approach negative values. The de-
celeration and the heat release near the axis leads to a radial trans-
port of an angular momentum, which leads to a signiﬁcant reduc-
tion of the circumferential velocity. Near the mixing tube wall the
ﬂow in the axial direction is accelerated during ﬂashback.
Fig. 12
OH concentration distribution during upstream ﬂame
propagation-mushroom
shaped
ﬂame.
fÄ0.83,
TÄ300°C,
ReÄ54763.
Fig. 13
OH concentration distribution in stagnating ﬂames.
fÄ0.83, TÄ300°C, ReÄ54763.
Fig. 14
Flame position and unsteady ﬂow during a ﬂashback. fÄ0.83,
TÄ300°C, ReÄ54763, measuring position rÄ0.13Di , zÄÀ1.55D.
Fig. 15
Flame position „left… and unsteady ﬂow during a ﬂashback. fÄ0.83,
TÄ300°C, ReÄ54763, measuring position rÄ0, zÄÀ1.55Di .
282 Õ Vol. 126, APRIL 2004
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

From aerodynamic testing of tubular swirling ﬂows, it is well
known that small and lengthy cylindrical recirculation zones on
the axis can be generated if the swirl number exceeds a certain
maximum, if the radial distribution of the axial and tangential
momentum is not properly tailored, or if the ﬂow on the axis
experiences a loss in total pressure during inﬂow through the
swirler or due to the dissipation of kinetic energy in the vortex
core. In the latter case, the loss of total pressure leads in a second
step to lower axial velocities and a lower axial momentum on the
axis. In our case, an analog effect occurs because the pressure
distribution in the burner exit plane is inﬂuenced by the chemical
reaction in the combustion chamber. For constant total pressure
upstream of the swirler, the pressure on the axis rises at the burner
exit with increasing thermal power. Consequently, this pressure
rise leads to a reduction of the jet velocity near the burner outlet
until the breakdown begins to propagate upstream. The associated
shifting of the ﬂame position with increasing equivalence ratio is
depicted in Fig. 10.
Interestingly, the burner conﬁguration II ~cf. Fig. 3! showed a
completely different ﬂashback behavior, despite the relatively
moderate differences of the two ﬂow ﬁelds. Even with stoichio-
metric mixtures of natural gas and air, only a periodic displace-
ment of the reaction was measured with the optical ﬂame sensor.
The ﬂame did not propagate further upstream than to a position of
z520.8Di . Even in additional tests with hydrogen instead of
natural gas, ﬂashback could not be observed although the turbu-
lent ﬂame speed was much higher.
Apparently, the small additional overshoot of swirl free mixture
around the axis can prevent the upstream propagation of vortex
breakdown. The tests with hydrogen reveal in general that the
combustion induced vortex breakdown is governed by additional
parameters besides those responsible for the other ﬂashback phe-
nomena mentioned in the Introduction.
Concluding Remarks
From the experimental study on ﬂashback in tubular swirling
ﬂows the following conclusions can be made:
• High speed video recordings and OH-LIF measurements
show an upstream ﬂame propagation in the core ﬂow near the
centerline. A ﬂashback in the boundary layer could not be ob-
served.
• The axial velocity of the steady ﬂow ﬁeld is too high to allow
a turbulent ﬂame propagation in the core ﬂow without any addi-
tional driving forces. Therefore, ﬂashbacks in the core require a
breakdown of the axial velocity to occur ﬁrst. This effect could be
illustrated by LDA measurements.
• The propagation of the vortex breakdown into the mixing
tube is obviously induced by changes of the pressure boundary
condition at the combustion chamber inlet due to the chemical
reaction. This propagation is the prerequisite for the start of the
observed ﬂashback process. The ﬂame propagation is governed by
the feedback between the chemical reaction and the ﬂow in the
mixing tube and vice versa.
• With small modiﬁcations of the axial and circumferential mo-
mentum in the vortex core, the ﬂashback resistance can be con-
siderably improved.
• The investigated burner conﬁgurations are able to arrest the
ﬂame within a narrow margin of the equivalence ratio. This can be
explained by the increasing axial jet towards the swirler.
• Current paradigms concerning the appropriate swirl level of
gas turbine burner should be reviewed, since designs with lower
swirl exhibit advantages from the viewpoint of ﬂashback safety.
Acknowledgment
It is gratefully acknowledged that the work presented in this
paper has been supported by Alstom Power ~CH! AG. The authors
wish to thank T. Ruck and C. Steinbach for the useful discussions
and their support.
Nomenclature
Di 5 inner mixing tube diameter ~m!
dq 5 quenching distance ~m!
g 5 velocity gradient ~1/s!
u 5 instantaneous axial velocity ~m/s!
u¯ 5 mean axial velocity ~m/s!
u8 5 r.m.s. of ﬂuctuating axial velocity ~m/s!
u¯ a 5 mass mean axial velocity in the mixing tube ~m/s!
w 5 instantaneous circumferential velocity ~m/s!
w¯ 5 mean circumferential velocity ~m/s!
w8 5 r.m.s. of ﬂuctuating circumferential velocity ~m/s!
Re 5 Reynolds number
r 5 Radial coordinate ~m!
SL 5 laminar burning velocity ~m/s!
T 5 fuel/air temperature in the mixing tube ~°C!
t 5 time ~s!
z 5 axial coordinate ~m!
f 5 equivalence ratio
References
@1# Lewis, B., and von Elbel, G., 1987, Combustion, Flames and Explosions of
Gases, Academic Press, New York.
@2# Plee, S. L., and Mellor, A. M., 1978, ‘‘Review of Flashback Reported in
Prevaporizing/Premixing Combustors,’’ Combust. Flame, 32, pp. 193–203.
@3# Wohl, K., 1952, ‘‘Quenching, Flash -Back, Blow-Off—Theory and Experi-
ment,’’ 4th. Symposium (Int.) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pitts-
burgh, PA pp. 69–89.
@4# Abdel-Gayed, R. G., and Bradley, D., 1989, ‘‘Combustion Regimes and Strain-
ing of Turbulent Premixed Flames,’’ Combust. Flame, 76, pp. 213–218.
@5# Koroll, G. W., Kumar, R. K., and Bowles, E. M., 1993, ‘‘Burning Velocities of
Hydrogen Air Mixtures,’’ Combust. Flame, 94, pp. 330–340.
@6# Liu,
Y.,
and
Lenze,
B.,
1987,
‘‘Einﬂu¨sse
der
Frischgemisch-
Turbulenzparameter auf die Flammengeschwindigkeit in turbulenten Vormis-
chﬂammen, 3,’’ TECFLAM Seminar, Karlsruhe, Germany, pp. 77–86.
@7# Go¨kalp, I., 1980, ‘‘On the Correlations of Turbulent Burning Velocities,’’
Combust. Sci. Technol., 23, pp. 137–142.
@8# Do¨bbeling, K., Eroglu, A., Winkler, D., Sattelmayer, T., and Keppel, W., 1997,
‘‘Low NOx Premixed Combustion of MBTu Fuels in a Research Burner,’’
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 119, pp. 553–558.
@9# Guin, C., 1998, ‘‘Characterization of Autoignition and Flashback in Premixed
Injection Systems,’’ AVT Symposium on Gas Turbine Engine Combustion,
Emission and Alternative Fuels, Lisbon, Portugal.
@10# Sattelmayer, T., 2000, ‘‘Inﬂuence of the Combustor Aerodynamics on Com-
bustion Instabilities From Equivalence Ratio Fluctuations,’’ ASME Paper
2000-GT-0082.
@11# Syred, N., and Beer, J. M., 1973, ‘‘Effect of Combustion Upon Precessing
Vortex Cores Generated by Swirl Combustors,’’ 14th Symposium (Int.) on
Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 14, pp. 537–549.
@12# Hallett, W., 1981, ‘‘Zur Stro¨mung und Mischung in einer eingeschlossenen
Drallstro¨mung mit Querschnittsa¨nderungen,’’ dissertation TU Karlsruhe, Ger-
many.
@13# Broadway, J., and Karahan, E., 1981, ‘‘Correction of Laser Doppler Anemom-
eter Readings for Refraction at Cylindrical Interfaces,’’ DISA Information, No.
26.
@14# Fritz, J., Kro¨ner, M., and Sattelmayer, T., 2000, ‘‘Simultaner Einsatz optischer
Messmethoden zur Untersuchung der Flammenausbreitung in verdrallten Ro-
hrstro¨mungen,’’ Proceedings of the GALA 2000, Freising, Germany.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2004, Vol. 126 Õ 283
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
