
--- Page 1 ---

Experiments in Fluids 7, 344-354 (1989) 
Experiments in Fluids 
9 Springer-Verlag 1989 
Isothermal flow in a gas turbine combustor 
- a benchmark experimental study 
P. Koutmos and J. J. McGuirk 
Imperial College of Science and Technology, Mechanical Engineering Dep., Fluids Section, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2BX, UK 
Abstract. An experimental investigation of the three-dimensional 
flow field within a water model of a can-type gas turbine combus- 
tion chamber is presented. Flow visualisation demonstrated that 
internal flow patterns simulated closely those expected in real com- 
bustors. The combustor comprised a swirl driven primary zone, 
annulus fed primary and dilution jets and an exit contraction 
nozzle. LDA measurements of the three mean velocity components 
and corresponding turbulence intensities were obtained to map out 
the flow development throughout the combustor. Besides providing 
information to aid understanding of the complex flow events inside 
combustors, the data are believed to be of sufficient quantity and 
quality to act as a benchmark test case for the assessment of the 
predictive accuracy of computational models for gas-turbine com- 
bustors. 
I Introduction 
New designs of gas turbine combustion systems are often 
aimed at simultaneous improvements in several, if not all, 
combustor performance parameters. High priority is usually 
given to expansion of the range of stable operating condi- 
tions, improvement of exit temperature traverses, and (more 
recently) reduced pollutant emissions. All of these features 
are crucially dependent on internal flow patterns and the 
associated rates of mixing. This fact alone has motivated the 
need for a better and more fundamental understanding of 
the processes taking place inside a combustion chamber. 
Further, no design techniques currently in general use can 
produce a combustor design that does not require subse- 
quent development and the development process for a sys- 
tem which meets at least some of the above goals has also to 
date been largely experimental and empirical. Whilst this 
approach has been reasonably successful, increased use of 
computational procedures in parallel to experimentation 
would be expected to accelerate the development of im- 
proved combustor designs and reduce development costs. 
This is particularly evident in view of the number of interac- 
ting flow parameters within the combustor such as swirler 
flow, jet and cooling slot flows, influence of downstream exit 
contraction nozzle etc. Needless to say, the availability of 
suitable experimental data is also critical to the development 
and validation of mathematical models for combustor flows 
(Bruce et al. 1979; Coupland and Priddin 1986; Sturgess and 
Syed 1980). The motivation behind the investigation de- 
scribed herein was therefore twofold: (i) to provide compre- 
hensive measurements which can be used with confidence to 
assess and further develop existing numerical models, and 
(ii) at the same time to provide data which allow better 
understanding of the parameters controlling the complex 
aerodynamics of combustor flows. 
Because of the complexity of such flows the approach 
usually adopted for the validation of numerical models (and 
thus the acquisition of suitable data) is to divide the real flow 
into a number of well-controlled component flows that em- 
phasise only one or two of the important physical processes 
at a time. Many of the experimental investigations which 
have provided detailed information on internal combustor 
flow fields have consequently employed axisymmetric geom- 
etries. This minimises the number of circumferential planes 
on which measurements must be made and allows attention 
to be focussed on, for example, the influence of swirl on 
simulated primary zone flow structure (Altgeld et al. 1983; 
Vu et al. 1983; Rhode et al. 1983; La Rue et al. 1984). Al- 
though undoubtedly important for the immediate swirler 
vicinity, the fact that in real combustors the axisymmetry is 
destroyed by the presence of radially inflowing jets weakens 
the general relevance of these measurements. Other studies 
have chosen to reverse the above roles, namely to neglect 
swirl and place all emphasis on the behaviour of rows of jets 
in a confined cross-flow (Khan et al. 1981); relevance here is 
clearly restricted to combustor dilution zones. Recently at- 
tempts have been made to provide measurements in flows 
which contain both swirl and normally discharged jets. So 
et al. (1985) and Ahmed and So (1987) have presented some 
useful data, but have unfortunately chosen to restrict atten- 
tion to a single jet, which severely limits the practical rele- 
vance of their data. Their investigations did show however 
that jet mixing and penetration are significantly affected by 
the swirling motion. This implies that a strong interaction 
exists between swirler fluid and jet fluid and test data for 
model validation should contain both features. Only then 


--- Page 2 ---

P. Koutmos and J. J. McGuirk: Isothermal flow in a gas turbine combustor 
n-~tameter 
_E 
345 
)arate feed 
L1 G 
L 2 I 
@.Ne La;er~_~,__.. 
~..~_. 
Oscilloscope 
Frequency 
tracker 
Digital 
voltmeter y+ 
Fig. 1. Experimental arrangement 
can the ability of the model to represent the feedback mech- 
anisms between swirler, primary jet and dilution jet flows in 
a real combustor be properly tested. Detailed measurements 
which go some way to achieving this have been obtained by 
Jones and Total (1983). The combustor was a realistic can- 
type geometry comprising a swirler, primary and dilution 
jets and an exit nozzle but only the temperature and gas 
composition fields were obtained. Some velocity informa- 
tion is available (Bicen and Jones 1986) but optical access 
problems restricted this to the immediate vicinity of the jet 
holes; important information on the internal flow structure 
is therefore missing. 
The present investigation aims to provide a complete set 
of velocity information for a realistic combustor geometry 
containing both swirl and jet flow features. The model used 
is geometrically identical to that used in the experiments of 
Jones and Toral (1983) and Bicen and Jones (1986) with the 
only omission being the wall cooling arrangements. It is an 
unfortunate consequence of the desire to provide a compre- 
hensive mapping of the internal volume that this can only be 
easily achieved under isothermal flow conditions using a 
perspex model. Water flow models are still used by industry 
during the empirical design process, and computational 
models also imply that the flow patterns can be similar in 
reacting and isothermal flow (Coupland and Priddin 1986). 
Nevertheless, the use of isothermal flow presents a need to 
ensure that the flow structure is similar to that expected in 
a burning combustor before detailed measurements are un- 
dertaken. Neither does the restriction to isothermal flow 
preclude the use of the data for computer model validation, 
since both numerical and turbulence modelling aspects will 
be severely tested by the complex flow under study here. The 
present data provide a suitable benchmark test case which 
any mathematical model should be capable of predicting 
adequately if it is to be considered for use as a design tool. 
In addition to providing the detailed information under one 
set of flow conditions, the current work also quantifies the 
changes brought about by modifying the swirler geometry, 
and demonstrates how the detailed measurements may be 
used to evaluate global design parameters of use to com- 
bustor designers such as the primary jet recirculation ratio. 
2 Flow configuration 
The experimental facility and a sketch of the model com- 
bustor geometry used are presented in Figs. 1 and 2 respec- 
tively. The main geometrical characteristics of the model 
combustor were intended to be similar to those found in 
can-type combustors [e.g. as in the Rolls-Royce Spey engine 
(Gradon and Miller 1968) and its later derivatives (Bhangu 
et al. 1983)]. The model was manufactured from perspex and 
consisted of a hemispherical "head" section attached to a 
cylindrical central barrel of 74 mm internal diameter which 
terminates in a circular to rectangular contraction nozzle. 
The combustor was located concentrically in a larger 
diameter tube so that an evenly spaced surrounding annular 
passage was formed. The curved vane aerodynamic swirlers 
typical of production chambers (Bhangu et al. 1983) were 
attached to the head with their central hub blocked off 
(Fig. 3). No attempt was made to simulate any fuel injector 
flow, but this possesses such small momentum compared to 
other inflows that it has a negligible influence on setting the 
flow pattern. The swirl number (based on the usual defini- 


--- Page 3 ---

346 
Swirie'T with 
J 
r 
~ 
U A-A 
45 vaqes~y4~t 
" i .... 
"~ ........ 
L I 
i~ ~6 
_,_ 
80 
_i_ 
80 
_ 
6hol'es e]O 
12 hotes ~ 10 
1 . . . . . .  
Tube !D ]60OD 165 .... 
ix 
9 
-A 
t 
Experiments in Fluids 7 (1989) 
Fig. 2. Model combustor geometry 
Swirler 1 
@ 
18 vanes of 45 o 
Swirler 2 
20 vanes of 45 ~ 
dimension in mm 
Fig. 3. Geometry of the two swirlers used in the investigation 
tion and using the outer radius as the non-dimensionalising 
length) was 0.74 for swirler I while that of swirler 2 was 0.85. 
Primary holes (six in number) of 10 mm diameter equi- 
spaced around the combustor were located 46 mm down- 
stream of the swirler. A second row of 12 equispaced 10 mm 
diameter holes (dilution holes) was arranged a further 
80 mm downstream. Two constant head tanks supplied wa- 
ter to drive the combustor flow. The first provided a sepa- 
rate feed to the swirler only; the second was connected to the 
larger containing tube to provide an annular feed to both 
hole rows, this external annulus was blocked off by the 
retaining flange at the furthest downstream end. A large 
annulus height was chosen to ensure essentially plenum fed 
jets in both rows. The outflow from the combustor entered 
(via a free overflow) a large sump tank from where it was 
recycled to the two constant head tanks. For the present 
study the total mass flow through the combustor/T/total cor- 
responded to 3.27 kg/s, 15% of this flowed through the 
swirler and the remainder was split 33% and 52% through 
primary and dilution holes respectively. The swirler flow 
was metered with a rotameter while the flows through the 
ports were determined by integrating LDA measured axial 
velocity profiles in the annulus. The above division of the 
available head gave rise to a Reynolds number of 5.6 x 104 
based on the bulk mean velocity inside the combustor 
(U b =4 x n'Ztot/(~ x Dc2)=0.76 m/s) and the internal com- 
bustor diameter (Dc = 74 mm). 
In order to provide information on inlet conditions in as 
much detail as possible, profiles of the three normal stresses 
were obtained immediately upstream of the swirler inside 
the separate feed, an average value for the turbulence kinetic 
energy deduced from these measurements at this position 
was 7 x 10-4 m2/s 2 for swirler 1 and 9.5 x 10 -4 for swirler 2. 
Similarly, the measured values of the axial and azimuthal 
normal stresses were also used to determine the turbulence 
kinetic energy at the jet entry planes. Interference of the laser 
beams with the hole edges did not allow the V component to 
be measured accurately at this position, so the assumption 
was made of equality between radial and azimuthal normal 
stresses. The resulting turbulence energy values were 
9.5x10 4m2/$2 
for 
the 
primary 
holes 
and 
1.33x 
10-3 m2/s 2 for the dilution holes. 
3 Measurement techniques 
Flow visualisation offered the best means of demonstrating 
quickly the suitability of the internal flow patterns obtained 
with the above flow split for simulating combustor flows. In 
the present work hydrogen bubbles provided the most suit- 
able flow visualisation pictures (polystyrene beads were also 
tried but rejected due to their tendency to scratch the per- 
spex walls). Note that the flow visualisation was not used to 
extract any details of the flow as this is impossible in the 
complex highly turbulent regions of combustor flow. The 
pictures were only used to confirm adequate jet penetration 
and primary recirculation patterns. The bubbles were pro- 
duced from 1 mm stainless steel wires inserted through tapp- 
ings in the larger containing tube and entering the com- 
bustor through the jet ports. A vertical sheet of light 2 mm 
thick was produced using a specially designed light source; 
photographs of the bubble streaklines were taken, typically 


--- Page 4 ---

P. Koutmos and J. J. McGuirk: Isothermal flow in a gas turbine combustor 
347 
cl b 
/_ 
\ 
i 
d e 
g 
h 
1 
't 
'IF I I I I I I I I I I I I 17-I I I I I 1 
l[111111111111Iti 
Ill 
il 
HI [IIl]lllllllllltllill 
LHIIIIIIIIII4-!-,F!!!!!! 
J: 
w 
m 
r-i 
il 
• 
~ 
swlr 
Fig. 4. Co-ordinate system and network of mea- 
surement points: 
0 plane: 1 0 ~ 2 15 ~ , 3 30 ~ , 4 60 ~ 
X/Dc 
x/D e 
a 
0.135 (0.135) 
h 
1.094 (1.135) 
b 
0.270 (0.270) 
i 
1.229 (1.270) 
c 
0.486 (0.527) 
j 
1.364 (1.405) 
d 
0.621 (0.662) 
k 
1.500 (1.540) 
e 
0.756 (0.797) 
1 
1.702 (1.743) 
f 
0.824 (0.864) 
m 
1.870 (1.910) 
g 
0.959 (0.999) 
axial locations in parentheses are for operation 
with swirler 2 
TaMe 1. Characteristics of the optical arrangement 
5 mW He-Ne laser 
Focal length of lenses (ram) 
L 1 
L2 
L3 
Beam diameter of 1/e 2 intensity (mm) 
Half-angle of intersection, in air (~ 
Fringe separation (gm) 
Intersection volume diameter at 1/e 2 intensity 
(ram) (in water) 
Intersection volume length at 1/e 2 intensity 
(ram) (in water) 
Calculated number of fringes within 1/e a in- 
tensity band with no frequency shift 
Velocimeter transfer constant (MHz/ms-1) 
with no frequency shift 
2 = 632.8 nm 
fl = 110 nominal 
fz = 300 nominal 
f3 = 300 nominal 
0.8 
5.98 
3.037 
0.111 
1.416 
37 
0.329 
with shutter speeds ranging from 1/10 to 1/4 s, the very light 
sensitive film rated at ASA 400 was then overdeveloped. 
Radial planes at 0 = 0 ~ and 30 ~ (see Fig. 4 for origin of the 
0 co-ordinate) were studied in detail; the whole combustor 
geometry being rotated using the rear retaining flange to 
bring the relevant 0 plane into the visualisation plane (i.e. 
the vertical position). 
Detailed measurements of the three mean velocity com- 
ponents and the corresponding turbulent normal stresses 
were obtained with a laser-Doppler anemometer operating 
in the dual beam forward scatter mode. The outer contain- 
ing tube in the vicinity of the model combustor was im- 
mersed in a plane-walled trough filled with distilled water to 
minimise the effects of the different refractive indices be- 
tween air, perspex and water on the beam passage through 
the curved tube wall. The optical arrangement is shown in 
Fig. 1 and comprised a 5 mW He-Ne laser, a focussing lens, 
a rotating diffraction grating G (to split the incident beam 
and provide frequency shifts up to 2 MHz), a light collecting 
system and a photomultiplier (RCA 4836). Table 1 summar- 
ises the principle characteristics of the system. 
The Doppler signals were demodulated by a frequency 
tracker (Cambridge Consultants CCO1) and the analogue 
output was processed through a true time integrator and an 
RMS meter. The use of suitable frequency shifts helped to 
obviate limitations imposed by the tracking range and the 
slew rate restrictions of the tracker. A detailed analysis of 
instrumentation of this type has been provided, e.g. by 
Durst et al. (1981). Measurements of the mean axial, azi- 
muthal and radial velocities and their normal stresses were 
obtained at the 0 ~ 15 ~ and 30 ~ azimuthal planes. The mea- 
surements were obtained at a total of 13 axial locations 
spanning the positions where beam interference was expe- 
rienced either due to the swirler and curved head upstream 
or to the nozzle geometry downstream. The network of 
measurement points and the system of co-ordinates used in 
presenting the results are shown in Fig. 4. 
Errors associated with the measurement of the mean ve- 
locity and RMS fluctuation levels include the influence of 
mean velocity gradients across the measuring volume, finite 
transit time broadening, instrument noise and short term 
fluctuations in the rotation of the grating. In addition, the 
error due to the offset in the calibration curve of the tracker 
output contributed to the error for the mean velocity (Kout- 
mos 1985). Errors in the mean velocities are estimated to be 
4% of the bulk velocity with maximum values in regions of 
high velocity gradients. Errors in the measurement of the 
RMS level are estimated to be about 6%. The random error 
associated with the instability of the grating speed is esti- 
mated to be only 0.3% of the measured velocity values. 


--- Page 5 ---

348 
Experiments in Fluids 7 (1989) 
b 
Fig. 5a and b. Hydrogen bubble flow visualisation; a primary jet 
entry and upstream recirculation (swirler 1), b dilution jet entry 
(swirler 1) 
4 Discussion and results 
Flow visualisation studies were conducted for a variety of 
flow splits between swirler and jets prior to the current 
measurements (Koutmos 1985). For the present case, where 
the swirler mass flow rate was 15% of the total, a stable and 
symmetric toroidal vortex was identified upstream of the 
axis of the primary ports with the primary jet trajectory 
close to 90 ~ (Fig. 5 a). Although the dilution jet trajectory 
was less steep, penetration was sufficient to create a small 
but weak recirculation on the can centre line as depicted by 
the few hydrogen bubbles found upstream of the wire 
(Fig. 5 b). These two pictures provide a reassuring demon- 
stration that the flow in the current model is exactly that 
expected to occur in a well-designed combustor. 
Axial velocity and turbulence intensity data were also 
taken throughout the annular gap surrounding the com- 
bustor. These have been reported in Koutmos et al. (1984), 
emphasis here is placed on the internal combustor measure- 
ments. Figures 6-8 present radial profiles of the three mean 
velocities and the corresponding turbulence intensities at the 
three azimuthal planes (0 ~ 15 ~ 30 ~ obtained under opera- 
tion with swirler 1. The radial co-ordinate is non-dimen- 
sionalised using the inside diameter of the larger containing 
tube D (160 mm). The velocity used for non-dimensionalisa- 
tion is the bulk velocity Ub defined earlier. A scale for nor- 
malised velocities and turbulence levels is given in each Fig- 
ure. Setting aside the nozzle region, the geometry of the 
present can gives rise to an expected cyclically repeating 
behaviour every 60 ~ 0 = 0 ~ corresponds to a plane contain- 
ing both primary and dilution jets, whereas 0 = 30 ~ contains 
only dilution jets. Strictly speaking, measurements should 
have been taken on both 0 = 15 ~ and 45 ~ since these will not 
be identical. It was deemed sufficient to restrict attention to 
only 3 0 planes as this characterises the strength of the three- 
dimensionality sufficiently. Measurements 
were 
taken 
across a complete combustor diameter, to check the accu- 
racy of cyclical repeatability. In Figs. 6 8 a positive radius 
corresponds to the right half of the combustor (looking 
downstream), a negative radius implies the left half; up- 
wards W velocities are plotted as positive and downwards W 
velocities as negative to clarify the swirl profile shape. 
Dealing first with the mean axial velocity distributions 
(Figs. 6a, 7a and 8a), profiles within the primary zone 
(stations a, b, c) indicate the strength and axisymmetric na- 
ture of the toroidal vortex visualised in Fig. 5 a. Even at 
station c which is within one jet diameter of the primary 
port, closely axisymmetric behaviour may be seen with the 
only slight deviations being the higher velocities on the 30 ~ 
plane in the near wall regions. The primary jet entry plane, 
d, gives the first indication of three-dimensional behaviour; 
profile shapes are quite similar on the 15 ~ and 30 ~ planes, 
but very different on 0 ~ with low U velocities near the hole 
entry; this indicates the 90 ~ jet entry angle as observed 
above. Further evidence for this lies in the negative velocities 
found on the can centre-line at this plane, characterising the 
contribution the primary jet fluid makes to the upstream 
vortex. Positive axial velocities are found on the centre-line 
at stations f-k throughout the intermediate zone. The 
magnitudes of maximum backwards and forwards velocities 
are observed to be about 2.4 and 2.0 times Ub respectively, 
indicating that perhaps slightly more than half the primary 
jet fluid passes upstream. An attempt will be made later to 
quantify this feature since it is crucially important to com- 
bustor designers. Axisymmetric behaviour returns very 
rapidly after jet entry. Only at plane f are small but clear 
differences seen between 0 planes. These differences are 
however important since they take the form of a small recir- 
culation region at station f on the 0 ~ plane. The absence of 
this on other planes shows the three-dimensional nature of 
this separation region which exists on the lee side of the jets. 
Radial and azimuthal transfer of momentum compensates 
rapidly for this velocity deficit and smooths out the profile 
shape so that a much flatter profile is obtained at station k 
just 1.5 jet diameters upstream of dilution jet entry. The 


--- Page 6 ---

P. Koutmos and J. J. McGuirk: Isothermal flow in a gas turbine combustor 
d 
f 
g 
h 
j 
k 
t 
m 
0.5 
2_r 
D 
0 
b ~3.5 
a 
b 
d 
g 
h 
j 
m 
0.5 ~- 
d 
12- 
. 
f 
9 
h 
j 
k 
o 
~ 
1 
0/U b 
0 
1 
9 
I 
0 
m 
V/U b , ~//U b 
, V~u21Ub, V~IUb,V~IU b 
1 
Fig. 6 a- e. Velocity and turbulence field (swirler 1, 0 = 0 o); a axial, b azimuthal, c radial 
349 
a-0.5 
0.5 
2r 
D 
0 
b -0.5 
0.5 
c 05 
0.5' 
a 
b 
c 
d 
f 
g 
h 
j 
k 
[ 
m 
a 
b 
c 
d 
f 
g 
h 
g 
h 
j 
k 
k 
m 
m 
o 
0 
1 
9 
1 
0 
U/U b , V/U b ,~'/U b 
, V~u21Ub, V~lub,VF~/Ub 
t 
Fig. 7 a- e. Velocity and turbulence field (swirler 1, 0 = 15 ~ a axial, b azimuthal, c radial 


--- Page 7 ---

350 
Experiments in Fluids 7 (1989) 
/ 
4 
a 
b 
c 
d 
0 @ 
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
a -0.5 
~, ct 
b 
c 
d 
b -0.5 
g 
h 
j 
_f 
0.5 
2._E 
D 
0 
c -0.5 
c 
d 
g 
h 
j 
k 
m 
g 
h 
m 
k 
o i 
i UIU b,vlU b,WIU b 
0 
1 
9 i 
" VuZ/U~/u~'Vw//ubu 
o 
1 
Fig. 8a- c. Velocity and turbulence field (swirler 1, 0 = 30 ~ a axial, b azimuthal, c radial 
m 
localised negative velocity regions and the slow axial devel- 
opment of the flow near the combustor wall are important 
in determining the location of wall cooling arrangements 
and minor adjustments such as trimmer holes. They seem to 
correlate well with the location of hot spots identified in 
experimental production chambers of similar geometry 
(Bhangu et al. 1983). 
The rapid mixing and re-distribution of momentum 
which takes place in the intermediate zone may be quanti- 
fied by observing that the centre-line axial velocity has been 
reduced by 100% between stations g and k, which is less 
than 20% of the total combustor length. In the dilution 
zone, stations I and m, evidence of much weaker penetration 
is found; the very small negative velocity region on the 
centre-line implies that only the upstream edges of the jet are 
able to impinge on each other. The double S shape of the 
axial velocity profile at station m is typical of that measured 
in several rows of jets in cross-flow experiments (e.g. Khan 
et al. 1981). Shallower penetration compared to the primary 
jets is not unexpected if the momentum flow rate ratios of 
the two jet systems are considered (total radial momentum 
flow/total axial momentum flow). For the primary jets a 
ratio of 11 is found and strong jet impingement is to be 
expected. The corresponding value for the dilution jets has 
reduced to 5 and greater downstream bending is bound to 
Occur. 
Swirl velocities (Figs. 6 b, 7 b and 8 b) within the toroidal 
vortex (stations a, b) are low compared to those down- 
stream. The maximum W location changes position from 
the middle of the can radius at station b progressively mov- 
ing towards the axis at station c and d as the inflowing jets 
entrain some swirling fluid and carry this inwards. The 
blockage effect caused by jet merging forces the majority of 
the swirling fluid to exit from the primary zone at planes 
other than those containing jets. This results in different 
swirl distributions at station d between the 0 ~ 15 ~ and 30 ~ 
planes; the former has very low swirl velocities at the com- 
bustor walls, whereas in the latter two, which form the exit 
route from the primary zone, progressively larger W is mea- 
sured. As this fluid passes downstream it is entrained into 
the low pressure regions behind the jets leading to the forced 
vortex swirl profile as seen at plane f. A similar type of swirl 
velocity profile has been measured by Altgeld et al. (1983) in 
their investigation of an axisymmetric swirl stabilised model 
combustor. The profile shape subsequently remains close to 
solid body rotation throughout the intermediate zone with 
almost linearly decaying levels of maximum swirl until the 
entry of the dilution jets. The larger number of dilution jets 
increases the blockage factor so that swirling fluid is forced 
towards the centre line (station 1 and m). Another reason for 
the increase of the W component near the centre line is the 
slight non-cyclic behaviour of the flow in the dilution region 


--- Page 8 ---

P. Koutmos and J. J. McGuirk: Isothermal flow in a gas turbine combustor 
351 
due to the upstream effect of the nozzle. Since the mode of 
measurement of the W component is to traverse along a 
horizontal diameter of the combustor it is expected that if 
this plane does not coincide with the plane on which OV/Or 
is zero then an artificially large W component may be mea- 
sured. Evidence of non-cyclic behaviour is seen in the pres- 
ence of non-zero swirl velocities on the combustor centre- 
line at stations 1 and m. 
Radial velocity profiles are presented in Figs. 6 c, 7 c and 
8c. No measurements were possible at station b due to 
strong beam refraction caused by the double head curva- 
ture. The importance of the primary jets in locating the 
downstream end of the primary vortex is evident from the 
strong inward velocities, on average twice the bulk axial 
velocity, over most of the diameter at station d (0 = 0~ The 
profiles on the 15 ~ and 30 ~ planes show the jet merging in the 
centre-line vicinity but small V velocities in the near-wall 
regions again pinpointing the exit route from the primary 
zone. Fluid with high radial momentum disappears remark- 
ably quickly, presumably due to high pressure forces, and 
the profiles at all stations from f to k show very small V 
velocities, and little differences between 0 planes. Once the 
dilution jets are reached (station 1) the linear V distribution 
reappears, this time on both 0 ~ and 30 ~ planes. Both abso- 
lute magnitudes (typically 1.0 Ub) and rates of disappear- 
ance (see station m) are smaller than for the primary jets 
which is entirely consistent with the shallower entry angles 
seen in the flow visualisation pictures (Fig. 5 b). 
Levels of turbulence generated throughout the com- 
bustor are important since they affect the entrainment rates 
in the primary zone and the penetration and mixing rates of 
the primary and dilution jets. Under combusting conditions 
they influence the stability limits, combustion efficiency and 
ignition performance (Lefebvre 1983). Practically flat distri- 
butions of the turbulence intensities are found within the 
primary zone (stations a, b), while at stations c, d, f large 
radial and axial velocity gradients and the impingement of 
opposing jets gives rise to centre line maxima in all three 
components. The turbulence quantities indicate smaller 
deviations from axi-symmetry compared to the mean values 
(see station f). The maximum value of the RMS of the swirl 
component was measured on the centre line at station d and 
was twice that of the axial turbulence intensity, indicating 
the strong anisotropy of the turbulence in this region. The 
radial turbulence intensities exhibit similar behaviour to the 
azimuthal values with similar centre line levels and rates of 
decay. The strong influence of impingement in determining 
these distributions is underlined by the fact that it is only at 
station 1 (where weak impingement is known to occur) that 
off centre-line maxima in turbulence intensities are ob- 
served. Clearly shear generation is the dominant mechanism 
when impingement is not present. Turbulence kinetic energy 
contours obtained from the three normal stresses are shown 
in Fig. 9. This is merely an alternative view of the measure- 
ments already discussed, but does identify clearly the highly 
turbulent parts of the flow as regions of strong impingement 
Fig. 9. Turbulence kinetic energy contours (k/U~, swirler 1, 
0=0 ~ 
(primary zone) or strong interaction between jets and cross- 
flow with downstream, weaker impingement (dilution zone). 
The performance of the second swirler will now be exam- 
ined under operating conditions similar to those of swirler 1. 
The variations in the flow distributions obtained with the 
two swirlers arise mainly from the following differences. 
(1) The larger number of vanes employed in swirler 2; 
(2) The geometry of swirler 2 corresponds to a ratio of 
Douter/Dhub=l.5 while that of swirler 1 corresponds to 
Do~ter/Dh,,b= 2.6; as a consequence swirler 2 has a reduced 
outlet area (by about 57%) and correspondingly its average 
axial and swirl velocities increase by a factor of 2. (3) The 
swirl number of swirler 2 is 0.85 while that of swirler I is 
0.74. The influence of this change in swirler geometry on the 
flow patterns is depicted in Fig. 10 which combines the axial 
velocity and turbulence kinetic energy profiles in the pri- 
mary (stations c, d) and dilution (stations 1, m) zones for 
each of the swirlers (0 = 0 ~ plane only). As a result of the 
higher axial momentum imparted to the swirler flow, 
swirler 2 reduces the magnitude of the maximum negative 
axial velocity by about 50% (station c) and, in spite of the 
increase in swirl number, its location is also shifted away 
from the centre line [similar behaviour has been observed by 
Kilik (1976)]. This denotes a reduction in the primary jet 
trajectory and penetration. In accord with the weaker im- 
pingement, levels of turbulence in the primary zone are also 
reduced (Fig. 10, stations c and d) by about the same 
amount. Such variations in the aerodynamics of the primary 
zone as a result of changes in swirler geometry have also 
been observed in experimental production chambers 
(Bhangu 1983). Rapid mixing in the intermediate zone 
means that the flow quickly forgets its different origins and 
flow and turbulence distributions at stations 1 and m show 
little difference, although reduced dilution jet penetration is 
also evident in Fig. 10. 
It has been mentioned above that a quantitative estimate 
of how much primary jet fluid contributes to the primary 
vortex is an important design criterion. An attempt has been 
made to interpret the present measurements in this light. 
The primary zone recirculation ratio was here estimated by 
integration of the negative part of the axial velocity profile 
over the whole cyclic sector at station c (chosen as the sta- 
tion nearest to the centre of the recirculation). This quantity 
was obtained for each of the swirlers operating with various 
swirler flow rates [whilst keeping primary and dilution hole 
flow rates constant (Koutmos 1985)] and has been plotted 
against the ratio of swirler to primary jet mass flow rate in 


--- Page 9 ---

352 
0,5 i 
-{i 
0.25- 
0 
0.5 
2r 
-6 
0,25 
~ 
0 
a swirter 1 
9 swirter 2 
d 
o 
L~ 
j 
C 
o251  
&- 
V 
1 U/Uband R/U~ 
0.5" 
2r 
0.25 
b 
0 
Fig. 10a anti b. Influence of swirler geometry on a axial velocity 
field, and b turbulence kinetic energy field (swirler 1, 0 = 0 ~ 
Fig. 11 a. The graph depicts a decreasing percentage of pri- 
mary fluid to participate in the vortex as rhsw/rhp, increases. 
The fall off is quite rapid at first, but slows up at high values 
of rhsw/rhv,. Differences between the two swirlers are rather 
small. The same quantity plotted against the ratio of swirler 
to primary jet momentum produces the trend shown in 
Fig. 11 b. The use of momentum flow rate has two effects, 
firstly to produce an almost linear trend in the region where 
vortex strength is decreasing rapidly, and secondly to sepa- 
rate the performance of the two swirlers much more. In the 
absence of primary jets, the second swirler must perform 
better than the first as a result of its improved entrainment 
ability, due to higher swirl number. The cross-over observed 
in Fig. l lb 
serves to illustrate the competing effects. 
Swirler2 has an eventual superior performance, but 
achieves this by introducing high axial velocities which force 
" ,ol 
.go.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
Experiments in Fluids 7 (1989) 
D,,- 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
, 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
r~sw/ntlpr 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
b 
i 
i 
i 
i 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
Gxsw/Gpr 
Fig. 11 a and b. Primary zone recirculation ratio and comparison 
of the performance between o swifter 1 and [] swirler 2 (Gxs w is 
the axial momentum through the swifter and Get is the radial 
momentum through the primary holes) 
o 
0.5 
! 
1.0 
a 
w 
10 
. 
, 
/ 
0.35 
] 
-~ 
.40 
40 
I 
0 
0.5 
z 
1.0 
b 
W 
Fig. 12. a Axial velocity field (U/Ub), b axial turbulence intensity 
field (l/~/Ub) at exit from the nozzle contraction (swirler 1) 
the primary jets downstream and this reduces their contribu- 
tion to the recirculating flow. In design terms assessing per- 
formance in the manner shown in Fig. 11 b seems more in- 
formative. 


--- Page 10 ---

P. Koutmos and J. J. McGuirk: Isothermal flow in a gas turbine combustor 
353 
Exit conditions from the combustor are also of interest in 
engineering terms since they affect the performance of 
downstream components such as nozzle guide vanes and 
turbine blades. The normalised exit axial velocity and turbu- 
lence intensity fields are shown in Fig. 12a and b respec- 
tively. Non-uniformities spanning a factor of 2 remain in the 
exit axial velocity field; these mainly arise due to low veloci- 
ties near the upper corners of the exit cross section and high 
velocities occurring near the lower surface of the nozzle 
(Fig. 12 a). The former are related to the velocity deficit near 
the wall at station m (Fig. 6a) and the locally expanding 
cross-section of the nozzle while the latter are caused by the 
cross-stream elevation of the geometry. Comparison of the 
quantity ((Um,x--Umln)/Ub) between station m and the exit 
can give an estimate of the effectiveness of the nozzle in 
suppressing velocity non-uniformities; this had a value of 2 
at station m (Fig. 6 a) while at the exit its value was reduced 
to 1.5. Turbulence intensities at the exit (Fig. 12b) are also 
important; damping of these fluctuations is achieved by pro- 
moting intense mixing in the dilution zone. Comparison of 
the maximum value of the axial turbulence intensity between 
the exit and station m indicates that turbulence intensity 
levels at the outlet have been reduced by about 45%. 
5 Summary 
(1) The velocity and turbulence fields inside a model com- 
bustor geometry typical of current can-type systems and 
operated under isothermal conditions have been presented 
in detail. Information about the interaction between swirler, 
primary, dilution and exit flows has been provided and in- 
terpreted in the form of jet penetration angles and identi- 
fication of regions of recirculation, intense turbulence gener- 
ation and rapid mixing. 
(2) The influence of swirler geometry has also been in- 
vestigated. A change in swirler geometry comprising a de- 
crease in swirler exit area and an increase in swirl number 
resulted in a reduction in the strength of the primary zone 
recirculation and the levels of turbulence inside the primary 
zone due to weaker impingement of the primary jets. The 
variations were found less pronounced in the dilution zone. 
(3) Efficient and rapid mixing throughout the inter- 
mediate and dilution zones reduced non-uniformities at the 
exit from the combustor. Maximum turbulence intensities at 
this position were of the order of 0.5 Ub representing a re- 
duction of 50% over those emerging from the dilution re- 
gion. 
(4) Since the measurements were obtained inside a realis- 
tic configuration and display flow patterns which are repre- 
sentative of gas turbine practice they are also representative 
of the aerodynamic behaviour of practical combustion 
chambers. The identification of the flow regions with high 
turbulence generation and anisotropy, pronounced three- 
dimensionalities or established cyclic behaviour should pro- 
vide useful information for numerical modelling exercises. 
These features help with respect to the choice of turbulence 
models, the use of zonal approaches to cover the entire 
complex geometry and the requirements for local grid node 
refinement. Information has also been provided to assist in 
the establishment of inflow boundary conditions in these 
calculations. These comprehensive data are then most suit- 
able for the testing of numerical calculation schemes. The 
ability to predict this isothermal flow accurately would rep- 
resent a significant step forward in the appraisal of com- 
bustor prediction procedures. 
Acknowledgements 
The work reported here has been supported by the Ministry of 
Defence via RAE (Pyestock). The authors would like to ack- 
nowledge their gratitude for this support and the many useful dis- 
cussions with staff and colleagues at RAE (Pyestock), Rolls-Royce 
plc. and Imperial College. 
References 
Ahmed, S. A.; So, R. M. C. 1987: Characteristics of air jets dis- 
charging normally into a swirling cross-flow. AIAA J 25, 
429-435 
Altgeld, H.; Jones, W. P.; Wilhelmi, J. 1983: Velocity measurements 
in a confined swirl driven recirculating flow. Exp. Fluids 1, 
73-78 
Bhangu, J. K.; Snape, D. M.; Eardley, B. R. 1983: The design and 
development of a low emissions transply combustor ['or the civil 
Spey engine. AGARD CP 353 
Bicen, A. F.; Jones, W. P. 1986: Velocity characteristics of iso- 
thermal and combusting flows in a model can-type combustor. 
Combust. Sci. Technol. 49, 1-15 
Bruce, T. W.; Mongia, H. C.; Reynolds, R. S. 1979: Combustor 
design criteria validation. USARTL-TR-78-55, 1-3 
Coupland, J.; Priddin, C. H. 1986: Modelling the flow and combus- 
tion in a production gas turbine combustor. In: Turbulent shear 
flows 5 (ed. Durst, F.; Launder, B. E.; Lumley, J. L.; Schmidt, 
F. W.; Whitelaw, J. H.), pp. 310-323. Berlin, Heidelberg, New 
York: Springer 
Durst, F.; Melling, A.; Whitelaw, J. H. 1981: Principles and practice 
of laser Doppler anemometry. New York: Academic Press 
Gradon, K.; Miller, S. C. 1968: Combustion development on the 
Rolls-Royce Spey engine. In: Combustion in advanced gas tur- 
bine systems (Cranfield Int. Symp. Ser. Vol. 10) (ed. Smith, J. 
E.). New York: Pergamon Press 
Jones, W. P.; Toral, H. 1983: Temperature and composition mea- 
surements in a research gas turbine combustion chamber. Corn- 
bust. Sci. Technol. 31, 249-275 
Khan, Z. A.; McGuirk, J. J.; Whitelaw, J. H. 1981: A row of jets in 
a cross-flow. AGARD CP 308 
Kilik, E. 1976: The influence of swirler design parameters on the 
aerodynamics of the downstream recirculation region. PhD 
thesis, School of Mechanical Engineering, Cranfield Institute of 
Technology, UK 
Koutmos, P. 1985: An isothermal study of gas turbine combustor 
flows. PhD thesis, University of London, UK 
Koutmos, P.; McGuirk, J. J.; Vafidis, C. 1984: Internal flow-field 
measurements in a model can-type gas-turbine combustion 
chamber. In: Laser anemometry in fluid mechanics (ed. Adrian, 
R. J.; Dur~o, D. F. G.; Durst, F.; Mishina, H.; Whitelaw, 
J. H.), pp. 305-317. Lisboa/Portugal: Ladoan 


--- Page 11 ---

354 
La Rue, J. C., Samuelsen, G. S.; Seiler, E. T. 1984: Momentum and 
heat flux in a swirl stabilised combustor. Proc. 20th Int. Symp. 
Combust., The Combustion Institute 
Lefebvre, A. H. 1983: Gas turbine combustion. Washington/DC: 
Hemisphere 
Rhode, D. L.; Lilley, D. G.; McLaughlin, D. K. 1983: Mean flow 
fields in axisymmetric combustor geometries with swirl. AIAA 
J. 21, 593-600 
So, R. M. C.; Ahmed, S. A.; Mongia, H. C. 1985: Jet characteristics 
in confined swirling flows. Exp. Fluids 3, 221-230 
Experiments in Fluids 7 (1989) 
Sturgess, G. J.; Syed, S. A. 1980: Validation studies of turbulence 
and combustion models for aircraft gas turbine combustors. In: 
Proc. Symp. Momentum and Heat Transfer Processes in Recir- 
culating Flows (ed. Launder, B. E.; Humphrey, J. A. C.), pp. 
71-89. ASME Winter Annu. Meet. Chicago/IL, November 
Vu, B. T.; Gouldin, F. C. 1982: Flow measurements in a model swirl 
combustor. AIAA J. 20, 642-651 
Received July 29, 1988 
Technical notes 
A two-spark schlieren system for very-high velocity measurement 
D. Papamoschou 
Graduate Aeronautical Laboratories, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
1 Introduction 
To produce movies of supersonic flows, from which mean- 
ingful information can be extracted, is a non-trivial task. 
In a supersonic wind tunnel, speeds are of the order of 
1,000 m/s and the scale of turbulent structures is typically of 
the order of millimeter. To capture the flow details, exposure 
times of less than 0.1 gs, and framing rates from 1 to 100 las 
are desirable. While high-speed movie cameras with framing 
rates up to 5 million per second are commercially available, 
they are expensive, require an extremely-powerful light 
source, and are inflexible as to adjusting the exposure and 
the framing rate independently. 
A simple and relatively inexpensive optical method to 
record the evolution of very rapid events in high-speed flows 
is described in this paper. It is a two-spark variant of the 
schlieren system. For each shot, two distinct frames are 
produced on the same piece of film, each of very short 
(20 ns) exposure. The timing between the two frames is ad- 
justable and can range anywhere upwards of I gs. The sys- 
tem requires very few additions to an existing schlieren setup 
and contains no moving parts. It has been successfully ap- 
plied to a supersonic shear-layer experiment where velocities 
of turbulent-flow structures were accurately determined. 
2 Description 
The working principle of the system is illustrated on Fig. 1. 
Two slightly-out-of-axis light beams are produced by two 
different spark gaps, each with 20 ns spark duration (Xenon 
Corp., Model 787B). The relative angle of the two beams is 
exaggerated on the drawing: in reality, it is only 0.5 ~ . Near 
their sources, the two beams are brought close together by 
means of a beam splitter, which acts as a beam combiner. 
This was necessary because the physical size of the spark 
gaps did not allow a separation between electrodes smaller 
than 5 cm, while a 1-cm separation was desirable. Thus, 
50% of the light is directed toward the optical system and 
the other 50% is focused on a photodiode connected to a 
digital oscilloscope (Hewlett-Packard Model 54200A). A 
flat mirror directs the two beams to a concave mirror that 
turns them into parallel beams. After passing through the 
test section, the two beams are focused by a second concave 
mirror. Both concave mirrors have 100-cm focal length. At 
about 80 cm downstream of the second concave mirror, 
after the two beams no more overlap but before the focal 
point, a split mirror is placed that steers each beam in a 
different direction. The split mirror is actually made of 
two front-surface flat mirrors that can rotate around each 
other's outer edges. Their relative angle is set such that 
the source images of the two beams coincide. The knife edge 
is inserted at the location of the overlapping source images, 
so it controls the contrast of both beams simultaneously. 
The differential beam steering also has the important 
effect that two distinct images appear on the photographic 
film. Image 1 corresponds to the light beam produced by 
spark 1 and image 2 to that of spark 2. Therefore, by con- 
trolling the time interval between spark firings, one regulates 
the "framing rate". This is done as follows: an Intel 8085 
microprocessor generates two TTL pulses, each on a sepa- 
rate channel, with specified timing between pulses. The 
pulses trigger the high-voltage power supplies (Xenon 
Corp., Model 437B) which in turn activate the sparks. The 
