
--- Page 1 ---

 
GE Global Research 
 ______________________________________________________________ 
 
 Technical Information Series 
 
 
 
 
Combustion Dynamics Diagnostics and 
Mitigation on a Prototype Gas Turbine 
Combustor 
 
 
 
 
 
Bassam Mohammad, Keith McManus and Jeffrey Ruszczyk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2011GRC950, July 2012 
 Public (Class 1) 


--- Page 2 ---

Copyright © 2012. ASME. Used with permission.


--- Page 3 ---

GE Global Research 
Technical Report Abstract Page 
 
Title  
Combustion Dynamics Diagnostics and Mitigation on a Prototype Gas Turbine 
Combustor 
 
Author(s)  
Bassam Mohammad 
 
 
Phone    1 518-387-5472 
 
 
Keith McManus 
 
 
 
  1 518-387-6597 
Jeffrey Ruszczyk 
 
 
 
  1 518-387-6507 
 
 
 
Component 
Emissions & Fuel Flexibility Laboratory, Niskayuna 
 
 Report 
Number 
2011GRC950 
Date 
July 2012 
 
Number  
of Pages 
11 
Class 
Public (Class 1) 
  
Key Words: Dynamics, emissions, gas turbine, acoustics instabilities, mitigation, NOx, CO. 
 
Abstract: Combustion dynamics have detrimental effects on hardware durability as well as 
combustor performance and emissions. This paper presents a detailed study on the impact of 
combustion dynamics on NOx and CO emissions generated from a prototype gas turbine 
combustor operating at a pressure of 180 psia with a pre-heat temperature of 720 F (E-class 
machine operating conditions). Two unstable modes are discussed. The first is an intermittent 
mode that emerges at flame temperatures near 2900°F, resulting in high NOx and CO emissions.  
With increasing fuel flow, NOx and CO emissions continue to increase until the flame 
temperature reaches approximately 3250°F, at which point the second acoustic mode begins to 
dominate.  Operation in this second 750 Hz mode results in significantly reduced NOx and CO 
emissions.  At pressures higher than 180 psia, the intermittent mode intensifies, leading to 
flashback at flame temperatures above 2850°F. In order to mitigate the intermittent mode, a 
second configuration of the combustor included an exit area restriction. The exit area restriction 
eliminated the intermittent mode, resulting in stable operation and low emissions over a 
temperature range of 2700-3200°F. A comparison of the NOx emissions, as function of flame 
temperature, with previous published data for perfectly premixed indicates that, while the low 
amplitude 750 Hz oscillations have little effect, the intermittent mode significantly increases 
emissions.  
 
In the current research a ceramic liner is used while the previous published data was collected 
with a quartz liner. Typically, quartz is avoided due to reductions in effective flame temperature 
by radiation losses.  Experiments showed that NO emissions was not affected by the combustor 
liner type. This agreement between the quartz and ceramic liners data indicates limited effect 
from the radiation heat losses on NOx emissions. 
 
 
Manuscript received July 04, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 4 ---

 
1 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo 2012: Power for Land, Sea and Air 
ASME Turbo Expo 2012 
June 11-15, 2012, Copenhagen, Denmark 
GT2012-68570
COMBUSTION DYNAMICS DIAGNOSTICS AND MITIGATION ON A PROTOTYPE 
GAS TURBINE COMBUSTOR 
 
 
Bassam S. Mohammad, Keith McManus, Jeffrey Ruszczyk   
General Electric Global Research Center 
Niskayuna, NY 12309, USA 
 
 
Ahmed M Elkady, Mark A Mueller 
General Electric Aviation 
Evendale, OH 45215, USA 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Combustion dynamics have detrimental effects on 
hardware durability as well as combustor performance and 
emissions. This paper presents a detailed study on the impact of 
combustion dynamics on NOx and CO emissions generated 
from a prototype gas turbine combustor operating at a pressure 
of 180 psia with a pre-heat temperature of 720 F (E-class 
machine operating conditions). Two unstable modes are 
discussed. The first is an intermittent mode that emerges at 
flame temperatures near 2900°F, resulting in high NOx and CO 
emissions.  With increasing fuel flow, NOx and CO emissions 
continue to increase until the flame temperature reaches 
approximately 3250°F, at which point the second acoustic mode 
begins to dominate.  Operation in this second 750 Hz mode 
results in significantly reduced NOx and CO emissions.  At 
pressures higher than 180 psia, the intermittent mode 
intensifies, leading to flashback at flame temperatures above 
2850°F. In order to mitigate the intermittent mode, a second 
configuration of the combustor included an exit area restriction. 
The exit area restriction eliminated the intermittent mode, 
resulting in stable operation and low emissions over a 
temperature range of 2700-3200°F. A comparison of the NOx 
emissions, as function of flame temperature, with previous 
published data for perfectly premixed indicates that, while the 
low amplitude 750 Hz oscillations have little effect, the 
intermittent mode significantly increases emissions.  
In the current research a ceramic liner is used while the 
previous published data was collected with a quartz liner. 
Typically, quartz is avoided due to reductions in effective flame 
temperature by radiation losses.  Experiments showed that NO 
emissions was not affected by the combustor liner type. This 
agreement between the quartz and ceramic liners data indicates 
limited effect from the radiation heat losses on NOx emissions.  
 
1    INTRODUCTION 
In recent decades, gas turbine combustor development has 
been heavily influenced by increasingly stringent emissions 
requirements. The development of the Dry Low Emissions 
(DLE) and Dry Low NOx (DLN) technologies has coincided 
with a need to mitigate the thermo-acoustic combustion 
instabilities associated with lean premixed combustion. 
Combustion instabilities can result in high amplitude pressure 
oscillations due to coupling between heat release fluctuations 
and system acoustics that are primarily dependent on system 
geometry and boundary conditions. Fundamental understanding 
of these phenomena as well as development of effective 
mitigation strategies is of prime importance to both gas turbine 
manufacturers as well as end users since combustion dynamics 
can have detrimental effects on the hot-section component 
durability and engine operability and emissions.  
Well-controlled, premixed combustion experiments are 
often 
utilized 
to 
evaluate 
emissions 
entitlement 
and 
flammability limits [1-5]. Perfectly premixed combustion 
experiments, in which the fuel and air are mixed upstream of 
the combustor inlet, avoid the complexity and uncertainty in 
mixedness that is present in industrial gas turbine combustion 
systems.  Hence, it allows the isolation of the flame chemistry 
effects and provides the opportunity to validate detailed 
chemical kinetics mechanisms.    Several authors have reported 
the results of perfectly premixed flames at typical gas turbine 


--- Page 5 ---

 
2 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
pressures and temperatures. Elkady et. al. studied the 
production of NOx and CO under perfectly premixed conditions 
in a high-pressure quartz combustor [6]. Their work extended 
the experiments of Leonard and Correa [1] and included the 
effect of residence time. However, in premixed combustion, the 
propensity for combustion acoustics is high, and could have a 
dominant effect on emissions. Combustion dynamics is an area 
of active research [7-11]; a recent review discusses in details 
different instability modes as well as active and passive control 
strategies [12].  
 
This paper presents a study of the effect of combustion 
dynamics on emissions and operability using a prototype gas 
turbine combustor.  Two liners were tested, one with an open 
end with a constant cross-sectional area and a second having an 
area restriction at the exit.. The configuration with a constant 
area cross-section generated high amplitude intermittent 
pressure oscillations which significantly affected emissions and 
operability. The  configuration with an 44% area reduction  
reduced the dynamics significantly and extended the combustor 
operability. The emissions data from both configurations is 
presented and the data is analyzed to provide insight on the 
effect of the dynamics mode on emissions and operability.  
 
The experiments also shed light on the effect of heat losses 
on NOx production. This is done by comparing the results from 
the ceramic liners to the results published recently from a 
quartz liner. 
 
2    NOMENCLATURE 
P3 
= Combustor inlet pressure 
T3 
= Combustor air/Fuel mixture inlet temperature 
TC 
= Thermocouple 
P 
= Pressure 
P/P 
= Percentage pressure drop across Combustor 
NOx 
= Nitric Oxides 
CO 
= Carbon Monoxide 
O2 
= Oxygen 
CO2 
= Carbon dioxide 
H2 
= Hydrogen 
ppmvd 
= Particle per million volume dry 
Tflame  
= Flame temperature based on O2 emissions 
ms 
= millisecond 
ppm/ms  = Particle per million per millisecond 
ft/s 
= Velocity in feet’s/second 
3     EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND TEST CONDITIONS: 
3.1 Experimental facility 
The test setup is very similar to that of Elkady et. al [6]. 
The ASME stamped pressure vessel has a diameter of 16’’ with 
pressure and temperature ratings of 600 psia and 1100°F, 
respectively. Details of the pressure vessel with air, fuel, water 
and exhaust connections are shown in Figure 1. Air is supplied 
through two independent feeds for combustion and cooling 
which are metered separately. High-pressure, preheated 
combustion air is connected to a T-connection where the fuel is 
injected. Prior to entering the combustor, the fuel and air 
mixture passes through a tube bundle, as shown in Figure 2, 
having a length greater than 200 tube diameters to achieve 
condition close to 
perfect 
mixedness. A 
number of 
thermocouples are installed on the tube surface to monitor for 
auto-ignition and flashback. These T/C’s, along with combustor 
inlet temperature (T3) T/C, are connected to an interlock 
system that shuts down the fuel supply if auto ignition or 
flashback occurs (in the tube bundle or at the nozzle inlet). The 
cooling air is directed to the outer side of the combustor to 
balance the pressure across the liner and to cool the metallic 
support sleeve surrounding the liner. The exhaust gases 
emanating from the liner are mixed with the spent cooling air in 
the exhaust plenum where cooling water is injected to reduce 
the exhaust temperatures upstream of a pressure control valve. 
The cooled exhaust gases are directed through the exhaust 
piping and released to the atmosphere. 
The fuel used in this study is a typical pipeline natural gas 
having a methane content of approximately 96%. Preheated 
750°F is utilized to provide both combustion and liner cooling 
air.  The total preheated air mass flow rate ranges between 1-2.4 
lbm/sec depending on the operating conditions. Flame 
temperatures are varied from lean blow-out (LBO) up to 3300 
F. Combustion air is metered using a venturi with an accuracy 
of less than 1%. Fuel is metered using a Coriolis type mass 
flow meter with an accuracy of 0.5%. Both meters were 
calibrated to ensure high measurement accuracy. 
3.2 Ceramic Combustor 
The ceramic combustor assembly is illustrated in Figure 3. 
The assembly comprises an inlet manifold with a conical 
entrance, burner, dome flange, ceramic liner, liner sleeve, 
cooling air sleeve and a mounting plate to assemble the 
combustor to the high pressure vessel. The air fuel mixing tube 
is connected to the conical entrance of the inlet manifold to 
straighten the reactant stream prior to a perforated plate that 
stabilizes the flame in the combustor. Measurements of 
combustor inlet pressure (P3) and inlet temperature (T3) are 
made at the inlet cone.  
Details of the perforated flame stabilizer are shown in 
Figure 4. The stabilizer also serves as a flame arrestor, 
preventing flashback of the flame into the inlet manifold. The 
flame arrestor tubes have a diameter of 0.06 inch while the 
flame stabilizer tubes have a diameter of 0.125’’ arranged in a 
manner similar  to the one used by Leonard et al. [1] and 
Elkady et al. [6]. The perforated plate is made of Inconel 718 
and has 36 holes arranged as shown in Figure 4. The tube 
spacing is ¼’’ with the center hole designed to fit a ¼ inch 
igniter (hydrogen torch).  
The ceramic liner is installed in an Inconel 718 tube by 
shrink fitting the tube to the ceramic liner. The ceramic liner 
has a length of 9 inches and an internal diameter of 1.9 in. The 
liner sleeve is welded to the mounting flange to prevent leakage 
of cooling air into the combustor section. Leakages upstream of 
the flame holder are prevented by welding the inlet manifold to 
the flame holder. .  


--- Page 6 ---

 
3 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
The burner assembly is mounted on the mounting flange 
with five bolts.  A metallic seal is used to prevent cooling air 
from entering the combustor.  
3.3 Emissions Sampling 
Combustion products are sampled using a water-cooled gas 
sampling probe placed on an axial traverse. The sample is then 
transferred to the sample-conditioning unit via heated line 
passing through a heated filter. A stream of the sample is then 
cooled, dried, and sent to a gas sampling system for CO2, O2, 
UHC, and CO measurement. The other stream remains heated 
before entering the NOx analyzer to eliminate loss of NO2 The 
gas sampling unit is calibrated using standard calibration gases. 
The analyzers are spanned prior to tests and then checked 
during and after the experiments to ensure no drift.  A recent 
gauge repeatability and reproducibility analysis (gauge R&R) 
was performed on the NOx analyzer confirming a measurement 
accuracy of +/- 1 ppm of the full range. In this report, NOx 
emissions are corrected and reported to a 15% O2 level by 
volume. 
3.4 Test conditions and data acquisition 
Experiments are conducted at P3 of 180 and 260 psia. The 
combustor residence time is roughly 20 ms. The combustor 
pressure drop ( P/P3) varied from 0.5 to 1.1% depending on 
operating conditions. The stabilizing jet velocity (calculated 
based on preheated air flow) varied in the range of 44-50 ft/s 
depending on the test conditions. 
Real-time data is acquired at a frequency of 1Hz. Reported 
data point represent an average of 10 consecutive data samples. 
Maximum NOx standard deviation is roughly ±0.8ppm (1.9% 
mean value). The reported average P3 and T3 has a typical 
standard deviation of ±1.2 psi and ±4 F respectively.  Flame 
temperatures are calculated using fuel-air ratios based on 
metered air and fuel flows or the O2 and/or CO2 percentages in 
the sampled combustor products.  The latter technique is valid 
when complete combustion occurs; i.e., at flame temperature 
above the LBO limits.  In this study, the flame temperature 
based on O2 and CO2 typically match to within 10-15 degrees.  
In addition, the flame temperature based on metered air and 
fuel matches with the temperature based on O2 emissions 
within 1%. In this paper, reported flame temperatures are 
calculated based on O2 concentrations.  The uncertainty in 
flame temperatures is estimated to be ±40 F. 
 
4     RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
4.1 Effect of Combustion Dynamics on Emissions and 
Operability  
Figures 5 and 6 present time-averaged NOx and CO 
behavior as function of flame temperature. Three regimes of 
combustor operability are observed. The first regime 
corresponds to a stable combustion mode at flame temperatures 
up to 2940°F. The second regime is characterized by a highly 
unstable mode at flame temperatures between 2940-3200°F. 
The third regime is a stable combustion mode characterized by 
low amplitude 750Hz oscillation at flame temperatures higher 
than 3250°F. In the following discussion, the data is discussed 
in a chronological order as fuel flow was increased to raise the 
flame temperature from 2700°F up to 3300°F.  
 The combustor is ignited at 180 psia, preheat temperature 
of 720°F and a flame temperature of about 2700°F. The ignition 
process was very smooth and the NOx emissions were low as 
expected at such low flame temperatures.  As more fuel is 
injected, the NOx increased and CO decreased until a 
temperature of about 2940°F was reached (Figures 5 and 6). An 
example of dynamic pressure amplitudes in this quiet regime is 
shown in Figure 7. It is apparent that the combustion process is 
taking place at a high degree of stability as demonstrated by the 
low amplitude of pressure oscillations. A water cooled camera 
installed in the pressure vessel provided images of the flame 
stability. The image captured in the quiet mode showed 
consistent illumination indicating a steady flame which is in 
agreement with the acoustic signal.  
 In the second regime, an intermittent thermo-acoustic 
instability mode is encountered as shown in Figure 8. This 
mode results in an unsteady flame behavior leading to a 
significant increase in NOx and CO emissions as shown in 
Figures 5 and 6. NOx emissions reached levels 4x those 
measured in the absence of the dynamic instability. At the same 
time, CO emissions increased by 30x..  As the temperature 
exceeds 2900°F, the unstable mode is manifest via unsteady 
illumination due to the flame oscillation. Adding more fuel 
increases the dynamic pressure amplitude of the intermittent 
mode from 3 psi peak-to-peak (p-p) to more than 5 psi p-p as 
shown in Figure 8. Most probably the unsteady flame motion 
creates hot spots generating NOx while simultaneously causing 
intermittent flame extinction causing high CO.   
As the flame temperature exceeds 3200°F, the intermittent 
mode diminishes and a constant low-amplitude 750 Hz 
oscillation prevails. Once the transition occurs, a sharp decrease 
in NOx is observed and CO levels return to equilibrium levels.  
A time trace of the dynamic pressures during transition from 
the intermittent mode to the constant low amplitude mode is 
shown in Figure 9.  
        When the experiment was repeated at higher pressure, it 
was observed that at pressures above 300 psia , flashback 
occurred at flame temperatures lower than the transition to 
stable operation. This change in behavior is primarily due to the 
effect of the combustor operating pressure on the acoustic 
impedance. The results show that the intermittency of 
combustion oscillations changes flame structure, resulting in 
increased levels of NOx and CO. It is also apparent that higher 
operating pressures intensify the amplitude of oscillations.  
4.2 Intermittent Mode Mitigation  
In an attempt to suppress the intermittent mode and extend 
the window of operation, an area restriction at the combustor 
exit was added as shown in Figure 3. Repeating the 
experiments with area restriction eliminated the intermittent 


--- Page 7 ---

 
4 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
mode, resulting in well-behaved NOx and CO data trends as 
seen in Figures 5 and 6, respectively. Compared to unsteady 
operation, NOx emissions are decreased by approximately 
80%. It appears that the exit area restriction reduced the 
communication between the combustor and the exhaust 
plenum. This restricted communication significantly altered the 
acoustic impedance and extended the window of operation 
throughout 2700-3200 F flame temperatures. It is noteworthy 
that with the exit area restriction the combustor operability was 
also extended to pressures higher than 400 psia.  
4.3 Effect of Combustion Dynamics on Emissions and 
Operability (real time data): 
Figure 10 shows the instantaneous NOx and CO emissions 
data collected with Configuration 1 (no area restriction). The 
sample is transferred from the probe to the sampling system in 
roughly 30 seconds. Though the low sampling frequency does 
not allow the sampling system to capture the frequency of 
oscillations, the flame oscillations are manifested in terms of 
oscillations in CO and NOx emissions as shown in Figure 11. 
There are roughly six zones of interest demonstrated on the 
figure.  
Zone one corresponds to the quiet mode. It is apparent that 
no fluctuations in NOx and CO are present under this stable 
combustion mode. NOx climbs slightly as the flame 
temperature is increased. Zone 2 is equivalent to the 
intermittent mode which initiates at flame temperature near 
2900 F. The impact on NOx and CO is enormous as shown in 
Figure 10. Zone 3 corresponds to a flame temperature of around 
3000 F. This zone shows a tremendous increase in NOx while 
CO, on average, decreases slightly.  Co and NOx fluctuations in 
this zone intensify in correspondence to the increase in the 
intermittent mode amplitude of oscillation. In Zone 4, NOx 
fluctuations are suppressed until a sudden drop in NOx and CO 
occurs at a flame temperature of 3250F. The CO equilibrates 
and the flame is steady. In an attempt to reduce the combustor 
head end flame temperature the fuel flow rate was decreased to 
3200 F (Zone 6). This reduction is instantly associated with 
initiation of the intermittent oscillation mode and consequently 
with increased levels of NOx and CO as shown in Figure 10. 
The results discussed in this section show that the 
fluctuations in NOx and CO emissions are good indicators of 
the amplitude of combustion instabilities. Also, the results show 
that approaching the conditions that trigger instabilities from 
higher or lower flame temperature has the same effect on the 
system behavior. The critical conditions that define the thermo-
acoustic instabilities of the system are a property of the system 
and not dependent on the combustor loading sequence. 
4.4 Effect of Radiation Heat Losses on Emissions: 
As mentioned previously, the combustor liner and burner 
under investigation are identical to the quartz liner combustor 
investigated by Leonard and Correa [1] and Elkady et. al [6]. 
Figure 11 shows a comparison of the NOx emissions obtained 
from the current ceramic liner combustor (data collected at 179 
Psia and 720F) to the data presented by Leonard and Correa 
quartz combustor (data collected at 152 Psia and 650F). The 
results are almost identical with slight discrepancy at high 
flame temperature due to a difference in residence time. Figure 
13 shows a comparison of the data collected with the ceramic 
combustor at 258 Psia and 786 F with more recent data 
published by Elkady et. al (quartz liner with emissions data 
collected at 235 Psia and 715 F). Again, excellent agreement is 
noticed between both experiments. 
Based on the agreement of quartz and ceramic liners, it can 
be concluded that the radiation heat losses from the flame has at 
most a small effect on the NOx emissions. It appears that at 
these flame temperatures, radicals are being produced and NOx 
production does not get quenched or slowed by radiation heat 
losses as long as the flame temperature is high enough to avoid 
reaction quenching.  Also, the results show that the low 
amplitude sustained oscillations has no effect on emissions 
since there is excellent agreement between bot data sets. 
5     CONCLUSIONS 
Intermittent mode of oscillations significantly increases NOx 
and CO emissions. It is also function of pressure and it 
intensifies as the combustor operating pressure is increased. In 
cases where combustion oscillations affect emissions, the 
amplitude of emissions fluctuations is directly proportional to 
the amplitude of oscillations. Also, the conditions at which the 
oscillations are generated are shown to be independent of the 
combustor loading sequence, but rather to the system properties 
that get triggered at certain operating conditions. 
This study shows that a 44% restriction in the exit area, 
changed dynamics boundary condition and was sufficient in 
this configuration to suppress the intermittent mode and restrict 
the acoustic communication between the combustor and the 
surrounding geometry. Low amplitude constant oscillations are 
shown to have little/ no effect on the combustor emissions.  
Combustion emissions from ceramic and quartz liners are 
shown to almost identical. This points to limited/no effect of 
radiation heat losses on combustion emissions 
6     REFRENCES 
 
[1] 
G. Leonard and S. Correa, "NOx Formation in 
Premixed High-Pressure Lean Methane Flames," in 
Fossil Fuel Combustion Symposium: 13th Annual 
Energy-Sources 
Technology 
Conference 
and 
Exhibition, New Orleans, USA, 1990, pp. 69-74. 
[2] 
M. R. Johnson, et al., "A Comparison of the 
Flowfields and Emissions of High-Swirl Injectors and 
Low-Swirl Injectors for Lean Premixed Gas Turbines," 
in Proc. Combust. Inst., 2005, pp. 2867-2874. 
[3] 
D. Littlejohn and R. K. Cheng, "Fuel Effects on a 
Low-Swirl Injector for Lean Premixed Gas Turbines," 
in Proc. Combust. Inst., 2007, pp. 3155-3162. 
[4] 
R. K. Cheng, et al., "Laboratory Studies of the Flow 
Field Characteristics of Low-Swirl Injectors for 
Application to Fuel-Flexible Turbines," Journal of 


--- Page 8 ---

 
5 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, vol. 130, 
2008. 
[5] 
D. Littlejohn, et al., "Laboratory Investigations of 
Low-Swirl Injectors Operating with Syngases," 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 
vol. 132, 2010. 
[6] 
A. M. Elkady, et al., "GAS TURBINE EMISSION 
CHARACTERISTICS IN PERFECTLY PREMIXED 
COMBUSTION," in Proceedings of ASME Turbo 
Expo 2011: Power for Land, Sea and Air, Vancouver, 
Canada, 2011. 
[7] 
T. C. Lieuwen and V. Yang, Combustion instabilities in 
gas turbine engines : operational experience, 
fundamental mechanisms and modeling. Reston, VA: 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 
2005. 
[8] 
S. Candel, et al., "Flame dynamics and combustion 
noise: progress and challenges," International Journal 
of Aeroacoustics, vol. 8, pp. 1-56, 2009. 
[9] 
N. Syred, "A review of oscillation mechanisms and the 
role of precessing vortex core (PVC) in swirl 
combustion systems," Progress in Energy and 
Combustion Science, vol. 32, pp. 93-161, 2006. 
[10] 
N. Syred, "Generation and Alleviation of Combustion 
Instabilities in Swirling Flow " in Advanced 
Combustion and Aerothermal Technologies, ed: 
Springer Netherlands, 2007, pp. 3-20. 
[11] 
T. Lieuwen and B. T. Zinn, "The Role of Equivalence 
Ratio Oscillations in Driving Combustion Instabilities 
in Low NOx Gas Turbines," in Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute, 1998, pp. 1809-1816. 
[12] 
Y. Huang and V. Yang, "Dynamics and stability of 
lean-premixed swirl-stabilized combustion," Progress 
in Energy and Combustion Science, vol. 35, pp. 293-
364, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 9 ---

 
6 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Pressure vessel and air/fuel connections. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Air /Fuel mixing tube with surface temperature monitoring. 
 


--- Page 10 ---

 
7 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
 
Figure 3. Ceramic Combustor Assembly. Exit area restriction is shown to the right. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Perforated flame burner. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 11 ---

 
8 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
 
Figure 5. NOx15 emissions vs. flame temperature for both combustor configurations. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. CO emissions vs. flame temperature for both combustor configurations. 


--- Page 12 ---

 
9 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
 
Figure 7. Instability amplitude vs. time (Quite mode). 
 
 
Figure 8. Instability amplitude vs. time (Intermittent mode). 
 
 
Figure 9. Instability amplitude vs. time (transition from intermittent to continuous low amplitude oscillation). 
 


--- Page 13 ---

 
10 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
 
Figure 10. Instantaneous NOx and CO emissions as function of time (Data for Configuration 1). 
 
 
Figure 11. Comparison of NOx emissions from Configuration 2 with Leonard and Correa.


--- Page 14 ---

 
11 
Copyright © 2012 by ASME 
 
Figure 12. Comparison of NOx emissions from Configuration Two with Elkady et. al. 
 
