
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
www.elsevier.com/locate/combustﬂame
Flame characteristics in a novel petal swirl burner
Lingling Zhao ∗, Qiangtai Zhou, Changsui Zhao
School of Energy and Environment, Southeast University, Nanjing 210-096, China
Received 18 November 2007; received in revised form 14 April 2008; accepted 21 April 2008
Available online 27 May 2008
Abstract
A three-dimensional (360◦) body-ﬁtted coordinate mathematical model to simulate pulverized coal particle
combustion in a petal swirl burner (PSB) is ﬁrst set up to analyze the ﬂame stability and its characteristics. The
studies on the ﬂow pattern, the temperature distribution, and the ﬂue gas composition of the ﬂame, the ignition
location, and the combustion efﬁciency of the pulverized coal particle are conducted. The results show that owing
to the special geometric design of the PSB, some of the pulverized coal particles leaving the burner can directly
enter the radial recirculation zone (RRZ) behind the petal ﬂame stabilizer (PFS) and are immediately ignited
and burned in the RRZ, producing a sort of ﬂame that is always on duty behind each petal, which is called the
permanent ﬂame. The ﬂame pattern, which is a combination of the main ﬂame and several permanent ﬂames,
provides a sufﬁcient heat source for reliable ignition and steady combustion even for the low-volatile coal-ﬁring
and turndown capacity operation, and is advantageous to lower NOx emission. Moreover, the mechanisms by
which the special ﬂame pattern of PSB can be existed are analyzed. A PSB test was undertaken in a 210-MW
power plant boiler to investigate the performance of the PSB with ﬁring of low-volatile pulverized coal. The
temperature measurement value along the burner axis is given, in which the temperature distribution and the
ignition location are clearly shown.
© 2008 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Petal swirl burner; Flame stability; Numerical simulation; Flame pattern
1. Introduction
Electric power generation from power plants with
pulverized coal-ﬁred boilers is the major electricity
source in China, and coal consumption for generat-
ing electricity has risen dramatically, with pollutant
emissions being increased rapidly in the past 20 years.
From the viewpoint of continuous and persistent de-
velopment strategy, energy saving and environmental
protection become the ﬁrst important responsibility to
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: zhao_lingling@seu.edu.cn (L. Zhao).
be carried out [1,2]. Therefore, the development of
a combustion system with stable combustion of coal,
high efﬁciency of combustion, and minimum pollu-
tant emissions from the ﬂue gas of the boilers remains
one of the active research issues in the ﬁeld of coal
combustion.
The existing state of coal applications in China
shows that the use of low-volatile coal, such as an-
thracite and semi-anthracite coal (or lean coal), and
low-rank coal (high-ash coal) for boiler fuel in the
power plants is quite common [3,4], but the unsta-
ble combustion problem appears to be a vexing issue,
even though the boiler burner is designed for the com-
bustion of low-volatile or low-rank coals.
0010-2180/$ – see front matter © 2008 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2008.04.012


--- Page 2 ---

278
L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
Swirl burners with opposite-wall arrangement
have been widely put to practical use for coal-ﬁred
boilers in power plants [5–7]. The main disadvantage
of the swirl burners is unstable combustion while low-
volatile coal is burned. For example, the phenomenon
of ﬂame extinction in a PAX-DRB type burner of
a coal-ﬁred boiler with capacity 210 MW in Xinhai
Power Plant occurs frequently as low-volatile coal is
burned. The ﬂame extinction of a swirl burner with a
bluff body stabilizer in a 210-MW boiler of Huang-
dao Power Plant burning low-volatile coal is another
example, which occurs when the boiler load exceeds
even 75–80% of rated capacity. Therefore, ﬂame sta-
bility for the swirl burners is one of the basic factors
to be taken into account in the development of a new
type of swirl burner, and it is necessary to study the
swirl ﬂame pattern and to understand the inﬂuences
on the mechanism of ﬂame pattern formation.
The ﬂame stability of coal combustion depends to
a great extent on whether the ignition of coal particles
is rapid or not. The ignition and combustion of the
coal particles release thermal energy resulting from
rapid chemical reaction, raise the recirculating ﬂue-
gas temperature to a high level, and quickly heat up
the successive coal particles by means of intense mix-
ing with the high-temperature recirculating ﬂue-gas
ﬂow [8,9]. The high-temperature combustion ﬂame is
then sustained.
One way to achieve the rapid ignition of the coal
particles is to create a high-temperature continuous
ﬂame right behind the burner. The stable ﬂame can
provide the thermal energy for the heating and ig-
nition of the coal particles. There are two important
factors that affect the pulverized coal ignition and the
stable combustion for the swirl burners. The establish-
ment of the internal center recirculation zone (CRZ)
creates the opportunity for the high-temperature ﬂue
gas ﬂowing backward from the combustion ﬂame to
form a hot-gas reverse ﬂow and a heat source for the
burner exit. The energy supply level is dependent on
the recirculation zone parameters, such as its width
and length, reverse ﬂow rate, and temperature. The
movement situations of the pulverized coal particles
(the solid phase), including the solid phase concen-
tration and the distribution and trajectory of the coal
particles, will affect the heating rate and the ignition
of the coal particles. If the coal particles leaving the
burner move quickly toward the secondary-air side,
the heating rate decreases, the ignition of the coal
particles will be dramatically delayed, and the ﬂame
extinction even occurs for the burning of low-volatile
coal.
The mechanisms of the ﬂow ﬁeld, the reverse
ﬂow characteristics, and the solid-phase coal parti-
cle movement have been studied by many researchers
[10–12]. The formation of the CRZ, gas-phase ﬂow
ﬁelds, and the solid-phase distribution, concentration,
and trajectory can be aerodynamically simulated [13–
16], providing a convenient method of understanding
the mechanisms of the combustion ﬂame pattern for
a swirl burner [17,18]. In addition, the experiments
are employed to research different coal particle types
of the optical particle concentration to the ﬂame and
these experiments play a role in the current burner de-
signed so that the particle was kept as a dense perfect
mixture; for a detailed description of that mechanism
we refer to the literature [19–22]. The formation of
dense-lean combustion structures is a result that can
always be observed, together with the swirl ﬂame in
highly turbulent combustors. The appearance of these
organized the air-particle ﬂow distribution structure
that was found for nonpremixed combustion systems
and is also independent of the applied ﬂame type (jet,
bluff body, or ring-stabilized ﬂames). However, even
though mostly particles can enter the recirculation,
sometimes the temperature of the recirculating ﬂue
gas at the front of the recirculation zone is not high
to the coal ignition temperature because the long dis-
tance reverses movement and heat and mass transfer.
In the present paper the ﬂow ﬁeld, the particle tra-
jectory, and the ﬂame pattern are described by the
three-dimensional model and observation. The main
purpose of our research work is to create a stable high-
temperature heat source near the burner exit; that is,
there is a stable ﬂame or heat source at the front of the
main recirculation zone, to provide sufﬁcient heat for
igniting the successive pulverized-coal particles. The
key point is to establish a way in which part of the coal
particles from the pulverized coal stream can directly
enter the recirculation zone and the main recircula-
tion zone is not destroyed by the impingement of the
pulverized-coal air stream. Therefore, the rapid igni-
tion of the coal particles can be achieved. In this pa-
per, the ﬂow pattern, the coal particle movement, and
the ﬂame characteristics for a novel swirl burner are
studied, and how to create a high-temperature ﬂame
right at the burner exit and what characteristics the
ﬂame has are also investigated.
2. Experimental burner
In order to research the effects of the ﬂow char-
acteristics on the ignition issue and the ﬂame sta-
bility for the combustion of low-volatile and low-
quantity coal in a swirl burner, according to the prin-
ciples mentioned above, a new-type stabilizer of the
swirl burner (petal ﬂame stabilizer, PFS) is developed
which has received a patent in China. The burner to
which the new type stabilizer is applied is called a
petal swirl burner or PSB for short, and this com-
bustor is illustrated schematically in Fig. 1. The fuel


--- Page 3 ---

L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
279
Fig. 1. Structure of petal swirl burner.
(pulverized coal) stream is introduced through the
annular channel between the primary air nozzle and
the central tube and the combustion air channel con-
sists of the secondary nozzle and the tertiary noz-
zle. The combustion air swirling is maintained by a
tangential-entry swirl generator located upstream of
the burner throat that produced the solid-body rotation
ﬂow in the secondary nozzle. The original stabilizer
is a surface-curved, gradually enlarged, and hollow
cone, which is connected to the central tube (core
tube) outlet end. The burner does not operate well
and is characterized by high unburned carbon and fre-
quent ﬂame extinction when ﬁring low-rank coal. The
hollow cone stabilizer is replaced with a PFS in the
experimental burner to form the PSB. From the back
view the stabilizer appears to be a ﬂower with several
petals. The curved surface of the stabilizer consists
of two parts, a convex surface and a concave surface.
The outermost convex is given the name of the petal
peak, and the innermost concave is called the petal
valley.
The stabilizer is connected to the outlet end of the
core for the swirl burner, which plays the role of a
bluff body with the central air ﬂow (ﬂowing inside
the core tube) being shut down. When the primary-
air coal stream ﬂows through the PSB, a strong cen-
tral recirculation zone is formed behind the stabilizer;
a large amount of high-temperature ﬂue gas will ﬂow
backward to the burner exit to heat up the primary air–
coal stream. The circumferential length of the contact
boundary between the primary-air coal ﬂow and the
high-temperature recirculating ﬂue gas is much larger
than that of the burner, having a common bluff body
or hollow cone. This means that the mixing area of
the coal particles with the high-temperature ﬂue gas
is expanded more. The ﬂow ﬁelds and characteristics
of this type of stabilizer have been analyzed. As will
be seen from the ﬂow ﬁeld of the PFS, there exists a
secondary radial recirculation zone behind each of the
petals besides the central recirculation zone (CRZ).
Therefore, the mixed intensity of the recirculating ﬂue
gas ﬂow with the primary air–coal stream is higher
than that of the common swirl burner. In addition,
moving annularly through the PFS of the burner, the
primary-air coal stream is divided into two parts. The
ﬁrst part ﬂows outward by the outward leading effect
of the outermost convex (petal peak area), and the
second part moves inward and along the ﬂower val-
ley. Some of the coal particles follow the air ﬂow of
the latter part and directly enter the central recircula-
tion zone, in which rapid ignition of the coal particles
occurs because of high temperature and less air (fuel-
rich) conditions.
This special petal swirl burner (Fig. 1) is used in
a semi-anthracite in a 210-MW power station boiler.
A three-dimensional (360◦) body-ﬁtted coordinate
mathematical model is ﬁrst set up to simulate the pul-
verized coal particle combustion for the PSB. The
ﬂow pattern, the temperature distribution, and the ﬂue
gas composition of the ﬂame are calculated. The ig-


--- Page 4 ---

280
L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
Table 1
Most physical and chemical processes of coal combustion
Physical and
chemical process
Sub-model
The selected
model
Gas phase
turbulent and
recirculation
Gas turbulent
model
RNG k–ε model
Pulverized coal
dispersion
Two phase
turbulent
dispersion model
Discrete random
walk model
Devolatilization
model
Two-competing-
model
Coal combustion
model
Char combustion
Kinetics-
diffusion
model
Mixture model
Turbulent
combustion
model
PDF model
nition of the pulverized coal particles and the ﬂame
formation of the PSB are analyzed. The experimental
measurements for the temperature ﬁeld of the PSB in-
stalled in the boiler are taken and compared with the
calculation results.
3. Mathematical model
The governing equations are solved numerically
for the simulation of all processes, such as turbulent
ﬂow, coal combustion, solid particle transportation,
mass transfer, and radiative and convective heat trans-
fer. The main combustion submodels are listed in Ta-
ble 1.
The gas ﬂow is simulated with the Euler assump-
tion, and since the ﬂow is turbulent, the widely used
RNG k–ε model [23,24] is coupled to close the turbu-
lence problem. The coal combustion model comprises
volatile yield, homogeneous combustion, and char
heterogeneous oxidation. The devolatilization rate is
simulated using two competing models [25], which
implies that the rate of production of volatile gases
is deﬁned by two competing process. The homoge-
neous combustion of volatiles released from the par-
ticle is simulated using the mixed burnt model [26].
The instantaneous mass fractions are given in terms
of the instantaneous mixture fraction. The mean mass
fractions of fuel, oxidant, and combustion products
are obtained from the mean and variance of the mix-
ture fraction assuming the probability density func-
tion (PDF) [27,28]. The coal combustion model has
to be combined with a particle transportation calcu-
lation. A Lagrangian approach has been chosen, con-
sidering the inﬂuence of a diluted particle phase on
the ﬂuid ﬂow [29]. The interactions between parti-
Table 2
Composition and heating value for the case study coal
Proximate analysis (as received)
Moisture (%)
7.12
Ash (%)
25.56
Volatile (%)
14.39
Fixed carbon (%)
52.93
Ultimate analysis (as received)
Carbon (%)
58.62
Hydrogen (%)
3.02
Nitrogen (%)
0.97
Oxygen (%)
4.40
Sulphur (%)
0.31
Heating value (as received)
Gross caloriﬁc value (kcal/kg)
5340
cles have been neglected. The thermal radiation in
the furnace is the dominant heat transfer mechanism
due to the presence of a mixture of participative gases
and particles at high temperature. The radiative heat
transfer has been simulated using the discrete transfer
method [13], which solves a transportation equation
for the radiation intensity along the paths between two
boundary walls. The inﬂuence of the particles, also
participating in the radiative heat transfer, is taken ac-
count of using a speciﬁc heat source in the energy
conservation equation.
The calculation coal is a type of semi-anthracite
with volatile 14.39% selected for the experimental
test, whose ultimate and proximate analyses are listed
in Table 2. High-volatile and high-quality coal can be
ignited quickly and combust stably. In order to ana-
lyze the ﬂame stability of PSB, we select this semi-
anthracite coal.
4. Results and discussion
The three-dimensional computational ﬂuid dy-
namic (CFD) models constitute a powerful tool to
deal with the structure–complexity simulation of a
PSB and to investigate the processes taking place
in the boiler, providing a great number of precise
numerical values for velocity, temperature, and con-
centration ﬁelds, irradiation proﬁles, heat transfer dis-
tribution, and pollutant emission. Simulations have
been carried out concerning the predictions of the
ﬂame characteristics for different boiler loads. A com-
plete simulation, including ﬂuid ﬂow, coal combus-
tion, heat transfer, and particle trajectory, has been
performed for each case to analyze the ﬂame charac-
teristics of this type of burner.
4.1. Flame pattern
Predictions of temperature distribution and ﬂame
pattern at 100% boiler load are shown in Figs. 2 and 3.


--- Page 5 ---

L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
281
Fig. 2. Flame pattern of PSB at petal peak plane (K).
Fig. 2 describes the temperature distribution for the
petal peak plane, while Fig. 3 indicates that of the
petal valley plane. These ﬁgures show that the ig-
nition occurs immediately behind the burner nozzle
exit, with a complex ﬂame pattern. With the special
design of the PSB burner, the whole thick ﬂame of
the burner is split up into a thin annular and six (petal
number) separate ﬂames as seen in Fig. 4. The ﬂame
pattern is special, with separate ﬂames at the front of
the recirculation zone immediately behind the petals,
and the main ﬂame extended for meters. These sep-
arate ﬂames are stable and can generate an adequate
heat source to heat up and ignite the coal particles;
therefore, the separate ﬂame is called a “permanent
ﬂame.” The pulverized coal particles entering the fur-
nace through the petal valley area are heated by the
heat source from the permanent ﬂame on both sides
and ignited rapidly. This ﬂame pattern is proﬁtable for
the coal combustion.
Generally, near the petal peak surface, the temper-
ature level is of great beneﬁt to the coal combustion.
When entering the furnace, the rapid ignition of the
coal particle results in a high-ﬂame-temperature re-
gion reaching about 1300–1500 ◦C at the permanent
ﬂame area. The ﬂame at the recirculation boundary
is also in the high-temperature region, and the ﬂame
has a long shape; the whole ﬂame extends to a great
distance. In the axial area of the burner, there is a
lack of oxygen, so the ﬂame temperature is not so
high, roughly about 1000–1300 ◦C. The ﬂame tem-
perature is at the level of 1100–1500 ◦C as a whole.
From the petal valley plane view, we can also see
the existence of the permanent ﬂame close behind the
concave area. The highest temperature of the PSB is
not in the center recirculation zone. For the PSB, the
highest temperature zone is located in two regions.
The ﬁrst high-temperature region is at the permanent
ﬂame as mentioned above, and the second one is in
the boundary area, where the intense mixing between
the pulverized coal–air ﬂow and the high-temperature
recirculated ﬂue gas ﬂow takes place with high trans-
fer rates of heat and mass accompanying it. The ﬂame
in this area extends for meters and is called the main
ﬂame.
Fig. 4 shows the combustion process of the PSB
ﬂame. The ﬁgure is taken at different distances from


--- Page 6 ---

282
L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
Fig. 3. Flame pattern of PSB at petal valley plane (K).
Fig. 4. Flame development process of petal swirl burner (K).
the burner exit: z = 0.5 m, z = 0.6 m, and z = 0.9 m.
It is seen from this ﬁgure, that the front part of the
ﬂame also has the petal shape, and thus, the ﬂame ro-
tates with the swirl secondary ﬂow. Finally, the petal-
shaped ﬂame is combined with the surroundings to
form a round ﬂame as a whole. The lower temper-
ature zone in the ﬁgure is shown with a blue color,
which corresponds to the unignited region of the coal


--- Page 7 ---

L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
283
Fig. 5. Velocity vector ﬁeld of stabilizer at petal peak surface (m/s).
particles and of the secondary air ﬂow. In the radial re-
circulation zone, at the position z = 0.5 m, the ﬂame
temperature is as high as 1300–1500 ◦C; not far be-
hind that position, the temperature is slightly higher.
The high-temperature ﬂame zone extends for meters
at the boundary of the mixing area between the main
ﬂow and the recirculation ﬂue gas ﬂow.
4.2. Formation of the special ﬂame
Why does the PSB form this special ﬂame pattern?
It corresponds with the ﬂow pattern and particle tra-
jectory of this type of burner. Figs. 5 and 6 show the
velocity distribution of the stabilizer, through which
only the primary air ﬂow is introduced into the fur-
nace. It can be seen that a vigorous radial recircula-
tion zone (RRZ) is recognized. The ﬂame pattern of
the PFS is characterized with several sorts of recir-
culation zone. There exist a radial recirculation zone
and a pair of axial recirculation zones behind each
of the petals, besides the central recirculation zone
(CRZ). The radial recirculation zone of the PFS plays
an important role in the ignition of the pulverized
coal particles. When the pulverized coal air stream
ﬂows through the PFS of the burner, part of the coal
particles pass through the petal valley area into the re-
circulation zone. After changing direction and turning
to the radial recirculation zone with outward direction
ﬁrst and downward direction later, this part of the par-
ticles are recirculated in the RRZ. The recirculating
coal particles in the RRZ are situated in conditions of
easy ignition because of high temperature, less excess
air (fuel-rich condition), and more resident time. And
therefore, the particles are heated up quickly, ignited
rapidly, and burned steadily within the RRZ to form a
high-temperature permanent ﬂame, which generates a
heat source to heat up the pulverized coal particles.
The particle trajectory of the PSB of the burner
can also explain the existence of the permanent ﬂame.
Figs. 7a and 7b show the particle trajectories of the
PSB ﬂowing through the petal peak and petal valley
areas, respectively. It is seen that the particle ﬂow-
ing through the petal valley area moves straight ahead
and enters the recirculation zone with a stay of two or
three turns in the RRZ. The particle across the petal
peak area slightly diffuses outward before changing
direction inward, and moves in the RRZ with a quick
turn. This means that parts of the coal particles can di-
rectly or indirectly ﬂow into the RRZ and recirculate
in this region.
The existence of the RRZ, the characterization of
the PSB ﬂame, combined with the ordinary central
recirculation zone, gives vital energies to the bound-
ary between the pulverized coal ﬂow and the high-
temperature recirculating ﬂue gas ﬂow. The heat and
mass transfer between them becomes more intense
because the transfer takes place with not only the


--- Page 8 ---

284
L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
Fig. 6. Radial recirculation zone behind the stabilizer (m/s).
Fig. 7. Particle trajectory of petal swirl burner. The value is residence time (s). (a) is petal peak area; (b) is petal valley area.


--- Page 9 ---

L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
285
Fig. 8. Flame pattern of PSB at 75% rated capacity of boiler (K).
microscopic turbulent ﬂuctuation that occurs at the
boundary shear-layer of the recirculation zone in the
ordinary swirl burners, but also the macroscopic in-
tensive convection and mixing. The exchange rates of
heat and mass transfer between the pulverized coal
particles and the high-temperature recirculating ﬂue
gas at the boundary are enhanced, which accelerates
the ignition and the combustion of pulverized coal
particles. Therefore the second high-temperature re-
gion near the boundary is formed, which is called the
main ﬂame.
It is clear that the PSB has many important fea-
tures, including the formation of a multizone of the
recirculating ﬂue gas and the direct entry of the coal
particles into the recirculation zone. These features
are propitious for the stable combustion that is espe-
cially important with low-volatile and low-rank coals.
The pulverized coal particles entering the recircula-
tion zone are burned under less excess air (fuel-rich)
conditions because of the large quantity of coal par-
ticles that undergo rapid ignition and exhaust oxygen
quickly, which is advantageous to the attenuation of
the NOx emission.
4.3. Flame temperature for low capacity
The temperature ﬁelds of the ﬂame at boiler load
of 75 and 55% of rated capacity, respectively, are
shown in Figs. 8 and 9 for comparison. As can be
seen from Fig. 8 for 75% of rated capacity, the size
of the high-temperature region for the main ﬂame has
decreased, but the temperature level is roughly the
same as in Figs. 2 and 3. For the boiler load of 55%
of rated capacity, the high-temperature region of the
main ﬂame decreases further, and the value of the
highest temperature of the ﬂame decreases somewhat.
The permanent ﬂame is still existent, with a temper-
ature level of 1300–1400 ◦C, even turning down the
boiler load to the value of 55% of rated capacity, as
seen in Fig. 9.
5. The measured data
The furnace measured data used in this paper orig-
inate from an industry experiment carried out in the
Huangdao Power Station 210-MW boiler. There is an


--- Page 10 ---

286
L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
Fig. 9. Flame pattern of PSB at 55% rated capacity of boiler (K).
inspection hole fort each burner on the center of the
core pipe, and through it we can see the ﬂames and
measure the temperature along the center line for dif-
ferent coal and boiler loads.
Observing through the central inspection hole
of the burner, we can see the coal particle stream
ﬂowing, the particles entering the recirculation zone,
the particles changing direction, and the successive
ﬂashes of the coal particles. We ﬁnd that the ﬂame
is not outstandingly bright on the burner axis. This
proves the movement of the coal particle into the
recirculation. The adjustment of the secondary air
bafﬂe does not inﬂuence the stable combustion of
the PFB burner. The results of the industry experi-
mentation indicate that the PSB can stably burn the
semi-anthracite coal with Vdaf = 12–18% in 55–
100% boiler load. Fig. 10a is the experimental data
of the ﬂame temperature for the centerline of the
burner measured from the inspection hole at the cen-
ter of each burner. The solid line in this ﬁgure is
the experimental results for different operation condi-
tions, which shows that the particle can ignite within
200 mm of the burner exit. Fig. 10b shows the nu-
merical simulation data of the centerline at corre-
sponding boiler loads. The comparison of Fig. 10
shows that the ﬂame development tendency, espe-
cially for the coal ignition stage, is fairly similar
between the experiment and the numerical simula-
tion.
6. Conclusions
The design of the structure of the PFB burner has
taken the mixing of the primary air and pulverized
coal ﬂow with the recirculation ﬂue gas carefully into
consideration. The pulverized coal particles can en-
ter the recirculation zone, and then mix rapidly with
the recirculating ﬂue gas because of the great inten-
sity of the macroscopic convection transfer. The per-
manent ﬂames provide a stable and sufﬁcient heat
source for the pulverized coal ignition. This special
ﬂame pattern is proﬁtable for reliable ignition and
burnoff of the low-volatile pulverized coal, for turn-
down capabilities, and for attenuation of the NOx
emission.


--- Page 11 ---

L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
287
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10. Comparison of (a) measured and (b) calculated temperature values along the axis.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Ministry of Education
of the People’s Republic of China (2007 0286093)
and Huangdao Power Plant. The authors express their
gratitude to Huangdao Power Plant for the contribu-
tion to the experimental unit and data.
References
[1] N. Patel, M. Kırta¸s, V. Sankaran, S. Menon, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 31 (2) (2007) 2327–2334.
[2] S. Chaiklangmuang, J.M. Jones, M. Pourkashanian, A.
Williams, Fuel 81 (18) (2002) 2363–2369.
[3] X. Jun, X.X. Sun, S. Hu, D.X. Yu, Fuel Process. Tech-
nol. 68 (2) (2000) 139–151.
[4] X.M. Jiang, C.G. Zheng, C. Yan, D.C. Liu, J.R. Qiu,
J.B. Li, Fuel 81 (6) (2002) 793–797.
[5] D.M. Kang, F.E.C. Culick, A. Ratner, Combust. Flame
151 (3) (2007) 412–425.
[6] T. Tsumura, H. Okazaki, P. Dernjatin, K. Savolainen,
Appl. Energy 74 (3–4) (2003) 415–424.
[7] S. Ishizuka, T. Motodamari, D. Shimokuri, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 31 (1) (2007) 1085–1092.
[8] B.D. Bellows, M.K. Bobba, A. Forte, J.M. Seitzman,
T. Lieuwen, Proc. Combust. Inst. 31 (2) (2007) 3181–
3188.
[9] M.Y. Gu, M.Y. Zhang, W.D. Fan, L. Wang, F. Tian,
Fuel 84 (16) (2005) 2093–2101.
[10] L.X. Zhou, L. Li, R.X. Li, J. Zhang, Powder Tech-
nol. 125 (2–3) (2002) 226–233.
[11] Y.C. Guo, C.K. Chan, Fuel 79 (12) (2000) 1467–1476.
[12] J. Zhang, S. Nieh, Powder Technol. 112 (1–2) (2000)
70–78.
[13] M. Xu, J.L.T. Azevedo, M.G. Carvlho, Fuel 79 (2000)
1611–1619.
[14] R. Kurose, H. Makino, A. Suzuki, Fuel 83 (6) (2004)
693–703.
[15] J.R. Fan, X.D. Zha, K.F. Cen, Fuel 80 (3) (2001) 373–
381.


--- Page 12 ---

288
L. Zhao et al. / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 277–288
[16] A.X. Sengissen, A.V. Giauque, G.S. Staffelbach, M.
Porta, W. Krebs, P. Kaufmann, T.J. Poinsot, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 31 (2) (2007) 1729–1736.
[17] K. Vanoverberghe, E. Van den Bulck, M. Tummers,
Flow Turb. Combust. 73 (1) (2004) 25–47.
[18] Y. Huang, V. Yang, Proc. Combust. Inst. 30 (2) (2005)
1775–1782.
[19] A. Olivani, G. Solero, F. Cozzi, A. Coghe, Exp. Therm.
Fluid Sci. 31 (5) (2007) 427–436.
[20] S.I. Shtork, C.E. Cala, E.C. Fernandes, Exp. Therm.
Fluid Sci. 31 (7) (2007) 779–788.
[21] O. Andrea, S. Giulio, C. Fabio, A. Coghe, Exp. Therm.
Fluid Sci. 31 (5) (2007) 427–436.
[22] J.R. Fan, P. Sun, Y.Q. Zheng, Y.L. Ma, K.F. Cen,
Fuel 78 (1999) 1387–1394.
[23] L.X. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, Fuel 82 (8) (2003)
1001–1007.
[24] A. Frassoldati, S. Frigerio, E. Colombo, F. Inzoli,
T. Faravelli, Chem. Eng. Sci. 60 (11) (2005) 2851–
2869.
[25] T.L. Bris, F. Cadavid, S. Caillat, S. Pietrzyk, J. Blondin,
B. Baudoin, Fuel 86 (14) (2007) 2213–2220.
[26] L. Ma, J.M. Jones, M. Pourkashanian, A. Williams,
Fuel 86 (12–13) (2007) 1959–1965.
[27] L.B. Thomas, C. Francisco, C. Sebastien, S. Pietrzyk,
J. Blondin, B. Baudoin, Fuel 86 (14) (2007) 2213–
2220.
[28] P. Javier, A. Inmaculada, A. Williams, Fuel 86 (15)
(2007) 2283–2290.
[29] G. Gouesbet, A. Berlemont, Prog. Energy Combust.
Sci. 25 (1999) 133–159.
