
--- Page 1 ---

David L. Daggett
Boeing Commercial Airplane Company, Seattle, Washington
Robert C. Hendricks
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Anuja Mahashabde and Ian A. Waitz
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Water Injection—Could it Reduce Airplane
Maintenance Costs and Airport Emissions?
NASA/TM—2007-213652
March 2007
ISABE–2005–1249


--- Page 2 ---

NASA STI Program . . . in Profile
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The
NASA Scientific and Technical Information (STI)
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain
this important role.
The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices
of the Agency Chief Information Officer. It collects,
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI program provides access
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and its
public interface, the NASA Technical Reports Server,
thus providing one of the largest collections of
aeronautical and space science STI in the world.
Results are published in both non-NASA channels and
by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which
includes the following report types:
•
TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of
completed research or a major significant phase
of research that present the results of NASA
programs and include extensive data or theoretical
analysis. Includes compilations of significant
scientific and technical data and information
deemed to be of continuing reference value.
NASA counterpart of peer-reviewed formal
professional papers but has less stringent
limitations on manuscript length and extent of
graphic presentations.
•
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific
and technical findings that are preliminary or
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release
reports, working papers, and bibliographies that
contain minimal annotation. Does not contain
extensive analysis.
•
CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
technical findings by NASA-sponsored
contractors and grantees.
•
CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
papers from scientific and technical
conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA.
•
SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
technical, or historical information from
NASA programs, projects, and missions, often
concerned with subjects having substantial
public interest.
•
TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
language translations of foreign scientific and
technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission.
Specialized services also include creating custom
thesauri, building customized databases, organizing
and publishing research results.
For more information about the NASA STI
program, see the following:
•
Access the NASA STI program home page at
http://www.sti.nasa.gov
•
E-mail your question via the Internet to
help@sti.nasa.gov
•
Fax your question to the NASA STI Help Desk
at 301–621–0134
•
Telephone the NASA STI Help Desk at
301–621–0390
•
Write to:
           NASA Center for AeroSpace Information (CASI)
           7115 Standard Drive
           Hanover, MD 21076–1320


--- Page 3 ---

Water Injection—Could it Reduce Airplane
Maintenance Costs and Airport Emissions?
NASA/TM—2007-213652
March 2007
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Prepared for the
17th International Symposium on Airbreathing Engines (ISABE)
cosponsored by the German National Organizing Committe, DGLR, and MTU AERO Engines GmbH
Munich, Germany, September 4–9, 2005
ISABE–2005–1249
David L. Daggett
Boeing Commercial Airplane Company, Seattle, Washington
Robert C. Hendricks
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Anuja Mahashabde and Ian A. Waitz
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts


--- Page 4 ---

Acknowledgments
The authors and co-authors Chris Snyder and Jeff Berton would like to thank Professor Mark Spearing and Dr. Philippa Reed
from the University of Southampton, UK, for their help and guidance in the turbine life section.
Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information
7115 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076–1320
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22161
Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov
Level of Review: This material has been technically reviewed by technical management.


--- Page 5 ---

NASA/TM—2007-213652 
1
Water Injection—Could it Reduce Airplane Maintenance Costs 
and Airport Emissions? 
 
David L. Daggett 
Boeing Commercial Airplane Company 
Seattle, Washington 98124 
 
Robert C. Hendricks 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Glenn Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 
 
Anuja Mahashabde and Ian A. Waitz 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents results of a study on the feasibility and 
performance impact of using water injection on a Boeing 747–
400 aircraft to reduce NOx emissions during takeoff. For the 
primary PW4062 engine studied, injecting water directly into 
the combustor was the preferred method. Using a 1:1 water-
to-fuel 
injection 
ratio 
is 
estimated 
to 
yield 
an 
80 percent NOx reduction along with a potential reduction in 
smoke during takeoff. This would require 400 gal of 
conditioned water to be used onboard the aircraft during 
takeoff to 3000 ft (914 m) altitude. The engine’s turbine inlet 
temperature would be reduced by over 120 °F (67 K). Engine 
operation at reduced temperatures also holds the potential for 
hot section life improvement. According to the estimates 
obtained from one engine company, up to a 29 percent 
increase in turbine life may be expected. Performance 
penalties include an approximately 750 lb (340 kg) increase in 
aircraft weight that could reduce range by 60 n mi. Carrying 
this additional weight requires about 20 gal more fuel. 
Another challenge of water injection is its increased 
propensity to cause the compressor to stall, or reduce the stall 
margin. Addressing this issue may result in fuel efficiency 
penalties. Also, there are several engine operability issues that 
need to be addressed, along with significant testing and 
certification requirements. The resulting high development 
costs, coupled with engine performance penalties on older 
designs, will make the system unattractive as a retrofit option. 
However, for a newly designed engine and airframe, some of 
these costs and penalties may be reduced. If one considers the 
full potential for the longer lived turbine’s positive impact on 
engine maintenance costs, the system was estimated to have 
potential savings for an operator of a newly designed airplane 
of up to 1.0 percent in operating costs. Therefore, if the engine 
uncertainties can be overcome, water injection could possibly 
become an attractive option to consider for future aircraft in 
reducing takeoff emissions. A number of uncertainties require 
further study and testing in order to validate the potential for 
this technology and develop appropriate systems. A change in 
engine and airplane systems architecture of this type can only 
be made with mature technology.  
Nomenclature 
E 
Young’s modulus [Pa] 
EINOX  Emissions Index for NOx (gm/kg fuel burned) 
fhp 
fluid horsepower 
gpm 
gallons per minute 
HPC 
high-pressure compressor 
LPC 
low-pressure compressor 
Nf 
cycles to failure  
NOx 
nitrogen oxides  
OPR 
overall pressure ratio 
PW 
Pratt & Whitney 
RA 
% reduction in area 
T3 
compressor exit temperature 
T4 
turbine inlet temperature 
TVC 
trapped vortex combustor 
Δ εtotal 
total strain  
εf 
true fracture ductility  
σult 
ultimate tensile strength (Pa) 
Introduction 
Aviation is anticipated to resume growing at about 
5 percent per year. As such, environmental pressures will 
continue to mount and could invoke limits to the growth of 
commercial aviation. Therefore, the aviation community is 
putting more effort towards improving aircraft environmental 
performance. Continued reductions in NOx emissions are an 
important part of the solution.  
Although excellent progress has been made in reducing 
aircraft engine hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions, 
NOx has been difficult to control. A tradeoff exists between 
engine fuel efficiency and NOx emissions. As engine fuel 
efficiency is improved by increasing the overall pressure ratio 
(OPR) of the engine’s compressor, the increased compressor 
 


--- Page 6 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
2
 
 
Figure 1.—NOx emissions are very sensitive to 
temperature (ref. 1). 
 
 
 
Figure 2.—Adding water to the combustor 
reduces the turbine inlet temperature, which 
will reduce NOx emissions and increase 
turbine life. 
 
exit gas temperature (T3) that goes with the higher OPR 
usually 
results 
in 
higher 
specific 
NOx 
emissions 
(fig. 1). 
New low-emission combustors have been developed to 
control the NOx increases that go with higher OPR, more fuel 
efficient engines. However, it is increasingly difficult to 
constrain the specific NOx increase associated with higher 
OPR designs.  
One of the methods used to control NOx emissions in 
industrial gas turbine engines is to inject water directly into 
the combustor. Figure 2 shows modeled results; as the water-
to-fuel injection ratio is increased, the turbine inlet 
temperature (T4) decreases. This reduces NOx emissions and 
may also improve turbine life. 
Water injection has been used for over 60 years in aviation 
for engine cooling, which then enabled an added thrust 
capability. However, during the early years of its use, the side 
benefit of emissions reduction was not considered. 
In the older Boeing 747–100 and 747–200 aircraft that used 
water injection, wing tanks held between 420 and 704 gal of 
demineralized conditioned water for takeoff use. Water 
injection pumps were located at the base of the water tanks in 
the leading edge of the wing root. Several problems surfaced 
with older water injection systems including internal 
corrosion, water freezing, and poor engine water distribution 
that led to engine durability problems. The occasional 
improper use of poor quality water (i.e., tap water) also 
reduced engine life. All of these factors gave water injection a 
poor reputation in the aviation industry. However lessons 
learned from this system, coupled with operating experience 
of industrial engines and good design practices may make 
water injection again worthy of consideration. 
Airplane Water Storage and Distribution 
System 
A Boeing 747–400ER was used as the baseline airplane for 
the study. This model was chosen because of the experience 
available from older water injection systems. In addition, a 
large, newly designed 747-class airplane is also considered for 
the preliminary business trades part of this analysis. 
From a previous feasibility study of long range aircraft 
using water injection (ref. 2), it was determined that the 
system for the 747 would require about 400 gal of water from 
takeoff roll to 3000 ft altitude. After investigating various 
potential locations within the wing, including those areas 
previously used for water tanks and now filled with difficult 
to relocate equipment, the water tank location selected was 
under the cargo floor (fig. 3). As this location is heated, it may 
also help to address the issue of water freezing in the tanks. 
Space for a single tank was unavailable and so multiple 
water tanks were configured to fit between the fuselage 
frames. There are existing wires and hydraulic and pneumatic 
lines running along the centerline of the aircraft through the 
frames. Therefore, the tanks were also split into left and right 
sections. All of the tanks are connected via a manifold and 
each left (port) tank contains a high-pressure pump as shown 
in figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 3.—Tanks under the cargo floor on the Boeing 
747 study airplane contain conditioned water for the 
water injection system. 


--- Page 7 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
3
 
 
Figure 4.—Each of the left water tanks contains a high-
pressure pump and fits into the existing 747 airplane 
design. 
 
Each engine requires a water supply pressure of about 
800 psig with a peak flow rate of 60 gpm. This results in 
28 fhp (21 kW) of energy required to supply water for each of 
the four engines, or 112 fhp (84 kW) in total. Including pump 
and electric motor efficiency losses, the system would then 
require about 200 hp (148 kW) of electrical power, which is 
substantial compared to typical engine electrical power 
offtakes.  
The one-, two-, and four-pump combinations were 
considered, but it was determined that a four-pump 
combination was required in order to reduce the amount of 
electric in-rush current. The four-pump configuration still 
required startup staging and could not be operated if one of 
the main engine generators were inoperative. 
The four-pump configuration may also be easier to control 
as each of the pumps has a separate flow control valve as 
shown in figure 5. 
The major weight item in the system is a 1.25-in. outer 
diameter (OD) water line that runs to each engine (about  
1400 in. long for the inboard and 1900 in. long for the 
outboard engine). It was determined that titanium lines and 
fittings would most likely be used to reduce weight and 
corrosion problems.  
Routing a 1.25 in. OD water supply tube from the aircraft 
wing through the pylon (strut) to the engine could be 
challenging as there are already many tubes and electrical 
lines running through the limited available space. 
To prevent engine deterioration, the airplane must be 
serviced with demineralized water. In order to ensure that the 
ground service staff does not inadvertently refill the tanks 
with tap water, a preliminary design of a refill system was 
performed and a demonstration unit built and tested (ref. 3). 
Specialized refill nozzles and water purity sensors were 
included in a demonstration setup, which would help prevent 
contaminated water from being introduced into the water 
injection system. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.—To control pump motor in-rush current, a four-pump design was chosen for the water injection system. 
 


--- Page 8 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
4
 
 
Figure 6.—Water misting concept would spray atomized 
water in front of the low-pressure compressor. 
Engine Water Injection System 
Compressor Water Misting Scheme 
Two methods of injecting water into the engine were 
considered: (1) misting of the water at the entrance to the 
compressor and (2) directly injecting water into the combustor 
through a dual fuel-water nozzle. The water misting concept 
would spray finely atomized water in front of the low-pressure 
compressor as illustrated in figure 6.  
Water does not readily evaporate into the airstream in a 
uniform way, therefore, the water droplet size needs to be 
sufficiently small in order to avoid being centrifuged to the 
outside of the engine case (fig. 7). Larger droplets can cause 
engine case distortions that must be avoided.  
Another challenge of water misting is its increased 
propensity to cause the compressor to stall or reduce the stall 
margin. An engine performance model of the water misting 
system predicted that the increased water mass flow through 
the compressor would result in an unacceptable 9 percent 
reduction in stall margin for the low-pressure compressor and 
3 percent for the high-pressure compressor. 
While this concept affords the best overall engine 
performance, because of the cooling action of the evaporating 
water (ref. 5), there are several design uncertainties and 
operational risks of using this type of water injection on 
aeroengines.  
Combustor Water Injection Scheme  
Fewer difficulties are estimated for injecting water directly 
into the combustor. Figure 8 shows a new industrial water 
injection concept that sprays a water/fuel mixture directly into 
combustor. This should help to avoid the previous problems 
of poor water distribution that were found on the heritage 747 
aircraft.  
 
 
 
Figure 7.—On the water misting system, the water droplet 
size needs to be small and well distributed to avoid being 
centrifuged to the outside of the engine case (ref. 4). 
 
 
 
Figure 8.—Another concept is to inject water directly into 
the combustor through the fuel nozzle. 
 
One of the disadvantages of this system is that higher fuel 
and water pressures are required during takeoff to move a 
larger volume of liquid through a fuel nozzle that is optimized 
for cruise. This results in higher water and fuel pump weights. 
One way to address the pressure issue may be to inject water 
into the swirl vanes of the fuel nozzle as shown in figure 9.  
Weighing 
the 
design 
challenges 
and 
compressor 
operational issues of the water misting system versus the 
extensive history of combustor water injection in the industrial 
gas turbine industry, it was considered prudent to exclusively 
pursue the combustor water injection methodology for this 
study. Figure 10 shows the strengths of each of the two 
systems. Less development risk and fewer compressor surge 
issues were the primary drivers in selecting the combustor 
water injection system to pursue. Water misting was therefore 
not given further consideration for this study.  
 


--- Page 9 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
5
 
 
Figure 9.—Water could also be injected through the swirl 
vanes to reduce the required water pressure (ref. 6). 
 
 
 
Figure 10.—Combustor water injection method was 
selected over water misting for the study. 
Experimental and CFD Combustor 
Results for a TVC 
Recent studies have been conducted of water injection’s 
effects in a trapped vortex combustor (TVC) at the U.S. Air 
Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 
(ref. 7). This combustor is an experimental design that 
suggests it may offer a highly efficient, compact, stable 
combustor.  
Figure 11 illustrates computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 
modeling of a baseline trapped vortex combustor (top) and a 
 
 
 
Figure 11.—CFD model of a TVC (top) shows that a 1:1 
water-to-fuel injection ratio (bottom) reduces the flame 
temperature. 
 
water-injected TVC (bottom). The difference in the colored 
patterns between the top and bottom illustrations show the 
flame temperature effects of injecting water at a 1:1 water-to-
fuel ratio.  
The water-injected combustor tests showed similar 
temperature reductions as was modeled, had excellent flame 
stability, and exhibited large emissions reductions, with 
absolute reduction values dependent on [Ф, (T,P)inlet]. 
Although this combustor design is an unusual variant, 
Figure 18 will show that water injection again provides about 
an 80 percent NOx reduction for a 1:1 water-to-fuel injection 
ratio, even for usual designs. 
Figure 12 shows photographs of the baseline TVC in the 
top of the illustration and the water-injected TVC in the 
bottom. One can visually ascertain the cooling effects that 
water injection provides, which may also help reduce 
combustor wall radiative heating, by observing the effects on 
flame luminescence. Water injection does not prematurely 
extinguish combustion as evidenced by the blue flame in the 
combustor exit throat on the bottom picture. 
Engine Operations 
Although the laboratory combustor sector tests showed 
predictable results and did not raise any operability issues, the 
effects on the entire engine must be taken into account when 
considering water injection. A water-injected PW4062 engine 
was 
modeled 
using 
proprietary 
engine 
company 
thermodynamic performance codes (ref. 8) to assess the 
potential impacts on engine operability.  
One of the significant drawbacks of water injection is that it 
adversely impacts engine compressor performance. Figure 13 
shows the degradation of compressor surge margin versus the 
 


--- Page 10 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
6
 
 
Figure 12.—Photos provide a clue of the high-
temperature baseline (top) and cooler, water- 
injected combustor (bottom). 
 
 
 
Figure 13.—Combustor water injection resulted in LPC 
and HPC surge margin losses of 0.4 and 1.6 percent, 
respectively. 
 
water injection rate. At a 1:1 water-to-fuel injection ratio, the 
low-pressure compressor (LPC) and high-pressure compressor 
(HPC) surge margins decrease 0.4 and 1.6 percent, 
respectively, due to the increased mass flow of the water and 
resulting mismatch between the compressor and turbine.  
In order to recover these surge margins on the PW4062 
engine, a turbine rematch would be required. This would 
result in a 0.4 percent specific fuel consumption (SFC) penalty 
for a retrofitted engine. 
 
 
Figure 14.—At a constant engine power setting, water 
injection reduces combustor exit temperature 135 °F. 
 
This level of SFC penalty is quite large when considering that 
it would affect the engine during the rest of the engine 
operating life. However, if a new engine were to be designed, 
taking into account that water injection would be an added 
feature, then the SFC penalty could perhaps be avoided.  
The engine model results showed that with a water 
injection system, while keeping a constant thrust level, the 
combustor outlet temperature could be reduced 135 °F, which 
results in a 120 °F decrease in turbine inlet temperature and 
25 °F decrease in EGT (exhaust gas temperature). Figure 14 
shows the combustor exit temperature profile of the engine as 
it operates from aircraft takeoff roll, through climbout, and 
initial climb. The water injection system reduces the peak 
turbine blade metal temperature where it is needed most—
during takeoff and climbout. 
If water misting of the compressor were used, a 410 °F 
reduction in T4 is predicted. However, the overriding 
compressor surge issues precluded further consideration of 
this system in the study. 
Engine Component Life 
The hot section (combustor and turbine) of a gas turbine 
engine generally has a shorter design life than the rest of the 
engine due to the challenging high-temperature operating 
environment (fig. 15).  
The potential life benefit analysis presented here simply 
assumes that turbine life is primarily limited by the 
temperatures experienced by the blades. The dominant 
mechanisms of failure in the turbine are identified as low-
cycle fatigue, creep, and oxidation. Owing to the complexity 
of the interactions between these failure mechanisms and the 
lack of detailed knowledge about the loads and temperatures 
involved, a high-fidelity life model is not feasible. A 
generalized fatigue life analysis using an empirical model is 
presented along with a brief overview of the effects of creep 
and oxidation as found in the literature. (This area would 
require considerably more attention in an actual engine design 
development project.) 


--- Page 11 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
7
 
 
Figure 15.—Hot section design life is often 
shorter than the rest of the engine due to the 
challenging high-temperature environment 
(ref. 16). 
 
Using the Universal Slopes method (ref. 9), a preliminary 
quantitative analysis has been performed for possible fatigue 
life benefits from water injection.  
The Universal Slopes method is a modified version of the 
Coffin-Manson and Basquin equations with experimentally 
obtained coefficients and is given by 
 
 
6.0
6.0
12
.0
5
3
−
−
+
=
Δ
f
f
f
ult
total
N
N
E
.
ε
σ
ε
 
(1) 
 
where, 
(
)
= ln 1+%elongation
f
ε
, or 
1
=ln 1
⎛
⎞
⎜
⎟
−
⎝
⎠
f
RA
ε
 
 
Nickel-base 
superalloys, 
Inconel 
625, 
706, 
and 
Rene 80 were used for this analysis (refs. 10 to 12). The total 
strain was selected such that the respective stress level is 
limited from 40 to 80 percent of the ultimate tensile strength at 
a given temperature level. This corresponds to applying a 
design safety factor of 2.5 to 1.25, respectively. The life 
cycles to failure were acquired from equation (1), varying 
strain levels and material properties with temperature. Life 
ratios were obtained by dividing the cycles to failure at each 
temperature and strain level by the cycles to failure at the 
maximum temperature and strain level. Figure 16 shows the 
results obtained for Inconel 625, Inconel 706 and Rene 80. 
The overall trend noticed in figure 16 is that life benefits 
improve with decreasing temperature. In the case of Inconel 
706, the life ratio curve appears different from those of 
Inconel 625 and Rene 80. The differences in the life estimate 
behaviors of Inconel 706, Inconel 625, and Rene 80 primarily 
arise from variations in material properties and strain levels 
used. Additionally, the range of temperatures used for Inconel 
706 is narrower than those used for the other materials, 
 
 
 
Figure 16.—Inconel 625, Inconel 706, and Rene 80 
total turbine blade life estimate. 
 
which puts limitations on the comparisons possible. It is seen 
that for a 120 °F reduction in the turbine inlet gas and blade 
temperatures, life improves by a factor of approximately 2 for 
Inconel 625, 1.65 for Inconel 706, and about 3.5 for 
Rene 80. As noted from this comparison, an accurate estimate 
for life benefits can only be obtained with a detailed analysis 
using the material properties, temperatures, and load levels 
involved in the specified engine type.  
There will also be differences in the life benefits possible 
based on ambient operating conditions. As seen from 
figure 16, the slope of the fatigue life ratio curve changes 
depending on the temperature range concerned; at higher 
temperatures the life curve slope is steep as compared to lower 
temperatures where the life curve flattens out. This indicates 
that for the same 120 °F metal temperature reduction, it is 
possible for hot operators to encounter higher life benefits as 
compared to cold operators. 
In addition to the limitations arising from the lack of 
detailed data, there are also some notable shortcomings in the 
application of the Universal Slopes method. The coefficients 
used in equation (1) are obtained through isothermal, room 
temperature fatigue tests done on a wide range of materials. 
As shown in the Manson report (ref. 8), these average 
coefficients provide fairly reliable life estimates for the 29 
materials tested with 99.5 percent of the experimental data 
falling within a factor of 20 of the predicted life. However, 
life estimates obtained under thermomechanical fatigue (TMF) 
can vary significantly from those obtained from isothermal 
low-cycle fatigue. Under in-service conditions, turbine blades 
are exposed to widely varying thermomechanical loads, and 
simplified isothermal models do not capture the complexity of 
the situation. The deviation of isothermal results from TMF 
results depends largely on the material properties and the 
nature of the TMF cycle. The primary reason for the use of the 
Universal Slopes method in this analysis was the ease 


--- Page 12 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
8
involved in its use and availability of the necessary material 
data. Despite its shortcomings, this method is an appropriate 
tool for a preliminary design level analysis where the overall 
trends in life behavior are sought.  
In order to provide an estimate for creep and oxidation life 
benefits from water injection, we present some relevant results 
available in the literature. Based on common industry practice 
(ref. 13), approximations for changes in the first stage turbine 
blade life resulting from changes in gas and metal 
temperatures as well as centrifugal stresses are shown in 
table 1. 
 
Table 1.—Turbine blade life estimate variation  
with temperature and stresses 
Variation 
1st blade creep 
fatigue life 
1st blade 
oxidation life 
Local gas temperature  
±18 °F (mean 3140 °F) 
±15% 
±14% 
Metal temperature 
±5 °F (mean 1340 °F) 
±8% 
±8% 
Centrifugal stresses ±1% 
±6% 
------ 
 
It can be noted from Table 1 that blade life estimates are 
sensitive to the gas and metal temperature as well as stress 
levels used in the analysis. The combined effects of 
thermomechanical fatigue, creep, and oxidation are usually 
studied experimentally and then modeled based on the data 
obtained. However, from the first-order analysis presented 
here, it is seen that there may be hot section life benefits 
resulting from water injection. In order to quantify these 
results with more confidence, detailed experimental studies 
replicating the operating conditions under water injection on 
appropriate turbine blade materials are necessary.  
Figure 17 shows some detailed estimates made by engine 
companies using proprietary methods and detailed material 
and design data, of the effects of using a 1:1 water-to-fuel 
injection ratio to achieve a 120 °F reduction in T4. 
For a 747 aircraft operating on a 3000 n mi mission, under 
standard day conditions, with the water injection system used 
 
 
 
Figure 17.—There is agreement that water injection 
will reduce T4 to improve life, but disagreement by 
how much. 
from takeoff roll to 3000 ft altitude, Pratt & Whitney (PW) 
estimated a 29 percent improvement in the turbine service life 
for the PW4062 engine. Rolls-Royce (RR) estimated the 
turbine life could potentially increase up to 20 percent for a 
newly designed engine which is operated in a hot climate. 
However, for cold climate operation with thrust de-rate, there 
could be no savings at all.  
There are a host of uncertainties in predicting the ultimate 
life of a turbine blade itself (refs. 14 to 16). Coupling this with 
the uncertainties in the airplane operating conditions, the 
engine design, the turbine blade material and technology level, 
the engine could experience very little to quite large 
improvements in durability. Laboratory tests and field testing 
would be necessary to quantify the real benefits for a fully 
realized design. 
Emissions  
Aircraft NOx, HC, CO, and smoke are the currently 
regulated engine gaseous emissions. There have been 
numerous tests showing that as water is injected into a gas 
turbine combustor, NOx emissions will decline (refs. 17 to 
19). Figure 18 shows these results along with data from the 
TVC tests (ref. 20) and a test from an engine for a Boeing 777 
aircraft.  
Although there is some scatter in the degree of NOx 
reduction, there are similarities between engines that are old 
or new, industrial or aeroengine, large or small, experimental 
or production combustors, as well as full-scale or laboratory 
sector rigs. Thus, it appears as though water injection would 
reduce NOx emissions on the order of 80 percent when a 1:1 
water-to-fuel ratio is used during takeoff. 
 
 
 
Figure 18.—Tests have shown that a 1:1 water-to-fuel 
injection ratio will reduce NOx emissions some 
80 percent, which is fairly consistent across engine 
types. 


--- Page 13 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
9
 
 
Figure 19.—Tests on a modern aeroengine have shown 
that water injection may reduce smoke emissions. 
 
An 80 percent NOx reduction during a takeoff is estimated 
to save 56 lb (25.5 kg) of emissions for a 747–400 aircraft.  
Other tests (refs. 21 and 22) and more recent tests on a 
modern aeroengine for a Boeing 777 aircraft suggest that 
water injection may also reduce smoke emissions as shown in 
figure 19. 
A further benefit is that water injection is estimated to 
reduce sideline takeoff noise by 0.3 EPNdB partly due to 
reduced jet velocity and partly by decreasing the corrected fan 
speed (N1). This small value may not be measurable in a real 
design, but it is encouraging to see that the trend appears to be 
in the preferred direction. 
Costs 
A water injection system for a newly designed engine and 
airframe was the only scenario result that might make for a 
positive business case. 
In order for the water injection system to be considered for 
use, it must show value to aircraft operators and also make a 
positive business case for the engine and airframe 
manufacturers. 
The original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) will have to 
offset nonrecurring development costs with projected revenue 
in order for the net present value (NPV) of the water injection 
system to be positive.  
Trade studies were conducted for three water injection 
scenarios: a retrofit kit for an in-service 747–400 airplane, a 
production 747 airplane, and a newly designed 747-class 
airplane.  
The retrofit scenario resulted in a very high cost for the 
water injection kit. This is because of very high non-recurring 
costs to develop a system for an engine already in service. 
There would also be high recurring costs to the OEM as this 
system would require that many aircraft engine parts with 
remaining life (e.g., fuel nozzles) be replaced with the water 
injection parts. Lastly, it was estimated that there would be a  
 
 
 
Figure 20.—Water injection system costs are affordable only 
for newly designed airplanes due to lower nonrecurring 
and recurring costs as well as a larger potential market. 
 
limited market for this retrofit kit. Figure 20 shows that such a 
system could cost several million dollars per airplane—an 
unacceptably high cost for airlines operating in a very 
competitive market. 
For a new production airplane, the recurring costs would 
decrease as the engine and airframe would be configured with 
the water injection system when it is built at the factory. This 
reduction, along with being able to spread the nonrecurring 
costs over a larger market, would reduce the sales cost, but it 
would still be quite high. 
The best business case occurs for the OEM and the operator 
for a newly designed engine and airplane. The nonrecurring 
costs decrease rapidly as the water injection system would be 
built, tested, and certified along with the rest of the airplane, 
sharing in these costs. This reduces the sales costs and makes 
for a more attractive technology option for the airline 
operator. 
Cost to the airline to operate the system will be very 
important if water injection is to be successful. Under the best 
circumstances, savings from turbine maintenance may offset 
water injection costs to provide overall total airplane operating 
cost reductions.  
For 
the 
best 
new 
airplane 
production 
scenario, 
figure 21 shows that turbine maintenance and (Swedish) 
emissions-based landing fees savings might offset the costs of 
the water injection system and could conceivably provide up 
to a 1.0 percent reduction in airplane operating costs. When 
removing the emissions-based landing fees, the operator might 
still save on the order of 0.65 percent in operating costs.  
 


--- Page 14 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
10
 
 
Figure 21.—An airplane operator may be able to save 
up to 1.0 percent on overall airplane operating costs 
when emissions-based landing fee savings are 
considered. 
Summary 
In deciding on the preferred method of injecting water into 
the engine, the combustor water injection scheme was chosen 
as the preferred option since there was not a clear path to 
resolve the associated compressor surge issues with water 
misting.  
Engine performance penalties and compressor operational 
challenges are expected if water injection were to be installed 
on existing engines as a retrofit kit. This could possibly be 
ameliorated for a new engine design. 
The water injection system could achieve an 80 percent 
NOx reduction level during takeoff when a 1:1 water-to-fuel 
ratio is used to 3000 ft altitude. This requires 400 gal of 
conditioned water for a 747 airplane. Smoke emissions could 
possibly be reduced by up to four-fold. With a 120 °F 
decrease in turbine inlet temperature, the turbine life of the 
PW4062 engine was estimated by Pratt & Whitney to increase 
up to 29 percent when takeoff thrust is held constant.  
There is approximately a 750 lb weight penalty to carry the 
water injection system components on the 747. When the 
water injection system is chosen to be operated, there would 
be an additional 3340 lb reduction in payload capability to 
account for the 400 gal of carried water. Use of the water 
injection system was considered optional for the purposes of 
this study.  
Nonrecurring engineering, testing, and certification costs 
for water injection are less if the system is designed into a new 
airplane at the start of a program. These costs would escalate 
dramatically if water injection were to be specially designed 
and certified for an existing airplane as a retrofit kit. The 
recurring cost for the water injection system itself is relatively 
minimal. 
Taking into account the water injection system operating 
costs and the engine maintenance savings, an airplane 
operator may save up to 0.65 percent in airplane-related 
operating costs. For operators flying into airports with 
emissions-based charges, the savings could increase.  
The poor reputation of older water injection systems, the 
added airplane weight of the system, and the inconvenience of 
having to fill the aircraft with demineralized water will be 
major negative issues to address. 
Although water injection has been used for many years on 
older commercial aircraft and is currently used on at least one 
military aircraft and many industrial gas turbine engines, it is 
an unproven technology for modern commercial aeroengines. 
Therefore, water injection for commercial aircraft is presently 
considered at a low technology readiness level. 
Recommendation 
It is suggested that future research primarily focus on 
removing the engine design, development, and operational 
uncertainties associated with water injection. Incorporating 
the technology on a new engine demonstrator would be ideal. 
The airframe portion of the water injection system is fairly 
straight forward, but still needs to be included to support any 
prototype system test of engine water injection. Failure modes 
and effects work must be completed for the full system. 
As most NOx is emitted during cruise, it could be useful to 
undertake a study to see if cruise NOx could be reduced by 
optimizing the combustor for this phase of flight while relying 
on water injection to control takeoff NOx. 
References 
1. Lefebvre, Arthur, 1983: Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor 
& Francis. 
2. Daggettt, David, et al., 2004: “Water Misting and 
Injection of Commercial Aircraft Engines to Reduce 
Airport NOx,” NASA/CR—2004-212957. 
3. Bennet, K., Hoff, M., Lang, T., Rushwald, B., Schwartz, 
A., 2005: “Boeing Demineralized Water Delivery 
System,” final report, University of Colorado.  
4. Eames, David, 1998: “Short Haul Civil Tiltrotor 
Contingency Power System Preliminary Design,” NAS3–
97029. 
5. Daggett, David, et al., 2004: “Water Injection: Disruptive 
Technology 
to 
Reduce 
Airplane 
Emissions 
and 
Maintenance Costs,” SAE paper 2004–01–3108.  
6. “The Jet Engine,” 1986: Rolls-Royce plc. 
7. Discussions with AFRL/PRTC personnel, Air Force Aero 
Propulsion Laboratory, 2004: Wright-Patterson Air Force 
Base, Ohio. 


--- Page 15 ---

 
NASA/TM—2007-213652 
11
8. Becker, Arthur, et al., 2005: “Engine Company 
Evaluation of Feasibility of Aircraft Retrofit: Water 
Injected 
Turbomachines,” 
NASA 
Order 
Number 
NNC04QB58P.  
9. Manson, S.S., 1964: “Fatigue: A Complex Subject—
Some Simple Approximations,” The William M. Murray 
Lecture, Presented at 1964 SESA Meeting, Cleveland, 
OH. 
10. High 
Temp 
Metals 
Inc., 
Technical 
library, 
<http://www.hightempmetals.com/technicaldata.php> 
11. Military 
Handbook—MIL–HDBK–5H: 
Metallic 
Materials and Elements for Aerospace Vehicle Structures, 
2003 U.S. Department of Defense. 
12. Klopp, W.D., 1984: Nonferrous Alloys, Aerospace 
Structural Metals Handbook, Code 4214, pp 1–18. 
13. Zupnik, T.F., 1979: “Hot Section Technology,” Pratt 
Whitney, GTL Lecture Series—MIT. 
14. Zaretsky, 
E.V., 
2002: 
“Weibull-Based 
Design 
Methodology for Rotating Aircraft Engine Structures,” 
NASA/TM—2002-211348. 
15. Dennis, A.J. and Cruse, T.A., 1979: “Cost Benefits from 
Improved Hot Section Life Prediction Technology,” 
AIAA–79–1154. 
16. Halila, E.E., Lenahan, D.T., and Thomas, T.T., 1982: 
“High Pressure Turbine Test Hardware Detailed Design 
Report,” NASA CR–167955. 
17. Bahr, D.W., 1973: “Technology for the Reduction of 
Aircraft Turbine engine Exhaust Emissions,” Paper 29, 
Atmospheric Pollution by Aircraft Engines, AGARD CP–
125, Advisory Group for Aerospace Research & 
Development. 
18. Hung, W.S.Y., 1974: “Accurate Method of Predicting the 
Effect of Humidity or Injected Water on NOx Emissions 
from Industrial Gas Turbines,” ASME Publication 74–
WA/GT–6.  
19. Mongia, H.C., and Hoover, J.A., 1992: “In-situ Industrial 
Gas Turbine Combustion Control Technology for Ultra-
Low Emissions,” ASME paper IGTI-Vol. 7, ASME 
Cogen-Turbo, Book No. 100333.  
20. Hendricks, R.C., Shouse, D. and Roquemore, M., 2004: 
“Water Injected Turbomachinery,” The 10th International 
Symposium on Transport Phenomena and Dynamics of 
Rotating Machinery. 
21. Marchionna, N.R., et al., 1973: “The Effect of Water 
Injection on Nitric Oxide Emissions of a Gas Turbine 
Combustor Burning ASTM Jet-A fuel,” NASA Technical 
Memorandum, TM X–2958. 
22. Lefebvre, A.H. and Durrent. T., 1960: “Design 
Characteristics Affecting Gas Turbine Combustion 
Performance,” SAE Preprint 240C, also Esso Air World, 
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 64–69. 


--- Page 16 ---

This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 301–621–0390.
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE
2. REPORT DATE
19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
 OF ABSTRACT
18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
 OF THIS PAGE
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.  Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA  22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC  20503.
NSN 7540-01-280-5500
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18
298-102
Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188
12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE
8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
 REPORT NUMBER
5. FUNDING NUMBERS
3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE
6. AUTHOR(S)
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)
14. SUBJECT TERMS
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
 OF REPORT
16. PRICE CODE
15. NUMBER OF PAGES
20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT
Unclassified
Unclassified
Technical Memorandum
Unclassified
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field
Cleveland, Ohio  44135–3191
1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)
10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
 AGENCY REPORT NUMBER
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC  20546–0001
Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov
March 2007
NASA TM—2007-213652
ISABE–2005–1249
E–15141
WBS 2250000013
17
Water Injection—Could it Reduce Airplane Maintenance Costs and
Airport Emissions?
David L. Daggett, Robert C. Hendricks, Anuja Mahashabde, and Ian A. Waitz
Aircraft; Economics; Engines; Emissions; Water injection
Unclassified -Unlimited
Subject Categories: 07, 26, 27, 37, and 45
Prepared for the 17th International Symposium on Airbreathing Engines (ISABE) cosponsored by the German National Organizing
Committee, DGLR, and MTU Aero Engines GmbH, Munich, Germany, September 4–9, 2005. David L. Daggett, P.O. Box 3707,
Boeing Commercial Airplane Company, Seattle, Washington 98124; Robert C. Hendricks, NASA Glenn Research Center;
Anuja Mahashabde and Ian A. Waitz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139.
Responsible person, Robert C. Hendricks, organization code R, 216–977–7507.
This paper presents results of a study on the feasibility and performance impact of using water injection on a Boeing 747–400 aircraft to reduce NOx
emissions during takeoff. For the primary PW4062 engine studied, injecting water directly into the combustor was the preferred method. Using a 1:1
water-to-fuel injection ratio is estimated to yield an 80 percent NOx reduction along with a potential reduction in smoke during takeoff. This would
require 400 gal of conditioned water to be used onboard the aircraft during takeoff to 3000 ft (914 m) altitude. The engine’s turbine inlet temperature
would be reduced by over 120 °F (67 K). Engine operation at reduced temperatures also holds the potential for hot section life improvement.
According to the estimates obtained from one engine company, up to a 29 percent increase in turbine life may be expected. Performance penalties
include an approximately 750 lb (340 kg) increase in aircraft weight that could reduce range by 60 n mi. Carrying this additional weight requires
about 20 gal more fuel. Another challenge of water injection is its increased propensity to cause the compressor to stall, or reduce the stall margin.
Addressing this issue may result in fuel efficiency penalties. Also, there are several engine operability issues that need to be addressed, along with
significant testing and certification requirements. The resulting high development costs, coupled with engine performance penalties on older designs,
will make the system unattractive as a retrofit option. However, for a newly designed engine and airframe, some of these costs and penalties may be
reduced. If one considers the full potential for the longer lived turbine’s positive impact on engine maintenance costs, the system was estimated to
have potential savings for an operator of a newly designed airplane of up to 1.0 percent in operating costs. Therefore, if the engine uncertainties can
be overcome, water injection could possibly become an attractive option to consider for future aircraft in reducing takeoff emissions. A number of
uncertainties require further study and testing in order to validate the potential for this technology and develop appropriate systems. A change in
engine and airplane systems architecture of this type can only be made with mature technology.


--- Page 17 ---



--- Page 18 ---

