
--- Page 1 ---

Shi Liu
Electric Power Research Institute of Guangdong
Power Grid Corporation,
Guangzhou 510080, Guangdong Province, China
Hong Yin
Electric Power Research Institute
of Guangdong Power Grid Corporation,
Guangzhou 510080, Guangdong Province, China
Yan Xiong
Energy and Power Research Center of Chinese
Academy of Sciences,
Lianyungang 222069, Jiangsu Province, China
e-mail: dennis198738@163.com
Xiaoqing Xiao
Electric Power Research Institute of Guangdong
Power Grid Corporation,
Guangzhou 510080, Guangdong Province, China
A Comparative Analysis of
Single Nozzle and Multiple
Nozzles Arrangements for
Syngas Combustion in Heavy
Duty Gas Turbine
Heavy duty gas turbines are the core components in the integrated gasiﬁcation combined
cycle (IGCC) system. Different from the conventional fuel for gas turbine such as natural
gas and light diesel, the combustible component acquired from the IGCC system is
hydrogen-rich syngas fuel. It is important to modify the original gas turbine combustor
or redesign a new combustor for syngas application since the fuel properties are featured
with the wide range hydrogen and carbon monoxide mixture. First, one heavy duty gas
turbine combustor which adopts natural gas and light diesel was selected as the original
type. The redesign work mainly focused on the combustor head and nozzle arrangements.
This paper investigated two feasible combustor arrangements for the syngas utilization
including single nozzle and multiple nozzles. Numerical simulations are conducted to
compare the ﬂow ﬁeld, temperature ﬁeld, composition distributions, and overall perform-
ance of the two schemes. The obtained results show that the ﬂow structure of the multiple
nozzles scheme is better and the temperature distribution inside the combustor is more
uniform, and the total pressure recovery is higher than the single nozzle scheme. Through
the full scale test rig veriﬁcation, the combustor redesign with multiple nozzles scheme is
acceptable under middle and high pressure combustion test conditions. Besides, the
numerical computations generally match with the experimental results.
[DOI: 10.1115/1.4034232]
Keywords: gas turbine, combustion, syngas fuel, single nozzle, multiple nozzles
Introduction
As the concerns of fossil fuel emission and issue of environ-
mental protection increase, the requirement for cleaner and more
efﬁcient energy utilization is of signiﬁcant importance. The IGCC
system application could provide a clean and efﬁcient pathway for
coal resources which is abundant in China. Besides, other resour-
ces such as biogas and industrial furnace gas could also be subsid-
iary energy provision for the whole power system.
Heavy duty gas turbine has been commercially successful
energy and power technology for many decades. It is a good
choice for gas utilization with the characteristics of low pollution,
high efﬁciency, and high reliability. However, the syngas from the
IGCC system and other industrial process is mainly hydrogen-rich
gas with low caloriﬁc value. Therefore, the operation strategy of
the existing gas turbine system and the combustor should be modi-
ﬁed or redesigned in order to adopt syngas fuel. It is becoming a
hot issue with continuous effort from the research and industrial
ﬁeld since the last decade [1,2], which includes the blended com-
bustion of hydrogen and methane, syngas fuel with hydrogen and
carbon monoxide. Most research focuses on the combustion per-
formance with some literature focusing on the reaction kinetics
and combustion dynamics [3,4]. Several original equipment man-
ufacturers (OEMs) have designed and tested the advanced gas tur-
bine combustor for both natural gas and unconventional fuel
application [5–8]. Based on the accumulated experience, the com-
bustor for syngas use is still under development and optimization
[9,10] especially for heavy duty gas turbine.
With the rapid development of computer resources and numeri-
cal methods, computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFDs) simulation has
become an essential procedure in the combustor design/redesign
process [11–13]. Previous numerical researches are mainly
focused on the model combustor, small prototype or even concept
combustor design with chemical kinetics investigation [14–18].
Besides, the emissions can also be modeled and predicted by
numerical methods for industrial practice [19]. In order to develop
combustor technology for syngas utilization, this paper presents a
CFD investigation of syngas/air mixture reaction in a heavy duty
gas turbine combustor which is originally operated with natural
gas and light diesel as fuel.
In this paper, a full scale heavy duty combustor was modeled
and analyzed by commercial CFD software FLUENT. Two combus-
tor head arrangements with single nozzle and multiple nozzles
were conceived and proposed for syngas combustion. In order to
reduce the computation cost and improve efﬁciency, only the 1/5
or 1/4 (72 or 90 deg of the full annulus) of the combustion cham-
ber is simulated for the two redesign schemes. The modeling
includes realizable k–e turbulence model and steady ﬂamelet com-
bustion model. Probability density function (PDF) is adopted to
consider the turbulence and combustion interaction.
As known, the low caloriﬁc value of natural gas is about 36 MJ/
Nm3 while the syngas is only about 6–10 MJ/Nm3. The huge dif-
ference in the fuel property indicates that it is difﬁcult to evaluate
the loss and gain during the redesign process. Not only the com-
bustor should be redesigned, but also the operating point of tur-
bine and compressor should be adjusted or even redesigned. For
this case, the whole system performance was traded off to accom-
modate the fuel change. While for this research, the focus is
mainly on the selection of different schemes. This investigation
focuses on the combustor internal reacting ﬂow ﬁeld, temperature
Contributed by the Advanced Energy Systems Division of ASME for publication
in the JOURNAL OF ENERGY RESOURCES TECHNOLOGY. Manuscript received May 11,
2016; ﬁnal manuscript received June 30, 2016; published online August 17, 2016.
Assoc. Editor: Mohamed A. Habib.
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
MARCH 2017, Vol. 139 / 022004-1
Copyright V
C 2017 by ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/139/2/022004/6149620/jert_139_02_022004.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 2 ---

distribution, and the overall
combustion performance. The
obtained numerical results could provide strong support for design
consideration and experimental preparation.
Combustor Geometry Description and Nozzle
Arrangements
The prototype combustor of this research is selected from one
typical type heavy duty gas turbine [20], which is applied for natu-
ral gas and light diesel oil. The chosen combustor refers to a
reversal can combustor type. In the gas turbine unit, the can com-
bustors are connected by the crossﬁre tubes and arranged uni-
formly in the circumferential direction around the rotor axis. The
original can combustor geometry is shown in Fig. 1. Every com-
bustor has one cylindrical combustor liner inserted in the liner
bushing forming an annular guiding ﬂow channel. The com-
pressed air will ﬂow through the diffuser, cooling holes/dilution
holes/secondary holes/primary holes on the combustor liner, and
combustor head inlet. The internal volume of the combustor can
be separated into primary zone, secondary zone, and the dilution
zone. The fuel and air are mixed and ignited in the primary reac-
tion zone ﬁrst with some air supplemented in the secondary zone.
Then the combustion hot gas is diluted and temperature distribu-
tion altered. A complex three-dimensional shape pipe denoted as
transition piece will guide the hot gas into turbine components.
Usually, the traverse shape of the transition piece changes gradu-
ally from circular shape to sector shape. As shown in Fig. 2, the
combustor liner and the combustor head with multiple nozzle
arrangements are assembled as illustrations without the casing and
bushing covering.
The shape and size of the combustor casing, the size of combus-
tor liner and transition piece are kept as the original design for
natural gas application. To accommodate the syngas utilization,
the combustor head and nozzle are redesigned. The ﬁlm cooling
holes arrays are kept the same, while the location and size of the
primary, secondary, and dilution holes are modiﬁed in order to
adjust the combustion performance.
The total areas of the primary holes, secondary holes, and dilu-
tion holes on the combustor liner are the same for both the single
and multiple nozzles schemes. However, the total number of the
three kind holes for single nozzle arrangement is 4/5 of that in
multiple arrangements. In the multiple nozzle arrangement, there
are ﬁve swirl nozzles on the outer ring of the combustor. To keep
the design symmetrical, the holes numbers are multipliers of ﬁve.
Besides, the ﬁlm cooling holes design of the single nozzle
arrangement is the same as multiple nozzles arrangement.
Taking the multiple nozzles arrangement combustor for illustra-
tion, there are two rows of primary holes with ten primary holes
for each row. The ﬁrst row of primary holes is designed with the
diameter of 17.9 mm, while the holes diameter of the second row
13.4 mm. After the primary holes rows, the secondary holes row
for subsidiary combustion includes ﬁve holes, with the holes
diameter of 11.2 mm. The last row of dilution includes ﬁve holes
in this case with the holes diameter 39.8 mm. When considering
the circumferential location, the secondary holes and the dilution
holes keep the same which means on the same axial line. The pri-
mary holes show 18 deg stagger relative to the secondary holes as
shown in Fig. 2. There are 16 rows of cooling holes designed to
cross the whole combustor liner to provide enough cooling. The
number of cooling holes in each row changes from 32 to 230. In
addition, the maximum diameter of the cooling hole is 6.3 mm,
while the minimum is only 1.4 mm.
Limited modiﬁcations can be conducted to redesign or retroﬁt
the combustor head, mainly the nozzle arrangements. To be more
speciﬁc, the air and fuel swirlers, fuel injection locations, and
cover cones should be deliberately validated to burn the low calo-
riﬁc syngas while maintaining the combustor outlet temperature.
In order to adopt syngas fuel, two combustor design schemes were
proposed including the single nozzle arrangement and multiple
nozzle arrangements. The most notable difference between the
two schemes is the combustor head and nozzle structure.
The detailed structure of the single nozzle combustor head is
shown in Fig. 3. The nozzle is designed with one syngas passage
and one central oil passage. In the current simulation, the oil noz-
zle is not considered. The syngas is injected into the reaction zone
through several inclined holes which helps generate swirling syn-
gas ﬂow. The air swirler is equipped with several inlet-holes and
swirl vanes which forms rotating air ﬂow passages. The air and
syngas would mix and react downstream of the nozzle. Since the
heat load of the combustor head is relatively high, the cooling air
is guided into the ﬂat cover plate and then through the cooling
holes on the cover cones.
The multiple nozzles combustor consists of ﬁve syngas nozzle
circumferentially around the central axis and one oil nozzle in the
center. Every syngas nozzle is independent and composed of outer
air swirler and inner syngas swirler. The central nozzle oil injec-
tion is only for the ignition and start-up process while the central
nozzle air swirler is always in service. Therefore, for this investi-
gation, the oil injection is neglected while the central air swirler is
modeled in the simulation. The combustor head structure for mul-
tiple nozzles arrangement is displayed in Fig. 4. Impingement
cooling is adopted for the cooling design of the combustor head.
Numerical Modeling and Validation of Combustor
Numerical Modeling Methods. Taking into account that the
combustor chamber (without the transition piece) structure is axis-
symmetrical, only the 1/5 or 1/4 (72 or 90 deg of the full annulus)
Fig. 1
Original combustor model structure
022004-2 / Vol. 139, MARCH 2017
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/139/2/022004/6149620/jert_139_02_022004.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 3 ---

of the combustion chamber is modeled in order to improve the
computational efﬁciency. The model revision and the mesh gener-
ation are conducted in the software GAMBIT. As introduced previ-
ously, there are 16 rows of cooling holes on the combustor liner,
with the holes diameter ranging from 1.4 mm to 6.3 mm. In the
simulation, the cooling holes are simpliﬁed as cooling slots, with
the total area equal to that of cooling injection holes [21].The
inﬂuence of the crossﬁre tubes on the combustor ﬂow ﬁeld is not
considered in the computation. For the mesh independence check,
two mesh schemes with 6  106 and 10  106 elements of mixed
type were generated, respectively. In Fig. 5, the combustor liner
and the cooling slots mesh on the periodic surface are given.
Besides, the air and syngas swirler mesh is also displayed with
tangential direction inlet.
For the reacting ﬂow ﬁeld simulation, the viscous N–S equa-
tions were solved and the results obtained. Since there exists
strong swirling ﬂow at the locations of the air swirler outlet and
syngas fuel swirler outlet, the realizable k–e turbulence model was
selected [22]. For the wall region turbulence treatment, the stand-
ard wall function is chosen. The realizable k–e model has been
shown to provide more accurate prediction of high Reynolds num-
ber turbulent ﬂows compared to the standard k–e model which is
also validated in Ref. [23]. Besides, the realizable k–e model
incorporates the factors of swirl and curvature which is more
adaptable for the current simulation
@ qk
ð
Þ
@t
þ @ qkui
ð
Þ
@xi
¼ @
@xj
l þ lt
rk

 @k
@xj
"
#
þ Gk þ Gb  qe  YM þ Sk
(1)
@ qe
ð
Þ
@t
þ @ qeui
ð
Þ
@xi
¼ @
@xj
l þ lt
re

 @e
@xj
"
#
þ C1e
þ e
k Gk þ C3e þ Gb
ð
Þ  C2e q e2
k þ Se
(2)
The combustion simulation was carried out using the steady
ﬂamelet combustion model. In steady ﬂamelet combustion mod-
els, the variables such as temperature, density and species are
speciﬁed by two parameters, the mixture fraction and scalar dissi-
pation rate. The ﬂamelet combustion model is suitable for diffu-
sion combustion as introduced in the classic literature [24]. In the
ﬂamelet generation process, the opposing diffusion ﬂame equa-
tions are transformed from physical space to mixture fraction
space, with the scalar dissipation be modeled in the meantime
 qvZ
Lei
d2Yi
dZ2 ¼ _xi
(3)
qvZ
d2T
dZ2 þ 1
Cp
dCp
dZ þ
X
N
i¼1
Cpi
Lei
dYi
dZ
 
!
dT
dZ qvZ ¼ 1
Cp
X
N
i¼1
hi _xi
(4)
The detailed chemical reaction mechanism developed by Drake
and Blint [25] is adopted which includes 22 species and is vali-
dated with the CO/H2/N2 fuel diffusion ﬂame experimentin CO/
H2/N2 laminar opposed-ﬂow diffusion ﬂames CO/H2/N2 laminar
opposed-ﬂow diffusion ﬂames. Therefore, the mechanism is suita-
ble for the simulation is considered in the current case. Through
the calculation, the distribution of a variety of species can be
obtained, such as H2, CO, CO2, NO, OH, etc. The probability den-
sity function (PDF) model is conducted to consider the interaction
between turbulence and combustion. Radiative heat transfer was
Fig. 2
Three-dimensional illustration of the combustor liner and the combustor head
scheme
Fig. 3
Single nozzle combustor head structure
Fig. 4
Multiple nozzles combustor head structure
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
MARCH 2017, Vol. 139 / 022004-3
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/139/2/022004/6149620/jert_139_02_022004.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 4 ---

considered by using discrete ordinate radiation model. For the dis-
cretization and equation solving, the second-order upwind scheme
and the SIMPLE method were selected to implement the
calculation.
The external and internal sides of the combustor liner are
directly connected by primary holes, secondary holes, dilution
holes,, etc. Reversal ﬂow supply from the compressor is set up
from the downstream part. Boundary conditions include the air
inlet mass ﬂow rate, fuel inlet mass ﬂow rate, periodic boundary,
and combustor pressure outlet. The two sides of the sector as
shown in Fig. 6 are periodic boundary. The outer wall is consid-
ered as adiabatic and the combustor liner wall is set as conjugate
wall which allows for heat conduction.
The speciﬁed boundary conditions for the conversion of a sin-
gle combustion chamber are as follows: air inlet mass ﬂow rate is
given as 13.63 kg/s and the inlet temperature is 355 C. The pres-
sure outlet is set up as 12.3 atm. For the syngas fuel, the inlet mass
ﬂow rate is given as 1.22 kg/s with the inlet temperature140 C.
The volume fraction of the syngas is shown in Table 1. The low
caloriﬁc value of the syngas is 10 MJ/Nm3.
Numerical Validation
Numerical method validation for the combustion simulation
had been completed before the redesigned combustor was investi-
gated. Reference [26] provides a full test data for a can combustor
which adopts diffusion combustion. Therefore, the validation for
the numerical method can be conducted ﬁrst.
The combustor model for validation is displayed in Fig. 7 with
the combustor length of 395 mm and the inner diameter of
125 mm. The combustor head is conical shape cover with air inlet
holes on the wall [26].The inner diameter of the conical cover
smaller end is about 25.4 mm, with the height of 28.6 mm. The
ﬂow paths of the air ﬂow include six rows of air inlet holes on the
conical cover, primary and dilution holes. Besides, several rows
of ﬁlm cooling holes are also considered. The fuel nozzle is
located in the center with the diameter of about 7.67 mm. The fuel
injection direction is vertical to the conical end. In the computa-
tion, 1/6 sector of the total cylinder is adopted to simulate the
combustion. The domain covers the circumferential angle from
30 to 30 deg. The 30 and 30 deg planes denote the two
periodic boundary planes, while the 0 deg plane denotes the cen-
tral axial plane which cuts through the conical cover inlet holes,
primary holes, and dilution holes. The axial ﬂow direction is des-
ignating the z coordinate direction. All the numerical modeling
methods have been mentioned above and the boundary types are
also given in the ﬁgure.
The validation simulation results were compared to the experi-
mental test data in detail. As shown in Fig. 8, the axial velocity
distributions at different axial locations were presented. The com-
putation result is not ideally in good agreement with the experi-
mental data however the general trend matches as shown in
Fig. 8. The adopted technique in the literature is contact measure-
ment which has disturbances on the ﬂow ﬁeld. Therefore, the
measured velocity is also with some error especially in the place
near the wall. Besides, the experimental test is divided into up and
down parts. Although the measured two locations are symmetri-
cal, the realistic measured data are not fully symmetrical while
the computations are.
Based on the research group’s work and accumulated knowl-
edge, the numerical computations can predict the ﬂow structure
qualitatively right as shown in Fig. 9. Besides, the averaged outlet
Fig. 5
Mesh generation for the combustor simulation
Fig. 6
Boundary conditions type speciﬁcation
Table 1
Detailed syngas composition
Composition
Volume fraction (%)
CO
47.8
H2
37.3
CO2
14.3
N2
0.6
Fig.
7
Can
combustor
structure
for
combustion
model
validation
022004-4 / Vol. 139, MARCH 2017
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/139/2/022004/6149620/jert_139_02_022004.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 5 ---

temperature is 796.7 K, which is very close to the measured value
796 K. The computed total pressure loss is 3.68%, which is
slightly larger than the measured data 3.28%. In general, the pre-
dicted overperformance of the combustor is taken with acceptable
reliability.
Results and Discussion
The targeted combustor heat load corresponding to the speciﬁed
boundary conditions is 13.33 MW. The total equivalence ratio is
about 0.25 for the syngas fuel, with the combustor outlet tempera-
ture of about 1365 K. Since the combustor is designed to achieve
nonpremixed combustion, the adiabatic ﬂame temperature can
reach over 2200 K at the ﬂame front with equivalence ratio of
about 1.
Before the computational results are discussed, the mesh inde-
pendence check is conducted. The following ﬁgure gives a com-
parison of the computed results for the multiple nozzles case. The
traverse cut plane at the dilution hole is chosen and the axial
velocity contour is presented in Fig. 10. The mesh of 6  106 and
10  106 shows slight inﬂuences on the mixing result. Therefore,
the mesh setup is destined with the total number 6  106.
Multiple Swirlers Arrangement
For the reversal ﬂow combustor with a variety of holes on the
liner, air ﬂow distribution in the chamber is a signiﬁcant issue for
designer, which indicates excellent combustion and dilution per-
formance. The mass ﬂow rate distribution can be obtained by
postprocessing the CFD simulation results, and the statistic data is
listed in Table 2. According to the air splits statistic results, the
single nozzle arrangement for syngas fuel is close to the natural
gas original scheme. As the results indicated, the large variation
of the air splits in single and multiple nozzles is mainly caused by
the combustor head design and holes arrangements. However, the
purpose of this investigation is to check the inﬂuences of different
air splits on the ﬂow ﬁeld and combustion performance. There-
fore, it is not considered to adjust the holes arrangement of multi-
ple nozzles to match the single nozzle arrangement in this
investigation. As shown in Table 2, the combustor head consumes
about 14% of the total air mass ﬂow for the multiple nozzles case
while it is about 11% in the single nozzle case. Besides, the air
ﬂow for the primary/secondary/dilution holes and ﬁlm cooling
also show discrepancy between the two schemes. Although the
total areas of the primary/secondary/dilution holes for the two
schemes are the same, the number of the three type holes for mul-
tiple nozzles is 1.25 times of the single nozzle arrangement, which
leads to smaller amount of air ﬂow on the combustor liner. For the
ﬁlm cooling, the multiple nozzles arrangement consumes more air
than the single nozzle design.
The total pressure recovery coefﬁcient for the combustion
chamber is shown in Table 3. Compared to the single nozzle com-
bustor, the pressure recovery coefﬁcient of the multiple nozzle
arrangement is obviously improved, with about 2.1% enhance-
ment. In contrast to the combustor utilizing natural gas and light
diesel, the syngas fuel is of low caloriﬁc value. Therefore, the
amount of syngas fuel admission is signiﬁcantly larger than the
traditional fuel type. When the fuel supply pressure is further
Fig. 8
Axial velocity comparison of numerical simulation and experimental results
Fig. 9
Axial velocity distribution and streamline in 0 deg cut-
plane
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
MARCH 2017, Vol. 139 / 022004-5
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/139/2/022004/6149620/jert_139_02_022004.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 6 ---

considered, the difference of pressure recovery coefﬁcient for the
two schemes will be even larger, reaching to about 3.1%.
The equations of the total pressure recovery coefﬁcients CTPR1
and CTPR2 (with/without syngas fuel pressure modiﬁcation) are
listed as follows:
CTPR1 ¼ TPou=TPin
(5)
CTPR2 ¼ TPou=ðTPin þ Vfuel  TPfuel=VairÞ
(6)
The general results show that the average temperature at the
combustor outlet for the single nozzle and multiple nozzles
arrangements are 1367 K and 1363 K, respectively, which is just
slight difference. In order to give more detailed information of the
two schemes, the temperature ﬁeld, ﬂow ﬁeld structure, and com-
position distributions in terms of the computational results are
given.
First, the axial cut-plane through the dilution holes is presented
with the temperature distribution and the axial velocity distribu-
tion as shown in Fig. 11. As can be seen, for the single nozzle
case, the high temperature zone is tending to be restricted in the
area near the central axis of the combustion chamber. While the
axial distance between the high temperature region and the com-
bustor head is relatively large, the cooling requirement for the
combustor head in the single nozzle case is not quite high. How-
ever, for the multiple nozzles case, the high temperature region
possesses wider area before dilution. One thing is that the primary
air is even closer to the combustor head which promotes the com-
bustion reaction earlier in this case than the single nozzle case.
Besides, the multiple nozzles mainly inject fuel on the outer side
of the combustor head. Therefore, the high temperature zone
expands radially and projects high heat load on the combustor
head. In general, this is the reason why cooling design is more
urgent in the multiple nozzles arrangement.
Furthermore, it can be inferred from Fig. 11 that there are more
recirculation zones in the multiple nozzles case than the single
nozzle case. In the single nozzle conﬁguration, the recirculation
zone is formed by the swirling air and syngas ﬂow, and enhanced
by the primary air injection. Basically, the zone is formed by the
single swirler with some local corner vortex in the interface with
the primary jets. For the multiple nozzles conﬁguration, every sin-
gle swirler unit can generate swirling recirculation zone. Besides,
the central swirler can also creates the pilot swirling recirculation
zone which helps enhance mixing and stabilize the ﬂame. It is
quite beneﬁcial for the ﬂame stability when there exist more recir-
culation zones in the ﬂow ﬁeld. From the formation mechanism of
the recirculation, the single nozzle arrangement should adjust the
cooperation of central swirler and the primary air injection. How-
ever for the multiple nozzles case, the single small swirler unit
can be effective to generate recirculation. It is indicated that, for
the multiple nozzles case, the design of the primary air jet location
can be more ﬂexible.
Besides, it is also displayed in the ﬁgure that the injection depth
of secondary and dilution holes is larger in the single nozzle case
than that of the multiple nozzles case. The reason is that the area
of single dilution hole is larger in the single nozzle case. Deeper
injection length is beneﬁcial for the temperature distribution
adjustment, and especially it can help reduce the peak value of
outlet temperature for the single nozzle case. Further temperature
uniformity could be realized by the transition piece guiding the
ﬂow after ﬂowing through the combustor.
The mixture fraction distribution and the mole concentration of
OH composition in the axial cut-plane are presented in Fig. 12 for
both single nozzle and multiple nozzles arrangement. In the multi-
ple nozzles case, the syngas fuel is injected through the single
swirler unit around the axis which can realize good mixing in the
short axial distance. The radial distribution of the mixture fraction
is quite uniform without considering the central swirling air ﬂow.
For the single nozzle arrangement, the fuel mixing and transfer is
mainly conﬁned in the area near the combustor axis. Therefore,
the mixing quality deﬁnes the ﬂame front, combustion perform-
ance, and temperature distribution. From the distribution of OH
composition mole concentration which can reﬂect the ﬂame front
location, the space for fuel heat release is more conﬁned in the
single nozzle case which also causes larger total pressure loss.
Full Scale Test Rig Introduction
In order to validate the combustor design, the full-scale high
pressure/high temperature test rig is established and located in
Lianyungang test base, which belongs to Energy and Power
Research Center of Chinese Academy of Sciences as shown in
Fig. 13. The whole test base includes all the infrastructures, sub-
sidiary systems, and the test section. In detail, the experimental
test base mainly includes air compressing system with heating
system, high-pressure cooling water system, low pressure cooling
water recycling system, water treatment system, steam boiler, fuel
supply system (natural gas, synthetic gas, and light diesel oil), and
Fig. 10
Mesh independence check and comparison of axial velocity (left: 6 3 106, right:
10 3 106)
Table
2
Flow
distribution
over
the
combustor
liner
(percentages)
Type
Combustor
Big holes
Film cooling
Single nozzle
10.93
47.91
41.15
Multiple nozzles
14.42
39.38
46.20
Table 3
Total pressure recovery coefﬁcient
Type
Without fuel
pressure modification
With fuel pressure
modification
Single nozzle
0.941
0.930
Multiple nozzles
0.961
0.959
022004-6 / Vol. 139, MARCH 2017
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/139/2/022004/6149620/jert_139_02_022004.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 7 ---

control measurement nitrogen and oxygen generation system. The
experimental test base layout with the control station and data
postprocessing methods can be referenced in the literature
[11].The full-scale combustion test section is displayed in Fig. 11.
The test base can provide test service for heavy duty gas turbine
combustion test, in support of combustor design veriﬁcation and
validation. The capacity for compressed air supply can reach the
maximum ﬂow rate of 12 kg/s, with the maximum pressure 12 atm
and the maximum temperature of 450 C by electrical heating.
The long term design target of the test rig capacity is over 20 kg/s
with the maximum pressure 40 atm which is close to the most
advanced technology level in the world.
Furthermore, the whole measuring system for the test section is
illustrated. The inlet air temperature for the combustor is meas-
ured by ﬁve K-type thermocouples, with the average value of the
measured data being adopted. The measurement error of the ther-
mocouples is less than 1.0 C with the sensitivity of about 0.1 C.
For the combustor outlet temperature at the transition piece
Fig. 11
Axial cut-plane of temperature and axial velocity distribution for two schemes (up: single nozzle case, down: multiple
nozzles case)
Fig. 12
Axial cut-plane of mixture fraction and OH mole fraction for two schemes (up: single nozzle case, down: multiple noz-
zles case)
Fig. 13
Display of full-scale combustion test facility
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
MARCH 2017, Vol. 139 / 022004-7
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/139/2/022004/6149620/jert_139_02_022004.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 8 ---

downstream, the measurement rake is installed with R-type ther-
mocouple in the rakes. The rake can be driven by the stepping
motor, scanning the whole temperature ﬁeld at the transition piece
outlet section. The measurement error of the R-type thermocou-
ples is 1.0 C with the sensitivity of about 1.0 C. The combustor
inlet air pressure and the combustion gas pressure at the transition
piece outlet are measured by the calibrated total pressure probe,
with the measuring accuracy of 0.1%. The inlet air mass ﬂow rate
is measured using the oriﬁce plate ﬂow meter supplied by the
AþK Company. The fuel gas ﬂow measurement is conducted by
using vortex ﬂow meter with the precision of 1%FS. The sampling
probe for pollution emission is located at the exit of the
transition piece, and the ﬂue gas sampling analyzing device is
Testo350 enhanced analyzer, with its precision details shown in
Table 4.
Middle and High Pressure Test Verification
In this veriﬁcation test, the multiple nozzles conﬁguration is
adopted and manufactured. Since the target pressure cannot be
fully realized yet, the middle pressure combustion test is con-
ducted ﬁrst. Different from the design stage in which the fuel and
air mixing and ﬂow organization is signiﬁcant, it is necessary to
consider the transition piece in the veriﬁcation stage. In this inves-
tigation, the geometry and the boundary condition type for the
whole transition piece are displayed in Fig. 14. The test has also
been completed under full-scale middle pressure combustion con-
ditions. Test conditions are listed: inlet air pressure 2.3 atm, air
preheating temperature 356 C, air mass ﬂow rate 2.2 kg/s, and
syngas fuel mass ﬂow rate 0.23 kg/s. The temperature of the syn-
gas fuel is 140 C. To save the computational cost, the gas inlet
boundary conditions are transferred from the numerical results of
combustor outlet. The acquired boundary variables include the
temperature, velocity, and turbulent parameters distribution. Then
the numerical iterations are completed only for transition piece
domain. As shown in Fig. 15, the temperature distribution of the
numerical simulation and experimental results at the transition
piece outlet are compared. Generally, the obtained numerical
results are consistent with the measured value in trend. The tem-
perature measurement for the transition piece outlet is conducted
by installing the movable struts with thermocouples. All the meas-
ured surface data are not recorded at the same transient time step.
In actual situation of the experiment, the temperature ﬂuctuation
is quite obvious which causes that the measured data is not as ﬂat
as the CFD results contour. The steady Reynolds-averaged
Navier–Stokes simulations cannot predict the transient character-
istic of the combustion condition. Besides, the temperature meas-
urements strut can also inﬂuence the ﬂow ﬁeld which might cause
the temperature distortion.
By comparing the normalization of the temperature distribution
curve in Fig. 16, results show that numerical simulation can cap-
ture the maximum temperature spot and the general trend, which
is helpful for the prediction and experimental work.
Table 4
Flue gas analyzer precision
Composition
Measurement range
Measurement error
O2
0–21 vol. %
60.2%
NO
0–4000 ppm
65 ppm (0–99 ppm), 65% (100–4000 ppm)
NO2
0–500 ppm
65 ppm (0–99 ppm), 65% (100–500 ppm)
CO
0–10,000 ppm
610 ppm (0–199 ppm), 65% (200–2000 ppm)
Fig. 14
Temperature distribution at the transition piece outlet
Fig. 15
Temperature distribution at the transition piece outlet
Fig. 16
Radial distribution of averaged temperature data
022004-8 / Vol. 139, MARCH 2017
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/139/2/022004/6149620/jert_139_02_022004.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 9 ---

The test has also been completed under full-scale high pressure
combustion conditions. Detailed test conditions are as follows:
inlet air pressure 10.02 atm, air preheating temperature 405 C, air
mass ﬂow rate 10.54 kg/s, syngas fuel mass ﬂow rate 1.062 kg/s,
and the nitrogen mass ﬂow rate 0.868 kg/s. The temperature of
both the syngas fuel and nitrogen is 20 C. The caloriﬁc value and
compositions of the syngas fuel are shown in Table 1.Through the
complicated combustion test process, the general combustor per-
formance is acquired: the average temperature at the combustor
exit of about 1216 C, combustion efﬁciency reaching 99.9%, the
total pressure recovery coefﬁcient 0.955 without taking the fuel
pressure into account, NOx emissions 22 ppmv (at 16%O2), CO
emissions 17 ppmv (at 16%O2).
After the combustion test, the detail check shows that there is
no obvious high temperature region. The highest temperature spot
of the combustor liner is below 861 C without thermal barrier
coating sprayed. Based on the industrial experience, if the thermal
barrier coating is sprayed onto the liner, the highest temperature
could be reduced further to 50 C at least. Besides, the total pres-
sure recovery coefﬁcient of the numerical calculation is in good
agreement with the experimental measurements. The full load
combustion test is still under preparation.
Conclusion
Based on the combustion modeling validation, two design
schemes of the full-scale heavy duty combustors with single noz-
zle and multiple nozzle arrangements were investigated. Numeri-
cal simulations using the commercial CFD software FLUENT were
adopted. By comparing the numerical results of the two design
arrangements, it is shown that the ﬂow ﬁeld structure in the multi-
ple nozzles case is more preferable, with more uniform combustor
temperature ﬁeld and higher total pressure recovery coefﬁcient.
In addition to the numerical simulation, the veriﬁcation test is
also completed for the multiple nozzles arrangement combustor.
The test condition is full-scale middle (2.3 atm) and high pressure
(10 atm). The combustor liner wall temperature, pollutant emis-
sions, and total pressure recovery coefﬁcient are all qualiﬁed for
the combustor design proved by the test. In order to reach the
design target and save the cost of time and resources, numerical
simulations can be helpful to predict the ﬂow ﬁeld, temperature
distribution, and overall performance in the combustor. Therefore,
it is worth of conducting numerical simulations during the design
and retroﬁt process.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support
from the project supported by General Financial Grant from China
Postdoctoral
Science
Foundation
(2015M570696)
and
the
research project of China Southern Power Grid Company, Ltd.
(No. K-GD20140492).
Nomenclature
CTPR1 ¼ total pressure recovery coefﬁcient without syngas fuel
pressure modiﬁcation
CTPR2 ¼ total pressure recovery coefﬁcient with syngas fuel pres-
sure modiﬁcation
TPfuel ¼ total pressure of syngas fuel
TPin ¼ total pressure of the inlet air
TPou ¼ total pressure of the combusted gas at the combustor
outlet
Vair ¼ volume fraction of air in the combustor
Vfuel ¼ volume fraction of syngas fuel in the combustor
References
[1] Bannister, R. L., Newby, R. A., and Yang, W. C., 1998, “Development of a
Hydrogen-Fueled Combustion Turbine Cycle for Power Generation,” ASME J.
Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 120(2), pp. 267–283.
[2] Ibrahim, A. S., and Ahmed, S. F., 2015, “Measurements of Laminar Flame
Speeds of Alternative Gaseous Fuel Mixtures,” ASME J. Energy Resour. Tech-
nol., 137(3), p. 032209.
[3] Lieuwen, T., McDonell, V., Petersen, E., and Santavicca, D., 2008, “Fuel Flexi-
bility Inﬂuences on Premixed Combustor Blowout, Flash Back, Autoignition
and Stability,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 130(1), p. 011506.
[4] Sanusi, Y. S., Habib, M. A., and Mokheimer, E. M. A., 2014, “Experimental
Study on the Effect of Hydrogen Enrichment of Methane on the Stability and
Emission of Non-Premixed Swirl Stabilized Combustor,” ASME J. Energy
Resour. Technol., 137(3), p. 032203.
[5] Davis, L. B., and Black, S. H., 1999, “Dry Low NOx Combustion Systems for
GE Heavy-Duty Gas Turbines,” Report No. GE Power Systems_GER-3568G.
[6] Feigl, M., Setzer, F., Varela, R. F., Myers, G., and Sweet, B., 2005, “Field Test
Validation of the DLN 2.5H Combustion System on the 9H Gas Turbine at Bal-
gan Bay Power Station,” ASME Paper No. GT2005-68843.
[7] York, W. D., Ziminsky, W. S., and Yilmaz, E., 2013, “Development and Test-
ing of a Low NOx Hydrogen Combustion System for Heavy Duty Gas
Turbines,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 135(2), p. 022001.
[8] Chacartegui, R., Torres, M., Sanchez, D., Jimenez, F., Munoz, A., and Sanchez,
T., 2011, “Analysis of Main Gaseous Emissions of Heavy Duty Gas
Turbines Burning Several Syngas Fuels,” Fuel Process. Technol., 92(2),
pp. 213–220.
[9] Dodo, S., Asai, T., Koizumi, H., Takahashi, H., Yoshida, S., and Inoue, H., 2014,
“Performance of a Multiple-Injection Dry Low NOx Combustor With Hydrogen-
Rich Syngas Fuels,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 135(1), p. 011501.
[10] Asai, T., Dodo, S., Karishuku, M., Yagi, N., Akiyama, Y., and Hayashi, A.,
2015, “Part Load Operation of a Multiple-Injection Dry Low NOx Combustor
on Hydrogen-Rich Syngas Fuel in an IGCC Pilot Plant,” ASME Paper No.
GT2015-42312.
[11] Deng, X., Xiong, Y., Yin, H., and Gao, Q., 2016, “Numerical Study of the Effect
of Nozzle Conﬁgurations on Characteristics of MILD Combustion for Gas Tur-
bine Application,” ASME J. Energy Resour. Technol., 138(4), p. 042212.
[12] Lai, M., Reynolds, R. R., and Armstrong, J., 2002, “CFD-Based, Parametric,
Design Tool for Gas Turbine Combustors From Compressor Deswirl Exit to
Turbine Inlet,” ASME Paper No. GT2002-30090.
[13] Dudebout, R., Reynolds, B., and Molla-Hosseini, K., 2004, “Integrated Process
for CFD Modeling and Optimization of Gas Turbine Combustors,” ASME
Paper No. GT2004-54011.
[14] Safari, M., and Sheikhi, M. R. H., 2014, “Large Eddy Simulation for Prediction
of Entropy Generation in a Non-Premixed Turbulent Jet Flame,” ASME J.
Energy Resour. Technol., 136(2), p. 022002.
[15] Gobbato, P., Masi, M., Toffolo, A., and Lazzaretto, A., 2011, “Numerical Simu-
lation of a Hydrogen Fuelled Gas Turbine Combustor,” Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy, 36(13), pp. 7993–8002.
[16] Shih, H. Y., and Liu, C. R., 2014, “A Computational Study on the Combustion
of Hydrogen/Methane Blended Fuels for a Micro Gas Turbine,” Int. J. Hydro-
gen Energy, 39(27), pp. 15103–15115.
[17] Bulat, G., 2015, “Reacting Flow in an Industrial Gas Turbine Combustor: LES
and Experimental Analysis,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 35(3), pp. 3175–3183.
[18] Alzahrani, F. M., Sanusi, Y. S., Vogiatzaki, K., Ghoniem, A. F., Habib, M. A.,
and Mokheimer, E. M. A., 2015, “Evaluation of the Accuracy of Selected
Syngas Chemical Mechanisms,” ASME J. Energy Resour. Technol., 137(4),
p. 042201.
[19] Bulat, G., Jones, W. P., and Marquis, A. J., 2014, “NO and CO Formation in an
Industrial Gas Turbine Combustion Chamber Using LES With the Eulerian
Sub-Grid PDF Method,” Combust. Flame, 161(7), pp. 1804–1825.
[20] Cui, Y., 2005, “Numerical and Experimental Investigation on Gas Turbine
Combustor for Syngas,” Ph.D. thesis, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China.
[21] Xiong, Y., Ji, L., Zhang, Z., Wang, Y., and Xiao, Y., 2008, “Three Dimensional
CFD Analysis of a Gas Turbine Combustor for Medium/Low Heating Value
Syngas Fuel,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-50662.
[22] Shih, T.-H., Liou, W. W., Shabbir, A., Yang, Z., and Zhu, J., 1995, “A New k-e
Eddy-Viscosity Model for High Reynolds Number Turbulent Flows—Model
Development and Validation,” Comput. Fluids, 24(3), pp. 227–238.
[23] Chen, L., and Battaglia, F., 2015, “The Effects of Fuel Mixtures in Non-
Premixed Combustion for a Bluff-Body Flame,” ASME J. Energy Resour.
Technol., 138(2), p. 022204.
[24] Peters, N., 1984, “Laminar Diffusion Flamelet Models in Non-Premixed Turbu-
lent Combustion,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 10(3), pp. 319–339.
[25] Drake, M. C., and Blint, R. J., 1989, “Thermal NOx in Stretch Laminar
Opposed-Flow Diffusion Flames With CO/H2/N2 Fuel,” Combust. Flame,
76(2), pp. 151–167.
[26] Bruce, T. W., Mongia, H. C., and Reynolds, R. S., 1978, “Combustor Design
Criteria Validation,” Report No. USARTL-TR-78-55A, 55B, 55C.
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
MARCH 2017, Vol. 139 / 022004-9
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/139/2/022004/6149620/jert_139_02_022004.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026
