
--- Page 1 ---

P. Gokulakrishnan1
e-mail: gokul@cseﬁre.com
M. J. Ramotowski
G. Gaines
C. Fuller
R. Joklik
L. D. Eskin
M. S. Klassen
R. J. Roby
Combustion Science and Engineering, Inc.,
8940 Old Annapolis Road,
Suite L,
Columbia, MD 21045
A Novel Low NOx Lean,
Premixed, and Prevaporized
Combustion System for Liquid
Fuels
Dry low emission (DLE) systems employing lean, premixed combustion have been suc-
cessfully used with natural gas in combustion turbines to meet stringent emission stan-
dards. However, the burning of liquid fuels in DLE systems is still a challenging task due
to the complexities of fuel vaporization and air premixing. Lean, premixed, and prevapor-
ized (LPP) combustion has always provided the promise of obtaining low pollutant emis-
sions while burning liquid fuels, such as kerosene and fuel oil. Because of the short
ignition delay times of these fuels at elevated temperatures, the autoignition of vaporized
higher hydrocarbons typical of most practical liquid fuels has been proven difﬁcult to
overcome when burning in a lean, premixed mode. To avoid this autoignition problem,
developers of LPP combustion systems have focused mainly on designing premixers and
combustors that permit rapid mixing and combustion of fuels before spontaneous ignition
of the fuel can occur. However, none of the reported works in the literature has looked at
altering fuel combustion characteristics in order to delay the onset of ignition in lean,
premixed combustion systems. The work presented in this paper describes the develop-
ment of a patented low NOx LPP system for combustion of liquid fuels, which modiﬁes
the fuel rather than the combustion hardware in order to achieve LPP combustion. In the
initial phase of the development, laboratory-scale experiments were performed to study
the combustion characteristics, such as ignition delay time and NOx formation, of the
liquid fuels that were vaporized into gaseous form in the presence of nitrogen diluent. In
the second phase, a LPP combustion system was commissioned to perform pilot-scale
tests on commercial turbine combustor hardware. These pilot-scale tests were conducted
at typical compressor discharge temperatures and at both atmospheric and high pres-
sures. In this study, vaporization of the liquid fuel in an inert environment has been shown
to be a viable method for delaying autoignition and for generating a gaseous fuel stream
with characteristics similar to natural gas. Tests conducted in both atmospheric and high
pressure combustor rigs utilizing swirl-stabilized burners designed for natural gas dem-
onstrated an operation similar to that obtained when burning natural gas. Emission
levels were similar for both the LPP fuels (fuel oils 1 and 2) and natural gas, with any
differences ascribed to the fuel-bound nitrogen present in the liquid fuels. An extended
lean operation was observed for the liquid fuels as a result of the wider lean ﬂammability
range for these fuels compared to natural gas. DOI: 10.1115/1.2904889
Introduction
Traditionally, spray diffusion combustors have been employed
in gas turbines that operate on liquid fuels such as fuel oils 1 and
2. However, this diffusion mode of operation tends to produce
unacceptable levels of NOx emissions. The current technology for
burning liquid fuels in gas turbines is to use water and/or steam
injection with conventional diffusion burners. Emission levels for
a typical “state of the art” gas turbine, such as GE 7FA burning
fuel oil 2 in diffusion mode with water/steam injection, are
42 ppm NOx and 20 ppm CO 1. Water/steam injection has a
dilution and cooling effect, lowering the combustion temperature
and thus lowering NOx emissions. However, at the same time,
water/steam injection is likely to increase CO emissions as a result
of local quenching effects. Thus, the “wet” diffusion type of com-
bustion system for liquid fuels must trade off NOx emissions for
CO emissions.
In recent years, stringent emission standards have made lean,
premixed combustion more desirable in power generation and in-
dustrial applications than ever before since this combustion mode
provides low NOx and low CO emissions without water addition.
Lean, premixed combustion of natural gas avoids the problems
associated with diffusion combustion and water addition. Thus,
lean, premixed combustion is the foundation of modern dry low
emissions DLE gas turbine combustion systems. When operated
on natural gas, DLE combustion systems provide NOx and CO
emissions of 25 ppm or less with no water addition. However,
these systems cannot currently operate in a premixed mode on
liquid fuels because of autoignition and ﬂashback within the pre-
mixing section.
Plee and Mellor 2 characterized autoignition of the fuel/air
mixture in the premixer as an important factor that causes ﬂash-
back in practical combustion devices. Autoignition of the fuel/air
mixture occurs before the main combustion zone when the igni-
tion delay time of the fuel/air mixture is shorter than the mean
residence time of the fuel in the premixer. Autoignition especially
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received
September 24, 2007; ﬁnal manuscript received October 5, 2007; published online
May 30, 2008. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the ASME
Turbo Expo 2007: Land, Sea, and Air GT2007, Montreal, Canada, May 14–17, 2007,
Paper No. GT2007-27552.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2008, Vol. 130 / 051501-1
Copyright © 2008 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

occurs with the higher-order hydrocarbon fuels, such as fuel oils,
which have shorter ignition delay times compared to natural gas
3. The short ignition delay times of vaporized higher hydrocar-
bons have been proven difﬁcult to overcome when burning in a
lean, premixed mode.
Nevertheless, in order to overcome high NOx levels produced
by spray combustion, gas turbine designers still desire to use lean,
premixed, and prevaporized LPP combustion. Several ap-
proaches have been reported in the literature 4–12 to overcome
ﬂashback and autoignition in the premixers of LPP combustors.
These approaches attempt to achieve low NOx emissions by de-
signing premixers and combustors that permit rapid mixing and
combustion before spontaneous ignition of the fuel can occur. In
most of the work reported on LPP combustion systems in the
literature, the fuel is directly sprayed into the premixer so that the
liquid fuel droplets vaporize and mix with air at lean conditions.
Typically, swirlers with multiport liquid fuel injection systems are
employed for better fuel/air mixing 7. However, unlike these
attempts to alter hardware, there has been no reported work on
altering fuel combustion characteristics in order to delay the onset
of ignition in lean, premixed combustion systems.
In this study, vaporization of the liquid fuel in an inert environ-
ment has been shown to be a technically viable approach for LPP
combustion. As described in this paper, a patented fuel vaporiza-
tion and conditioning process 13 was developed and tested to
achieve low emissions NOx and CO comparable to those of
natural gas while operating on liquid fuels, without water or steam
addition. In this approach, liquid fuel is vaporized in an inert
environment to create a fuel vapor/inert gas mixture, LPP gas,
with combustion properties similar to those of natural gas. A pre-
mature autoignition of the LPP gas was controlled by the level of
inert gas in the vaporization process. Tests conducted in both at-
mospheric and high pressure test rigs utilizing typical swirl-
stabilized burners designed for natural gas found an operation
similar to that achieved when burning natural gas. Emission levels
were similar for both the LPP gas fuels fuel oils 1 and 2 and
natural gas, with any differences in NOx emissions ascribed to
fuel-bound nitrogen present in fuel oil 2. Also, tests showed that
the LPP combustion system helps to reduce the NOx emissions by
facilitating stable combustion even at very lean conditions when
using liquid fuels. An extended lean operation was found for the
liquid fuels due to the wider lean ﬂammability range for these
fuels compared to natural gas. An added advantage of the fuel
vaporization and conditioning process is the ability to achieve fuel
interchangeability of a natural-gas-ﬁred combustor with liquid
fuels.
The initial phase of development of the LPP system described
in this work involved laboratory-scale experiments to study com-
bustion characteristics, such as ignition delay time and NOx for-
mation, of the liquid fuels that are vaporized into gaseous form in
the presence of nitrogen diluent. In the second phase of this pro-
gram, the LPP system 13 was commissioned to perform large-
scale pilot experiments on atmospheric pressure and high pressure
test rigs. Fuel oils 1 and 2 were chosen as typical liquid fuels for
the tests. In this study, fuel oil 1 refers to commercially available
kerosene and fuel oil 2, known as diesel fuel 2, is similar to
commercially available home heating oil. Also, for a comparative
study, experiments were performed with n-heptane, which is a
widely studied liquid fuel. The chemical and physical speciﬁca-
tions of the fuel oils are listed in Table 1. The chemical analysis
shows that when compared to fuel oil 1, fuel oil 2 has a higher
content of aromatics as well as fuel-bound nitrogen and sulfur.
Effect of Diluent on Ignition Delay Time
As discussed above, one of the causes of ﬂashback in gas tur-
bine combustors is the premature autoignition of the fuel in air
during premixing. One way to avoid autoignition is to extend the
induction period, known as the ignition delay time, of the fuel/air
mixture by reducing the formation of combustion radicals that are
necessary for autoignition of the mixture at a given temperature.
In hydrocarbon oxidation, during the induction period, the diluent
plays an important role as a third-body enhancer for recombina-
tion reactions and slows down the radical formation 14. These
effects, in turn, extend the induction period so that the ignition
process will be delayed. Therefore, increasing the diluent fraction
of the fuel/oxidant mixture will increase the ignition delay time.
In the present work, the effect of diluents on the ignition delay
time was investigated for vaporized liquid fuels, such as fuel oils
and n-heptane.
The ignition delay time experiments were performed in an at-
mospheric pressure ﬂow reactor, which consists of a premixing
section and a plug-ﬂow test section. The fuel was vaporized into
gaseous form in a preheated nitrogen environment before being
mixed with air in the premixing section, which is located at the
entrance to the reactor. Figure 1 shows the cross-sectional view of
the premixing section. The premixing section opens into the plug-
ﬂow test section via an expanding duct in order to prevent the
separation of ﬂows at the entrance of the test section. The test
section is a 522 in.2 alumina tube placed inside a furnace with
three independently controlled zone heaters.
One of the difﬁculties in any ﬂow reactor experiment is quickly
mixing the fuel and oxidant at the entrance to the reactor 15,16.
In this work, the rapid mixing of the vaporized fuel with air was
achieved by using a swirler followed by an expanding duct that
opened into the test section. A photomultiplier coupled with a
narrow band ﬁlter centered at 430 nm was placed at the end of
the test section to detect CH* emissions. The time between the
Table 1
Chemical and physical properties of fuel oils 1 and 2
used in the experiments
Fuel oil 1
Fuel oil 2
API gravity at 60°F
45.7
37.6
Speciﬁc gravity at 60°F
0.7985
0.8373
Visocity at 40°C cS
1.04
2.6
Molecular weight
150
182
Parafﬁns vol %
83.6
79.3
Aromatics vol %
15.7
19.8
Oleﬁns vol %
0.7
0.9
C wt%
85.78
86.83
H wt %
14.15
13.09
N wt %
0.02
0.04
S wt %
0.03
0.03
H/C molar ratio
1.91
1.85
Chemical formula
C11H21
C13H24
Fig. 1
Schematic of the premixing section of the ﬂow reactor
used for ignition delay time measurements
051501-2 / Vol. 130, SEPTEMBER 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

injection of fuel vapor into the mixing section and the detection of
the CH* emission signal was designated as the ignition delay
time. The plug-ﬂow test section was maintained at a constant ini-
tial reactor temperature. The ﬂow reactor premixer temperature
was maintained at 600 K in order to simulate the conditions in a
gas turbine premixer. A detailed description of the ﬂow reactor
facility can be found in a previous publication 17.
Figure 2 shows the ignition delay time as a function of O2
mole % in the inlet stream for n-heptane at 823 K and 900 K. The
equivalence ratio of the fuel/oxidant mixture was maintained at
stoichiometric conditions. The experimental measurements are
compared to ignition delay time model predictions using the de-
tailed kinetics mechanism of Curran et al. 18. As can be seen in
the ﬁgure, the effect of diluent on ignition delay time increases
with decreasing inlet temperature. For example, for the n-heptane
measurements shown in Fig. 2, the ignition delay time is propor-
tional to XO2−0.80 at 900 K and to XO2−2.2 at 823 K, where
XO2 refers to the mole % of O2 in the inlet stream to the test
section of the ﬂow reactor.
Figure 3 compares the ignition delay time of both vaporized
fuel oils with n-heptane as a function of O2 mole % at the inlet to
the ﬂow reactor at 900 K. Both fuel oils 1 and 2 show ignition
delay times longer than those of n-heptane due to the presence of
aromatic hydrocarbons in the fuel oils. Fuel oil 1 shows a similar
O2 dependency on the ignition delay time as that of n-heptane.
However, the effect of O2 on the ignition delay time is higher for
fuel oil 2 compared to n-heptane. For example, for the ignition
delay time measurements shown in Fig. 3, the n-heptane ignition
delay time is proportional to XO2−0.8, while the fuel oil 2 ignition
delay time is proportional to XO2−1.0.
Effect of Pressure on NOx Formation
In the LPP system design, the liquid fuel is vaporized in an inert
environment to create a gaseous fuel. This gaseous fuel is then
premixed with air and burned in a manner similar to lean, pre-
mixed natural gas combustion. However, fuel oil, even as a gas-
eous fuel, is expected to produce slightly higher NOx than natural
gas fuel, as most fuel oils contain fuel-bound nitrogen. In this
work, a series of experiments was performed over a range of
pressures up to 10 atm in a bench-scale, high pressure swirl
burner to investigate the NOx production from the fuel oils when
supplied as vaporized liquid fuels in an inert environment. To
compare the formation of NOx to the vaporized fuel oils, experi-
ments were also performed with natural gas.
The bench-scale LPP combustion system consists of a swirl-
stabilized burner where a radially injected gaseous fuel stream is
mixed with primary air before the fuel/air mixture reaches the
burner surface. A cutaway view of the high pressure swirl burner
is shown in Fig. 4. A stand-alone vaporizing system for liquid
fuels is directly connected to the fuel port of the swirler to supply
the liquid fuel in gaseous form. Nitrogen was used as the diluent
for vaporization. The burner was placed in a pressure vessel with
a jacket cooling system along the wall. The pressure was varied
from
1 atm to 10 atm.
The
air
ﬂow
was
varied
from
1 g/s to 10 g/s
with
an
input
power
of
approximately
1 kW to 15 kW, respectively, for natural gas fuel. A water-cooled
sample probe was placed just above the ﬂame zone to draw ex-
haust gas samples into analyzers to measure CO, CO2, and NOx
emissions. Measurements of CO and CO2 were obtained using
nondispersive infrared NDIR ray absorption analyzers, while
NOx was measured using the chemiluminescence detection
method.
Experiments were performed to investigate the effect of diluent
on NOx formation by varying the N2 to fuel molar ratio in the
vaporizer in a range of 2–10. During the experiments, nitrogen
was preheated to 573 K 300°C to vaporize the liquid fuel in the
vaporizer. Figure 5 shows the NOx and CO measurements as a
Fig. 2
Atmospheric pressure ignition delay time measure-
ments of stoichiometric n-heptane/O2/N2, mixture as a func-
tion of the inlet O2 composition. Key: symbols, experimental
data; lines, ignition delay time model predictions using the de-
tailed kinetic model of Curran et al. †18‡.
Fig. 3
Comparison of ignition delay time measurements of
n-heptane, fuel oil 1, and fuel oil 2 as a function of the inlet O2
composition at 900 K inlet temperature, 1 atm pressure, and 1.0
equivalence ratio
Fig. 4
Cutaway view of the bench-scale, high pressure swirl
burner used to investigate NOx emissions from the LPP
combustion
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2008, Vol. 130 / 051501-3
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

function of diluent to fuel molar ratio for fuel oil 2 at 5 atm and at
an equivalence ratio of 0.6. In Fig. 5, CO and NOx measurements
show that the diluent N2 to fuel molar ratio does not have any
signiﬁcant effect on CO and NOx emissions above a ratio of 4.
Figure 6 shows NOx measurements as a function of equivalence
ratio for methane, fuel oil 1, and fuel oil 2 at several pressures.
Due to the presence of fuel-bound nitrogen, the fuel oils produce
higher NOx than methane. For methane, the NOx measurements
increased from 2 ppm to 5 ppm when the equivalence ratio was
increased from 0.55 to 0.75 at 2 atm. For fuel oil 2, the NOx
increased from 5 ppm to 18 ppm when the equivalence ratio was
changed from 0.5 to 0.7 at 8 atm. Fuel oils 1 and 2 have
0.02 wt % and 0.04 wt % fuel-bound nitrogen, respectively, as
listed in Table 1. Thus, potentially, the fuel-bound nitrogen can
produce approximately 4 ppm and 10 ppm of NOx, respectively,
for fuel oils 1 and 2 at a 0.6 equivalence ratio, assuming that all
the fuel-bound nitrogen atoms are converted to NOx. At an
equivalence ratio of 0.6, methane produced approximately 2 ppm
NOx at 5 atm, as shown in Fig. 6. The measured NOx emissions
for fuel oils 1 and 2 were 6 ppm and 10 ppm, respectively, at the
same conditions. Thus, the difference in NOx between the meth-
ane and fuel oils can entirely be accounted for by the NOx that
comes from the fuel-bound nitrogen.
The effects of pressure and equivalence ratio on the NOx for-
mation for fuel oil 2 are presented in Fig. 7. The results are also
compared to those of methane. The effect of pressure on the NOx
formation shows a similar trend for fuel oil 2 as for methane.
When the equivalence ratio was increased from 0.5 to 0.7, the
formation of NOx was increased by a multiple of approximately 2
for fuel oil 2, independent of pressure. Three factors contribute to
the increase in NOx for fuel oils as the equivalence ratio is in-
creased: 1 the amount of fuel-bound nitrogen available for NOx
conversion is also increased; 2 the increase in ﬂame temperature
creates more thermal-NOx formation; 3 the prompt-NOx contri-
bution increases as the availability of CH-like radicals increases
as the mixture gets richer. The last two factors also contribute to
the increase in NOx for methane as the equivalence ratio is in-
creased, as shown in Fig. 6. The difference in NOx between meth-
ane and fuel oil 2 is equivalent to the NOx produced by the fuel-
bound nitrogen.
From the chemical composition analysis shown in Table 1, the
contribution of fuel-bound nitrogen to NOx would be 12 ppm for
fuel oil 2 at 0.7 equivalence ratio. In Fig. 7, the measured NOx for
fuel oil 2 at 0.7 equivalence ratio is approximately equal to the
NOx produced by methane plus 12 ppm fuel NOx. These results
indicate an apparent quantitative conversion of fuel-bound nitro-
gen to NOx at these lean conditions.
The results given in Fig. 7 show that NOx formation in methane
and fuel oil 2 exhibits a slight positive dependence on pressure.
The effect of pressure on NOx emissions during lean, premixed
combustion is inﬂuenced by many factors 19–23: degree of fuel-
air mixing, equivalence ratio, residence time, and inlet tempera-
ture. Leonard and Stegmaier 19, Steele et al. 20, and Bhargava
et al. 21 studied the inﬂuence of pressure on NOx formation in
lean, premixed systems but reached differing conclusions. Le-
onard and Stegmaier 19 concluded that NOx emissions are inde-
pendent of pressure for a perfectly premixed system with a ﬂame
temperature in the range from 1700 K to 1900 K. Lean, premixed
combustion experiments of Bhargava et al. 21, performed from
7 atm and 27 atm, showed that the pressure effect on NOx is
negligible up to 0.50 equivalence ratio. However, equivalence ra-
tios larger than 0.5 showed a positive pressure dependence on
NOx. Bhargava et al. 21 indicated that equivalence ratio and
absolute pressure are also important factors that determine the
effect of pressure on NOx. Conversely, Steele et al. 20, who
performed high pressure jet-stirred reactor experiments from
Fig. 5
The effect of N2 to fuel dilution ratio on NOx and CO for
fuel oil 2 at 5 atm and 0.6 equivalence ratio
Fig. 6
Comparison of NOx measurements for methane and
fuel oils 1 and 2 as a function of equivalence ratio at varying
pressures. Key: methane at 2 atm „*… and 5 atm „… pressures;
fuel oil 1 at 3 atm „…, 4 atm „…, and 5 atm „… pressures; fuel
oil 2 at 5 atm „…, 8 atm „…, and 10 atm „… pressures. The
lines indicate the trends. The fuel to N2 molar dilution ratio was
1–5.
Fig. 7
Comparison of NOx measurements for methane and
fuel oil 2 as a function of pressure. The fuel to N2 molar dilution
ratio was 1–5.
051501-4 / Vol. 130, SEPTEMBER 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

1 atm to 7 atm, reported a slightly negative pressure dependence
on NOx. The results of Steele et al. may be due to the absence of
a signiﬁcant plug-ﬂow residence time in the downstream of the
jet-stirred reactor used in their experiments. Thus, based on the
experimental data 19,21 reported in the literature and the experi-
mental results discussed in this paper, it can be concluded that
NOx formation in a gas turbine combustor is independent of pres-
sure or has a slight positive pressure dependence at very lean
conditions. However, NOx emissions will increase with pressure
for higher equivalence ratio mixtures.
Pilot-Scale Testing
The next stage of development of the LPP system involved
pilot-scale testing to study emissions and combustion characteris-
tics, such as ﬂame stability and lean blowout LBO limits, on
realistic turbine hardware. A scaled-up version of the lean, pre-
mixed, swirl-stabilized burner used for the high pressure bench-
scale tests was designed, built, and tested. The design of this
scaled-up burner is similar to that found in modern DLE gas tur-
bine combustion systems 1,24–27. This large-scale test facility
was able to supply up to 0.6 kg/s ﬂow rate of air for the atmo-
spheric pressure tests.
Atmospheric pressure tests were performed with combustion air
at typical gas turbine compressor discharge temperatures of
600–620 K. Figure 8 shows NOx emission data obtained in the
atmospheric pressure, swirl-stabilized burner for methane, fuel oil
1, and fuel oil 2. Figure 8 also compares the natural gas NOx
measurements of Leonard and Stegmaier 19, as well as the NOx
data at 2 atm and 5 atm of pressure obtained in the high pressure
swirl burner described in Fig. 6. The experimental data of Leonard
and Stegmaier 19 was measured between 1 atm and 30 atm. The
NOx measurements shown in Fig. 8 for fuel oil 2 are approxi-
mately the same as those observed in the high pressure swirl
burner experiments. The same ﬁgure also shows that fuel oil 1
produced relatively lower NOx, while natural gas gave higher
NOx when compared to the high pressure burner results.
Single Gas Turbine Burner Testing
The next step in the pilot-scale testing was to perform combus-
tion tests on actual turbine hardware at both atmospheric and high
pressure conditions. A Solar Turbines Centaur 50 gas turbine fuel
nozzle was used for all real hardware tests. This natural gas nozzle
was used for the vaporized liquid fuel LPP gas tests without any
modiﬁcations. Tests were conducted at single nozzle, full load
conditions for a Centaur 50, a Taurus 60, and a Taurus 70 gas
turbine 27. During the gas turbine burner tests, the liquid fuel
was supplied in gaseous form from the vaporizer.
The testing involved a study of emissions and combustion char-
acteristics, such as ﬂame stability and LBO limits. Both the atmo-
spheric pressure and high pressure tests were performed at typical
compressor discharge temperatures. For the high pressure tests,
typical compressor discharge pressures were also used. Figure 9
shows a representative atmospheric pressure ﬂame structure for
natural gas and for fuel oil 1 from a Centaur 50 fuel nozzle at full
load conditions. As can be seen in the ﬁgure, the LPP ﬂame with
fuel oil 1 exhibits a very similar ﬂame structure and color to that
of the natural gas ﬂame.
Figures 10 and 11 show the results of atmospheric pressure
testing of a single gas turbine fuel nozzle at Centaur 50 full load
conditions for three fuels. Prevaporized fuel oil 1 and fuel oil 2
run as LPP gas both show low NOx and CO emissions comparable
to those of DLE combustion systems ﬁred on natural gas. The
ﬁgures show that these low NOx and low CO emissions are si-
multaneously achieved. As discussed earlier, the primary differ-
ence between natural gas and LPP gas NOx emissions can be
attributed to the fuel-bound nitrogen present in the fuel oils. Also,
during the testing, no ﬂashbacks were observed at any of the test
conditions when operating on the fuel oils using the LPP system,
and a stable ﬂame was easily maintained when switching fuels
from natural gas to LPP gas and back again.
Actual turbine hardware tests were conducted using a high
pressure facility capable of testing a single gas turbine fuel nozzle
at full compressor discharge temperature and pressure. The LPP
liquid vaporizer was used to supply the liquid fuels in gaseous
Fig. 8
NOx data obtained in the atmospheric pressure test rig
for methane, fuel oil 1, and fuel oil 2. The data are compared to
the methane data of Leonard and Stegmaier †19‡ as well as to
the NOx data obtained in the high pressure swirl burner de-
scribed in Fig. 6 at 2 atm and 5 atm.
Fig. 9
Comparison of natural gas and fuel oil 1 ﬂames at at-
mospheric pressure for Centaur 50 fuel nozzle at full load
conditions
Fig. 10
Comparison of NOx emission measurements for fuel
oil 2, fuel oil 1, and natural gas as a function of measured ex-
haust gas temperature for a single fuel nozzle at Centaur 50 full
load conditions „100%…. The combustion air temperature was
613 K, the combustor pressure was 1 atm, and the fuel dilution
was 6:1 „molar basis….
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2008, Vol. 130 / 051501-5
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

form. The same fuel nozzle used for natural gas testing was also
used for liquid fuel testing on LPP gas without any modiﬁcations.
Figure 12 shows NOx and CO emissions at full load conditions for
both natural gas and fuel oil 2.
During the testing, emission and dynamics data were taken over
a range of lean equivalence ratios from approximately 0.75 to the
LBO limit. However, the emission data are plotted against the
measured exhaust gas temperature in order to provide a common
temperature reference. The lowest temperature data points shown
in Fig. 12 reﬂect the experimentally observed LBO limit. Figure
12 shows that fuel oil 2 LPP gas has an extended LBO limit
compared to natural gas and can thus achieve NOx emissions
nearly as low as natural gas despite the fuel-bound nitrogen.
Figure 12 also shows that the crossover point between NOx and
CO emissions extends to lower temperatures and therefore lower
equivalence ratios for fuel oil 2 LPP gas as compared to natural
gas. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, fuel oil 2 LPP gas showed
increased ﬂame stability and an extended LBO limit at lower tem-
peratures equivalence ratio compared to natural gas.
Figure 13 shows comparable NOx and CO emissions for both
Taurus 60 and Taurus 70 single nozzle full load conditions. The
data indicate that similar emissions are achieved, even though the
Taurus 70 full load conditions are at higher temperature and pres-
sure than the Taurus 60 operating conditions. Finally, as was ob-
served in the atmospheric pressure tests, these high pressure tests
also demonstrate that a stable burner operation was easily main-
tained when switching fuels from natural gas to LPP gas and back
again.
The signiﬁcance of the data shown in Fig. 12 is that liquid
fuels, such as fuel oil 2 LPP gas, are able to achieve low NOx
emission levels similar to natural gas. For an exhaust temperature
ﬁring temperature of 1318 K, Fig. 12 shows NOx and CO emis-
sions for natural gas to be 9 ppm and 3.5 ppm, respectively. The
comparable fuel oil 2 LPP gas emissions at the same exhaust
temperature are 16 ppm for NOx and 4.0 ppm for CO. Because
the LPP gas fuel characteristics are similar to those of natural gas,
fuel oil 2 LPP gas is capable of being used in modern DLE gas
turbine combustion systems without changes to the burner hard-
ware while achieving much lower NOx and CO emissions than
fuel oils burned in conventional spray ﬂames with water addition.
Conclusions
This paper described the development of and results from a
patented low NOx LPP combustion system for liquid fuels. In the
LPP combustion system, liquid fuels were vaporized into gaseous
form in an inert environment using nitrogen as diluent. The effect
of nitrogen diluent on ignition delay time was measured in a
laboratory-scale ﬂow reactor. The experimental results show that
diluent nitrogen increased the ignition delay time at typical air/
fuel premixing conditions in gas turbines. Also, high pressure,
swirl-stabilized burner experiments were performed to study NOx
formation using the LPP combustion system. The fuel oils in gas-
eous form were premixed with air and burned to achieve very low
NOx emissions comparable to those of natural gas in a lean, pre-
mixed combustion system. The difference in NOx between meth-
ane and the fuel oils was attributed to the conversion of fuel-
bound nitrogen into NOx.
Finally, the test program demonstrated that the LPP combustion
system described in this paper was able to produce low NOx and
low CO emissions without autoignition and ﬂashback. These re-
sults were achieved at compressor discharge temperatures and
pressures using actual full-scale turbine hardware designed for
Fig. 11
Comparison of CO emission measurements for fuel oil
2, fuel oil 1, and natural gas as a function of measured exhaust
gas temperature for a single fuel nozzle at Centaur 50 full load
conditions „100%…. The combustion air temperature was 613 K,
the combustor pressure was 1 atm, and the fuel dilution was
6:1 „molar basis….
Fig. 12
Comparison of NOx and CO emission measurements
for fuel oil 2 and natural gas as a function of measured exhaust
gas temperature for a single fuel nozzle at Taurus 60 full load
conditions „100%…. The combustion air temperature was 648 K,
the combustor pressure was 12.6 atm, and the fuel dilution was
5:1 „molar basis….
Fig. 13
Comparison of NOx and CO emission measurements
for fuel oil 2 as a function of measured exhaust gas tempera-
ture for a single fuel nozzle at Taurus 60 „T60… and Taurus 70
„T70… full load conditions „100%…. The combustion air tempera-
tures were 648 K „T60… and 706 K „T70…, the combustor pres-
sures were 12.6 atm „T60… and 16.2 atm „T70…, and the fuel di-
lution was 5:1 „molar basis….
051501-6 / Vol. 130, SEPTEMBER 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

natural gas operation without any modiﬁcations to the combustor
hardware. The test data show that at equivalent exhaust ﬁring
temperatures, NOx emissions for natural gas and fuel oil 2 LPP
gas were 9 ppm and 16 ppm, respectively. CO emissions were
3.5 ppm and 4.0 ppm, respectively. Because the LPP gas fuel
characteristics are similar to natural gas, fuel oil 2 LPP gas is
capable of being used in modern DLE gas turbine combustion
systems without changes to the burner hardware while achieving
single digit NOx and CO emissions levels.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the LPP Combustion
design team for the work described in this paper. Speciﬁc thanks
go to Maclain Holton, Diwakar Vashishat, Robert Schmidt, Joseph
Currano, and David Sykes for their help during the design, build-
ing and testing phases of the project. The authors would also like
to acknowledge the assistance of Solar Turbines, especially Dr.
Ken Smith, Leonel Arellano, and Vu Phi. This work was funded
by LPP Combustion, LLC.
References
1 Davis, L. B., and Black, S. H., 2000, “Dry Low NOx Combustion Systems for
GE Heavy-Duty Gas Turbines,” General Electric Power Systems, Report No.
GER 3568G.
2 Plee, S. L., and Mellor, A. M., 1978, “Review of Flashback Term Reported in
Prevaporizing/Premixing Combustors,” Combust. Flame, 32, pp. 193–203.
3 Oumejjoud, K., Stuttaford, P., Jennings, S., Rizkalla, H., Henriquez, J., and
Chen, Y., 2005, “Emission, LBO and Combustion Characterization for Several
Alternative Fuels,” ASME Paper No. GT2005-68561.
4 Maier, G., and Wiitig, S., 1999, “Fuel Preparation and Emission Characteris-
tics of a Pressure Loaded LPP Combustor,” Paper No. AIAA-99-3774.
5 Imamura, A., Yoshida, M., Kawano, M., Aruga, N., Nagata, Y., and Kawag-
ishi, M., 2001, “Research and Development of a LPP Combustor With Swirl-
ing Flow for Low NOx,” Paper No. AIAA-2001-3311.
6 Ikezaki, T., Hosoi, J., and Hidemi, T., 2001, “The Performance of the Low
NOx Aero Gas Turbine Combustor Under High Pressure,” ASME Paper No.
2001-GT-0084.
7 Lin, Y., Peng, Y., and Liu, G., 2004, “Investigation on NOx of a Low Emission
Combustor Design With Multihole Premixer-Prevaporizer,” ASME Paper No.
GT2004-53203.
8 Lee, C., Chun, K. S., and Locke, R. J., 1995, “Fuel-Air Mixing Effect on NOx
Emissions for a Lean Premixed-Prevaporized Combustion System,” Paper No.
AIAA-95-0729.
9 Michou, Y., Chauveau, C., Gijkalp, I., and Carvalho, I. S., 1999, “Experimen-
tal Study of Lean Premixed and Prevaporized Turbulent Spray Combustion,”
Paper No. AIAA 99-0332.
10 Hoffmann, S., Judith, H., and Holm, C., 1998, “Further Development of the
Siemens LPP Hybrid Burner,” ASME Paper No. 98-GT-552.
11 Mansour, A., Benjamin, M., Straub, D. L., and Richards, G. A., 2001, “Ap-
plication of Macrolamination Technology to Lean, Premixed Combustion,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 123, pp. 796–802.
12 Røkke, N. A., and Wilson, A. J. W., 2001, “Experimental and Theoretical
Studies of a Novel Venturi Lean Premixed Prevaporized LPP Combustor,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 123, pp. 567–573.
13 Roby, R. J., Klassen, M. S., and Schemel, C. F., 2006, “System for Vaporiza-
tion of Liquid Fuels for Combustion and Method of Use,” U.S. Patent No.
7,089,745.
14 Lifshitz, A., 2001, “Chemical and Combustion Kinetics,” Handbook of Shock
Waves, Vol. 3, Academic, New York.
15 Yetter, R. A., Dryer, F. L., and Rabitz, H., 1991, “A Comprehensive Reaction
Mechanism for Carbon Monoxide/Hydrogen/Oxygen Kinetics,” Combust. Sci.
Technol., 79, pp. 129–140.
16 Gokulakrishnan, P., Kazakov, A., and Dryer, F. L., 2003, “Comparison of
Numerical and Experimental Kinetic Data for Flow Reactor Systems: Mixing
Effects,” Proceedings of the Third Joint Meeting, The Combustion Institute.
17 Gokulakrishnan, P., Gaines, G., Currano, J., Klassen, M. S., and Roby, R. J.,
2007, “Experimental and Kinetic Modeling of Kerosene-Type Fuels at Gas
Turbine Operating Conditions,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 129, pp.
655–663.
18 Curran, H. J., Gaffuri, P., Pitz, W. J., and Westbrook, C. K., 1998, “A Com-
prehensive Modeling Study of n-Heptane Oxidation,” Combust. Flame, 114,
pp. 149–177.
19 Leonard, G., and Stegmaier, J., 1994, “Development of an Aeroderivative Gas
Turbine Dry Low Emissions Combustion System,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Tur-
bines Power, 116, pp. 542–546.
20 Steele, R. C., Tonnouchi, J. H., Nicol, D. G., Horning, D. C., Malte, P. C., and
Pratt, D. G., 1996, “Characterization of NOx, N2O and CO for Lean Premixed
Combustion in High Pressure Jet-Sirred Reactor,” ASME Paper No. 96-GT-
128.
21 Bhargava, A., Kendrick, D. W., Colket, M. B., Sowa, W. A., Casleton, K. H.,
and Maloney, D. J., 2000, “Pressure Effect on NOx and CO Emissions in
Industrial Gas Turbines,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-97.
22 Correa, S. M., 1992, “A Review of NOx Formation Under Gas-Turbine Com-
bustion Conditions,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 87, pp. 329–362.
23 Mongia, R. K., Tomita, E., Hsu, F. K., Talbot, L., and Dibble, R. W., 1996,
Sym. Int. Combust., Proc., 26, pp. 2749–2755.
24 Schorr, M. M., and Chalﬁn, J., 1999, “Gas Turbine NOx Emissions Approach-
ing Zero—Is It Worth the Price?,” General Electric Power Generation, Report
No. GER 4172.
25 Pavri, R., and Moore, G. D., 2001, “Gas Turbine Emissions and Control,”
General Electric Power Systems, Report No. GER 4211.
26 Eimers, R. A., Smith, K. O., and Cowell, L., 2001, “Developments in Low
Emissions Combustion Systems for Industrial Gas Turbines,” Solar Turbines,
Report No. TPSOLONOX/901.
27 Knodle, M. S., 1998, “Centaur, 40, Centaur 50 and Taurus 60 Gas Turbine
Product Technology Update,” Solar Turbines Turbomachinery Technology
Seminar, Paper No. TTS123/398/M.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2008, Vol. 130 / 051501-7
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
