
--- Page 1 ---

Holger Ax1
e-mail: holger.ax@dlr.de
Ulrich Stopper
Wolfgang Meier
Manfred Aigner
Institute of Combustion Technology,
German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Pfaffenwaldring 38-40,
D-70563 Stuttgart, Germany
Felix Güthe
Alstom Ltd.,
CH-5401 Baden, Switzerland
Experimental Analysis of the
Combustion Behavior of a Gas
Turbine Burner by Laser
Measurement Techniques
Experimental results from optical and laser spectroscopic measurements on a scaled
industrial gas turbine burner at elevated pressure are presented. Planar laser induced
ﬂuorescence on the OH radical and OH chemiluminescence imaging were applied to
natural gas/air ﬂames for a qualitative analysis of the position and shape of the ﬂame
brush, the ﬂame front and the stabilization mechanism. The results exhibit two different
ways of ﬂame stabilization, a conical more stable ﬂame and a pulsating opened ﬂame.
For quantitative results, one-dimensional laser Raman scattering was applied to these
ﬂames and evaluated on an average and single-shot basis in order to simultaneously
determine the major species concentrations, the mixture fraction, and the temperature.
The mixing of fuel and air, as well as the reaction progress, could thus be spatially and
temporally resolved, showing differently strong variations depending on the ﬂame stabi-
lization mode and the location in the ﬂame. DOI: 10.1115/1.3205033
Keywords: laser
diagnostics,
Raman
scattering,
gas
turbine
combustor,
ﬂame
stabilization
1
Introduction
The lean premixed combustion concept is widely applied in
stationary gas turbines GTs in order to achieve low NOx levels.
However, these ﬂames are prone to combustion instabilities in the
form of unsteady ﬂame stabilization or thermoacoustic pulsations
1–5. These phenomena arise from a complex interaction be-
tween the turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld, the ﬂame reactions, and the com-
bustor geometry. Furthermore, effects of unmixedness have a sig-
niﬁcant inﬂuence on the ﬂame stabilization and emissions 6,7.
Different approaches have been reported to reduce or even to
eliminate the unsteady effects, e.g., active or passive control
mechanisms 8–13 or fuel staging 14. However, a fundamental
understanding of the underlying mechanisms has not been reached
so far, and further experimental and numerical studies are neces-
sary before the potential of lean premixed combustion can be fully
exploited.
In recent years, detailed laser diagnostic studies in GT-relevant
combustors have contributed signiﬁcantly to a better understand-
ing of processes such as ﬂame stabilization, combustion instabili-
ties, pollutant formation and ﬁnite-rate chemistry effects. Fre-
quently
used
measuring
techniques
were
particle
image
velocimetry PIV or laser Doppler velocimetry LDV for the
ﬂow ﬁeld; laser induced ﬂuorescence LIF for ﬂame radicals,
tracers, pollutants, or temperature; coherent anti-Stokes Raman
scattering CARS for temperature; and laser Raman scattering for
species concentrations. Overviews and detailed descriptions of the
different laser measurement techniques can be found in Refs.
15–18. In some research groups, high-pressure test rigs have
been equipped with optical access in order to apply these tech-
niques to GT combustion processes under realistic conditions, i.e.,
preheated air, elevated pressure, high thermal loads, high turbu-
lence levels, and relevant combustor geometries, see for example
Refs. 19–28. Here, challenges arise from the limited optical ac-
cess and especially from window contamination by the high ther-
mal loads or particles in the ﬂow 29. Particularly for single-shot
one-dimensional 1D Raman measurements, which require high
laser pulse energies, a high laser ﬂuence can lead to window dam-
age or optical breakdown in the focal region.
In the investigations presented here, a scaled industrial GT-
burner was installed in the high-pressure test rig at the Institute of
Combustion Technology of the German Aerospace Center DLR
in Stuttgart and investigated using different laser measuring tech-
niques in combination with chemiluminescence imaging, exhaust
gas analysis, and dynamic pressure recording. The combustor was
operated with natural gas NG and preheated air T=400°C, and
the ﬂame settings were varied in a wide range of thermal power,
equivalence ratio, and fuel staging. Main goals of the study were
a detailed characterization of the combustion process, the inﬂu-
ence of fuel staging on the ﬂame stabilization, the quantiﬁcation
of the degree of mixing, the identiﬁcation of effects of turbulence-
chemistry interactions, and the investigation of transient ﬂame
behavior. Planar laser induced ﬂuorescence PLIF of OH and
OH chemiluminescence imaging were applied to determine the
ﬂame structures and the stabilization region. Further, 1D-laser Ra-
man scattering was used to quantitatively measure the major spe-
cies concentrations N2, O2, H2O, CxHy, CO2, CO, and H2 and
the temperature. By this technique, the local mixture fraction and
the reaction progress could be determined, revealing effects of
unmixedness and turbulence-chemistry interactions.
The focus of this paper lies on the comparison of two different
ﬂames in terms of their shape and stabilization on the burner.
Detailed quantitative results from single-shot 1D-Raman measure-
ments on a scaled industrial GT-burner under realistic conditions
are presented for the ﬁrst time to our knowledge.
2
Experimental Setup
2.1
Burner and Test Rig. The experiments were conducted
on a geometrically downscaled version of a gas turbine burner
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received April
8, 2009; ﬁnal manuscript received May 14, 2009; published online March 5, 2010.
Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the ASME Gas Turbine
Technical Congress and Exposition, Orlando, FL, June 8–12, 2009.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2010, Vol. 132 / 051503-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

Alstom EV burner 30,31. The burner has already been the
object of various experimental and numerical investigations with
respect to the ﬂow ﬁeld, the ﬂame behavior, emissions, the ﬂame
stability, and the mechanism of ﬂame stabilization, see Refs.
14,32. A schematic drawing of the burner is shown in Fig. 1. The
positions of the laser sheet for LIF measurements and the radial
proﬁles where the Raman measurements were taken are also indi-
cated. It should be noted that the laser beam for the 1D-Raman
measurements was directed orthogonally to the LIF laser sheet;
the line in Fig. 1 refers to the middle of the imaged range, which
intersects the LIF sheet.
The design of this swirl-stabilized burner is based on two
halves of a cone, which are radially shifted apart. This generates
two tangential slots of constant width, through which the combus-
tion air enters the cone. By this concept, a tangential velocity
component is induced in the ﬂow, with an increasing swirl
strength downstream and which results in a vortex breakdown
close to the burner exit D=70 mm. The fuel is injected through
small holes along the tangential slits and mixes with the entering
air. Additional fuel can be injected through the tip of a pilot lance,
which protrudes on the axis 54 mm upstream from the burner
mouth. The two fuel ﬂows tangential slots and pilot lance can be
controlled separately for different fuel staged operation condi-
tions. The staging ratio is deﬁned as the ratio of the fuel mass ﬂow
through the lance to the total fuel mass ﬂow. For the present study,
the EV type burner was operated and investigated in the high-
pressure
combustion
test
facility
HBK-S
Hochdruckbrennkammerprufstand-Stuttgart at the DLR Stut-
tgart. The test rig and the specially designed rectangular combus-
tion chamber 99129 mm2 were both equipped with large
quartz glass windows to provide full optical access on all four
sides. The outer windows in the pressure vessel were exposed to
elevated pressure but only at intermediate to low temperatures,
while the inner ones were directly exposed to the ﬂame but only
moderate pressure variations. The inner windows were installed in
a double-glazed conﬁguration with cooling air ﬂowing between
the glass plates in order to reduce the thermal load of the win-
dows. So, there were three windows in total both on the laser
entrance and the exit side, as well as on the two sides in line of the
detection. The burner plate was cooled by air streaming through
small holes into the combustion chamber.
2.2
Flames. The burner was operated with natural gas/air
ﬂames with a thermal power up to 370 kW at different values of
air equivalence ratio  and staging ratios. The NG was taken from
the public power supply. The composition of the NG hardly varied
during the period of the measurement campaign with a mean com-
position of 94.14% CH4, 2.955% C2H6, 0.557% C3H8, 0.064%
C4H10, 0.07% isobutane, 2.124% N2, and 0.09% CO2. The air
preheat temperature was kept constant to 673 K, the pressure in-
side the combustion chamber was 3 bars. It has been observed in
the ﬂow ﬁeld that the burner can exhibit two different ways of
ﬂame stabilization, depending on the several conditions, as it has
been reported from several investigations, both experimental and
theoretical 14,32,33. One is a conical and more stable ﬂame with
respect to pulsations, which is anchored inside the burner cone.
The other one is stabilized just downstream the burner exit. In this
case, the ﬂame is more opened and the outer recirculation zone
ORZ is more pronounced compared with the cone stabilized
ﬂame. The opened mode has better mixing leading to lower NOx,
but it is also more prone to pulsations. Generally speaking, the
transition from the cone stabilized to the opened ﬂame takes place
with increasing  decreasing reactivity with a relatively small
range in which the ﬂame alternates between the two states, or with
a reduced staging ratio. The transition to the opened ﬂame is ac-
companied by a reduction of NOx emissions and a pressure drop
across the burner, both in the case of increasing  and the case of
a reduced staging ratio. In this study, the results of 1D-Raman
measurements of two selected ﬂames are presented, one of each
way of stabilization, and compared with the according LIF and
OH chemiluminescence measurements. The two ﬂames are re-
ferred to as ﬂames A and B in this paper. Flame A is a cone
stabilized ﬂame with a thermal power of 345 kW, a staging ratio
A of 0.23, and A1.3. Flame B is an opened ﬂame with 317
kW, B=0.17, and B1.7. The corresponding mixture fractions
f are fA=0.044 and fB=0.034 for ﬂames A and B, respectively.
2.3
PLIFÕOH Chemiluminescence Imaging. For the OH-
PLIF measurements a ﬂashlamp pumped frequency doubled
Nd:YAG laser Quanta Ray, DCR-2 was used to pump a fre-
quency doubled tunable dye laser Lumonics, HD-500 at 10 Hz.
The UV beam pulse duration of 8 ns and line width of 0.4 cm−1
had a pulse energy of approximately 2.5 mJ at the exit of the laser
and was tuned to the Q18 transition of OH at approximately 283
nm in the =0→=1 vibrational band of the A 2+-X2 sys-
tem. The population of the laser-coupled ground state of the se-
lected line varied by approximately 9% in the temperature range
of interest 1400–2200 K. Subsequent OH ﬂuorescence in the
=1→=1 and =0→=0 bands near 310 nm was detected
through an interference ﬁlter in the wavelength region 295–340
nm. This enabled suppression of light scattered from the incident
laser beam and background radiations. The output beam from the
dye laser was expanded into a vertical sheet by means of cylin-
drical lenses, as shown in Fig. 2. The laser sheet inside the com-
bustor was 60 mm in height and approximately 400 m in thick-
ness. By means of a beam splitter, a small portion of the incoming
laser beam was directed into a CH4/air reference ﬂame on a ma-
trix burner, operated under laminar conditions. The LIF produced
Fig. 1
Schematic drawing of the burner and the measurement
positions of the different laser diagnostic techniques
Fig. 2
Schematic drawing of the experimental setup for OH-
PLIF measurements
051503-2 / Vol. 132, MAY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

by that ﬂame was used for the online monitoring of the excitation
line wavelength.
The OH-PLIF detection system consisted of an image-
intensiﬁed charge coupled device ICCD camera Roper Scien-
tiﬁc, 512512 pixels with achromatic UV lens Halle, f /2, f
=100 mm. Part of incoming laser sheet was deﬂected into a
quartz cell ﬁlled with ﬂuorescent dye solution by means of a beam
splitter. The dye cell ﬂuorescence proﬁle was simultaneously im-
aged
using
another
ICCD
camera
Roper
Scientiﬁc,
512
512 pixels equipped with a Nikon lens f /4.5, f =105 mm.
This dye cell proﬁle was used for correcting the laser sheet proﬁle
inhomogeneities. The image intensiﬁer was set to an exposure
time of 400 ns for both the OH-PLIF and the dye cell ﬂuorescence
camera. In this experiment, an arrangement for the correction of
absorption 34,35 was not applied. The same detection system
along with the ﬁlter combination was used for the OH chemilu-
minescence measurements. The exposure time for the image in-
tensiﬁer was set to 40 s to capture the integrated along the line
of sight spontaneous emission from OH in the electronically ex-
cited state OH. The timing between the laser pulses and the
camera gate openings were synchronized by means of a pulse
delay generator DG535, SRS Inc., Sunnyvale, CA.
2.4
1D-Laser Raman Scattering. Single-shot vibrational Ra-
man scattering was applied to simultaneously determine the major
species concentrations N2, O2, H2O, NG, CO2, CO, and H2
along a line 7 mm in length. The NG was treated as one species in
the detection and evaluation procedure. The various hydrocarbons
within the NG all contribute to the Raman-active C–H stretch
vibration, which was detected at around 630 nm. The inaccuracy
associated with this simpliﬁcation is relatively small because the
maximum NG mole fractions measured in the investigated pre-
mixed ﬂames were approximately 0.1. Thus, the mole fractions of
the minor constituents of the NG are below 0.01. The main com-
ponents of the experiment were a laser system consisting of ﬁve
Nd:YAG lasers, a pulse stretcher, beam forming optics, the detec-
tion optics, a spectrograph, and an ICCD camera, as shown in Fig.
3. The Nd:YAG lasers provided ﬁve temporally separated pulses
at a wavelength of =532 nm of 7 ns duration, each at a repeti-
tion rate of 10 Hz, which were combined to one beam 36. In
order to reduce the intensity at the windows and to avoid optical
breakdown in the focal region the pulses were elongated by a
pulse stretcher, and furthermore the laser beams were focused by
a combination of two perpendicularly arranged cylindrical lenses
f =300 mm to generate a “blurred” focus of an average diameter
of 0.5 mm 29. In this way, a total pulse energy of 0.8 J could be
irradiated into the combustor. The pulse stretcher consisted of two
beam splitters and six mirrors, which divided each pulse into sev-
eral individual pulses, which were recombined again after having
traveled different path lengths, generating a total pulse duration of
about 350 ns 37. The Raman scattered light was collected at 90
deg by a custom designed achromatic lens system, with an aper-
ture of 150 mm conﬁgured for line imaging of Raman scattering
at 532 nm 36 and relayed onto the entrance slit of the spec-
trograph SpectraPro 300i, Acton Research, f =300 mm, 490
lines/mm, f#=4, and dispersion 6 nm/mm. For the rejection of
elastically scattered light, a holographic notch ﬁlter was placed in
front of the entrance slit. A slit width of 1 mm, a slit height of 14
mm, and a magniﬁcation of the detection optics of 2 resulted in an
imaged probe volume of 7 mm in direction of the laser beam and
0.5 mm in diameter. After spectral separation, the Raman bands
from the different major species were detected by an intensiﬁed
CCD camera 13401300 pixels along the line of 7 mm. The
images were binned on chip to superpixels 268 in the direction of
the spectral separation and 28 in spatial direction. This yielded a
partition of 28 measurement volumes along the laser line with
0.25 mm length. The laser was introduced from the top of the
combustor, and the focus was always kept in the middle of the
combustion chamber in vertical direction. The measuring location
within the combustion chamber was changed in the direction of
the detection line by translating the laser beam optics and detec-
tion optics simultaneously via computer controlled translation
stages. Due to restrictions of the optical access, the measuring
location closest to the burner mouth was 22 mm. For the measure-
ments presented in this paper, 500 single shots were recorded per
location.
One of the main challenges in performing the Raman measure-
ments was the degradation of the combustor windows, which were
directly exposed to the ﬂame. At high ﬂame temperatures, quartz
begins to soften and its surface becomes rough and increasingly
opaque leading to decreasing transmittance and, in the worst case,
to window damage by the laser beam. The degradation was not
uniformly distributed over the window and most severe where the
ﬂame hit the quartz surface. As a result, the effective laser pulse
energy at the measuring location could not always be determined
accurately. However, this quantity is usually needed to ratio the
Raman signals in order to determine the species concentrations
quantitatively. A similar uncertainty arose from the unknown
time and position dependent transmission of the window on the
detection side. Therefore, it was necessary to ﬁnd an appropriate
method to compensate for the lacking information.
2.5
Raman Data Evaluation. In order to deduce the species
number densities from the Raman signals, calibration measure-
ments were performed. Temperature dependent calibration and
crosstalk factors were determined in laminar ﬂat ﬂames 1150–
2200 K with known temperature and gas compositions operated
at atmospheric conditions in the GT combustion chamber. The
coefﬁcients for the low temperature range T=300–1000 K
were determined in cold and electrically heated gas ﬂows. The
temperature is deduced from the total number density using the
ideal gas law and the measured pressure in the combustion cham-
ber. The measured signals from the GT ﬂames were evaluated
using these calibration curves. Because the signals have to be
weighted by the laser pulse energy on a single-shot basis, the
uncertainty of the determination of the laser energy caused by
degraded windows led to a signiﬁcant uncertainty in the determi-
nation of the species number densities. Although the relative spe-
cies composition was hardly affected by this uncertainty, the total
number density and thus the temperature are. Therefore, the fol-
lowing procedure was applied to determine the temperature. All C
and H atoms in the combustion chamber stem from the fuel and
all N and O atoms from the air supply except for a negligible
contribution from the natural gas. During all processes in the
combustion chamber transport and chemical reactions the
atomic ratios C/H and N/O remain unaltered in every volume
element, i.e., 0.26 for C/H and 3.73 for N/O. A correct Raman
measurement must therefore yield these numbers. On the other
hand, the Raman calibration curves for the different molecular
Fig.
3
Schematic
drawing
of
the
setup
for
1D-Raman
experiments
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2010, Vol. 132 / 051503-3
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

species exhibit different temperature dependencies. Fortuitously,
the temperature dependencies vary in a way that the C/H and N/O
ratios deduced from the measurements are a unique and noticeable
function of T. Taking the relative Raman signal intensities from
each single-shot measurement, it turned out that only for one tem-
perature value the ratios C/H and N/O assumed the expected val-
ues. The Raman-spectrum was therefore scaled to match the opti-
mum value of both the C/H and the N/O ratio. The species number
density and the temperature were then calculated based on the
scaled spectrum.
The precision of the Raman results can be estimated by the
single-shot evaluation and shot noise analysis of measurements on
the stable calibration ﬂames. The relative standard deviations in
the postﬂame region of a ﬂat CH4/air ﬂame at atmospheric pres-
sure are typically around 4% for N2, 13% for H2O, 20% for CO2,
and 7% for the temperature and the mixture fraction. The absolute
temperatures of the calibration ﬂames were reproduced by an ac-
curacy better than 5%. The ﬂame temperatures had been deter-
mined beforehand using CARS with an accuracy of 3%. The tem-
perature data for ﬂat calibration ﬂames obtained by CARS
measurements have been published in Refs. 38,39. As the Ra-
man signals scale linearly with pressure, the signals from the GT
ﬂames 3 bars are a factor of 3 higher than in the calibration
ﬂames. The precision should therefore be improved by a factor of
	3. However, systematic uncertainties due to shifts in alignment
or signal correction might impair the accuracy.
3
Results
3.1
Cone Stabilized Flame A. The measurement results of
the two different ﬂames are presented one after another. First, the
cone stabilized ﬂame A is discussed. In Fig. 4 the mean OH
chemiluminescence of this ﬂame is shown, averaged over 200
single shots. The electronically excited OH is formed by the ﬂame
reactions in the region of the highest heat release rates and is
therefore a good marker for the position of the ﬂame front. In all
shown pictures, the ﬂow is from the bottom up. One can clearly
see that the ﬂame brush has a conical shape and is mainly con-
centrated in a distinct layer in the outer region of the swirled ﬂow
exiting the burner. The combustion of the fresh gas already takes
place inside the burner and just outside the burner exit. One
should keep in mind, however, that the detected signal of the
chemiluminescence is integrated over the whole ﬂame in the line
of sight and gives no information about the ﬂame structure details
with an appropriate spatial resolution. The slight asymmetry in the
intensity distribution might partly be due to inhomogeneities in
the transparency of the combustor windows. However, the com-
bustor geometry is not axial symmetric, so that the observed
asymmetry of the ﬂame might be real.
The PLIF measurements on OH reveal the hot regions in
the combustion chamber where the OH radical is present
1400 K. The results of the PLIF measurements of ﬂame A are
shown in Fig. 5. On top, the mean OH distribution is shown,
averaged over 200 single shots. The asymmetry is caused by ab-
sorption of the laser radiation by OH radicals and thus attenuation
of the laser light sheet, which enters the combustion chamber
from the left side. The hot inner recirculation zone IRZ reaches
back into the burner, where it promotes the ignition of the fresh
gas and stabilizes the ﬂame. The bottom picture shows a single
shot of the OH-PLIF measurements. Like the OH chemilumines-
cence measurements, it also shows the conical shape of the ﬂame
and reveals a strongly wrinkled ﬂame front due to the turbulence
of the ﬂow. Regions of high signal intensity red and yellow
indicate the location of the ﬂame front, where OH is formed in
superequilibrium concentrations 40.
Such a qualitative analysis of this ﬂame by OH-PLIF and OH
chemiluminescence has already been reported elsewhere 14. The
new component in the present study is the successful application
of laser Raman scattering, which allows for a quantitative analysis
with respect to the major species, the temperature, and the mixture
fraction. The results of the evaluated mixture fractions f in ﬂame
A at different radial positions 22 mm downstream are shown in
Fig. 6. The symbols represent the ensemble averaged values of the
measuring volume in the plane of the PLIF laser sheet over 500
single shots. As expected for a technically premixed ﬂame, the
mixture fraction is not constant, however, the variation in the
mean values is rather moderate over a large region. Close to the
burner axis −5 mmr5 mm, the mixture fraction is slightly
increased and asymmetric, which is presumably due to the asym-
metry of the ﬂow ﬁeld, as the burner is not rotationally symmetric.
Fig. 4
Mean distribution of the OH chemiluminescence of
ﬂame A „averaged over 200 single shots…. The dotted line indi-
cates the position of the radial proﬁle that was measured by
1D-Raman scattering.
Fig. 5
OH-PLIF measurements of ﬂame A. Top: mean OH dis-
tribution „averaged over 200 single shots…. Bottom: single-shot
OH-PLIF measurement.
Fig. 6
Radial proﬁle of the mean mixture fraction in ﬂame A 22
mm downstream from the burner mouth; for comparison, the
stoichiometric mixture fraction of the NG is 0.057
051503-4 / Vol. 132, MAY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

From r=5 mm outwards, the mixture fraction remains almost
constant until it starts to increase at a radius of r=25 mm. It
reaches the maximum value at r=34 mm, which is also the region
where the highest signal intensities can be found in the PLIF and
OH chemiluminescence measurements at this distance from the
burner mouth. Farther outwards the mixture fraction strongly de-
creases, which can be explained by the hot gas in the outer recir-
culation zone mixing with the cooling air for the burner plate,
which streams into the combustion chamber through the burner
plate. In Fig. 7 scatter plots are displayed showing the correlation
between the temperature and mixture fraction at some of the prior
shown radial positions at the same downstream location 22 mm.
The data points represent the results of the single-shot measure-
ment from all 28 measuring volumes along the laser line. In ad-
dition, the indicated black curve shows the correlation at adiabatic
equilibrium conditions, which was calculated with GASEQ 41. It
is not expected that the investigated ﬂame is in a state of adiabatic
equilibrium, however, the curve helps to assess the thermochemi-
cal state of the ﬂame. The light gray vertical line indicates the
stoichiometric mixture fraction for the given NG composition. In
general, the scatter plots reﬂect a signiﬁcant variation in f, which
changes with the radial position. For an industrial GT-burner, it is
the ﬁrst time that this variation could be determined quantitatively
on a single-shot basis, i.e., without temporal or spatial averaging.
The second general feature, which becomes immediately obvious
from the scatter plots, is the signiﬁcant variation in temperatures
reﬂecting different states of reaction progress. In the following the
different radial positions are discussed in more detail. At r
=9 mm, the temperatures are high with little ﬂuctuations and the
samples are close to adiabatic equilibrium. This is typical for the
IRZ, where the residence time was long enough for the gas to
almost completely react before being transported back to the
burner mouth. The small temperature depression compared with
equilibrium might be due to strain effects, temperature loss by
Fig. 7
Scatter plots of single-shot Raman measurements in ﬂame A at different radial positions 22 mm down-
stream from the burner mouth. Adiabatic equilibrium „black… and stoichiometric mixture fraction „light gray… are
indicated by lines.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2010, Vol. 132 / 051503-5
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

radiation or contact to cold surfaces or also to measurement un-
certainties. A detailed analysis of these effects would exceed the
scope of this paper; however, the approach to such an analysis is,
e.g., outlined in Ref. 42. The further outwards r=24 mm to r
=34 mm the more cold fresh gas is detected and the mean of the
mixture fraction increases, as it was seen in Fig. 6. The local
variation in the mixture fraction also increases, reaching from lean
f 0.02 to rich f 0.08 mixtures due to a not perfect mixing
of fuel and air. With increasing radius the number of samples with
cold temperatures T630 K increases. Although many of them
have near-stoichiometric mixture fraction values, they have not
reacted yet.
In addition, a large number of samples with intermediate tem-
peratures is seen, which reﬂects a state of “partially reacted.”
They most likely represent mixtures of hot reacted gas from the
recirculation zones with fresh cold gas from the burner, which
have not reacted yet due to ignition delay 42. Other reasons for
the partially reacted state might be local ﬂame extinction or that
the ﬂame front crossed the measurement volume. However, in any
case, these samples reﬂect effects of ﬁnite-rate chemistry. At r
=39 mm, most samples are in cold states with a smaller mean but
still strongly varying mixture fraction.
The detected hot burned states have a higher mixture fraction
compared with the cold states. This can be explained by the higher
reactivity of richer mixtures. At r=44 mm the mixture is even
leaner but hotter in the mean. The characteristics of the scatter
plots from the different radial regions are closely related to the
different ﬂow regions. Close to the ﬂame axis, in the IRZ, the gas
is mainly reacted, as explained before. Close to the ORZ r
40 mm, the gas is rather fuel lean and cold due to the inﬂuence
of the cooling air from the burner plate. In the regions of the shear
layers between the fresh gas injection and the IRZ or the ORZ, a
large variation in mixing and reaction progress is present.
A representative scatter plot of the measured species concentra-
tions is shown in Fig. 8 for H2O in correlation with the tempera-
ture. One can see that the formation of water correlates well with
the temperature, as expected, and that the results are in reasonable
agreement with the equilibrium state calculation. The samples
from the intermediate temperature range tend to exhibit lower
temperatures as for the equilibrium. This might be due to heat loss
or to effects of ﬂame strain exerted by the high turbulence levels
known from this kind of ﬂames. The mole fractions from the other
main species have also been evaluated but are not displayed and
discussed here due to the limited space available.
3.2
Lifted Flame B. Flame B is a pulsating opened ﬂame,
which is stabilized farther downstream than ﬂame A, just after the
burner exit. The mean OH distribution is shown in Fig. 9, indi-
cating the position of the ﬂame brush. The images were taken with
the same camera intensiﬁer gain as for the ﬂame A and were also
averaged over 200 single shots.
In comparison to ﬂame A, one can see that the ﬂame zone is not
so distinct and that the ﬂame is more open and wider. The regions
of the highest signal intensities lie further downstream and are less
intense than in ﬂame A.
The according OH-PLIF measurements of ﬂame B are shown in
Fig. 10, again, the mean OH distribution on top, averaged over
200 single shots, and a representative single-shot picture beneath.
It is clearly visible in both images, that ﬂame B stabilizes just
outside the burner and that the ORZ contains more OH than in
ﬂame A. In the single-shot exposure it can be seen that the ﬂame
front is highly wrinkled and is also partially located in the ORZ,
indicated by the spots of high signal intensities red and white
due to the superequilibrium concentrations of the OH in the reac-
tion zone. The contribution of the ORZ to the ignition and stabi-
lization of the ﬂame is therefore signiﬁcantly higher than in ﬂame
A.
The radial proﬁle of the mixture fraction f in ﬂame B is shown
in Fig. 11. As for ﬂame A, the mean values of f are plotted against
the radial position 22 mm downstream for the measuring volume
in the plane of the laser sheet for the PLIF experiment. Around the
burner axis −5 mmr5 mm, the mixture fraction is rela-
tively high, similar to ﬂame A. The peak value, however, is hardly
dislocated from the burner axis.
In the intermediate and outer radius range from r=10 mm
outwards, the values of f slowly increase up to the peak value at
Fig. 8
Scatter plot of H2O versus temperature in ﬂame A at a
radius of r=24 mm, 22 mm downstream from the burner
mouth. The light gray line indicates the adiabatic equilibrium
state.
Fig. 9
Mean distribution of the OH chemiluminescence of
ﬂame B „averaged over 200 single shots…. The dotted line indi-
cates the position of the radial proﬁle that was measured by
1D-Raman scattering.
Fig. 10
OH-PLIF measurements of ﬂame B. Top: mean OH dis-
tribution „averaged over 200 single shots…. Bottom: single-shot
OH-PLIF measurement.
051503-6 / Vol. 132, MAY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

r=35 mm and then decrease again in the ORZ. In comparison to
ﬂame A, the values of f are generally lower due to the higher
global air equivalence ratio of ﬂame B and also more evenly dis-
tributed, especially in the outer region r30 mm.
Results of the single-shot evaluation are displayed as scatter
plots in Fig. 12. The mixture fractions in all 28 measuring vol-
umes are plotted against the temperature for different radial posi-
tions 22 mm downstream together with the equilibrium state curve
black line and the stoichiometric mixture fraction for the NG
light gray line. As in ﬂame A, one can see the strong variations
in the mixture fraction, changing with the radial position. Partly,
the measured temperature of the burned gas lies above the equi-
librium curve, e.g., at r=30 mm. This deviation is possibly due to
an inaccuracy of the measurement. However, a detailed analysis
has not yet been performed and is in preparation.
In the following, the scatter plots for the different radial posi-
tions in ﬂame B are analyzed in more detail. At r=10 mm, most
Fig. 11
Radial proﬁle of mean mixture fraction in ﬂame B 22
mm downstream from the burner mouth
Fig. 12
Scatter plots of single-shot Raman measurements in ﬂame B at different radial positions 22 mm down-
stream from the burner mouth. The adiabatic temperature „black… and the stoichiometric mixture fraction „light
gray… are indicated by lines.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2010, Vol. 132 / 051503-7
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

measurements show high temperatures with relatively low varia-
tions in the mixture fraction. A minor part of the samples is de-
tected at cold or intermediate temperatures, which indicates that
this position is not fully inside the IRZ as it was in ﬂame A. With
increasing distance from the burner axis the variation in the mix-
ture fraction increases due to the effects of the not perfect mixing
of fuel with air, as well as the cooling air for the burner plate,
which mixes with the gas in the ORZ. The portion of cold samples
also increases steadily up to a radius of r=40 mm. At r
=44 mm the mean temperature increases again due to the inﬂu-
ence of the ORZ, where hot gas is transported back to the burner.
As a representative result of the single-shot evaluations of the
major species, the correlation of the H2O concentration with the
temperature is shown in Fig. 13 together with the adiabatic equi-
librium state. For a better comparison to ﬂame A, the results at the
same radius r=24 mm are displayed. In general, the H2O con-
centration is in good agreement with the equilibrium state for the
complete temperature range. The mean value of the H2O concen-
tration for the burned state T1500 K is smaller then in ﬂame
A, as expected, according to the lower global mixture fraction.
There are also far more samples in the intermediate to cold tem-
perature range as in ﬂame A, where the ignition has not set in yet,
or the gas is only “partially” burned due to the afore mentioned
reasons.
4
Summary
A downscaled industrial gas turbine burner was equipped with
an optical combustion chamber and installed in a high-pressure
test rig. It was operated at different ﬂame conditions at elevated
pressure. Laser spectroscopic and optical measurements have been
performed to investigate the ﬂame behavior and to provide data
for validation purposes of numerical simulations. Planar OH-LIF
and OH chemiluminescence were applied to reveal the structure
of the reaction zones and hot regions and the position and shape of
the ﬂame brush, respectively. 1D-laser Raman scattering has been
applied to measure the major species concentrations, the tempera-
ture and the mixture fraction along a line of 7 mm length. The
application of this technique to a high-pressure test rig of this size
was challenging and problems related to the high laser intensities,
and stained windows had to be overcome. Two different ﬂames in
terms of shape and stabilization ﬂames A and B were selected
and investigated in more detail. The OH-PLIF and OH chemilu-
minescence measurements revealed that ﬂame A, which was sta-
bilized within the burner cone, has a smaller and more distinct
ﬂame zone than the lifted and more unstable ﬂame B. The single-
shot Raman measurements enabled a detailed characterization of
the mixing and reaction progress of these ﬂames. Although it was
known before that the degree of premixing in GT burners is lim-
ited, it could now be quantiﬁed for the ﬁrst time without spatial or
temporal averaging. In both ﬂames, the mixture fraction exhibited
a signiﬁcant scatter at a distance of 1/3 of the burner exit di-
ameter, and its distribution varied with the radial position. The
scatter plots also revealed that the thermochemical state of the
ﬂames varied from nonreacted via partially reacted to fully
burned. The partially reacted mixtures had intermediate tempera-
tures and stemmed probably from the mixing of hot burned gas
with cold fresh gas before ignition has set in. The characteristics
of the scatter plots from different radial regions were in accor-
dance with the different ﬂow ﬁeld regions, i.e., the inﬂow of fresh
gases, the recirculation zones, and the shear layers.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank A. Koch, R. Sadanandan, and
their colleagues from the DLR test rig for their support and con-
tributions to the investigations. The ﬁnancial support from the
State
Baden-Württemberg,
the
EnBW
Energie
Baden-
Württemberg AG and ALSTOM Power within the research pro-
gram KW21 is gratefully acknowledged.
References
1 Paschereit, C. O., Gutmark, E., and Weisenstein, W., 1998, “Structure and
Control of Thermoacoustic Instabilities in a Gas-Turbine Combustor,” Com-
bust. Sci. Technol., 138, pp. 213–232.
2 Lefebvre, A. H., 1999, Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor & Francis, Philadel-
phia, PA.
3 Lee, J. G., and Santavicca, D. A., 2003, “Experimental Diagnostics for the
Study of Combustion Instabilities in Lean Premixed Combustors,” J. Propul.
Power, 19, pp. 735–750.
4 Sattelmayer, T., 2003, “Inﬂuence of the Combustor Aerodynamics on Com-
bustion Instabilities From Equivalence Ratio Fluctuations,” ASME J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power, 125, pp. 11–19.
5 2006, Combustion Instabilities in Gas Turbine Engines: Operational Experi-
ence, Fundamental Mechanisms, and Modeling, T. Lieuwen and V. Yang, eds.,
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Reston, VA.
6 Syed, K. J., and Buchanan, E., 2005, “The Nature of NOx Formation Within an
Industrial Gas Turbine Dry Low Emission Combustor,” ASME Paper No.
GT2005-68070.
7 Meier, W., Weigand, P., Duan, X. R., and Giezendanner-Thoben, R., 2007,
“Detailed Characterization of the Dynamics of Thermoacoustic Pulsations in a
Lean Premixed Swirl Flame,” Combust. Flame, 150, pp. 2–26.
8 Docquier, N., and Candel, S., 2002, “Combustion Control and Sensors: A
Review,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 28, pp. 107–150.
9 Emiris, I., and Whitelaw, J. H., 2003, “Control of Combustion Oscillations,”
Combust. Sci. Technol., 175, pp. 157–184.
10 Richards, G. A., Straub, D. L., and Robey, E. H., 2003, “Passive Control of
Combustion Dynamics in Stationary Gas Turbines,” J. Propul. Power, 19, pp.
795–810.
11 Mongia, H. C., Held, T. J., Hsiao, G. C., and Pandalai, R. P., 2003, “Chal-
lenges and Progress in Controlling Dynamics in Gas Turbine Combustors,” J.
Propul. Power, 19, pp. 822–829.
12 Zinn, B. T., 2005, “Smart Combustors—Just Around the Corner,” ASME Pa-
per No. GT2005-69138.
13 Schneider, E., Staudacher, S., Schuermans, B., and Ye, H., 2008, “Model
Based Active Combustion Control Concept for Reduction of Pulsations and
NOx Emissions in Lean Premixed Gas Turbine Combustors,” ASME Paper No.
GT2008-50326.
14 Geigle, K.-P., Meier, W., Aigner, M., Willert, C., Jarius, M., Schmitt, P., and
Schuermans, B., 2006, “Phase Resolved Laser Diagnostic Measurements of a
Downscaled, Fuel Staged Gas Turbine Combustor at Elevated Pressure and
Comparison With LES Predictions,” ASME Paper No. GT2006-90875.
15 Eckbreth, A. C., 1996, Laser Diagnostics for Combustion Temperature and
Species, Taylor & Francis, New York.
16 Kohse-Höinghaus, K., 2002, Applied Combustion Diagnostics, Taylor & Fran-
cis, New York.
17 Wolfrum, J., 2000, “Lasers in Combustion: From Basic Theory to Practical
Devices,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 27, pp. 1–42.
18 Barlow, R. S., 2007, “Laser Diagnostics and Their Interplay With Computa-
tions to Understand Turbulent Combustion,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp.
49–75.
19 Lee, S.-Y., Seo, S., Broda, J. C., Pal, S., and Santoro, R. J., 2000, “An Experi-
mental Estimation of Mean Reaction Rate and Flame Structure During Com-
bustion Instability in a Lean Premixed Gas Turbine Combustor,” Proc. Com-
bust. Inst., 28, pp. 775–782.
20 Meier, U. E., Wolff-Gassmann, D., and Stricker, W., 2000, “LIF Imaging and
2D Temperature Mapping in a Model Combustor at Elevated Pressure,”
Aerosp. Sci. Technol., 4, pp. 403–414.
21 Löfström, C., Engström, J., Richter, M., Kaminski, C. F., Johansson, P., Ny-
holm, K., Nygren, J., and Aldén, M., 2000, “Feasibility Studies and Applica-
tion of Laser/Optical Diagnostics for Characterisation of a Practical Low-
Fig. 13
Scatter plot of H2O versus temperature in ﬂame B at a
radius of r=24 mm. The light gray line indicates the adiabatic
equilibrium state.
051503-8 / Vol. 132, MAY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

Emission Gas Turbine Combustor,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-0124.
22 Gord, J. R., Brown, M. S., and Meyer, T. R., 2002, “Optical Diagnostics for
Characterizing Advanced Combustors and Pulsed-Detonation Engines,” 22nd
AIAA Aerodynamic Measurement Technology and Ground Testing Confer-
ence, St. Louis, MI, Jun. 24–26, Paper No. AIAA2002-3030.
23 Kojima, J., and Nguyen, Q.-V., 2004, “Measurement and Simulation of Spon-
taneous Raman Scattering in High-Pressure Fuel-Rich H2-Air Flames,” Meas.
Sci. Technol., 15, pp. 565–580.
24 Willert, C., Hassa, C., Stockhausen, G., Jarius, M., Voges, M., and Klinner, J.,
2006, “Combined PIV and DGV Applied to a Pressurized Gas Turbine Com-
bustor Facility,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 17, pp. 1670–1679.
25 Griebel, P., Siewert, P., and Jansohn, P., 2007, “Flame Characteristics of Tur-
bulent Lean Premixed Methane/Air Flames at High Pressure: Turbulent Flame
Speed and Flame Brush Thickness,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 3083–3090.
26 Janus, B., Dreizler, A., and Janicka, J., 2007, “Experiments on Swirl-Stabilized
Non-Premixed Natural Gas Flames in a Model Gas Turbine Combustor,” Proc.
Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 3091–3098.
27 Stopper, U., Aigner, M., Meier, W., Sadanandan, R., Stöhr, M., and Kim, I. S.,
2008, “Flow Field and Combustion Characterization of Premixed Gas Turbine
Flames by Planar Laser Techniques,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-50520.
28 Strakey, P. A., Woodruff, S. D., Williams, T. C., and Schefer, R. W., 2008,
“OH-Planar Fluorescence Measurements of Pressurized, Hydrogen Premixed
Flames in the SimVal Combustor,” AIAA J., 46, pp. 1604–1613.
29 Wehr, L., Meier, W., Kutne, P., and Hassa, C., 2007, “Single-Pulse 1D Laser
Raman Scattering Applied in a Gas Turbine Model Combustor at Elevated
Pressure,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 3099–3106.
30 Döbbeling, K., Hellat, J., and Koch, H., 2005, “25 Years of BBC/ABB/
ALSTOM Lean Premix Combustion Technologies,” ASME Paper No.
GT2005-68269.
31 Zajadatz, M., Lachner, R., Bernero, S., Motz, C., and Flohr, P., 2007, “Devel-
opment and Design of ALSTOM‘s Staged Fuel Gas Injection EV Burner for
NOx Reduction,” ASME Paper No. GT2007-27730.
32 Schmitt, P., Poinsot, T., Schuermans, B., and Geigle, K.-P., 2007, “Large-Eddy
Simulation and Experimental Study of Heat Transfer, Nitric Oxide Emissions
and Combustion Instability in a Swirled Turbulent High Pressure Burner,” J.
Fluid Mech., 570, pp. 17–46.
33 Biagioli, F., Schiessel, P., and Fischer, L., 2008, “Investigation of Flame Sta-
bility Characteristics of the EV Burner on the GT13E2 Engine,” ASME Paper
No. GT2008-50274.
34 Versluis, M., Georgiev, N., Martinsson, L., Aldén, M., and Kröll, S., 1997,
“2-D Absolute OH Concentration Proﬁles in Atmospheric Flames Using Planar
LIF in a Bi-Directional Laser Beam Conﬁguration,” Appl. Phys. B: Lasers
Opt., 65, pp. 411–417.
35 Giezendanner-Thoben, R., Meier, U., Meier, W., Heinze, J., and Aigner, M.,
2005, “Phase-Locked Two-Line OH Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence Ther-
mometry in a Pulsating Gas Turbine Model Combustor at Atmospheric Pres-
sure,” Appl. Opt., 44, pp. 6565–6577.
36 Karpetis, A. N., and Barlow, R. S., 2002, “Measurements of Scalar Dissipation
in a Turbulent Piloted Methane/Air Jet Flame,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 29, pp.
1929–1936.
37 Ax, H., Kutne, P., Meier, W., König, K., Maas, U., Class, A., and Aigner, M.,
2009, “Low Pressure Premixed CH4/Air Flames With Forced Periodic Mix-
ture Fraction Oscillations: Experimental Approach,” Appl. Phys. B: Lasers
Opt., 94, pp. 705–714.
38 Weigand, P., Lückerath, R., and Meier, W., “Documentation of Flat Premixed
Laminar CH4/Air Standard Flames: Temperatures and Species Concentra-
tions,” http://www.dlr.de/vt/datenarchiv/
39 Prucker, S., Meier, W., and Stricker, W., 1994, “A Flat Flame Burner as Cali-
bration Source for Combustion Research: Temperatures and Species Concen-
trations of Premixed H2/Air Flames,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., 65, pp. 2908–2911.
40 Sadanandan, R., Stöhr, M., and Meier, W., 2008, “Simultaneous OH-PLIF and
PIV Measurements in a Gas Turbine Model Combustor,” Appl. Phys. B: La-
sers Opt., 90, pp. 609–618.
41 http://www.arcl02.dsl.pipex.com/
42 Meier, W., Duan, X. R., and Weigand, P., 2006, “Investigations of Swirl
Flames in a Gas Turbine Model Combustor. Part II: Turbulence-Chemistry
Interactions,” Combust. Flame, 144, pp. 225–236.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2010, Vol. 132 / 051503-9
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
