
--- Page 1 ---

Peter Albrecht1
e-mail: albrecht@pi.tu-berlin.de
Stefanie Bade
e-mail: stefanie.bade@pi.tu-berlin.de
Arnaud Lacarelle
e-mail: arnaud.lacarelle@pi.tu-berlin.de
Christian Oliver Paschereit
Professor
e-mail: oliver.paschereit@tu-berlin.de
Hermann-Foettinger Institute (ISTA),
Technical University of Berlin,
D-10623 Berlin, Germany
Ephraim Gutmark
Distinguished Professor
Department of Aerospace Engineering and
Engineering Mechanics,
University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH 45221-0070
e-mail: ephraim.gutmark@uc.edu
Instability Control by Premixed
Pilot Flames
Premixed ﬂames of swirl-stabilized combustors (displaced half-cone) are susceptible to
thermo-acoustic instabilities, which should be avoided under all operating conditions in
order to guarantee a long service life for both stationary and aircraft gas turbines. The
source of this unstable ﬂame behavior can be found in a transition of the premix ﬂame
structure between two stationary conditions that can be easily excited by fuel ﬂuctuations,
coherent structures within the ﬂow, and other mechanisms. Pilot ﬂames can alleviate this
issue either by improving the dynamic stability directly or by sustaining the main com-
bustion process at operating points where instabilities are unlikely. In the present study,
the impact of two different premixed pilot injections on the combustion stability is inves-
tigated. One of the pilot injector (pilot ﬂame injector) was located upstream of the
recirculation zone at the apex of the burner. The second one was a pilot ring placed at the
burner outlet on the dump plane. A noticeable feature of the pilot injector was that an
ignition device allowed for creating pilot premixed ﬂames. The present investigation
showed that these premixed pilot ﬂames were able to suppress instabilities over a wider
fuel/air ratio range than the conventional premixed pilot injection alone. Furthermore, it
was possible to prevent instabilities and maintain the ﬂame burning near the lean blow-
out when a percentage of the fuel was premixed with air and injected through the pilot
ring. NOx emissions were signiﬁcantly reduced. DOI: 10.1115/1.3019293
1
Introduction
The prevention and suppression of unstable combustion condi-
tions in contemporary combustion chambers have to be guaran-
teed in all cases as otherwise the service life of the gas turbine can
be dramatically reduced by pressure pulsations. Two main mecha-
nisms are responsible for the development of instabilities: forced
instabilities such as fuel or air mass ﬂow ﬂuctuations and self-
driven instabilities such as thermo-acoustic instabilities. Besides
geometrical solutions for improving the dynamic stability, many
investigations have been conducted to force stable conditions by
secondary pulsed fuel injection see, e.g., Refs. 1–3. In most
cases, the fuel is modulated by injection valves with mechanical
parts that may erode over time. Therefore, actuators that can sup-
port the active control methods are desired, especially for aircraft
gas turbines with high safety standards. The control of the fuel
split in the burner by piloted local fuel injections may be seen as
a control method that fulﬁlls these criteria.
Pilot ﬂames may be used in two different ways to prevent in-
stabilities:
1. The pilot ﬂame is used directly to suppress the combustion
instabilities, possibly changing the operating point of the
burner.
2. The pilot ﬂame is used to move the operating point of the
burner to a more stable domain, which could be near the
lean blowout LBO limit of the burner as reported by some
authors.
As stated by different authors, the dynamic stability of the main
combustion can be improved by the use of pilot ﬂames. For ex-
ample, Nair and Lieuwen 4 showed on a simpliﬁed burner ge-
ometry that pilot ﬂame cannot only reduce the amplitude of pres-
sure oscillations but also stabilize the overall combustion zone for
equivalence ratio below the unpiloted limit. Even if not performed
on a swirled conﬁguration, these results may be applicable to
more complex ﬂows. An example of stabilization of swirling com-
bustor may be taken from Paschereit et al. 5. The authors could
stabilize the ﬂow over a wide operating range by adjusting the
position and the fuel mass ﬂow of the pilot injection. They also
pointed out a possible disadvantage of the use of pilot ﬂame re-
garding NOx emissions, which increase as the pilot fuel mass ﬂow
increases. This increase is mainly due to a decrease in the mixing
quality, which leads to locally diffusion-like ﬂames. These ﬂames
generate hot spots favorable to thermal NO emissions. A further
step to reduce NOx was done by Kendrick et al. 6. He used a
pilot premixed ﬂame where fuel and air were mixed well before
the injection into the combustion chamber. They could stabilize
the combustion process but the control authority was strongly de-
pendent on the pilot equivalence ratio pilot.
One possible explanation for the improved dynamic stability by
pilot ﬂames can be derived from basic investigations by Bradley
et al. 7. They have shown in their work that instabilities become
likely if the side recirculation zone see Fig. 2 loses its stabiliza-
tion effect on the premixed ﬂame. Thus, the ﬂame front oscillation
might be more easily excited by the already existing pressure
ﬂuctuations under these conditions, i.e., especially at operating
points where the transition of the ﬂame structure takes place 8.
For this reason, the Rayleigh criterion Eq. 1, Sec. 4.1 could be
satisﬁed faster as less excitation energy is necessary to exceed the
dissipation losses. He also noticed that the heat release rate within
the shear layer increases at stable conditions and decreases at
unstable conditions. Thus stabilization of the ﬂame may be linked
to a localized injection of fuel in the shear layer.
In some conﬁgurations e.g., Refs. 8–10, the amplitude of
pressure oscillations in swirl-stabilized combustors decreases sig-
niﬁcantly when operated at leaner mixtures low main. Seo 10
explained this behavior by low heat release ﬂuctuations near lean
blowout so that ﬂame instabilities are less likely. The mechanisms,
however, are still unclear.
Thus according to previous works, a study of the effectiveness
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received February 25, 2008; ﬁnal manuscript received August 25,
2008; published online January 12, 2010. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal.
Paper presented at the ASME Turbo Expo 2008: Land, Sea and Air GT2008, June
9–13, 2008, Berlin, Germany.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2010, Vol. 132 / 041501-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

of a pilot ﬂame will have to take into account the two dominant
parameters that seem to inﬂuence the pulsation behavior of the
main combustion:
1. the heat release rate Q˙ within the shear layer between both
recirculation zones
2. the equivalence ratio main of the main combustion
In the present study, the effectiveness of two pilot ﬂame injec-
tions on the stability of a swirl premixed burner is investigated. In
the ﬁrst part, the test rig is presented as well as the two injection
conﬁgurations: a premixed pilot injection that is able to be ignited
is mounted at the apex of the burner, just upstream of the stagna-
tion point of the center recirculation zone, and a pilot ring PR
placed at the burner outlet on the dump plane. The description of
the different injection conﬁgurations is shown in Sec. 3. The basic
behavior of the combustor is described in Sec. 4. The results of
the different injection conﬁgurations are shown in Sec. 5. They
clearly showed that an increase in ﬂame stabilization is achievable
for some of the conﬁgurations tested.
2
Combustion Facility
The behavior of the emissions and the pressure oscillations near
lean blowout were investigated with a swirl-stabilized combustor
that was vertically mounted in the atmospheric test rig facility, as
shown in Fig. 1. The swirl burner featured two axial slots formed
by two shifted half-cones of 82 mm diameter through which air
was forced in a circumferential direction see Ref. 11 for more
details. Natural gas was used as fuel and injected along the slots
through 62 equally distributed 0.7 mm diameter boreholes.
Thereby a homogeneous distribution of the mixture could be
achieved at the outlet of the swirl burner where the side and cen-
tral recirculation zones were generated by the strong swirling ﬂow
Fig. 2. The premixed ﬂame was able to anchor at that position so
that no additional ﬂame holder was needed. Furthermore, the swirl
burner has an opening at its apex where the pilot ﬂame injector
PFI lance was positioned for continuous fuel/air mixture injec-
tion. The PFI lance, discussed in Sec. 2.2 in detail, features an
embedded sparkplug that is able to ignite the mixture periodically.
2.1
Atmospheric Test Rig Facility. For the investigation of
emissions and pressure oscillations behavior near lean blowout, a
quartz glass combustion chamber was used, 0.3 m in height and
0.2 m in diameter.
A 1.3 m tube extension resonance tube with the same diam-
eter as the combustion chamber was mounted above the quartz
glass. To record the amplitude of pressure oscillations, a water-
cooled condenser microphone was mounted 0.4 m upstream of the
burner outlet plane. A sample rate of 4096 Hz was set, and a
low-pass ﬁlter at half of the sample rate was used. The pilot fuel
and the main fuel were measured using a Coriolis mass meter,
while the air mass ﬂow was measured by a laminar ﬂow element.
All mass ﬂows were set by metering valves that allowed a con-
stant mass ﬂow within a tolerance of less than 5%. Several k-type
thermocouples with a 1.5 mm diameter were used to monitor the
temperature of the preheated air upstream, the bottom exhaust
temperature at 0.7 m, and the exit exhaust temperature at 1.48 m
downstream of the dump plane. The water-cooled emissions probe
was located 0.75 m downstream from the burner exit and had
distributed openings to average the emissions across the exhaust
duct. A heated ﬂexible tube with a length of 12 m was used to lead
the emissions into an analysis system, where NO and NO2 were
measured wet and CO, CO2, and O2 were measured dry. All emis-
sions results presented in this study are based on 15 vol % O2 and
dry conditions. A constant exhaust mass ﬂow of 55 l/h was set.
An
OH-photomultiplier
Hamamatsu,
Arzbergerstr.
10,
D-82211 Herrsching am Ammersee, Germany, H5784-03 and an
Intensiﬁed Charged Coupled Device ICCD camera Imager In-
Pilot air
Main air
2
3
1
Heat
5
6
4
8
10
7
9
11
T
12
T
y
Pilot
ring
Flow
Pilot fuel
Main fuel
Pilot ring fuel
ICCD Camera
OH*
Photomultiplier
Exhaust
1.3m
0.2m
Flow
Swirl
burner
PFI
Lance
Microphone
Fig. 1
Test rig facility and the swirl-stabilized combustor: „1… laminar
ﬂow element, „2… pneumatic slide valve, „3… heat exchanger, „4+7… mass
meter, „5+8+10… needle valve, „6… high voltage ignition system, „9… rota-
meter, „11… thermocouple for bottom exhaust temperature, „12… thermo-
couple for exit exhaust temperature
041501-2 / Vol. 132, APRIL 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

tense, La Vision, Anna-Vandenhoeck-Ring 19, D-37081 Goettin-
gen, Germany equipped with a bandpass ﬁlter centered at
3122 nm were used to measure the ﬂuctuations of the heat
release rate and to visualize the ﬂame front at unstable conditions.
The ICCD camera was located 1.4 m in front of the combustion
test rig center axis see Fig. 6, and a ﬁber optic cable connected
to the photomultiplier was mounted very close to the quartz glass
combustion chamber 0.1 m and 0.2 m above the combustor
dump.
2.2
Pilot Flame Injector. The PFI was positioned in the cen-
ter of the swirl burner apex and consisted mainly of a tube with an
open end and a centered sparkplug see Figs. 1 and 2. Fuel and
air were mixed approximately 1.5 m before being led into the 1.2
m long PFI tube, so that a homogeneous mixture could be
achieved at the PFI outlet. The premixed pilot ﬂame could only be
stabilized with the presence of a spark as the mixture velocity was
set higher than the ﬂame velocity so that the pilot ﬂame could be
directly controlled by the sparkplug.
Preliminary tests with the PFI have shown its capability to pro-
duce periodically generated premixed pilot ﬂames under atmo-
spheric conditions see also Ref. 12. The spark frequency at
nonpreheated and preheated main air mass ﬂows was 110 Hz. At
this frequency, periodical ignition of the pilot fuel/air mixture
could be accomplished within the investigated operating range.
2.3
Pilot Ring. The 110 mm diameter pilot ring was made out
of a stainless steel tube, which was mounted on the burner dump
plane see Fig. 2. The 6 mm diameter tube was equipped with
nine equidistantly distributed 1 mm diameter fuel injectors. The
fuel injection was directed axially into the shear layer of the two
recirculation zones.
3
Test Setup
The tests were conducted at a constant main air mass ﬂow rate
of 200 kg/h with 300 K nonpreheated and 550 K preheated main
air temperatures, while the equivalence ratio main, the PFI, and
ring were varied. Different combustor exit conditions were cho-
sen to control the acoustic reﬂection coefﬁcient r from fully open
and reﬂecting down to r0.3. The test rig at a full reﬂecting
coefﬁcient had an outlet diameter of 200 mm, while the low re-
ﬂection conﬁguration had an outlet of 65 mm.
3.1
Test Cases Without Pilot Ring Injection. The pilot air
mass ﬂow rate of 7.5 kg/h through the PFI was kept constant
throughout the investigation without pilot ring injection, while
PFI=1.1 was maintained. The integrated sparkplug within the
PFI was switched off for the basic investigation described in Sec.
4, so that the pilot ﬂame would not ignite. Therefore, the ﬂame
front of the main combustion was always located above the burner
exit when the sparkplug was switched off.
Four different test cases were chosen to investigate the basic
lean premixed ﬂame behavior at different total and are summa-
rized in Table 1. The cases “PFI-300 K” and “PFI-550 K” were
repeated with PFI ﬂames to investigate the direct inﬂuence of the
PFI ﬂame on combustion instabilities Sec. 5.
3.2
Test Cases With Pilot Ring Injection. Four different
cases shown in Table 2 were investigated to understand the impact
pilot ring injection on the dynamic stability. To differentiate the
cases they are identiﬁed by numbers representing the PFI air and
fuel mass ﬂows in kg/h and PR air and fuel mass ﬂows in kg/h.
For example, “baseline” represents the baseline case without pilot
ring injection. A small amount of air PFI air was always used to
cool the sparkplug. To generate premixed pilot ring ﬂames, a con-
stant pilot ring mixture of 15 kg/h air and 0.96 kg/h fuel was
injected through the pilot ring case “premixed ring”. For diffu-
sion ﬂame generations, the same fuel mass ﬂow rate was injected
through the pilot ring case “diffusion ring”.
4
Basic Behavior of the Swirl-Stabilized Premixed
Flame Without Pilot Flames
The stability map for the different cases deﬁned in Sec. 3.1 is
shown in Fig. 3. While thermo-acoustic instabilities occurred for
the cases with the 200 mm diameter combustor outlets, the case
Table 1
Investigated cases without pilot ring injection. All
cases with PFI injection were conducted with 7.5 kg/h PFI air
mass ﬂow rate at PFI=1.1.
Cases
Preheat
temperature
K
Outlet
diameter
mm
PFI
injection
–
Baseline-550 K
550
200
No
PFI-550 K
550
200
Yes
PFI-550 K-65 mm
550
65
Yes
PFI-300 K
300
200
Yes
Table 2
Investigated cases with pilot ring injection. All test
cases were conducted at a main air preheat temperature of 550
K.
Cases
PFI
air
kg/h
PFI
fuel
kg/h
PR
air
kg/h
PR
fuel
kg/h
Baseline
1
0
0
0
Premixed ring
1
0
15
0.96
Diffusion ring
1
0
0
0.96
Air ring
1
0
15
0
1
2
3
“A-A”
“A-A”
Pilot
ring
Swirl burner
PFI lance
Fuel/Air
Spark plug
Fuel/Air
Fuel/Air
Side
Recir-
culation
Zone
Side
Recir-
culation
Zone
Central
Recirculation
Zone
Pilot
flame
Fig. 2
PFI installation at the cone vertex and Pilot Ring at the
combustor’s dump plane. Insert shows the prototype of the
PFI: „1… sparkplug, „2… ground electrode, and „3… ceramic tube.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2010, Vol. 132 / 041501-3
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

conducted with the 65 mm oriﬁce remained stable within the
whole investigated operating range and became unstable only
close to the LBO, independent of the preheat temperature. At
those points low frequency pressure oscillations at 3–7 Hz could
be detected. The cause is possibly an incomplete combustion
where fuel/air mixture pockets are ignited close to the hot inner
walls and hot exhaust gases. The amplitudes of the rms pressure
level for the “baseline-550 K” case were very low near lean blow-
out at total0.47 but increased signiﬁcantly with increasing
total.
The PFI-550 K case showed high level thermo-acoustic insta-
bilities at 0.47total0.6. Out of this region, i.e., extremely
close to the lean blowout limit and at condition total0.6, the
combustion was stable. The PFI-300 K case showed unstable con-
ditions with a high rms pressure level at total0.67.
4.1
Rayleigh Index. The instabilities found for the cases PFI-
550 K and PFI-300 K were more closely investigated to better
quantify
the
intensity
of
the
instabilities.
The
OH-
chemiluminescence OH and the pressure ﬂuctuations p of the
oscillating premixed ﬂame were simultaneously recorded, as
shown in Fig. 4 for the PFI-550 K case at total=0.55. The phase
shift of less than 90 deg between these two signals indicates
clearly unstable conditions. Also the Rayleigh index R, calculated
by the formula
R =
0
time
pt · OHtdt  dissipation losses
1
was fulﬁlled.
4.2
Power
Spectrum
and
Phase-Averaged
OH-
Chemiluminescence. The power spectrum for the case PFI-550 K
shows a distinct fundamental at 110 Hz with an amplitude nearly
three orders of magnitude higher than the background noise Fig.
5. To visualize the oscillating character of the unstable lean pre-
mixed ﬂame for the PFI-300 K case at total=0.66, phase-
averaged OH images were recorded in 45 deg steps, while the
images for each phase shift angle were calculated from 40 single
images Fig. 6. At 45 deg the highest OH-chemiluminescence
can be detected within the shear layer between the side and central
recirculation zones.
4.3
Hysteresis Effect. A hysteresis effect described in several
papers e.g., Refs. 13,10 was not clearly detected when inves-
tigating the pulsation behavior in both direction, from a rich to a
lean mixture and vice versa Fig. 7.
4.4
Heat Release Visualization for Different Operating
Points. OH-chemiluminescence was also measured at different
operating conditions shown in Fig. 7. Assuming that the heat re-
lease is qualitatively related to the OH-chemiluminescence, the
highest heat release rate at total0.6 could be detected within
the shear layer between the side and central recirculation zones
Fig. 7. The highest heat release rate at total0.5 close to the
lean blowout was approximately one combustor diameter down-
stream of the swirl burner exit. With increasing total, the maxi-
mum heat release zone moved further upstream. The right side of
the combustor ﬂame seemed to be more intense in all cases, but
this could be attributed to the arrangement of the camera position
and the swirl-stabilized burner. In this study, the cross section of
the combustor outlet air slots were located at a 45 deg angle to the
camera, as can be seen in Fig. 6.
5
Strategies for Suppressing Combustion Instabilities
With Pilot Flames
Two different ways to suppress instabilities that were described
in Sec. 4 are presented here. In Sec. 5.1, it will be shown that
premixed pilot ﬂames generated by the PFI are able to suppress
and directly control the instabilities. However, the improved dy-
namic stability could only be proven for a continuous PFI air mass
ﬂow rate of 7.5 kg/h at PFI=1.1. Test results in Sec. 5.2 show
that the ring injection of both fuel and air affects signiﬁcantly the
Fig. 3
Stability map of a swirl-stabilized combustion for differ-
ent preheat air temperatures of 300 K and 550 K and combus-
tion outlet diameters of 65 mm and 200 mm. The ignition device
was in all cases off, so that no PFI ﬂame was generated.
Fig. 4
OH-chemiluminescence and pressure signals for the
case PFI-550 K at total=0.55
Fig. 5
Power spectrum for the case PFI-550 K with and without
PFI ﬂame at total=0.55
041501-4 / Vol. 132, APRIL 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

pressure oscillation of the main combustion and is caused mainly
by a higher jet momentum through the pilot ring.
5.1
Active Control of Instabilities. Preliminary tests were
performed to investigate the effectiveness of the PFI lance. In the
following, we will only show operating conditions that were ef-
fective see Figs. 8–11. All rms pressure levels were normalized
by the background noise of the baseline case baseline-550 K at
total=0.45. The test conditions of the results presented in this
section are shown in Sec. 3.1.
5.1.1
Response Behavior for PFI Flame On/Off Conditions.
Two highly unstable conditions were chosen for the investigation
at total=0.55 and at 0.58 for 550 K preheated air and another
highly unstable condition at total=0.66 for nonpreheated air. The
550 K case is shown in Fig. 8. During the ﬁrst 12 s, the PFI spark
was off, and only a small amount of premixed fuel was injected
without PFI ﬂame. This was not enough to suppress the insta-
bilities. Then, a periodic PFI ﬂame was generated by the PFI
spark, and the instability was completely suppressed. Instabilities
at total=0.66 for nonpreheated air could be suppressed when the
sparkplug was activated, as can be seen in Fig. 9. Within the ﬁrst
12 s, a PFI ﬂame was generated by the activated sparkplug, and
the rms pressure level could be held to a very low level. Even
though the sparkplug was switched off after 12 s, the combustion
remained in a stable mode for approximately 6 s before becoming
unstable. After 56 s, the sparkplug was activated again, and the
instability was instantly suppressed. The time delay of several
seconds between the switching off of the spark and the initiation
of instabilities could be related to the fact that the ﬂame front was
stabilized inside of the swirl burner even though the PFI ﬂame
was already off.
5.1.2
Overall Dynamic Stability With PFI Flames. The insta-
bilities shown for the cases PFI-300 K and PFI-550 K could be
completely suppressed by the presence of the premixed PFI ﬂame
Figs. 10 and 11. The PFI changed the heat release distribution
within the ﬂame front, as can be seen in Fig. 10, and thus affected
the dynamic stability. The results are consistent with the investi-
gation of Paschereit et al. 14.
5.1.3
Emissions. The impact of the instabilities on the emis-
sion behavior can be seen in Fig. 12, where the NOx emissions
were recorded at different operating conditions and plotted versus
the total equivalence ratio total. The curve referred to as “PFI
ﬂame-off” was recorded when the PFI fuel/air mixture was not
ignited and therefore corresponds to PFI-550 K, as described in
Sec. 4. Furthermore, the cases with activated PFI ﬂame are re-
ferred to as “PFI ﬂame” in the following.
With PFI ﬂame, NOx emissions were reduced when compared
with the unstable baseline case. This is in agreement with Pas-
chereit and Gutmark 15, who showed that unstable premixed
combustion may increase NOx emissions. It is interesting to note
that the NOx emissions between the PFI ﬂame and the PFI ﬂame-
off case are similar in stable regions total0.6, compare Fig.
10, while the emissions signiﬁcantly differ within the unstable
region 0.5total0.6. Therefore, higher NOx emissions are
generated mainly by ﬂame temperature peaks induced by fuel/air
ratio oscillations during thermo-acoustic instabilities and not by
the PFI ﬂame itself.
Fig. 6
Phase-averaged OH-chemiluminescence images at different phase shift
angles at 200 kg/h main air mass ﬂow rate and 300 K nonpreheated air for
total=0.66. The instability occurred at 82 Hz.
Fig. 7
OH-chemiluminescence images and rms pressure level
at different operating points for the case PFI-550 K; the spark-
plug was not activated. While for the curve “rich-lean,” the
pressure ﬂuctuations were investigated from a rich mixture to a
lean mixture, and the rms pressure level was recorded for the
curve “lean-rich” at the starting operating point total near lean
blowout. A hysteresis effect was not clearly visible.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2010, Vol. 132 / 041501-5
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

5.2
Passive Control of Instabilities. After having shown that
the actively controlled pilot PFI could reduce signiﬁcantly pres-
sure pulsations and emissions, it was of further interest to inves-
tigate a premixed pilot located closer to the outer shear layer. A
pilot ring was installed at the burner dump plane Fig. 2, where
fuel or a fuel/air mixture could be injected directly into the shear
layer. A detailed overview of the parameter setup used for this test
and the deﬁnition of the cases can be found in Sec. 3.2.
5.2.1
Advantages of Premixed Pilot Ring Injection. In Fig. 13,
Fig. 8
Time signal of the pressure ﬂuctuations for the case PFI-550 K at total=0.55 and 0.61 with and without PFI
ﬂame. The frequency of the PFI ﬂame was 110 Hz.
Fig. 9
Time signal of the pressure ﬂuctuations for the case
PFI-300 K with and without PFI ﬂame at total=0.66. The fre-
quency of the PFI ﬂame was 110 Hz.
Fig. 10
Comparision of the OH-chemiluminescence between
the side and central recirculation zones for the case PFI-550 K
with and without PFI ﬂame
Fig. 11
rms pressure level for the case PFI-300 K with and
without PFI ﬂame. All rms values are normalized on the back-
ground noise of the baseline case at total=0.45.
Fig. 12
NOx emission for the case baseline-550 K and for the
case PFI-550 K with and without PFI ﬂame
041501-6 / Vol. 132, APRIL 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

the normalized rms pressure level versus total for different in-
jected mass ﬂows through the pilot ring is plotted. The data are
normalized by the rms pressure level at total=0.47 for the base-
line case. Using the premixed pilot premixed ring, the pressure
pulsation increase at total0.47 of the baseline case could be
delayed signiﬁcantly with the premixed pilot to total0.54. In-
jecting the same amount of fuel through the pilot ring but without
15 kg/h air mass ﬂow rate did not improve the dynamic stability to
a higher total, as can be seen in the case of “diffusion pilot.” As
expected, also the NOx emissions were signiﬁcantly higher when
compared with the premixed ring case Fig. 14. To visualize the
impact of the different injection conﬁgurations on the ﬂame shape,
the averaged ﬂame heat release was recorded with the ICCD cam-
era, and the resulting pictures are plotted in Fig. 15. The pictures
allow both to locate the axial ﬂame position and to estimate the
ﬂame
thickness,
characterized
by
the
spreading
of
the
OH-chemiluminescence. All the cases, except the diffusion ring
case, present stable ﬂames, which are shifted downstream outside
of the burner. A ﬂame located further downstream involves an
increase in the convective time delays of the fuel to the ﬂame
front. This induces a stabilization of the system as the time delays
are not related anymore to characteristic times of the combustor
unstable modes the period of the instability for example. More-
over, stable ﬂames show a stronger axial spread than unstable
ﬂames. A high spread is also linked with a high variance in the
convective time delay distribution. Increasing its value is also a
means to reduce the pulsation amplitude of a combustion system,
as shown in Scarinci and Freeman 16. The premixed ring case
presents high values of both parameters over a much wider
equivalence ratio range up to total=0.55 compared to the three
other cases, correlating very well with the rms pulsations shown
in Fig. 13. Thus, this case shows a positive impact on the two
parameters relevant to the stability of the system.
5.2.2
Damping Mechanism. Two different phenomena help in
understanding the beneﬁcial effect of the premixed ring on the
combustion stability: the leaner mixture of the main ﬂame and the
high momentum achieved through the ring injectors. First, inject-
ing about 15% of the overall fuel mass ﬂow through the ring
yields a leaner mixture of the premixed main ﬂame at constant
total equivalence ratio. When the main ﬂame approaches the lean
blowout limit, a lift-off of the ﬂame occurs, which stabilizes the
system because of the higher convective time delays. Through the
additional injection of fuel, the premixed ring allows us to per-
form combustion with a lifted ﬂame over a wider equivalence
ratio range main of the main ﬂame. It helps thus to sustain the
main ﬂame combustion near and below its natural lean blowout
limit. The second effect relates to the high momentum of the air
injected through the ring. To further understand the mechanism,
the impact of fuel ring injection and air ring injection on the main
combustion are separately investigated. The results are presented
in Fig. 16, where the rms pressure level deviation relative to the
baseline case is plotted versus the main equivalence ratio main.
While the air ring injection “air ring” damps signiﬁcantly the
rms pressure level of the main combustion when compared with
the baseline, the fuel ring injection diffusion ring excites the
pressure oscillations. The combined injection of fuel and air
through the pilot ring premixed ring is able to keep the pressure
oscillations below the baseline case but with lower damping effect
when compared with the air ring. Obviously, the stabilization ef-
fect on the main combustion is mainly caused by the high mo-
mentum of the pilot ring jet and not by the heat release rate within
the shear layer of both recirculation zones. The assumption is
Fig. 13
Inﬂuence of the pilot ring ﬂames „diffusion ring and
premixed ring… on the normalized rms pressure level. All rms
values were normalized on the background noise of the base-
line case at total=0.45.
Fig. 14
NOx emission for different pilot ring injection cases
Fig. 15
Mean ﬂame heat release of the four injection conﬁgu-
rations depending on the total equivalence ratio total
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2010, Vol. 132 / 041501-7
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

conﬁrmed when looking at the OH images corresponding to
main0.51 in Fig. 17. They conﬁrm that the air ring injection has
the most stabilizing effect at constant main by increasing the
spreading of the ﬂame.
6
Conclusion
Active and passive control methods for instability suppression
were successfully applied on a swirl-stabilized combustor. Stabil-
ity maps of the combustor were recorded for different operating
conditions. Unstable conditions were actively controlled by using
a periodically ignited premixed ﬂame. It reduced signiﬁcantly
pressure pulsations and NOx emissions. Regarding the passive
control method, a continuous premixed pilot ring injection located
at the combustor dump plane show reduced pulsations and emis-
sions. The damping effect is mainly achieved by the high jet mo-
mentum through the pilot ring. Moreover, the combined injection
of fuel and air through the ring inﬂuences and sustains signiﬁ-
cantly the spreading and the lift-off of the main ﬂame that appears
to be another damping source for pressure oscillations.
Acknowledgment
We gratefully acknowledge the work of Willi Postel who has
manufactured the PFI lance. Furthermore, we gratefully acknowl-
edge Tyler Jensen who helped us during preliminary tests of the
PFI lance.
Nomenclature
TCCW  wall temperature of the combustion chamber
OH  OH-chemiluminescence
total  total equivalence ratio calculated from main
and PFI
main  main equivalence ratio of the main combustion
PFI  equivalence ratio of the ﬂame produced by the
pilot ﬂame injector
pilot  equivalence ratio of the pilot ﬂame
p  pressure ﬂuctuation within the combustion
chamber
R  Rayleigh index
References
1 Candel, S. M., 1992, “Combustion Instabilities Coupled by Pressure Waves
and Their Active Control,” 24th Symposium International on Combustion,
The Combustion Institute, pp. 1277–1296.
2 Hoffmann, S., Weber, G., Judith, H., Hermann, J., and Orthmann, A., 1998,
“Application of Active Combustion Control to Siemens Heavy Duty Gas Tur-
bines,” Applied Vehicle Technology Panel Symposium, Lisbon, Portugal, Vol.
14.
3 Paschereit, C. O., Gutmark, E., and Weisenstein, W., 1999, “Control of Ther-
moacoustic Instabilities in a Premixed Combustor by Fuel Modulation,” AIAA
Paper No. 99-0711.
4 Nair, S., and Lieuwen, T., 2003, “Acoustic Detection of Imminent Blowout in
Pilot and Swirl Stabilized Combustors,” ASME Paper No. GT2003-38074.
5 Paschereit, C. O., Flohr, P., and Gutmark, E. J., 2006, “Combustion Control by
Vortex Breakdown Stabilization,” ASME J. Turbomach., 1284, pp. 679–688.
6 Kendrick, D. W., Anderson, T. J., Sowa, W. A., and Snyder, T., 1999, “Acous-
tic Sensitivities of Lean-Premixed Fuel Injectors in a Single Nozzle Rig,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 121, pp. 429–436.
7 Bradley, D., Gaskell, P. H., Gu, X. Y., Lawes, M., and Scott, M. J., 1998,
“Premixed Turbulent Flame Instability and NO Formation in a Lean-Burn
Swirl Burner,” J. Propul. Power, 211, pp. 32–39.
8 Fritsche, D., 2005, “Origin and Control of Thermoacoustic Instabilities in Lean
Gas Turbine Combustion,” Ph.D. thesis, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
Zurich.
9 Lenz, M., 1998, “Experimentelle Optimierung des Stabilitaetsverhalten von
Gasturbinenbrenner,” University Erlangen-Nuernberg, Chair of Technical
Thermodynamics, Germany, Technical Report.
10 Seo, S., 1999, “Parametric Study of Lean Premixed Combustion Instability in
a Pressurized Model Gas Turbine Combustor,” Ph.D. thesis, Department of
Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, Uni-
versity Park.
11 Keller, J., and Sattelmayer, T., 1991, “Double-Cone Burners for Gas Turbine
Type 9 Retroﬁt Application,” presented at the 19th International Congress on
Combustion Engines CIMAC, Florence.
12 Albrecht, P., Speck, S., Schimek, S., Bauermeister, F., Paschereit, C. O., and
Gutmark, E., 2007, “Lean Blowout Control Using an Auxiliary Premixed
Flame in a Swirl-Stabilized Combustor,” AIAA Paper No. 2007-5632.
13 Lepers, J., Krebs, W., Prade, B., Flohr, P., Pollarolo, G., and Ferrante, A.,
2005, “Investigation of Thermoacoustic Stability Limits of an Annular Gas
Turbine Combustor Test-Rig With and Without Helmholtz Resonators,” ASME
Paper No. GT-2005-68246.
14 Paschereit, C., Schuermanns, B., and Bueche, D., 2003, “Combustion Process
Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorithm,” ASME Paper No. 2003-GT-
38393.
15 Paschereit, C. O., and Gutmark, E. J., 2008, “Combustion Instability and Emis-
sions Control by Pulsating Fuel Injection,” ASME J. Turbomach., 1301, pp.
12–19.
16 Scarinci, T., and Freeman, C., 2000, “The Propagation of a Fuel-Air Ratio
Disturbance in a Simple Premixer and Its Inﬂuence on Pressure Wave Ampli-
ﬁcation,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-0106.
Fig. 16
Impact of different pilot ring injection cases on the
main ﬂame stabilization
Fig.
17
Mean
ﬂame
heat
release
of
the
four
injection
conﬁgurations
041501-8 / Vol. 132, APRIL 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
