
--- Page 1 ---

Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo 2006 
Power for Land, Sea, and Air 
May 8-11, 2006, Barcelona, Spain 
DRAFT GT2006-90213 
NONINTRUSIVE FLOWFIELD, TEMPERATURE AND SPECIES MEASUREMENTS ON A 
GENERIC AEROENGINE COMBUSTOR AT ELEVATED PRESSURES  
 
 
Christoph Hassa, Chris Willert, Michael Fischer, Guido Stockhausen, Ingo Röhle 
German Aerospace Center, Institute of Propulsion Technology, Linder Höhe, 51147 Cologne, Germany 
 
 
Wolfgang Meier, Lorin Wehr, Peter Kutne 
German Aerospace Center, Institute of Combustion Technology, Pfaffenwaldring 38, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
A generic combustor was built, that gives wide optical 
access at higher pressure and shares typical features with aero 
engine combustors. A comprehensive data set for validation of 
RANS and LES codes was generated at isothermal as well as 
combusting conditions at 2 and 10 bars with 650 K preheat 
using natural gas as fuel. The velocity field was measured using 
LDA (Laser Doppler Anemometry) and DGV (Doppler Global 
Velocimetry) as well as PIV (Particle Image Velocimetry). 
Temperature data were acquired using CARS (Coherent Anti 
stokes Raman Scattering) and SRS (Spontaneous Raman 
Scattering). Major species concentrations as well as the mixture 
fraction in the primary zone of the combustor were also 
measured using SRS. Mean and RMS values of the temperature 
measured by CARS in the secondary zone illustrate the 
influence of the jet impingement on the unsteady mixing of the 
jets with the swirling primary air. [Keywords: non intrusive 
measurements, aero engine combustion, elevated pressure] 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Combustion CFD codes currently used in the design of 
combustors are based on Reynolds averaged Navier-Stokes 
(RANS) equations, which are based on a steady-state solution 
of time-averaged flow equations. Although these codes have 
proved valuable in the design process, the RANS approach has 
well known deficiencies in accurately predicting features of 
turbulent flows like the spreading and mixing of turbulent jets, 
highly turbulent and genuinely unsteady flows. A more 
accurate prediction of the detailed flow field and distributions 
of temperature and chemical species will result in higher 
accuracy predictions of NOx and other harmful emissions. 
Some of the limitations of RANS codes can be overcome by the 
Large Eddy Simulation (LES) method, where time-dependent 
turbulent fluctuations of a size larger than the size of the 
numerical grid are resolved accurately in time. Within the 
MOLECULES project of the 5th EU Framework Program 
Growth [1], validated LES codes capable of simulating the 
turbulent, unsteady flow inside a combustor were to be 
provided to the aero engine industry with accurate, high-quality 
databases of validation data to compare the performance of the 
LES- against the current RANS codes in configurations sharing 
critical features with realistic combustors. 
Confidence in CFD as a design tool cannot be solely built 
on validation experiments that represent one aspect of the flow 
where the corresponding physical model is tested in isolation. 
Only a test case presenting a rather comprehensive range of 
effects found inside the combustion chamber in relevant 
geometries and at higher pressure will enable to judge the 
ability of the codes to optimally perform a practical calculation. 
Since the complexity and operational cost of a real aero engine 
sector combustor prevents the application of measurement 
techniques to fully catch the range of phenomena [2], 
compromises had to be made and a generic combustor was 
selected. It should nevertheless represent the conventional 
combustor architecture with a diffusion burning primary zone, a 
mixing zone with colliding jets and film cooled liner walls. 
 A single sector with quadratic cross section was chosen. 
For the verification of combustion models, the acquisition of 
mixture fraction data in the primary zone was judged to be 
essential and thus Spontaneous Raman Scattering was selected 
as the diagnostic method for temperature and species 
measurements in the primary zone. Since the Raman signal is 
too weak to be used in spray combustion, the burner had to use 
gaseous fuel. Hence a burner for combustion of natural gas with 
the same aerodynamic features as a generic diffusion burner for 
spray combustion was developed. For the same reason, sooting 
flames could not be allowed, which forced the choice of an 
overall lean air to fuel ratio for the primary zone. Given the 
possibility to acquire mixture fraction and temperature data, the 
effect of pressure on reaction progress becomes accessible. 
 
1 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 


--- Page 2 ---

Consequently two operating conditions, one near atmospheric 
pressure and one at sufficiently high pressure to observe a 
difference in kinetic effects, i.e. at 10 bars were chosen. To 
retain similarity to the flame stabilization in practical 
combustors, the combustor air was preheated to 650K. 
In the remainder of the paper, the specific features of the 
combustor connected to the optical access are pointed out, the 
trade off in the burner design between realism and good 
definition of boundary conditions is explained, the adaptation 
of the measurement techniques to the experiment is briefly 
discussed and exemplary results on boundary conditions, 
primary and secondary zone are highlighted. 
 
EXPERIMENT 
Combustor 
The Single Sector Combustor (SSC) test bed was used for 
the experiments [3]. However as hitherto the interest had been 
focused on the primary zone, its combustor had no optical 
access to the mixing zone and a new one had to be built. A 
longitudinal cross section of it is shown in Fig. 1. 
The pressure casing has windows at three sides. Two long 
windows are placed at the side of the sector stretching over 
primary- and mixing zone and a smaller one, seen in Fig. 1, 
giving access to the primary zone. In addition there are two 
windows in the exit plate to be used by Laser light sheets 
extending into the mixing zone. The casing is cooled with air at 
normal temperature flowing along the secondary channel 
around the combustor liner to the longitudinal sonic throat in 
the exit. It is also used for convective cooling of the liner, film 
cooling of secondary zone liner windows, the metallic parts of 
the liner and finally the control of the combustor pressure. 
Electrically preheated air enters the combustor liner through the 
burner, the filmer lips for the primary zone window cooling and 
the mixing jet holes. These have their own secondary channel, 
which is connected to two tubes leaving the combustor casing. 
The flow split between these three branches is set by 
exchangeable sonic nozzles in each flow path. The heated and 
unheated air flows are independently controlled. The liner 
cooling flow is monitored by a differential pressure 
measurement between the inside of the liner and secondary 
channel. The pressure oscillation inside the liner is measured 
with a water cooled Kistler sensor mounted flush to the liner 
wall. 
The design of the liner had to be adjusted to the demands 
of optical access to the primary and secondary zone. The jet 
mixing was to present a demanding task for the CFD 
benchmarking; hence a configuration with colliding jets was 
chosen. The multisector layout with one pair of opposite holes 
on the burner axis and one on the sector boundary was modified 
to one central pair of big holes and two pairs of small holes 
with an area equal to the central pair, resulting in one colliding 
and two non colliding pairs of jets. The correlation of 
Holdeman et al. [4] was used to size the holes for equal 
pressure loss of burner and liner holes. For the isothermal 
operation, the mass flow was changed using different critical 
nozzles to preserve the same momentum ratio for primary and 
mixing air as in the hot case. 
The optical access to mixing jets had to allow imaging of 
the downstream region but also to the upstream area where the  
 
Figure 1: Cross sectional view of single sector 
combustor 
mass from the colliding jets would penetrate. For the resulting 
60 mm window length, film cooling with ambient temperature 
air was judged necessary. The length of the primary zone was 
chosen to result in a nearly cubic volume. With the minimum 
length needed for the rims of the liner windows and the window 
cooling holes, the length of the primary zone window is 
restricted to 37 mm. 
Burner 
The calculation of the swirling, recirculating primary zone 
flow depends to a wide extent on the accurate formulation of its 
inflow boundary condition. Hence the use of practical hardware 
was foregone in favor of a burner designed to allow the best 
 
2 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 


--- Page 3 ---

 
natural gas inlet
outer swirler
(60 deg)
inner swirler
(60 deg)
outlet of cooling 
air for primary 
zone windows
air plenum
measurement
plane 1 mm from
burner outlet
possible measurement of the flow at the burner outlet.  
Nevertheless it should emulate a kerosene diffusion burner 
while using natural gas as fuel. A preexisting design of a gas 
film nozzle for atmospheric rigs was adapted to the SSC, see 
Fig. 2. The basic idea is to replace the fuel film inside the swirl 
cup of a double swirl burner with a co-annular fuel gas flow of 
about the same momentum. In contrast to industrial burners 
with fuel gas injection, the momentum of the air flow should 
dominate over that of the fuel gas flow and the mixing of the 
evaporating liquid fuel is mimicked by the entrainment of the 
lower velocity circular fuel jet. 
For the even distribution of the gaseous fuel around the 
circumference, the co annular channel was replaced by an array 
of 36 rectangular slots of 1.5 x 1 mm with solid bars in 
between, which ended 1 mm before the outlet of the burner. For 
an easy definition of burner outlet conditions, the recirculation 
of combustor air in the burner should be minimized and the 
burner flow should be measured as early as possible. Hence it 
was decided to let the swirl channels end in a straight section at 
the combustor inlet plane and to relinquish the diffuser which is 
normally used to augment the recirculated mass for a given 
amount of swirl [5]. To make up for that effect and to reach a 
swirl number for the gaseous flow including the nonswirling 
fuel gas flow, that guarantees stable recirculation and flame 
position, co swirl and a relatively high swirl angle of 60° was 
chosen and radial swirlers were used for ease of manufacturing. 
The resulting flame is shown in Fig. 3 at 4 bar and 700K 
with a view through the primary and secondary liner windows. 
Even with the high swirl, the expansion of the swirling flow is 
moderate. The distance needed to entrain the fuel gas jets 
represents an analog to the atomization, vaporization and 
mixing distance found in spray burners. Hence it is bound to 
exhibit a similar mixture of diffusion burning with partial 
premixing as spray burners with good atomization. However 
because of the long axial extension of the heat release zone 
resulting from that, the latter part of that zone is hidden by the 
rim between primary and secondary zone window. 
Operating conditions 
Table 1 gives an overview of the operating conditions. 
Since the control of the combustor pressure is effected with the  
 
Figure 3: Photograph of the flame at a pressure of 4 
bar and preheat temperature of 700 K 
Figure 2: Longitudinal section of the burner 
 
critical nozzle at the outlet and the cooling air mass flow, the 
lower pressure operating condition was not atmospheric but at 2 
bar. All tests were done at a pressure loss of 2.75%, which gave 
enough margin to the onset of an instability developing at 
higher pressure losses. As previously mentioned, the isothermal 
test was done with an equivalent volumetric air flow for the 
fuel gas and a higher ratio of primary to secondary air mass 
flow to compensate for the nonexistent temperature difference 
in the expression for the jet momentum ratio. 
Operating condition 
Cold 
Hot 
hot   
combustor pressure  
2 bar 
2 bar 
10 bar 
burner pressure drop 
2.75% 
2.75% 
2.75% 
plenum temperature 
280 K 
650 K 
650 K 
secondary air temp. 
280 K 
670 K 
680 K 
AFR 
no fuel 
25.5 
25.5 
burner pressure drop 
0.055bar 
0.055bar 0.275bar
burner air mass flow 
52.3 g/s 
35.7 g/s 
181 g/s 
natural gas mass flow 
3.4 g/s  air 
1.4 g/s 
7.1 g/s 
prim. zone film cooling air  11.2 g/s 
5.9 g/s 
26.4 g/s 
mixing air mass flow  
18.0 g/s 
22.3 g/s 
112 g/s 
mixing zone film cooling   28 g/s 
12 g/s 
48 g/s 
 
Table 1: Operating conditions of Single Sector 
Combustor 
 
upper calorific value 
10.19 
kWh/m³ 
lower calorific value 
9.191 
kWh/m³1
density at 1.013 bar, 0°C 
0.7939 
kg/m³ 
relative density2
0.614 
- 
Wobbe index 
13.005 
kWh/m³ 
 
Table 
2: 
Combustion 
related 
physico-chemical 
properties of natural gas 
 
Because of the appreciable fuel gas flows at higher 
pressure, the in house natural gas supply facilities were used 
which deliver a so called Low Gas with higher nitrogen 
                                                          
1 equivalent to 40861 kJ/kg 
2 relative to air 
 
3 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 


--- Page 4 ---

content. The chemical composition and the combustion related 
physico-chemical properties are given in table 2 and 3. 
 
    
Table 3: Chemical composition of the used natural 
gas 
MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 
Flow velocities were measured by LDA, PIV and DGV. 
The burner outflow and three profiles from 10 to 35 mm from 
the burner as well as several profiles around the mixing jets 
were measured with LDA. Dantec 2-D sending optics and a fast 
in house receiving optic operating at a 13° off axis angle were 
used. The signals were processed by Dantec Burst Spectrum 
Analyzers. The resulting dimensions of the measuring volume 
were a diameter of 150 µm and a length of 1.5 mm. The airflow 
was seeded with liquid particles of a glycerin and ethanol 
mixture for the isothermal- and with Al2O3 for the combusting 
case, both with diameters below 1µm. Tests with a calibrated, 
contoured nozzle gave an agreement of better than 1%. For the 
measurement at the burner outlet, the optics were tilted by 9° to 
circumvent the filmer lip for the window cooling air, see Fig. 2. 
The resulting statistical moments can be transformed to the 
original coordinate system. Spectral measurements were 
performed at the outlet and a height of 10 mm for isothermal 
and combusting flow. The data processing is described in [6]. 
The velocity field of the primary zone was measured by 
DGV. Its application to combusting flows is described in [7]. 
Only mean velocities are measured with the used setup with on 
chip integration of signals. On the other hand a very dense 
volumetric data set was produced, mapping out the primary 
zone from z = 2 to 34 mm in 2 mm steps and in 1 mm steps for 
the two other directions for isothermal and combusting flow. 
The detection limit of the technique is 1 m/s. As it relies on the 
measurement of intensity differences, special care has to be 
taken to avoid reflections and secondary scattering. A 
dynamical background signal correction and turbulence 
correction were introduced as new techniques to the data 
processing. However preference must be given to LDA data at 
the places where they are available. 
PIV was used to measure the velocities in the secondary 
zone. For the isothermal measurement, a Stereo-PIV setup 
could be used, that gives instantaneous 3-D velocity maps. 
Initial conditions of the jets were acquired at 1 mm distance 
from the holes. For the combusting experiment, only 2-d PIV 
was possible. A combination of 2-D PIV and DGV for the third 
velocity component was realized for this experiment to attain 
3D velocity data without 3-way optical axis in the mixing zone. 
The windows in the outlet were used for the Laser light sheet 
and the side windows for the imaging. The single shot 
uncertainty was calculated to 2-4 m/s, the resulting uncertainty 
for the mean velocity with 1000 shots to 0.1-0.2 m/s. The 
precise optical arrangement can be found in [8]. 
In the primary zone, laser Raman scattering was used for 
the 
simultaneous determination 
of 
the 
major 
species 
concentrations (CO2, O2, CO, N2, CH4, H2O, and H2), mixture 
fraction, and temperature. At a total of 1800 measurement 
locations on 5 heights (z = 10, 24, 18, 22, 26 mm) 1000 single 
shots were taken. A critical point was the irradiation of the 
focused high-power laser beam through the combustion 
chamber windows. The requirements for high signal levels and 
good spatial resolution in a 1D configuration were inevitably 
connected with the risk of window damage. Therefore a pulse 
train from 3 double-pulse Nd: YAG lasers at λ=532 nm was 
used for the excitation. In order to reduce the intensity at the 
windows and to avoid an optical breakdown in the focal region, 
the pulse train of the six laser pulses is elongated by a pulse 
stretcher, and furthermore the laser beams were focused by a 
combination of two cylindrical 250 mm focal-length quartz 
lenses to generate a “blurred” focus of an average diameter of 
0.5 mm. In this way, the total pulse energy of 1 J could be 
irradiated into the combustor. The signal levels generated with 
this setup were sufficiently high to allow for single-shot 
measurements. The optical setup, the calibration and evaluation 
procedure of the signals are described in [9]. 
Species 
Mol-% 
Carbon dioxide CO2 
0.8385 
Nitrogen N2 
9.1064 
Oxygen O2+Argon Ar 
< 0.01 
Methane CH4 
87.874 
Ethane C2H6 
1.7695 
Propane C3H8 
0.3083 
n-Butane C4H10 
0.0426 
i-Butane C4H10 
0.0303 
n-Pentane C5H12 
0.0057 
i-Pentane C5H12 
0.0067 
Neo-Pentane C5H12 
0.0019 
C6 and higher 
0.0161 
The temperatures in the secondary zone were measured by 
a commercial broadband CARS system (SOPRA). Data 
evaluation and part of the data acquisition were developed at 
DLR and especially adapted for measurements at high 
temperature and pressure [10]. The experiments were 
performed in a planar BOX-CARS beam arrangement on 
nitrogen. An achromatic lens with a focal length of 300 mm 
was used to focus the laser beams. The corresponding probe 
volume, in which 95% of the CARS signal is generated, had a 
length of 3.2 mm under laboratory conditions. 
Due to the broadband operation of the dye laser with each 
laser pulse it is possible to record a complete nitrogen CARS 
spectrum, which can be evaluated giving a single pulse 
temperature. A typical measurement ensemble (temperature 
PDF) contains between a few hundred and 1200 single pulse 
temperatures. From these ensembles temperature mean value, 
rms (T) and some other statistical information are extracted. At 
2 and 10 bars 40 measurements were taken in each of the 3 y-z 
planes at x=-10, 0 10 mm around the main jets on 5 heights at z 
= 85, 95, 105, 115 and 125 mm between -35 < y < 35 mm.   
Prior to the experiments the status of the CARS system and 
the data evaluation strategy were checked by temperature 
measurements 
on 
an 
atmospheric 
oven 
cell 
with 
a 
homogeneous and time stable temperature profile. The 
measured mean temperature of 1560 K agreed better than 1 % 
with data from a newly calibrated two colour pyrometer. For 
laboratory burner measurements the temperature accuracy 
under atmospheric conditions is about 2 % for the mean 
temperature and 2-3 % for the root mean square value rms(T), 
and at 10 bar about 3 % for the mean temperature and 4-5 % for 
rms(T), reflecting the lower temperature sensitivity of the 
CARS spectra. 
 
4 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 


--- Page 5 ---

RESULTS 
Boundary conditions 
LDA measurements were performed 1 mm from the burner 
outlet at all operating conditions. The mean velocity profiles of 
the isothermal condition are given in Fig. 4. 
 
 
 
The assumption of axial symmetry is shown to be justified. 
The wake of the fuel ring at r = 10 mm is clearly seen in the 
axial- and tangential profile, with a nearly zero value of the 
tangential velocity at the center of the slot. The axial velocity 
over a short part of the fuel ring is presented in Fig. 5. The 
remnants of the discrete fuel jets are still noticeable at this 
position 2 mm from the exit of the fuel ring, c.f. Fig. 2.  
Figure 5: Axial velocity over fuel ring at z = 1 mm at 
isothermal condition 
 
The profiles of the RMS velocity largely follow the 
gradient hypothesis; however the level is higher in the inner 
swirl stream, where all components reach a peak value of 25 
m/s. Furthermore the peak of the radial RMS velocity is at r = 0 
mm, which suggests an oscillation of the axis of the flow. 
Therefore, spectral analysis of the LDA data was performed.  
The spectra of the data obtained in the core of the burner 
flow exhibit a pronounced peak near 1.7 KHz for both the 
radial as well as the tangential component. No preferred 
frequencies were found for the autocorrelation of the axial 
component nor for any cross- correlation involving axial 
velocity. The flow of the burner annulus (r = 12 mm) exhibits 
no preferred frequencies whatsoever. 
The velocity measurement at the jet mixing holes in the 
cold flow was performed using a Stereo PIV setup permitting 
simultaneous measurement of all three velocity components. 
The thickness of the light sheet was 1 mm. Figure 6 shows the 
mean velocities of the first measurement plane at 1 mm from 
the central hole, the velocity components in the plane are 
presented as vectors while the component normal to the plane is 
indicated by color contours.  
Figure 4: Profile of axial (u), radial (v) and 
tangential (w) velocity 1 mm from burner outlet at 
isothermal condition 
Figure 6: Mean velocities 1 mm from center of mixing 
jet port at y = 49 mm, isothermal condition, the circle 
denotes the jet hole contour  
 
Figure 7: Instantaneous velocities at the same 
location and condition as Fig. above 
 
5 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 


--- Page 6 ---

The core of the jet is seen to be smaller as the hole 
diameter. This is caused by the flow characteristics of their 
secondary channel, c.f. Fig.1, which had to be rather thin to fit 
into the pressure casing. Also, the center of the jet is displaced 
a little to the negative x direction. High in plane velocities are 
seen at the border of the jet pointing inward to the jet core, 
reflecting the strong entrainment at the root of the jet. The 
stagnation line between the primary zone fluids passing to the 
left and right of the jet is turned by the swirl to an 11 o’clock 
direction seen from the center of the hole.  
In Fig. 7 the instantaneous velocity field is shown for the 
same location and condition as for Fig. 6. At this instant in 
time, the high velocity core of the jet has a much smaller 
extension than in the mean velocity field resulting from the 
vigorous interaction of primary and jet flow already at the root 
of the jet. This underlines the necessity to include a sufficient 
area upstream of the hole in the calculation domain. 
Furthermore the clear stagnation line in Fig. 7 presents itself at 
this time increment more as a stagnation region with low in 
plane velocities around the point x= -3mm, z=103 mm. 
Primary Zone 
Only results from the 10 bar operating condition with 
combustion are shown. First, an overview of the burner flow is 
given with the axial velocities in the region accessible through 
the primary zone window. 
 
Figure 8: Axial velocities at 1, 10, 20 and 35 mm from 
the burner for the 10 bar condition 
 
The slow radial expansion of the swirling flow is 
consistent with the expectation from the photograph of the 
flame in Fig. 3. From z = 20 mm to z = 35 mm the width of the 
recirculation zone already decreases and looses in strength such 
that the recirculated mass remains small. The wake of the fuel 
ring vanishes at 10 mm whereas it can be clearly seen at that 
position for the isothermal flow, which had a dummy fuel flow 
of air with the same volumetric rate but higher mass. 
The correspondent RMS velocities are shown in Fig. 9. The 
small peaks between r = 8 and r = 10 for the first profile show 
the extra shear generated by the discrete fuel jets. Since the 
flow is not circumferentially symmetric at this point, cf. Fig. 5, 
a measurement taken at the other axis has different 
Figure 9: Axial RMS velocities at 1, 10, 20 and 35 mm 
from the burner for the 10 bar condition  
Radial coordinate [mm]
RMS of axial velocity [m/s]
0
10
20
0
20
40
1 mm
10 mm
20 mm
35 mm
Radial coordinate [mm]
Axial velocity [m/s]
0
10
20
-40
0
40
80
1 mm
10 mm
20 mm
35 mm
 
values at this radius. Again the radial RMS velocity near the 
burner has a peak on the axis and consequently the spectral 
measurements performed near the burner also show peaks, this 
time in all velocity components and at 2.5 KHz which gives the 
same Strouhal number as for the isothermal case. Comparison 
of hot and cold spectral measurements at z = 10 mm reveals 
that the peak is progressively damped with the temperature rise 
from 10 mm > r > 0 mm.     
A comparison between velocity and temperature derived 
from the Raman data at z = 10 mm and z = 26 mm is shown in 
Fig. 10. 
 
 
r [mm]
u [m/s]
temperature [K]
-30
-20
-10
0
-50
0
50
1000
1500
2000
temperature: z = 10 mm
axial velocity: z = 10 mm
temperature: z = 26 mm
axial velocity: z = 26 mm
 
Figure 10: Mean temperatures and axial velocity for 
the 10 bar condition 
 
 
6 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 


--- Page 7 ---

The two chosen heights show the situation before and after 
ignition of the gaseous fuel stream. At z = 10 mm only the 
recirculation zone is hot. However, the mixture is within the 
approximate boundaries of the flammability limit only between 
8 mm < r < 13 mm, where the temperature is still rather low 
and hasn’t reached the spontaneous ignition temperature at the 
stoichiometric point at r = 12 mm. This condition is fulfilled for 
the mean flow between 10 mm < z < 14 mm. At z = 26 mm, the 
high temperature region has reached the core of the swirling jet 
flow. A more detailed view on reaction progress can be gained 
with a scatter plot of temperatures against mixture fraction. 
This is done at z = 18 mm in Fig. 11. for three different radii, r 
= 0, 12 and 26 mm. 
Figure 11: Scatter plot of temperature at 10 bars and 
z=18 mm. Symbols represent results from single 
pulse Raman measurements at three radial locations 
 
Not surprisingly, the mean mixture at r = 0 mm is rich with 
CH4 and O2 concentrations below 2% and the temperatures of 
the burned out mixture high. On the other side at r = 26 mm, 
the mixture fractions are very lean, the spread in temperature 
being produced by hot gas mixed in from the lean burning outer 
recirculation. The CO2 concentration at this plane reaches a 
minimum at r = 18 mm, with a slight increase at higher radii 
marking the occurrence of recirculated gases. At r = 12 mm, the 
mean mixture fraction is still rich, however the RMS value is at 
its peak here and hence a wide distribution of points along the 
abscissa is seen. The temperature distribution seems to be 
slightly bimodal with a lot of points below 900 K that haven’t 
reacted at all, quite a number of points above 2000 K that are at 
the approximate end of reaction and a somewhat smaller 
number of points between those temperatures. Fast chemistry 
would produce a bimodal distribution with almost no points 
between the low temperature limit and the adiabatic line. 
In summary, the limited amount of recirculated heat and 
the slow radial expansion of the swirling flow produced a 
reaction zone with an unusually long axial extension compared 
to most practical gas turbine burners. On the other hand that 
leads to a higher axial stratification of heat release and 
therefore lower axial gradients of species and temperature 
giving rise to a good spatial resolution of reaction progress in 
the measurements, which should make comparisons to 
computed results easier.  
Mixing Zone 
The mean mixing zone flow is portrayed by two cross 
sections in the plane of the main jets perpendicular to the z and 
the x axis. Because of the better quality of the combined PIV 
and DGV as well as the CARS measurements at the lower 
pressure, results from the 2 bar condition are selected. Figure 
12 shows the velocities in the plane of the jet holes at z=94mm. 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
 
T / K
f / -
10 bar, h=18 mm
 Tadiab.
 r = 0 mm
 r = 12 mm
 r = 26 mm
 
Figure 12: Mean velocities in the plane of the jets at 
z= 94 mm at 2 bar 
 
The extension of the measuring zone is higher in the positive y 
direction than in the negative one, because the light sheets were 
introduced from the exit flange window at the positive y side. 
The plot is an interpolation from the measurements made in 2 
mm increments with light sheets along the y direction. 
Consequently the velocity component in the x direction results 
from the DGV measurement and the velocity component in the 
y direction from the PIV measurement. The big jets are seen to 
collide, but also to be deflected into the counterclockwise 
direction under the influence of the swirl.  
 
 
 
Figure 13: Mean velocities in the plane of the jets at 
x= 0 mm at 2 bar 
 
 
7 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 


--- Page 8 ---

The orthogonal view through the main jets is depicted in Fig. 
13. Here the velocities result from PIV measurements of a 
single light sheet and therefore there is no interpolation. Apart 
from the slight shift of the stagnation point between the jets to 
y=2mm, the mean flow is quite symmetric. The jet fluid is 
mostly deflected to the downstream region, but there is also a 
non negligible amount recirculated into the primary zone.            
 
 
 
Figure 14: Instantaneous velocities in the plane of the 
jets at x = 0 mm at 2 bar 
 
 
Looking at three instantaneous snapshots of the velocities in the 
same plane depicted in Fig. 14, a different impression can be 
gained. The main jets collide and burst into rather sharp jet like 
structures downstream and upstream, that move with high 
speed in any angle. In the three snapshots we can distinguish a 
situation where the jet pointing upstream is fed from both main 
jets, from the jet on the positive y direction on the right and 
finally from the jet on the negative y side at the left side. 
Although the mean flow in Fig. 12 is symmetric in the y-z 
plane and the recirculating flow exhibits smooth gradients, it is 
genuinely unsteady. Not surprisingly the comparison between 
RANS and LES calculations that has been performed so far, c.f 
[11] shows a clear advantage for the LES calculation with the 
RANS 
result 
underpredicting 
the 
penetration 
and 
overpredicting the spreading angle of the jets. 
Although the best complement to the PIV measurements 
would have been planar temperature measurements, the method 
using OH-LIF could not be applied because of the lack of OH 
in the low temperature regions of the jet. Even for the 1-D 
Raman measurements, the optical access using the windows in 
the exit flange proved to be insufficient, hence CARS as a 
reliable single point technique with comparatively high single 
shot accuracy was chosen. Fig. 1 shows the mean temperature 
distribution in the same plane as Figs. 13 and 14 for the 2 bar 
condition. 
y / mm
z / mm
-20
0
20
80
90
100
110
120
130
<T> / K
1650
1600
1550
1500
1450
1400
1350
1300
1250
1200
1150
1100
1050
1000
950
900
850
800
750
700
650
x = 0 mm, 2bar
Figure 15: Mean temperatures in the plane of the jets 
at x = 0 mm at 2 bar 
 
The measurement points are marked with quadrangles. For ease 
of comparison with the preceding pictures, interpolation was 
used to arrive at the contour plot in the figure. The cold jets and 
their mixing with the hot primary air can be easily followed 
along the z = 95 mm line. When comparing with Fig 13, the 
smaller measuring range in the y direction has to be kept in 
mind. The measurement upstream of the jet axis at z = 85 mm 
shows the end of the primary zone, but also between -5 mm< y 
< 5 mm a colder region where the cold fluid from the colliding 
jet is encountered.  
Accordingly the map of the RMS temperatures in Fig. 16 shows 
very high temperature fluctuations where hot entrained primary 
fluid reaches the centerline of the jets. Although the velocity 
distributions below the collision at x = 0, z = 85 mm are very 
 
8 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 


--- Page 9 ---

Figure 16: RMS temperatures in the plane of the jets 
at x = 0 mm at 2 bar 
 
unsteady, with fluid from the jet alternating with fluid of very 
low velocity, the RMS of the temperature fluctuations are lower 
than on the centerline of the jets before the point of collision. 
Here, the temperature PDF of Fig. 17 available from the CARS 
measurement shows a lack of temperatures between 1800 and 
2200 K, which are found elsewhere in the hot zones with higher 
RMS temperatures. Even the low velocity fluid is already at 
lower temperature than the primary zone gas, whereas on the jet 
centerline pure jet fluid coexists with pure primary zone flow 
and mixtures thereof. Hence for the prediction of the mixing of 
the secondary air it is also necessary to accurately describe the 
turbulent mixing of temperature and the turbulence of the 
primary zone flow.   
 
  
 
Figure 17: Temperature PDF of CARS measurement 
at X = Y = 0 mm, z = 85 mm at 2 bar  
 
CONCLUSIONS 
The intention of the project to compile a comprehensive 
database of velocity, temperature and species for the validation 
of RANS and LES codes has been fulfilled. A dedicated 
combustor has been built and efforts to adapt measuring 
techniques have been undertaken to reach a threefold aim: 
y / mm
z / mm
-20
0
20
80
90
100
110
120
130
rms(T) / K
240
230
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
x = 0 mm, 2bar
The 
reactive 
flow 
of 
the 
combustor 
should 
be 
representative of a practical aeroengine combustor for the most 
important aspects of flow and combustion modeling. 
The boundary conditions should be described accurately 
enough to make the calculations as independent as possible 
from arbitrary choices made for the input to the computation. 
The comprehensiveness, the detail and accuracy of the data 
should be high enough to present a challenging task to the 
different groups of CFD modelers and users to which the 
dataset is transferred. 
The material presented in this contribution has been 
selected to enable the readers to judge how far this promise has 
been fulfilled. An exhaustive description of the physics 
contained in the dataset was not possible. Instead an overview 
of the whole combustor flow was given and some exemplary 
features were highlighted. The interaction of reaction and 
turbulent mixing in the primary zone could only be described 
superficially and the marked influence of the operating pressure 
was not exposed. This will be done in more detail in a 
subsequent publication. It was however shown that the heat 
release is neither dominated by mixing or chemical reaction 
times. With a fuel consisting predominantly of Methane for 
which good kinetic data is available, it should be a useful test 
case for combustion models. In the mixing zone, the 3-D field 
of instantaneous velocity data and the temperature information 
should constitute a demanding test case for the modeling of the 
turbulent transport of heat and momentum. 
It is anticipated that with more results from the calculations 
becoming available, the dataset will have to be interrogated and 
evaluated in many ways to elucidate the differences found 
between measurement and calculation. For this reason it will be 
a continuing activity for some time to come. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Partial funding of the work by the European Community 
under ‘Competitive and Sustainable Growth’ Programme 
(1998-2002), project MOLECULES, Contract N°: G4RD-CT 
2000-0402 is gratefully acknowledged. 
Thanks belong also to W. Quade for operation of the 
combustor and J. Koopman for evaluations of the dataset. The 
useful discussions with industrial partners of the project during 
the design phase are also acknowledged.  
 
REFERENCES 
1.     http://dbs.cordis.lu/ 
2. Hassa, C., Carl, M., Frodermann, M., Behrendt, Th., 
Heinze, J., Röhle, I., Brehm, N., Schilling, T. and Dörr, 
Th., 1999 “Experimental investigation of an axially staged 
combustor sector with optical diagnostics at realistic 
operating conditions”, Applied Vehicule Technology Panel 
Symposium on Gas Turbine Combustion, Emissions and 
Alternative 
Fuels, 
Paper 
18, 
Nato 
Research 
and 
Technology Organization  – Meeting Proceedings 14  
3. Behrendt, Th., Frodermann, M., Hassa, C., Heinze, J., 
Lehmann, B., Stursberg, K., 1999 “Optical measurements 
of Spray combustion in a single sector combustor from a 
practical fuel injector at high pressures”, Applied Vehicule 
 
9 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 


--- Page 10 ---

Technology 
Panel 
Symposium 
on 
Gas 
Turbine 
Combustion, Emissions and Alternative Fuels, Paper 43, 
Nato Research and Technology Organization  – Meeting 
Proceedings 14  
4. Holdeman, J.D., Srinivasan, R., Coleman. E.B., Meyers, 
G.D., White, C.D., 1987 “Effects of multiple rows and 
noncircular orifices on dilution jet mixing, J. Propulsion 
and Power, 3, 219 
5. Beer, J.M., Chigier, N.A., 1972,“Combustion Aerodyna-
mics“, Applied Science Publishers, London 
6. Becker, J. and Hassa, C., 2001 “Messung des turbulenten 
Längenmaßes in einem generischen Vormischmodul“ 
Fachtagung Lasermethoden in der Strömungsmesstechnik, 
GALA e.V. 
7. Fischer, M., Stockhausen, G., Heinze, J., Seifert, M., 
Müller, M., Schodl, R., 2004 “Development of Doppler 
global velocimetry measurement devices and combined 
application of DGV and OH chemiluminescence imaging 
to a gas turbine combustor”, paper 25-1, Proc: 12th Intl. 
Symp. of Laser Techniques to Fluid Mechanics,  Lisbon, 
8. Willert, C., Hassa, C., Stockhausen, G., Jarius, M., Voges, 
M., Klinner, J., 2005, “Combined PIV and DGV applied to 
a pressurized combustion facility“, 6th. Int. Symp. On 
Particle Image Velocimetry, Pasadena, California, USA, 
September 21-23  
9. Wehr, L., Meier, W., Kutne, W., Becker, J., 2005 „1D 
Single-Pulse Raman Measurements of Temperature and 
Mixture Fraction in a Gas Turbine Model Combustor at 
Elevated Pressure”, European Combustion Meeting, 
Brussels, The Combustion Institute 
10. Fischer, M., Magens, E., Winandy, A., 1993 “Single-Shot 
Broadband 
Nitrogen 
CARS 
Measurements 
with 
Temperatures up to 3200 K: Comparison of Different Data 
Evaluation Schemes”, Proceedings of the XI'th European 
CARS Workshop, Florence, March 23-25, 1992, published 
in "Coherent Raman Spectroscopy: Applications and New 
Developments", World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., 
Singapore, 1993, pp. 165-170. 
11. Eggels, R.L.G.M., Hassa, C., 2005, “Modelling of the flow 
field within a generic aero-engine combustor”, AIAA-2005-
3970, 
 
 
 
 
10 
Copyright © 2006 by ASME 
