
--- Page 1 ---

AlAA 92-3227 
Liquid Rocket Spray Combustion Stability 
Analysis 
R. J. Litchford 
University of Tennessee Space Institute 
Tullahoma, TN 
San-Mou Jen 
University of 
incinnati 
Cincinnati, OH 8 
AI AAISAEI ASM El AS E E 
28th Joint Propulsion 
Conference and Exhibit 
July 6-8, 1992 / Nashville, TN 
For permission to copy or republish, contact the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20024 


--- Page 2 ---

LIQUID R O C K E T  SPRAY COMBUSTION STABaITY ANALYSIS 
W 
Ron J. Litchfordt 
University of Tennessee Space Institute 
Tullahorna, Tennessee 97988 
San-Mou Jengt 
University of Cincinnati 
Cincinnati, Ohio 4522f 
Abstract 
Introduction 
A computational methodology for the analysis 
of spray combustion stability in liquid rocket com- 
bustors has been constructed. The analysis is based 
on the unsteady, quasi-two-dimensional Euler equa- 
tions with interphase source terms derived from a La- 
grangian treatment of the combusting spray. An ax- 
isymetric combustor geometry is analyzed in terms 
of an equivalent annular computational domain with 
periodicity conditions which may further be special- 
ized for a rectangular combustor geometry or re- 
duced to a quasi-one-dimensional description for pure 
longitudinal-mode analyses. The propellant spray 
is represented by Lagrangian tracking of computa- 
tional parcels each having a droplet spatial distri- 
bution described by a probability density function. 
The propellant burning rate is described by the d2 
vaporization law with the Ranz-Marshall convection 
correlation and a one-parameter phenomenological 
pressure-sensitive response index. The longitudinal- 
and tangential-mode instability characteristics of a 
generic combustor were investigated using the devel- 
oped methodology. Intrinsic longitudinal-mode in- 
stability was observed at relatively high pressure- 
sensitive combustion response levels. 
The result- 
ing limit cycle oscillation consisted of a single steep- 
fronted pressure wave undergoing repeated injector 
and nozzle reflections at the fundamental acoustical 
frequency. Intrinsic tangential-mode instability was 
observed even with vanishing pressure-sensitive com- 
bustion response. The observed instability exhibited 
mode switching from a single steep-fronted traveling 
pressure wave to two steep-fronted waves traveling in 
opposing directions. These extremely high-amplitude 
pressure waves were localized very near the injector 
face in a manner consistent with the shocklike waves 
observed in some experiments. 
- 
t Research Engineer, UT-Calspan Center for 
Space Transportation and Applied Research, Mem- 
ber AIAA. 
t. Associate Professor, Aerospace Engineering 
and Engineering Mechanics, Member AIAA. 
Copyright @American Institute of Aero- 
nautics and Astronautics, Inc., 1992. All 
rights reserved. 
W 
This paper reports on some recent efforts to ap- 
ply modern computational techniques to the analysis 
of spray combustion stability in liquid-fueled rocket 
engines. 
Such efforts seem justified on the basis 
that numerical methods allow for a more compre- 
hensive analysis of combustion instability than can 
be achieved using classical analytical treatments. By 
accounting for nonlinear behavior and allowing for 
more comprehensive physical submodeling, a com- 
putational approach becomes very alluring with the 
promise of shedding valuable insight on the myste- 
rious connections between unsteady combustion and 
organized flow oscillations. From a practical stand- 
point, an efficient computational tool can also serve 
as a valuable design aid. In this paper, we outline our 
attempt to construct the basic framework for such an 
engineering analysis tool with emphasis on robustness 
and efficiency while capturing the essential features of 
the physical phenomena. 
When attempting such a development, it is neces- 
sary to recognize that numerical solution techniques 
are beset with thier own special vexations in appli- 
cation and that physical theories for unsteady com- 
bustion phenomena retain a certain degree of uncer- 
tainty. Meaningful analysis of the problem is not yet 
a simple matter of mere implementation. For exam- 
ple, both the dissipative and dispersive characteristics 
of a particular scheme can have an important influ- 
ence on numerical accuracy in unsteady flow prob- 
lems as demonstrated by Hsieh.' Also, because com- 
bustion instability is basically a wave phenomenon, 
implementation of appropriate boundary conditions 
is not trivial. Stability is greatly determined by the 
transmission and reflection of flow disturbances in- 
cident on the boundaries. Furthermore, instability 
oscillation modes typically involve multidimensional 
effects and time accurate solutions are required im- 
posing additional computational burden. The fore- 
most difficulty, however, is the absence of definitive 
physical submodeling for unsteady combustion. 
The complex physics of unsteady spray combus- 
tion in liquid rocket engines can still only be grossly 
modeled using our best contemporary descriptions. 
Even with these available descriptions, there is diffi- 
culty in implementing the modeling within a CFD 
framework without introducing excessive computa- 
tional penalties or nonphysical numerical noise. For 
1 


--- Page 3 ---

instability problems, such nonphysical noise is of cen- 
tral importance, Strong numerical noise can falsely 
trigger nonlinear instabilities and yield misleading re- 
sults. 
The problems described above make the predic- 
tion and description of spray combustion instabili- 
ties especially difficult. Currently, stability analysis 
methods can. serve only as guides leading to quali- 
tative understanding rather than a priori quantita- 
tive predictions from first principles. By adapting 
contemporary computational techniques and refined 
physical submodeling, however, this situation may 
hopefully be improved. In fact, considerable progress 
is being made toward achieving this goal by several 
In this paper, our intent is to contribute to such 
an effort by developing a computational framework 
suitable for spray combustion stability analyses. Our 
desire is that the resulting development serve initially 
as a useful research code and ultimately as a de- 
sign aide following the introduction of more complete 
physical submodeling. Emphasis is placed on compu- 
tational efficiency and robustness. At this early stage 
of code development, a simple spray combustion phys- 
ical submodel is considered with a one-parameter phe- 
nomenological pressure-sensitive combustion response 
index. It seems wise to first obtain results using a 
simplified instability model in lieu of more compli- 
cated physical submodeling with inherently more con- 
voluted effects. With this controlled approach, we 
hope to develop a computational framework more ef- 
ficiently and still gain insight into the basic physical 
phenomena. Once established, the retrogressive na- 
ture of this developmental approach may be relaxed 
by substituting more refined physical submodeling. 
Theory 
Physical Model 
Recognizing that the physical model must ulti- 
mately describe transverse-mode instabilities but that 
computational efficiency is also essential, we have 
adapted the equivalent annular combustor representa- 
tion for an actual axisymmetric combustor geometry 
as formulated by French researcber~.~~~ 
Although this 
approach neglects radial-mode instabilities, it allows 
for a description of the more important tangential- 
modes with the computational savings derived from 
using a two-dimensional grid. The resulting formula- 
tion may also be specialized for rectangular combus- 
tors or reduced to a quasi-onedimensional description 
for pure longitudinal-mode analyses. The resulting 
computational framework is therefore quite versatile. 
The geometry of an axisymmetric combustor and 
an equivalent annular computational domain is shown 
in Fig. 1. Here, the axial coordinate of the compu- 
tational domain corresponds directly to that of the 
actual engine. The transverse length I ,  however, is 
chosen to match the desired nth tangential mode of 
the real combustor. Periodicity of the transverse cc- 
ordinate is also required. With these two lengths, the 
annular width 6 is fixed such that the cross-sectional 
areas match. Clearly, 6 is a function of axial posi- 
tion only. If analysis of a rectangular combustor is 
desired, I is taken as the height, b becomes a vari- 
able width, and the transverse periodicity condition 
is replaced by solid wall boundary conditions. For 
a quasi-one-dimensional analysis, I is taken as unity 
and 6 becomes a variable cross-sectional area. 
We consider a bi-propellant system with injection 
of a gaseous oxidizer and a fuel spray at the injector 
face. Treatment of the gas phase was simplified by 
neglecting viscous/turbulence effects except for inter- 
phase momentum exchange. Physical modeling of the 
combustion process was simplified by invoking the fol- 
lowing assumptions: 
w 
Fuel is injected as a monodispersed spray of 
droplets - atomization is neglected. 
The local mean vaporization rate is determined 
by applying the quasi-steady d2 vaporization law 
with corrections for convection and pressure sen- 
sitivity. 
Combustion is assumed to occur infinitely fast 
Analysis is restricted to fuel-lean operating con- 
ditions only so that all fuel is completely con- 
sumed. 
The gas-phase combustion products are assumed 
to be calorically as well as thermally perfect. 
following vaporization of the fuel droplets. 
u 
Gas-Phase Formulation 
In our development, the gas phase is treated us- 
ing an Eulerian description with appropriate source 
terms for interphase transport coupling with the 
spray. The problem thus reduces to solving the un- 
steady, quasi-two-dimensional Euler equations which 
may be written in conservative form using matrix n e  
tation as 
aQ 
aE 
d F  
-+-+-=H 
at 
ax 
ay 
where the conserved variable vector Q is defined by 
r pb 1 
Q =  
4 
and the convective flux vectors E and F are defined 
-- 2 


--- Page 4 ---

The vector H contains contributions due to the vari- 
able annular width and interphase transport source 
terms. We denote this vector as the sum of two com- 
ponents 
H = H i  + I f 2  
(4) 
For single-phase flow, only H I  need be considered to 
account for the variable annular width effect on the 
axial momentum equation. It consists of asingle com- 
ponent 
For twophase flow, the source vector Hz must be 
included to account for interphase transport effects 
on the continuous-phase conservation equations. The 
source vector HZ has the form 
W 
r 
1 
The perfect gas equation of state p = pRT = (y - 
l)[e - p$] completes the governing system where e = 
C,T + $ represents the total internal energy. 
This inhomogeneous form of the Euler equations 
retains a hyperbolic character. Thus, the Jacobian 
coefficient matrix A = aE/BQ has real eigenvalues u, 
u + e, u, and u - c with the speed of sound defined by 
c = m. 
Similarly, the eigenvalues of the Jacobian 
coefficient matrix B = BF/BQ are v, u, u + c, and 
u - c. Following conventional practice, A and B may 
be diagonalized such that 
T;'M-'AMT, 
= A z  
T;'M-'BMTy = Ay 
(7) 
where M = 
is a transformation matrix from the 
conservative variables Q to the primitive variables 
V ,  T, and Ty are similarity transformation matrices 
formed from the eigenvectors of the primitive variable 
Jacobian coefficient matrices M-'AM and M - ' B M ,  
and As and Ay are the diagonal eigenvalue matrices. 
W 
. ;:-i.~.i. 
For convieniedce, we may define positive and neg- 
ative eigenvalue matrices as A; 
and A, where '+' in- 
dicates the occurence of positive eigenvalues only and 
I - '  
indicates only negative eigenvalues. It follows, 
therefore, that 
+ 
+ 
(9) 
1.41 = MTz(A$ - A;)T;'M-' 
= A+ - A- 
IBI = MTy(l\y+ - A;)T;'M-' 
= B+ - B- 
Numerical Scheme 
Numerical solution of the Euler equations 
is accomplished through optional spatial finite- 
difference discretizations and a separate time- 
integration method. In selecting discretization meth- 
ods, we desired a conservative formulation capa- 
ble of yielding meaningful spatial resolution with- 
out spurious numerical oscillations. In selecting a 
time-integration method, we desired meaningful time- 
accuracy and good numerical stability. These prop- 
erties are central to the description of unsteady flows 
typically encountered in a combustion stability anal- 
ysis. Therefore, both the dissipative and dispersive 
characteristics of a numerical scheme are important 
to the problem. Of course, efficiency is always of ut- 
most concern. 
An assessment of numerical techniques for such 
unsteady flow calculations has been carried out by 
Hsieh.' Based on his results, explicit Runge-Kutta 
multi-stage timeintegration with 6th order central 
differencing of the convective fluxes and 4th order ar- 
tificial dissipation yield very good all around perfor- 
mance. He also found that 2nd order, upwind flux- 
differencing with Roe averaging of the Jacobian coef- 
ficient matrices and nonlinear flux limiters to achieve 
TVD conditions performed very well with regard to 
shock capturing but entailed higher dissipative errors 
in multidimensional problems. Our construction of a 
computational method for spray combustion stability 
is based on adopting the best performing techniques 
from this study. 
The development of the numerical scheme begins 
from the spatially discretized Euler equations yielding 
a system of ODES of the form 
where R(Q,,t) represents an explicit spatial operator. 
Applying the 4-stage Runge-Kutta method yields the 
- 3 -  


--- Page 5 ---

operational sequence 
Qfi = Q;,L 
Q~.;L = QY,, - ; i ~ t ~ ( ~ ! o ) )  
J,k 
Q$;: = ~ 7 , ~  
- -A~R(Q!')) 
Jlk 
Q$ = Q;,~ - -A~R(Q!~)) 
>,k 
1 
1 
3 
1 
2 
(11) 
QZE1 = QY,, - AtR(Q!3') 
I l k  
With 6th order central differencing of the convec- 
tive fluxes and the addition of 4th order artificial dis- 
sipation, the explicit spatial operator takes the form 
1 
R(Qi,k) = 
(EI+s.x - QEj+z,k + 45Ejt1,t 
-45Fj,t-1 4- 
QFj,k-z - Fj,k-s 
+D,? + D$Yi - Hj,k 
(12) 
The dissipation vector for the streamwise coordinate 
is9 
- 4Qjt1,k + 6Qj,k 
-4Qj-1,k 
+Qj-z.k) 
(13) 
with a similar definition for the transverse coordinate. 
This central difference scheme is very efficient and the 
method of choice in most cases. 
For a more computationally intensive approach, 
a characteristic-based spatial discretization using up- 
wind flux-differencing is included as an alternative 
where the explicit spatial operator may be written 
in terms of numerical flux vectors treated on a locally 
one-dimensional basis. 
Here, the 1st order accurate numerical flux vector is 
defined for the streamwise coordinate by 
- 
where the Jacobian coefficient matrix A is evaluated 
using the Roe averaged quantities"." 
W 
SimiIar relations hold for the transverF fluxes in 
terms of the Jacobian coefficient matrix B. 
As developed, the above 1st order accurate 
scheme exhibits robust nonoscillatory behavior, but 
spatial resolution is poor. Direct substitution of 2nd 
order difference formulas does not improve matters 
either since this leads to the generation of spurious 
oscillations. To circumvent this difficulty, Harten" 
has introduced the total-variation-diminishing (TVD) 
property and derived sufficient conditions for con- 
structing schemes which satisfy this property. Such 
constructions have been carried out for both explicit 
and implicit time integration ~chemes.'~J~ 
The mech- 
anisms currently in use for satisfying TVD conditions 
are based on some kind of gradient limiting procedure. 
We adapt such a procedure based on a nonlinear flux 
limiter. The second-order convective flux vector is 
obtained by adding corrective terms to the first-order 
flux vector. A generalized form which may he special- 
ized for second-order central, second-order upwind, or 
third-order biased upwind schemes is given by Hsieh' 
- 4  


--- Page 6 ---

and the minmod operator is defined by 
W 
minmod[z,y] = sgn(z) 
m 4 0 , m i n { l 4 y  sgn(z)ll 
(21) 
Similar forms hold for the transverse flux vector. The 
values of K corresponding to the type of scheme are 
presented in Table 1. The constant fl is a compression 
parameter which is restricted to the range 1 5 fl 5 
(3 - ~ ) / ( l -  
K) with fl = 6 when K = 1. 
Boundary Conditions 
Boundary conditions for the computational anal- 
ysis are implemented according to the propagation of 
information along the flow characteristics. On a lc- 
cally one-dimensional basis, for instance, each eigen- 
value may be associated with a particular character- 
istic. If the eigenvalue is positive, its corresponding 
characteristic is right/up running. Conversely, if the 
eigenvalue is negative, its characteristic is left/down 
running. When a characteristic runs out of the com- 
putational domain, the boundary condition depends 
on the internal flow field, and a numerical bound- 
ary condition must be formulated which depends on 
the computed solution. The number of unknown flow 
parameters minus the number of numerical bound- 
ary conditions gives the number of physical boundary 
conditions which must be imposed. 
For the subsonic inflow boundary, there are three 
in-running characteristics requiring three imposed 
physical conditions. In this analysis, we demand that 
the incoming gas-phase mass flux, flow angle (swirl), 
and entropy remain constant. The fixed gas-phase 
mass flux inflow implies the injection rate is insen- 
sitive to fluctuations at the injector face. Pressure- 
sensitive injection may be considered by including an 
appropriate injector admittance condition. 
For the outflow boundary, the flow is supersonic 
in the diverging section of the nozzle and all char- 
acteristics are out-running so that no physical con- 
ditions need be specified. However, it suffices for 
developmental purposes to consider a subsonic out- 
flow boundary condition at the nozzle entrance by 
making the short-nozzle appr~ximation.'~ 
Here, the 
flow is assumed to accelerate to sonic velocity in zero 
length. The physical condition imposed for the single 
in-running characteristic in this case is a fixed Mach 
number. Although this approximation is strictly valid 
for pure longitudinal-mode oscillations only, we uti- 
lize the approximation for the sake of simplicity even 
when transverse velocity components appear. 
At 
worse, this approach underestimates the nozzle damp- 
ing effect. For the purpose of obtaining a mean flow 
prior to making a stability calculation, we also have 
the option of specifying the static pressure at the noz- 
zle entrance. 
W 
- 
- 5  
Boundary conditions for the transverse direc- 
tion are irrelevant for the annular combustor geome- 
try in that it is only necessary to insure periodicity. 
When specializing for rectangular combustor geome- 
tries, solid wall boundary conditions are invoked by 
forcing the normal velocity component to zero. 
S p ~ y  
Combustion Formulation 
Treatment of the propellant spray is simplified 
by neglecting the atomization process and assuming 
the injection of groups of discrete droplets at specified 
time intervals. Each droplet group is then represented 
by a probability density function (pdf) in space. The 
behavior of the droplets within each group is deter- 
mined from the history of a single discrete compu- 
tational parcel whose instantaneous position corre- 
sponds to the mean of the pdf. Conversely to the gas 
phase, these parcels are treated in a Lagrangian fash- 
ion. Knowing the pdf's mean location and size at a 
given instant, we may calculate the probable number 
of physical droplets in each cell to evaluate interphase 
transport. 
The purpose of the pdf representation is to mini- 
mize the numerical shot noise which normally results 
when each parcel is described by a delta function 
point source and the droplet spray is undersampled. 
The numerical noise problem arising from the point 
source representation may be minimized by using a 
large number of parcels but with great sacrifice in 
Computational efficiency. This fundamental difficulty 
can be so troubling that an Eulerian description of 
the spray is generally preferred. By introducing a 
distributed parcel representation, we hope to allevi- 
ate the generation of nonphysical numerical noise nor- 
mally associated with a Lagrangian approach without 
suffering severe computational penalty. 
In this development, we employ a rectangular 
uniform pdf shape as depicted schematically in Fig. 
2. The streamwise width of this pdf corresponds to 
the product of the propellant injection velocity and 
a specified injection time interval. We currently im- 
pose an injection time interval such that this width 
is about 1.5 times the streamwise cell length. The 
width of the pdf in the transverse direction is cur- 
rently equated to the transverse cell length. In addi- 
tion, we require that these characteristic dimensions 
of the pdf shape remain fixed throughout a parcel's 
lifetime. A general theory has been developed to in- 
corporate the time evolving width of the pdf due to 
turbulent dispersion,'6 but we are neglecting turbu- 
lence effects in the present development. 
The mean position of each pdf is determined from 
Lagrangian tracking of a single computational parcel 
characterizing the behavior of the physical droplets in 
the group The equations governing particle motion 


--- Page 7 ---

are 
(23) 
For the sake of efficiency, we linearize Eq. (22) by 
holding (pg/pp)(CD/dp)\iig - 
constant over the 
computational time step and integrate analytically. 
This gives the updated parcel velocity as 
gP tipo exp [+] 
+ gg( 1 - exp [+I} 
(24) 
The parcel position is obtained through an even sim- 
pler treatment by using explicit Euler integration 
Zp NN Zp, i 
iip At 
(25) 
These approximate equations yield minimal error 
for small computational time steps and are sufficient 
for engineering calculations. Evaluation of parcel mo- 
tion is simplified even further in the current analysis 
by neglecting parcel motion in the transverse direc- 
tion. This simplification may be relaxed its desired 
but at increased computational expense. 
Physical modeling of the unsteady spray com- 
bustion process is an essential element of the stability 
analysis. A comprehensive description should be able 
to account for the effect of local flow fluctuations, in 
thdform of organized flow oscillations as well as tur- 
bulence, on interphase transport and the propellant 
combustion rate. Frankly, such a complete descrip- 
tion does not exist. Even the best current modeling 
techniques retain a measure of uncertainty and are 
generally quite complicated and encumbering. Be- 
cause we wish to avoid such unnecessary complication 
during the developmental process, we have adapted 
the relatively simple d2-law for droplet vaporization 
and have included simple multiplicative corrections 
for convective effects and pressure sensitivity. The 
instantaneous combustion rate of a parcel thus has 
the form 
(26) 
?r 
rh = ;ippdppIC,Kp 
where the correction factor for convective erects is 
given by the Ranz-Marshall correlation as'? 
IC, = 1 + 0.3Re1'2Pr113 
(27) 
The factor representing pressure sensitive com- 
bustion response is derived from the classical two- 
parameter n - r formulation proposed by Cr~cco.'~ 
In the n - 7 instability model, the propellant is as- 
sumed to undergo combustion after some time lag 
7 following injection. The mass burning rate dur- 
v 
ing combustion is also assumed to be proportional 
to pressure raised to the power n. Recognizing that 
our Lagrangian description of the spray yields a time 
lag effect somewhat analogous to that of the 7 pa- 
rameter, we concern ourselves only with the pressure- 
sensitive combustion response strength as represented 
by the n parameter. We then note that for small pres- 
sure changes about the mean the power law pressure 
dependence is approximately represented by a pro- 
portional relationship between burning rate and in- 
stantaneous pressure. Thus, expressing the burning 
rate BS the sum of a mean and fluctuating quantity 
h = Z + h', we introduce a pressure-sensitive com- 
bustion response index a, analogous to n, such that 
If we further assume that the 8-law corrected for 
convective effects only represents the mean burning 
rate, we may write the pressnre-sensitive correction 
factor as 
u 
The notation expressing the functional dependency of 
the pressure fluctuation implies that p'(t;zp) be eval- 
uated at time t at the instantaneous location of the 
parcel zp. This approach is somewhat artificial but 
serves as a useful construct for developmental pur- 
poses and is not devoid of merit as a phenomenologi- 
cal description. 
Computational Methodology 
Application of the above modeling scheme re- 
quires a two-part approach. First, a mean flow must 
be computed by specifying the mean combustor pres- 
sure at the nozzle entrance and setting a = 0. Be- 
cause of the unsteadiness induced by the convection 
correction, it is generally not possible to get a fully 
converged steady-state flow field in this way. We 
avoid this difficulty by freezing the source terms once 
it becomes obvious that additional convergence is im- 
possible and then continue the calculation. With 
the source terms frozen the calculation coverges very 
rapidly. For a multidimensional analysis, we also find 
it expedient to import a 1D mean flow solution. Once 
a mean flow field is obtained for reference by what- 
ever method, stability calculations are performed by 
restarting the code using the short-nozzle boundary 
condition and a specified combustion response index. - 
G 


--- Page 8 ---

Results and Discussion 
W 
There are two important combustor character- 
istics which influence stability. One is the localized 
combustion response to flow field fluctuations. An- 
other is the mean combustion distribution. It is these 
characteristics which greatly determine the tendency 
for a pressure wave to be amplified or attenuated. In 
our combustion model, the combustion response in- 
dex and, to a certain extent, the Rauz-Marshall cou- 
vection correlation describe the combustion response. 
On the other hand, the mean spray combustion dis- 
tribution is controlled by the mean burning rate con- 
stant in conjunction with the Lagrangian tracking for- 
mulation. 
Based on this spray combustion model, we have 
used the constructed computational methodology to 
investigate the stability characteristics of a represen- 
tative generic combustor. The propellant properties 
considered are given in Table 2. The combustor physi- 
cal conditions are given in Table 3. Because we wished 
to examine the effect of combustion distribution on 
stability, particularly longitudinal-mode, a mean flow 
field was computed for three different burning rate 
constants to obtain a range of mean spray lengths. 
The burning rate constants and their resulting mean 
spray lengths are summarized in Table 4. The mass 
flow rate, Mach number, and temperature distribu- 
tions for the computed mean flow fields are shown in 
Fig. 3. 
Our approach was two prong in that we first per- 
formed a longitudinal-mode stability analysis using a 
pure 1D description and then examined tangential- 
mode instability using the equivalent annular combus- 
tor formulation. In both cases, we varied the presure 
sensitive combustion response index to determine the 
levels needed for the combustor to become intrinsi- 
cally unstable. The results of this evaluation are de- 
scribed in the following sections. 
Longitudinal-Mode Stability Characteristics 
The longitudinal-mode calculations were per- 
formed using characteristic-based upwind flux differ- 
encing for spatial discretization. The 1D grid con- 
tained 101 evenly spaced nodes. To determine in- 
trinsic combustor stability, we examined the pressure 
history at the nozzle entrance as it evolved following 
restart from the mean flow with nonzero combustion 
response. Triggered instability was also briefly exam- 
ined by pulse combusting a specified fraction of the 
spray following restart. 
In Fig. 4, stable combustion behavior is demon- 
strated for a spray length to combustor length ratio of 
0.6 and a combustion response index of 0.9. Clearly 
there is a pressure oscillation in the combustor, hut 
its amplitude is too small to be of significance. In 
- 
- 
contrast, Fig. 5 shows intrinsic instability when the 
combustion response index is increased to 1.0. Here 
we see classical exponential growth of the pressure 
wave in the linear regime followed by attainment of 
a nonlinear limit cycle oscillation where amplification 
is balanced by damping and nozzle losses. The limit 
cycle oscillation manifests a well defined steep-fronted 
pressure wave which is truly periodic. The absence of 
numerical noise is noteworthy. 
Indeed, the spectral composition of the wave- 
forms in Figs. 4 and 5 reveal that they are virtually 
noiseless. The low amplitude pressure wave observed 
during stable combustion is seen to be almost sinu- 
soidal. However, the nonlinear limit cycle pressure 
wave observed during unstable combustion has a sub- 
stantial contribution from higher harmonics. In both 
cases the fundamental frequency is found to corre- 
spond with the classical acoustical frequency. This 
behavior was characteristic of all calculations. 
For additional insight, the fluctuations in veloc- 
ity, temperature, and entropy are shown in relation to 
fluctuations in pressure during unstable combustion 
in Fig. 7. These waveforms are clearly periodic, but 
they are far from sinusoidal. The nonlinear character 
of the wave phenonmena during unstable combustion 
is evident. The pressure profile within the unstable 
combustor is also shown in Fig. 8 at various time 
intervals where we see a single pressure wave imping- 
ing the injector head and being reflected toward the 
nozzle. 
As a summary of the longitudinal-mode stability 
calculations, a stability map has been constructed and 
presented in Fig. 9. In this map, the intrinsic stability 
limit is plotted against a normalized combustion re- 
sponse strength and a normalized mean spray length. 
The combustion response strength is defined as the 
product of the response index and the mean burning 
rate since it is this product which determines the mag- 
nitude of the fluctuating burn rate as the spray length 
is expanded or contracted. This is evident from an in- 
spection of Eqs. (26) and (29). What we find is that 
as the spray combustion region is expanded to en- 
compass a larger portion of the combustor, damping 
effects increase. While some energy is always added in 
phase with the wave, with an increasingly larger com- 
bustion region there is an increase in energy added 
out of phase with the wave. The net effect is greater 
stability. In contrast, as the spray combustion region 
is contracted and concentrated near the injector face, 
there is a simultaneous reduction in the out-of-phase 
contributions and increase in the in-phase contribu- 
tions. The net effect is greater instability. 
To make an important point concerning our in- 
stability model, the pressure history for a combustion 
pulsed (3% of total spray) stability calculation is pre- 
- 7  


--- Page 9 ---

sented in Fig. 10. Here, we find the same stability 
behavior as for the non-pulsed case except that the de- 
velopment of the limit cycle occurs much faster. The 
resulting waveforms are identical to that obtained for 
non-pulsed stability. This is further demonstrated by 
the spectral composition of the waveform in Fig. 11. 
The reason for this behavior is that the combustion 
response is linearly related to pressure as seen in Eq. 
(28). For a nonlinear model, pulsed stability could 
differ greatly from non-pulsed stability. 
Tangential-Mode Stability Characteristics 
All tangential-mode calculations were performed 
using 6th order central differencing for spatial dic 
cretization. The 2D grid for the annular combustor 
geometry contained 51 nodes in the axial coordinate 
and 30 nodes in the tangential coordinate. The trans- 
verse length was chosen to match the first tangential 
mode, and the annular width was adjusted to obtain 
the correct cross-sectional area. The inflow was con- 
strained to have zero swirl. Again, intrinsic stability 
behavior was examined by restarting from a mean 
flow field imported from the 1D analysis. 
Pressure histories for a spray length to combustor 
length ratio of 0.6 and a combustion response index 
of 0.1 are given in Fig. 12 demonstrating the de- 
velopment of an intrinsic tangential-mode instability. 
These pressures were recorded at 1/10 of the combus- 
tor length from the injector and at 3 tangential loca- 
tions differing by a phase angle of n/2. We observe 
the evolution of an extremely high-amplitude pres- 
sure wave traveling around the combustor although 
combustion response is extremely small. In fact, in- 
stability was observed for this combustor even with 
zero pressure sensitive combustion response. Evi- 
dently, the Ranz-Marshall convective correlation of- 
fers enough sensitivity to velocity fluctuations to sup- 
port a pressure wave. The reason for this behav- 
ior is attributed to minimal damping from drag, 
streamwise convective losses, and out-of-phase eu- 
ergy contributions. Obviously, the combustor is much 
more susceptible to tangential-mode instabilities than 
longitudinal-modes in accord with practical experi- 
ence. 
Also observable is mode switching which oc- 
curs during the 10 to 25 msec time interval follow- 
ing restart. 
The short term instability up to 10 
msec consists of a single unidirectional traveling high- 
amplitude pressure wave. This is evidenced by an ex- 
ploded view of the short term pressure histories in 
Fig. 13. We clearly see that the unstable pressure 
waveforms at Q = 0 and Q = A are exactly half a 
period out of phase. In the exploded view, we also 
observe that the pressure wave is almost entirely pos- 
itive biased, is shocklike in nature, and has a funda- 
mental frequency corresponding to the first spinning 
tangential-mode acoustical frequency of the chamber. 
Furthermore, there are some superimposed high fre- 
quency components which show up spectrally in Fig. 
14 consisting of low level noise and possible precursors 
to mode switching. 
Following mode switching, the pressure wave- 
forms at B = 0 and B = n are exactly in phase and 
oscillate at twice the fundamental frequency. This 
long term instability mode is shown in Fig. 15 during 
the time interval 35 to 40 msec after restart. Here, we 
also see that the pressure at B = A/Z is now oscillat- 
ing at the fundamental frequency with very high am- 
plitude peaks centered between the lower amplitude 
ones manifested at -9 = 0 and Q = A. Obviously, the 
instability now consists of two pressure waves travel- 
ing in opposing directions which meet at B = n/2 and 
B = 3 ~ / 2  
to form two extremely large pressure spikes 
on opposite sides of the combustor. 
The pressure field behavior during instability is 
exhibited more clearly in the flooded contour plots 
of Figs. 16 and 17 which show the cornbustor pres- 
sure history during the short term and long term 
modes, respectively. A revealing feature discernable 
from these flooded contour plots is the observation 
that the severity of the instability is localized near 
the injector face. The magnitude of the pressure wave 
diminishes rapidly downstream most probably as a re- 
sult of increased streamwise convective losses as the 
Mach number increases. The wave is also curved 
with the nozzle end leading the injector end. One 
can clearly ascertain the rationale and effectiveness 
of baffles in controlling tangential-mode instabilities 
from these results. 
Another noteworthy feature of this analysis is 
that the basic features of the instability are in accord 
with experimental results for a combustor with similar 
physical  condition^.'^ The research combustor used 
in the referenced experimental work was 11 inches 
in diameter while the combustor of this analysis is 
about 10 inches in diameter. Experimentally, a single 
high-amplitude shocklike pressure wave was observed 
sweeping about the chamber at the injector face with 
a period of 470 ps corresponding to the first spinning 
tangential-mode acoustical frequency. The pressure 
wave was found to decay very rapidly in amplitude 
and curve in the direction of rotation as one moved 
away from the injector toward the nozzle entrance. 
For the short term instability of our calculations, the 
period was about 435 ps in correspondence with the 
acoustical frequency, and we clearly have a strong 
shocklike pressure wave decaying rapidly in strength 
and curving in the direction of rotation downstream 
from the injector. That these essential features are 
common is encouraging and indicative that the anal- 
ysis has indeed captured at least the basic physics. 
W 
.- 
8 


--- Page 10 ---

Conclusion 
v 
Based on preliminary evaluation, the constructed 
computational methodology appears promising as a 
research tool and potential design/development aide 
for investigating the stability characteristics of liquid 
rocket engines. The low numerical noise properties 
of the method are very favorable, and Lagrangian 
treatment of the spray offers improved flexibility for 
direct modeling of spray combustion. In our judg- 
ment, the achievement of low noise while using a La- 
grangian technique is noteworthy considering that the 
number of computational parcels was kept to a mini- 
mum through the use of probability distributions for 
the propellant spray. The qualitative agreement he- 
tween a predicted tangential-mode instability, where 
a shocklike pressure wave was found to sweep about 
the chamber near the injector face, with existing ex- 
perimental results is also encouraging. 
Although the current development has been con- 
fined to a simplified linear pressure-sensitive combus- 
tion response model, more comprehcnsive physical 
submodeling may easily be implemented as desired. 
In fact, the most important use of the developed com- 
putational tool may well be as a research test bed for 
investigating the effect of various physical submodels 
on combustor stability characteristics. In conjunction 
with experimental data, much can be learned about 
the physical nature of combustion driven instabilities. 
With time, as modeling becomes more refined through 
an interplay between experiment and computation, it 
should be possible to evolve a support capability for 
aiding in design/development and investigating new 
combustor concepts. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was conducted as part of an ongo- 
ing spray combustion stability project supported by 
the University of Tennessee-Calspan Center for Space 
Transportation and Applied Research, UT Space In- 
stitute, Tullahoma, T N  37388 under NASA Grant 
NAGW-1195 and in part by Rocketdyne Div., Rock- 
well Int., Canoga Park, CA 91303 with Mr. Merlin 
Schuman as technical monitor. 
Nomenclature 
English Symbols 
A ,  B 
Jacobian coefficient matrices 
A, B 
b 
annular combustor width (m) 
C, 
Co 
drag coefficient, 
- -  
Roe-averaged Jacobian coefficient matrices 
v 
Cp 
constant-pressure specific heat (J/kg IC) 
constant-volume specific heat (J/kg I() 
C 
d 
6 
e 
9 
H 
h 
K" 
m 
n 
PT 
P 
Q 
P 
Aq 
R 
Re 
T 
- 
S 
t 
u, 21 
V 
w 
= 24(1+ Re$/G)/Re ;Re < 1000 
= 0.44 ;Re 2 1000 
speed of s h n d  (m/s) 
diameter (m) 
momentum exchange per unit volume (N/m3), 
convective flux vectors 
numerical flux vectors 
gradient limited flux vectors 
total internal energy ( J l k g )  
gravitational acceleration (m/s2) 
source vector 
specific stagnation enthalpy (J/kg) 
Ranz-Marshall forced-convection correction 
pressuresensitive combustion rate correction 
transverse combustor length (m) 
streamwise combustor length (m) 
conservative to primitive variable 
transformation matrix or mach number 
mass vaporization rate ( k g l s )  
particle density (particles/m3) 
Prandtl number 
pressure (Pa) 
conserved variable vector 
modulus of velocity (m/s) 
net specific energy generation ( J / k g )  
ideal gas constant ( J / k g  IC) 
or explicit spatial difference operator 
particle diameter based Reynolds number 
specific entropy ( J / k g  I() 
similarity transformation matrix or 
temperature (IC) 
time (s) 
velocity components (m/s) 
primitive variable vector, = b[p, zl, v,pIT 
mass vaporization rate per unit 
volume ( k g / m 3  s) 
space coordinates (m) 
- 
- -r 
nzdipColiip - tigl(Cp - tig) 
Greek Symbols 
a 
presuresensitive combustion response index 
p 
compression parameter or 
y 
specific heat ratio 
€ 
dissipation parameter 
K 
spatial discretization selection parameter 
A 
eigenvalue matrix 
X 
conductivity (W/rnK) 
p 
viscosity (kglrns) 
P 
density (kg/m3) 
u 
flux-limiter parameter 
7 
particle relaxation time (s), 
burning rate constant (m2/s) 
= ( 4 / 3 ) ( P ~ / P g ) ( d p / c D ) ( 1 / l ~ g  - 
Subscripts and Superscripts 
9 
gas-phase property 


--- Page 11 ---

grid index, parcel group index 
grid index 
liquid spray 
time index 
original value 
parcel property 
coordinate components 
downstream influence 
upstream influence 
reference condition 
vector 
mean value 
fluctuation about mean 
References 
1. Hsieh, K. C., “Assessment of Numerical Tech- 
niques for Unsteady Flow Calculations,” AIAA 
Paper No. 89-1956, 1989. 
2. Habiballah, M., Lourme, D., and Pit, F., ‘ T H E  
DRE - Numerical Model for Combustion Sta- 
bility Studies Applied to the Ariane Viking En- 
gine,” J. Propulsion and Power, Vol. 7, No. 3, 
pp. 322-329, 1991. 
3. DuBois, I. and Habiballah, M., “Numerical Sim- 
ulation of High-Frequency Instability in an Oxy- 
gen/Hydrogen Rocket Engine,” AIAA Paper No. 
91-1860, 1991. 
4. Venkateswaran, S., Grenda, J., and Merkle, C., 
“Computational Fluid Dynamic Analysis of Liq- 
uid Racket Combustion Instability,” AIAA Paper 
No. 91-1609, 1991. 
5. Grenda, J., Venkateswaran, S., and Merkle, C., 
“Liquid Rocket Combustion Instability Analysis 
by CFD Methods,” AIAA Paper No. 91-2085, 
1991. 
6. Bhatia, R. and Sirignano, W. A,, “One- 
Dimensional Analysis of Liquid-Fueled Combus- 
tion Instability,” J. Propulsion and Power, Vol. 
7, No. 6, pp. 953-961, 1991. 
7. Grenda, J., Venkateswaran, S., and Merkle, C., 
8 
9 
10 
“Multidimensional Analysis of Combustion In- 
stabilities in Liquid Rocket Motors,” AIAA Pa- 
per No. 92-3764, 1992. 
Kim, Y., Chen, Z., and Chen, C., “Prediction of 
Combustion Instability in High-pressure Liquid 
Propellant Rocket Engines,” AIAA Paper No. 
92-3763, 1992. 
Beam, R. M. and Warming, R. F., “An Im- 
plicit FiniteDifference Algorithm for Hyperbolic 
Systems in Conservation-Law Form,” Journal of 
Coniputalional Physics, Vol. 22, pp. 87-110, 
1976. 
Roe, P. L., “Approximate Riemann Solvcrs, Pa- 
rameter Vectors, and Difference Schemes,” Jour- 
nal of Computational Physics, Vol. 43, pp. 357- 
372, 1981. 
11. Roe, P. L., “Characteristic-Based Schemes for 
the Euler Equations,” Annual Review of Fluid 
Mechanics, Vol. 18, pp. 337-365, 1986. 
12. Harten, A,, “High-Resolution Schemes for Hy- 
perbolic Conservation Laws,“ Journal of Com- 
putational Physics, Vol. 49, pp. 357-393, 1983. 
13. Yee, H. C., Warming, R. F., and Harten, A,, 
“Implicit Total Variation Diminishing (TVD) 
Schemes for Steady-State Calculations,” Journal 
of Computational Physics, Vol. 57, pp. 327-360, 
1985. 
14. Yee, H. C., “Construction of Explicit and Im- 
plicit Symmetric TVD Schemes and Their Appli- 
cations,” Journal of Computational Physics, Vol. 
68, pp. 151-179, 1987. 
15. Crocco, L. and Sirignano, W. A,, “Effect of the 
Transverse Velocity Component on the Nonlinear 
Behavior of Short Nozzles,” AIAA J., Vol. 4, No. 
8, pp. 1428-1430, 1966. 
16. Litchford, R. J. and Jeng, S-M., “Efficient Sta- 
tistical nansport Model for Turbulent Particle 
Dispersion in Sprays,” AIAA J., Vol. 29, No. 9, 
pp. 1443-1451, 1991. 
17. Ram, W. E. and Marshall, W. R., ‘Evapora- 
tion from Drops - Part I ,” Chemical Engineering 
Progress, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 141-146, 1952. 
18. Crocco, L., “Aspects of Combustion Stability in 
Liquid Propellant Rocket Motors - Parts I and 
11,” ARS Journal, Vol. 21, No. 6, pp. 163-178, 
Nov. 1951, and Vol. 22, No.1, pp. 7-16, Jan. 
1952. 
19. Clayton, R. M., Ragero, R. S., and Sotter, J. 
G., “An Experimental Description of Destructive 
Liquid Rocket Resonant Combustion,” AIAA J., 
Vol. 6, No. 7, pp. 1252-1259, 1968. 
w 
- 10 


--- Page 12 ---

Table 1 Scheme Switchlng Parameter 
Scheme 
1: 
26 Order Upwind 
-1 
z1 Order Central 
1 
v 
3'' Order Biased Upwind 
1 /3 
Table 3 Combustor Physlcal Ccndltlcns 
I* 
0.5 m 
4 
0.05 m' 
P. 
34 atm 
- 
40 k g / s  
ril,l rilq 
0.25 
4 
100 pm 
u, 0 
75 m / s  
Table 2 Propellant PrqmrIIes 
Table 4 Mean Burning Rate I Spray Length 
7 
1 2  
B 
1. / I< 
co 
1800 J /kg K 
4 
20(10)' J I  kg 
1 4  
0.36 
P 
750 kQ/m' 
1.0 
0.60 
Y- 
S(10)' kg I m 3 
0 8  
0 90 
x 
l(10)' W / m K  
- 
~- 
. 
.. 
Axisymmetric Canbustor 
Entrance 
Equivalent Annular Combustor 
Figure 2. Schematic of rectangular uniform pdf in 
relation to Computational grid. 
Figure 1. Schematic of physical combustor and 
equivalent annular computational geometry. 
W 
- 11 - 


--- Page 13 ---

0.3 
, , , , , , , , 
, 
, , , , 
T 
M 
IC I 0.5 m 
1. I IC - 0.36 
6 - 1.4 nm*l Y E  
,
.
.
I
 , . . .  I
.
.
.
.
 
0.w 
1. = 0.5 m 
6-1.omnfIa 
u - 0.8 
Y)w 
*I10 
2500 
2260 -i 
m 3 
z m  D 
m 
,760 E 
IIM E 
5 
x 
1210 - 
? O M  
,so 
6 W  
L-
65.0 
11.6 
W.0 
W.0 
P . 6  
Time (msec) 
Figure 4. Longitudinal-mode, non-pulsed combustor 
stability calculation (stable). 
Figure 3. Computed mean flow field. 
- 12 


--- Page 14 ---

t 
,Figure 5. Longitudinal-mode, non-pulsed combustor 
stability calculation (unstable). 
2. 
m 
0 0.40 
'E 
lI = 0.5 m 
B = 1 mdlr 
a I O . 8  
lL(841 h2) 
I. = 0.5 m 
(L = 1.0 
p = 1 mmv* 
*.I 
6.0 
,.s 
(0.0 
Frequency (khz) 
Figure 6. 
during stable and unstable combustion. 
Spectral composition of pressure wave 
- 13 - 


--- Page 15 ---

Irn.0 
707.0 
102.0 
,03.0 
IM.0 
106.0 
Time (msec) 
Figure 7. Fluctuation of flow parameters during un- 
stable combustion. 
7.20 - P,-Matm 
1. - 0.5 m 
B.I.Omm',~ 
m -1.0 
1 I 
86.3 m 
1 .. 98.3 moec 
I - e5.7 moe~ 
t = 96.1 m x c  
W 
Figure 8. Pressure profiles during unstable cornbus- 
tion. 
Figure 9. Longitudinal-mode combustor stability 
map. 
- 14 - 


--- Page 16 ---

IC - 0.5 m 
o'zo 
LI = 1.0 md/* 
Figure 10. Longitudinal-mode, pulsed combustor 
stability calculation (unstable). 
Frequency (khz) 
0 
10 
20 
00 
40 
Time (rnsec) 
Figure 12. Tangential-mode, non-pulsed combustor 
stability calculation (unstable). 
Figure 11. 
from pulsed stability calculation. 
Spectral composition of pressure wave 
- 15 - 


--- Page 17 ---

x l l ~ = o . ,  
- 
8.0 
6 -  1.0 md1r 
_.... 
o s n  
a-0.1 
0.m 7 
Xllc=0.1 
- 
e - 0  
O'*O[ 
B-1.0mdIo 
a.0.1 
0.00 
Figure 13. Short term tangential-mode instability. 
0"'0 
X I  IC I 
0.1 
8 . 0  
6 - 1 mdls 
u - 0.1 
Frequency (khz) 
Figure 14. Spectral composition of tangential pres 
sure wave for short term mode. 
- 
B r O  
e - r  
....... 
m, 
;y1;;/* 
- 
e - 0  
e = n 1 2  
....... 
a=0.1 
Figure 15. Long term tangential-mode instability. 
16 


--- Page 18 ---

W 
e - 
2r 
e - 
2r 
.. 
0.m 
0.w 
0.75 
I .m 
e - 
2r 
X l l ,  
X / l ,  
0.m 
0.26 
0.50 
0.76 
X / l ,  
x / I, 
Figure 16. Combustor pressure history over one pe- 
riod of short term mode. 
17 - 


--- Page 19 ---

x I Io 
x I I( 
X l l ,  
W 
0 - 
2 R  
Figure 17. Conhustor pressure history over one-half 
period of long term mode. 
