
--- Page 1 ---

An investigation into the interaction of closely-spaced starting jets
D. Rival *, G. Ciccarelli
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada
Received 24 July 2006; received in revised form 12 December 2006; accepted 18 December 2006
Abstract
The transient, three-dimensional scavenging ﬂow inside a novel two-stroke engine has been investigated both experimentally in a
scaled water model as well as numerically using a commercial CFD code incorporating an unsteady Reynolds averaged Navier–Stokes
(URANS) formulation. The scavenging ﬂow consists of 16 round jets in close proximity of each other and the cylinder wall, developing
from the top of the combustion chamber down towards the exhaust ports located along the wall at the bottom of the cylinder. Flow
visualization of the scavenging ﬂow was performed using a scaled ﬁxed-piston water model and was used as a means of validating
the URANS simulations themselves. The ﬂow visualization experiments provided insight into the complex jet–jet and jet–wall interac-
tions within the engine cylinder. These interactions were not as well predicted by the CFD simulations. In fact, the CFD simulations were
found to signiﬁcantly under-predict the turbulent mixing between the jets. This suggests that unsteady-RANS formulations are incapable
of reproducing the large-scale and unsteady mixing structures associated with the vortex shedding between the closely-spaced jets.
 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Transient ﬂows; Jet–jet interaction; Jet–wall interaction; Unsteady RANS
1. Introduction
In light of the recent success of URANS simulations in
the prediction of periodic shedding ﬂows, i.e. behind a
square cylinder [1], there exists a strong level of optimism
that robust and eﬃcient URANS techniques can predict
other such unsteady ﬂows with reasonable accuracy. The
eﬀectiveness of such a numerical formulation in the predic-
tion of jet–jet and jet–wall interaction in close proximity,
strongly governed by a similar periodic shedding phenom-
enon [2], has been tested in context of a unique engine
cylinder ﬂow. A current push towards high-eﬃciency
hybrid vehicles, has recently led to the development of a
novel uniﬂow-type scavenged two-stroke engine in which
the combustion products are purged with fresh intake air
through a set of passive check valves situated in the cylin-
der head. The fresh intake air is driven by a constant-pres-
sure intake plenum located above the combustion chamber.
Prior to this scavenging process, blowdown is initiated
when the piston uncovers the exhaust ports at the bottom
of the cylinder. Immediately after, the intake check valves
open as the cylinder pressure reaches a pressure similar
to the air plenum pressure – marking the start of the scav-
enging process. Of interest to this particular investigation is
this scavenging ﬂow path, depicted in Fig. 1, in which the
added fresh air displaces the exhaust products out of the
cylinder via the exhaust ports. Mixing of fresh air and com-
bustion products at the jet boundary occurs through the
scavenging cycle resulting in small levels of intake air
short-circuiting. The current conﬁguration used in the
developmental engine consists of 16 intake valves in close
proximity. For this particular study, this intake valve con-
ﬁguration has been simpliﬁed to 16 equivalently-sized
round jets, as shown in Fig. 2. During a scavenging period
on
the
order
of
milliseconds
(depending
on
engine
speed), these 16 intake jets develop axially down through
0894-1777/$ - see front matter  2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2006.12.004
* Corresponding author. Present address: Institute of Fluid Mechanics
and Aerodynamics, Technische Universita¨t Darmstadt, Flughafenstrasse
19, D-64347 Griesheim, Germany. Tel.: +49 0 6151 16 6201; fax: +49 0
6151 16 6246.
E-mail address: rival@aero.tu-darmstadt.de (D. Rival).
www.elsevier.com/locate/etfs
Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 31 (2007) 1157–1164


--- Page 2 ---

the cylinder, purging the combustion products before the
start of the next cycle. This ﬂow ﬁeld is unique and con-
tains the superposition of many complex ﬂows including:
conﬁned free jets and wall jets, the interaction of multiple
axisymmetric jets and ﬁnally, the starting eﬀects of axisym-
metric jets.
2. Background
The aerodynamic ﬂow pattern associated with an axi-
symmetric conﬁned jet diﬀers greatly from that of its equiv-
alent free jet counterpart. The major diﬀerence between the
two ﬂows is the large recirculation zone developed around
the conﬁned jet, in which the entrained secondary ﬂow is
restricted by the geometry of the duct walls. Such steady
conﬁned ﬂows are of great interest in the development of
combustors and furnaces alike. An early experimental
study undertaken by Becker et al. [3] on the mixing of a sin-
gle conﬁned jet showed that the turbulent mixing occurs in
three distinct zones. The ﬁrst zone, also found in an equiv-
alent free jet, is termed the true jet-mixing zone in which the
jet grows laterally, ending when the jet reattaches onto the
duct wall. The second zone, downstream of the true jet-
mixing zone, contains the lateral dissipation of the mean
velocity gradients. Finally, in the third zone, the mixing
is analogous to that of a fully-developed pipe ﬂow. A more
recent study by Gould et al. [4] examined in more detail the
true jet-mixing zone using optical access ports and laser
Doppler velocimetry (LDV), allowing for measurements
of mean velocities and Reynolds stresses across a range
of axial planes in the duct. Subsequently the data was used
to validate a CFD simulation incorporating a k–e turbu-
lence model. Agreement was found to be rather good
except in the region where the turbulent mixing layer
reached the end of the potential core (at approximately
three jet diameters). Discrepancies were caused by the
Boussinesq approximation’s failure in predicting aniso-
tropic turbulence, such that the axial turbulent normal
stresses were under-predicted while the radial turbulent
normal stresses were over-predicted. With regard to
another aspect of the unique scavenging ﬂow, Anderson
et al. [2] investigated planar jet–jet interaction with extreme
close-spacing (1.5 < S/w < 2.67), where S is the jet spacing
and w is the jet exit width. For these conﬁgurations a peri-
odic, bluﬀ-body-type shedding behaviour was detected
between the two jets, where the spacer, of width d =
S  w, served as the bluﬀbody. It was not surprising then
that the near-ﬁeld ﬂow exhibited both jet-like and wake-
like characteristics. Further measurement of the periodicity
in the wake was made using hot-wire anemometry. Above a
jet spacing of S/w = 3, no periodicity was detected – hence
no vortex shedding. As the spacing was decreased, how-
ever, the Strouhal number itself decreased from 0.35 to
an asymptote value of approximately 0.20–0.24, which
agrees with vortex shedding Strouhal numbers correspond-
ing to D-shaped bodies in wind tunnel experiments. As an
extension to jet–jet interaction between two planar jets,
studies investigating multiple-jet interactions exist in the lit-
erature, often as applied to cold-model aerodynamic simu-
lations of industrial gas burners. One such study of
particular interest to this research project, performed by
Yimer et al. [5], examined the ﬁelds of mean velocity and
velocity ﬂuctuation intensity for a variety of close proxim-
ity, multiple-round-jet conﬁgurations. It was found that
beyond the near ﬁeld, the ﬂow from all the burner conﬁg-
urations tested developed into an equivalent round-jet ﬂow
emitting from a single source. Only in the near ﬁeld were
unique structures associated with individual test conﬁgura-
tions observed. Even with the jet conﬁguration containing
the closest jet spacing, the fully merged single jet did not
form until approximately 16 individual jet diameters down-
stream of the burner. In other words, the merging of the
jets requires that, even for the conﬁguration with the clos-
est jet spacing, a signiﬁcant distance in the axial direction –
a distance much larger than that of the cylinder stroke
length associated with this study’s novel two-stroke engine.
As the scavenging ﬂow of interest must develop in a very
short time span associated with the engine’s scavenging
4
5
6
Air 
2
1
3
Fig. 1. Schematic of novel scavenging system; spark plug (1), fuel-injector
(2), intake plenum (3), intake check valve (4), engine cylinder (5), and
exhaust ﬂow (6).
Intake Valve 
Exhaust Duct 
V1 
V2 
V3 
V4 
Quarter-Cylinder 
Model
Fig. 2. Top-view of engine cylinder depicting quarter-cylinder model and
valve conﬁguration.
1158
D. Rival, G. Ciccarelli / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 31 (2007) 1157–1164


--- Page 3 ---

phase (as short as 2 ms at 9000 rpm), the scavenging
process will be dominated by starting eﬀects of axisymmet-
ric jets. Unfortunately, little exists in the literature on the
development of transient jets. By far the most comprehen-
sive examination of a round jet starting vortex was per-
formed by Maxworthy [6] in which he devised a ﬂow
visualization experiment where a small piston was used to
generate a short ﬂuidic pulse. Through dye injection, this
short pulse provided suﬃcient momentum to develop a dis-
tinct, turbulent vortex ring which could then be tracked as
it propagated down through the test section within the
encompassing vortex bubble. This study provided insight
into the physical mechanisms dictating the development
and convection downstream of the round jet starting
vortex. Speciﬁcally, the concentrated vortex ring was gen-
erated through the rolling-up of the jet exit shear layer
within the separated ﬂow region at the exit of the jet.
The vortex ring was then subsequently observed to convect
downstream, entrain outer ﬂuid, mix with it, and deposit
the majority of this entrained ﬂuid into the wake, thus
forming a turbulent starting vortex bubble. In a continu-
ously developing unsteady jet, this starting vortex bubble
is formed and then slowly overtaken by the following noz-
zle ﬂuid. A handful of studies examining the relation
between entrainment rates and unsteady jets have been per-
formed. One such study, using pH indicators to determine
jet mixing characteristics, was performed by Kato et al. [7],
where the vortex bubble was found to enhance mixing of
the jet both in the axial and radial directions. Another
study, this time quantifying jet entrainment using LDV,
was performed by Bremhorst and Hollis [8]. Here, the
unsteady jet was pulsed with a signiﬁcant no-ﬂow period
between pulses. The entrainment rate was found to be more
than double that of an equivalent steady jet, primarily
because of the higher production of Reynolds shear stresses
at the leading vortex bubble.
There are two main objectives to this study. The ﬁrst
and foremost goal is to qualitatively understand the mixing
process associated with multiple, conﬁned round jets in
close proximity. The second objective is to verify the eﬀec-
tiveness of a URANS formulation in the prediction of such
a complex scavenging ﬂow associated with the novel two-
stroke engine described in Fig. 1. An experimental water
model has been constructed to conduct ﬂow visualization.
In order to verify the eﬀectiveness of the CFD simulations,
validation tests of the complex scavenging ﬂow have been
performed using the aforementioned experimental water
model.
3. Experimental tests and numerical simulations
Transient and isothermal (room temperature), ﬁxed-pis-
ton CFD simulations were performed and compared with
equivalent experimental water-model tests; both in turn
replicating the actual engine scavenging ﬂow. As described
by Stuecke et al. [9,10], through careful use of similitude,
simple water models can provide qualitative data for simu-
lating engine ﬂows. Operating conditions used in these tests
were speciﬁcally chosen to correspond with actual operat-
ing conditions used in the prototype engine, i.e. engine
speeds between 1000 and 9000 rpm and an intake plenum
pressure of 2 kPa gauge. By matching the Reynolds, Strou-
hal and Euler numbers the scavenging period and inlet
head for both CFD and experiment were determined to
be 0.6 s and 0.245 m of water (2.4 kPa gauge), respectively.
3.1. Experimental tests
An experimental water model was manufactured to geo-
metrically simulate the actual ﬁxed-piston scavenging pro-
cess. The experimental water model consisted of several
transparent acrylic pieces machined on a CNC-mill, which
were subsequently bonded together and sealed. In Fig. 3,
the cylinder model (17.2-cm bore, 15.3-cm stroke) is shown
sitting in an aquarium, which during the course of the scav-
enging process is also ﬁlled with water. The purpose of
incorporating the water-ﬁlled aquarium around the cylin-
der was to remove any light refraction associated with
the curved surface of the cylinder walls when viewing the
scavenging ﬂow normal to the aquarium’s surfaces. A sche-
matic describing the operation of the water-model cylinder
is shown in Fig. 4. The cylinder is separated from the inlet
water plenum by a plate with 16 3-cm diameter holes (A)
distributed in a pattern consistent with the prototype
engine, as shown previously in Fig. 2. The seeding liquid
representing the scavenging ﬂuid, i.e. water seeded with tal-
cum powder, was isolated from the rest of the water model
by a tube above one of the 16 valves using rubber plugs (B),
as shown in the schematic. To start the scavenging process
these rubber plugs were pulled into the ‘open’ position
from above. Subsequently the exhaust duct doors (C),
retained in the closed position with springs, sealed with
rubber and vacuum grease, and hinged at the bottom of
the aquarium, were pulled open via high-strength lines dri-
ven by a pair of Bimba Corp. 092-DP double-acting air-cyl-
inders (D). Control of the air-actuators themselves was
made through the activation of solenoid-driven air valves
(E) supplied by compressed air at roughly 600 kPa (F).
Fig. 3. Experimental water model before installation of air-actuated
exhaust valves.
D. Rival, G. Ciccarelli / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 31 (2007) 1157–1164
1159


--- Page 4 ---

Finally, constant intake plenum pressure was maintained
via a larger reservoir of water (G). This larger water reser-
voir was supported above the over-ﬂow line of the aquar-
ium at a height H such that a constant head (pressure)
could be maintained throughout the scavenging period.
The timing of the scavenging process, which was held con-
stant at 0.6 s for all tests, was controlled via an IOTech
DataShuttle A/D board. The digital 12 V square-wave sig-
nal to the solenoid-driven air valves was produced using a
signal generator within the DaisyLab 5.6 control and data-
acquisition software package.
Flow visualization of the jet-mixing process for Valve 1
(V1) and Valve 4 (V4) was performed for each valve indi-
vidually so as to compare the development of the transient
intake jets to those predicted by the CFD simulations.
Valve 2 (V2) and Valve 3 (V3) were not examined due to
high levels of light-reﬂection associated with their location
in the cylinder. As a means of capturing quasi two-dimen-
sional images through a particular intake jet of interest, a
4-mm thick light sheet was created through the model
devoid of background light while a single Sony DCR-
TRV140 NTSC camera acquired pictures normal to this
light sheet as shown in Fig. 5. The light sheet itself was cre-
ated by passing the collimated light from a NEC LT260
light projector with a 2100 Lumens rating through a slit
4 mm in width. The blocking-out of background light
was possible by covering the aquarium with layers of black
construction paper and then draping black cloth over top.
All ﬂow visualization was performed at a 15-frame-per-sec-
ond (fps) sampling rate, which provided adequate informa-
tion regarding the development of the intake jets.
3.2. Numerical simulations
A commercial CFD package (Fluent 6.1) was used
throughout the investigation. URANS-type CFD simula-
tions of the transient scavenging process were performed
on a grid- and domain-independent quarter-cylinder mesh
consisting of approximately 450,000 cells. The clearance
volume was constructed with unstructured cells (approxi-
mately 160,000 tetrahedral cells) while the rest of the cylin-
der, as well as the exhaust duct and exhaust plenum, was
meshed with structured cells. All transient simulations used
ﬁne time stepping on the order of 0.1 ms in order to main-
tain solution stability. The PISO algorithm was used for
pressure–velocity coupling. As well, the simulations incor-
porated a full ﬁrst-order discretization scheme for both
time and space.
A full second-order spatial discretization scheme was
attempted, including a second-order pressure discretization
and subsequently a second-order upwind discretization for
all other equations such as continuity, momentum, k, e,
energy and scalar transport (species concentration). It
was found that the solution would rapidly diverge due to
numerical instabilities. In order to achieve a full second-
H
F
E
D
C
B
G
A
Fig. 4. Schematic describing operation of water model; plate with 16 3-cm
diameter holes (A), rubber plugs sealing seeding injection tube (B), exhaust
duct doors (C), air cylinder (D), solenoid-driven air valve (E), compressed
air feed (F) and large water reservoir (G).
Fig. 5. Orientation of camera and light projector for ﬂow visualization of interacting jets.
1160
D. Rival, G. Ciccarelli / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 31 (2007) 1157–1164


--- Page 5 ---

order
spatially-discretized
solution,
further
grid
and
time-scale reﬁnements were necessary. However, such
reﬁnement was not feasible due to the limitations on com-
putational resources. Although ﬁrst-order simulations on
coarse grids are notorious for high-levels of artiﬁcial dissi-
pation, ﬁrst-order simulations incorporating a well reﬁned
mesh (grid independent solution), such as the one used in
this study, will experience negligible levels of artiﬁcial
dissipation.
The standard k–e turbulence model was used for all sim-
ulations as it is considered the most robust turbulence
model for high-Reynolds number ﬂows in complex internal
geometries, as reported by Nallasamy [11]. All aspects of
the transient simulations were conﬁgured such that they
matched as closely as possible the experimental water
model. In other words, the simulations used room temper-
ature water to represent both the scavenging ﬂuid as well as
the combustion products. In so doing, no discrepancies
associated with small compressibility eﬀects or similitude
would impede on the validation process. In Fig. 6, the
quarter-cylinder hybrid-mesh is shown with its respective
boundary conditions.
On the intake valve (pressure inlet) boundaries a prede-
ﬁned turbulence intensity (Tu = 5%) and turbulent charac-
teristic scale (wvalve = 30 mm) were prescribed in order to
compute the appropriate values of the turbulent kinetic
energy (k) and the turbulent kinetic energy dissipation rate
(e) at the inlet surfaces. However, turbulence measurements
themselves could not be taken in the experimental water
model and so a set of scavenging simulations were per-
formed with diﬀerent values of inlet turbulence intensity
in order to determine the sensitivity of this value on jet mix-
ing. The most appropriate method of quantifying the eﬀect
of inlet turbulence intensity on jet mixing is by plotting the
scavenging eﬃciency as a function of time, deﬁned as the
ratio of the mass of fresh charge retained over the total
mass of trapped cylinder charge. Since the scavenging
performance is a strong function of the mixing between
the intake jets and the ‘exhaust products’, accurate model-
ing of the turbulence intensity being convected into the
solution domain would be expected to play a role on the
subsequent mixing. As mentioned previously, the standard
turbulence intensity used in all simulations was 5% while
for this particular sensitivity study a simulation with a
20% intensity was attempted, representing an extremely
high inlet turbulence condition. In the other extreme, a
completely laminar simulation was performed. In Fig. 7,
one can see that the high inlet turbulence intensity simula-
tion had virtually no eﬀect on the scavenging performance,
thus showing that the bulk of the turbulence (mixing) was
generated in the multiple-jet shear layers. The laminar case
predicts a higher scavenging eﬃciency since less mixing
allows for more pure displacement of the ‘exhaust prod-
ucts’ out of the cylinder. One can also infer three distinct
scavenging periods from the shape of the scavenging
curves, showing that the scavenging process never reaches
quasi-steady state. The ramp-up constitutes the initial
start-up period of the inlet jets (in the ﬁrst 0.1 s) followed
by a linear displacement/mixing period (between 0.1 s
and 0.4 s) during which the intake jets drive much of the
‘exhaust products’ out of the cylinder. The third and ﬁnal
(logarithmic-shaped)
scavenging
period
asymptotes
towards a maximum scavenging eﬃciency of roughly 95%
at 0.8 s. The beginning of this ﬁnal period (at approxi-
mately 0.4 s) can be associated with the establishment of
short-circuiting, deﬁned as the point in time when ‘fresh
charge’ ﬂow begins exiting the exhaust ports at the bottom
of the cylinder. Note that in the following discussion the
comparison between experimental and CFD results are
made at two particular time periods, 0.2 s and 0.4 s, repre-
senting the linear displacement/mixing period and the
beginning of short-circuiting, respectively.
Fig. 6. Quarter-cylinder hybrid-mesh seen with piston ﬁxed at bottom.
Time (s)
)
%
(
y
c
n
ei
c
iff
E
g
n
i
g
n
e
v
a
c
S
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
20
40
60
80
100
2.4 kPa water (laminar)
2.4 kPa water (Tu=5%)
2.4 kPa water (Tu=20%)
Fig. 7. Scavenging eﬃciency as a function of time for laminar simulation
and URANS simulations with various inlet turbulence intensities (Tu).
D. Rival, G. Ciccarelli / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 31 (2007) 1157–1164
1161


--- Page 6 ---

4. Results
For each experimental test, eight consecutive ﬂow visu-
alization pictures of the jet development were captured. As
discussed previously, the three-dimensional jet–jet interac-
tion associated with this scavenging ﬂow is complex. There-
fore, as a means of benchmarking the ﬂow visualization
experiment, studies examining the single free-jet and
wall–jet ﬂows from Valve 1 and Valve 4 respectively,
without the inﬂuence of the surrounding jets, were also per-
formed. Refer to Fig. 2 for the valve number designations.
In Fig. 8a, the left column shows the development of the jet
ﬂow from Valve 1 with the inﬂuence of the surrounding
jets, i.e. all inlet ports are open. The right column shows
the corresponding development of the free-jet ﬂow from
Valve 1, but with all the other ports blocked. Note that
‘negative’ images are shown in order to aid with the con-
trast of the ﬂow visualization. Because of this, regions of
over-exposure appear black – this does not necessarily rep-
resent any coherent dense structure within the jet ﬂow.
Using light intensity as a direct correlation of seeding con-
centration, as quantitatively performed in the sol-scattered-
light technique developed by Becker et al. [3], one can make
inferences into the jet development and mixing in the cylin-
der as a function of time. In the comparison between the
multiple-jet ﬂow (left columns) and the single free-jet ﬂow
Fig. 8. Flow through Valve 1 (a) and Valve 4 (b); unseeded ﬂow through all other valves (left columns), no ﬂow through all other valves (right columns).
1162
D. Rival, G. Ciccarelli / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 31 (2007) 1157–1164


--- Page 7 ---

(right columns), a distinct diﬀerence in the jet development
can be observed. Although the heads of both jets seem to
move downwards at approximately the same speed, the
multiple-jet ﬂow shows no signs of the starting vortex bub-
ble associated with free-jet development. In fact, the multi-
ple-jet ﬂow appears highly diﬀuse and thicker at the port
inlet than at the head, contrary to the associated spreading
of the single-jet ﬂow. Note that for the single-jet ﬂow,
which appears to behave very much like an unconﬁned free
jet, the exit port is close to the center of the cylinder such
that very little jet–wall interaction is expected.
With regard to ﬂow visualization of Valve 4, a similar
comparison was made between the multiple-jet ﬂow and
the single-jet ﬂow (Fig. 8b). Again, the multiple-jet ﬂow
is portrayed in the left column, whereas, the single-jet ﬂow
of Valve 4, without the inﬂuence of the surrounding jets, is
shown in the right column. In this comparison, a much dif-
ferent behaviour was observed between the two seeded
ﬂows. Although the single-jet ﬂow projects directly down-
wards along the wall towards the exhaust port, as would
be expected from a normal wall jet, the interacting jet ﬂow
from Valve 4 is entrained inwards towards the center jet.
As well, the development of the multiple-jet ﬂow appears
to accelerate much slower, suggesting that the total mass
ﬂow rate through the cylinder is limited by the size and
geometry of the exhaust ports. In other words, when exam-
ining the single-jet ﬂow, the cylinder mass ﬂow rate is low
and the viscous losses through the exhaust ports are mini-
mal. However, with all 16 valves ﬂowing, as is the case with
the multiple-jet ﬂow, viscous losses in the exhaust ducts are
high. Because of this, the jets cannot accelerate as quickly
due to the larger pressure drop across the exhaust ports.
Similar to the comparison between the interacting-jet
ﬂow from Valve 1 and its respective single-jet ﬂow, the
interacting-jet ﬂow from Valve 4 is again much more dif-
fuse and spreads signiﬁcantly at the port entrance. This
highlights the strong eﬀect of the jet–jet interaction and
the associated strong levels of turbulence generated by
the shearing of multiple jets in close proximity. Also, there
appear to be large turbulent structures, on the order of the
jet diameters, that aid in the mixing of the multiple-jet ﬂow.
These are most likely fed by vortex shedding between the
closely-spaced jets, as observed by Anderson et al. [2]. As
is the nature of complex turbulent ﬂows the evolution of
the jet from experiment to experiment is found to be sto-
chastic. By comparing a set of ensemble-averaged experi-
mental ﬂow visualization images with the corresponding
water model CFD simulations, one can qualitatively vali-
date the CFD model which is based on the ensemble-aver-
aged (URANS) governing equations. Using particular
reference times at one-third and two-thirds of the way
through the scavenging process (0.2 s and 0.4 s respec-
tively), the downward propagation and spreading of the
transient jets can be compared. In Fig. 9a and b, the intake
ﬂow from Valve 1 is tagged with talcum powder while the
rest of the ports emit non-tagged water – thus the full eﬀect
of jet–jet interaction is being examined. The same compar-
ison is made in Fig. 9c and d, just with the tagged intake
Fig. 9. Multiple-jet ﬂow validation for Valve 1 (a) and (b) and Valve 4 (c) and (d) between CFD (left-hand-side of columns) and experimental ensemble-
averaged images (right-hand-side of columns) at two time intervals (mirrored over symmetry plane); for CFD images the red (black) and green (white)
zones represent pure scavenging water and jet-mixing regions, respectively. (For interpretation of the references in colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)
D. Rival, G. Ciccarelli / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 31 (2007) 1157–1164
1163


--- Page 8 ---

ﬂow from Valve 4 instead. The left-hand-sides shows
contours of species concentration where red (black) repre-
sents scavenging water and green (white) represents the
jet-mixing regions from the RANS-type CFD simulations.
Meanwhile, the right-hand-sides shows the ensemble-
averaged negative image from the ﬂow visualization of
the same propagating jet, just mirrored across the symme-
try plane.
Although one must be judicious when qualitatively com-
paring URANS-type CFD results with ensemble-averaged,
instantaneous images from experiment, the comparison in
Fig. 9a and b shows that the transient CFD simulations
were capable of predicting the general mixing-shape of
the inside jet, but not the proper distribution of ‘fresh’
intake charge. For example, the axial jet-propagation dis-
tance at both time steps is well predicted by the CFD.
However, one can infer from the ﬂow visualization images
that there exists a large concentration gradient between the
dark (concentrated) region near the jet exit and the grey
(diﬀuse) region below it, whereas with the CFD, no large
concentration gradient as such is predicted. Examining
individually several runs of the ﬂow visualization experi-
ment for the same given valve showed that the scavenging
process, which involved 16 interacting jets in close proxim-
ity, was in fact highly stochastic in nature – thus providing
a great challenge for URANS formulations.
In Fig. 9c and d, on the other hand, a much larger dis-
parity between CFD and experiment is observed. Again,
the same multiple-jet ﬂow occurs just that the intake ﬂow
from Valve 4 is tagged instead. In this case the CFD
over-predicts the jet development observed experimentally
such that the vortex head is well ahead for both time steps.
Furthermore, in the ﬂow visualization, the wall jet is
entrained inwards away from the wall, almost as if a recir-
culation zone is situated just below the jet entrance. The
CFD simulations are observed to under-predict the mixing
between the interacting jets such that all jets develop in a
much more structured, independent manner. This deﬁ-
ciency can be attributed to the unsteady-RANS formula-
tion, which has diﬃculties simulating the vigorous mixing
between the closely-spaced jets. Although the unsteady-
RANS formulation is capable of capturing certain vortical
structures, it cannot simulate the true turbulence in the
ﬂow but rather only its statistics. The ﬂow visualization
clearly depicts the evolution of turbulent structures on
the order of the jet diameter (these are missing in the
CFD simulations), which are responsible for most of the
mixing between the jets.
Given the rapid availability of more powerful computa-
tional resources in the future, large Eddy simulations (LES)
or hybrid techniques such as detached Eddy simulations
(DES) would be the most appropriate choice to model such
a transient, jet-interaction ﬂow. The justiﬁcation for this
statement is that all dominant turbulent structures would
be directly and accurately solved while small sub-grid
eddies, generally isotropic in nature, would be modeled
to conserve computational resources as with a RANS-type
formulation. URANS-type formulations lose their compet-
itive advantage over LES or DES when transient simula-
tions dominated by large turbulent structures, as in the
case of closely-spaced interacting jets, are being performed.
More generally speaking, a steady-state CFD model incor-
porating a k–e turbulence model can predict the time-aver-
aged spreading of a single round jet rather eﬃciently and
with relative accurateness, as described by Pope [12], while
for transient,
multiple-jet
ﬂows
dominated by large,
time-dependent turbulent structures, an unsteady-RANS
(URANS) formulation is much less eﬀective.
5. Conclusions
In this study, ﬂow visualization as well as CFD simula-
tions were used to simulate the transient, three-dimensional
development of the scavenging ﬂow in a novel, uniﬂow-
scavenged two-stroke engine. Flow visualization results
for the development period of these interacting jets show
that large turbulent structures, most likely fed by vortex
shedding between the interacting jets, diﬀuse the jets much
faster than in the case of their single free- or wall–jet coun-
terparts. As well, the ﬂow visualization tests showed that
the leading front of the interacting jets do not contain
any sign of a structured vortex bubble. Regarding the com-
parisons with CFD, strong limitations of the URANS for-
mulation were uncovered in the prediction of interacting
jets in close proximity.
References
[1] G. Iaccarino, A. Ooi, P.A. Durbin, M. Behnia, Reynolds averaged
simulation of unsteady separated ﬂow, International Journal of Heat
and Fluid Flow 24 (2003) 147–156.
[2] E.A. Anderson, D.O. Snyder, J. Christensen, Periodic ﬂow between
low aspect ratio parallel jets, Journal of Fluids Engineering 125 (2003)
389–392.
[3] H.A. Becker, H.C. Hottel, G.C. Williams, Mixing and ﬂow in ducted
turbulent jets, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 9 (1963) 7–
20.
[4] R.D. Gould, W.H. Stevenson, H.D. Thompson, Investigation of
turbulent transport in an axisymmetric sudden expansion, AIAA
Journal 28 (1990) 276–283.
[5] I. Yimer, H.A. Becker, E.W. Grandmaison, Development of ﬂow
from multiple-jet burners, Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering
74 (1996) 840–850.
[6] T. Maxworthy, Turbulent vortex rings, Journal of Fluid Mechanics
64 (1974) 227–239.
[7] S.M. Kato, B.C. Groenewegen, R.E. Breidenthal, Turbulent mixing
in nonsteady jets, AIAA Journal 25 (1987) 165–168.
[8] K. Bremhorst, P.G. Hollis, Velocity ﬁeld of an axisymmetric pulsed,
subsonic air jet, AIAA Journal 28 (1990) 2043–2049.
[9] P. Stuecke, C. Egbers, W. Geyer, Visualization of the ﬂow inside the
transfer channels of small two-stroke cylinders, SAE Paper 2003-43-
08, 2003.
[10] P. Stuecke, C. Egbers, W. Geyer, Visualization of the scavenging ﬂow
of small two-stroke cylinders, SAE Paper 2004-42-97, 2004.
[11] M. Nallasamy, Turbulence models and their applications to the
prediction of internal ﬂows: a review, Computers & Fluids 15 (1987)
151–194.
[12] S.B. Pope, An explanation of the turbulent round-jet/plane-jet
anomaly, AIAA Journal 16 (1978) 279–281.
1164
D. Rival, G. Ciccarelli / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 31 (2007) 1157–1164
