
--- Page 1 ---

G. Babazzi1
Baker Hughes,
Via Felice Matteucci 2,
Florence 50127, Italy
e-mail: giulia.babazzi@bakerhughes.com
S. Galeotti
Department of Industrial Engineering
of Florence (DIEF),
University of Florence,
Via S. Marta 3,
Florence 50139, Italy
A. Picchi
Department of Industrial Engineering
of Florence (DIEF),
University of Florence,
Via S. Marta 3,
Florence 50139, Italy
R. Becchi
Department of Industrial Engineering
of Florence (DIEF),
University of Florence,
Via S. Marta 3,
Florence 50139, Italy
M. Cerutti
Baker Hughes,
Via Felice Matteucci 2,
Florence 50127, Italy
A. Andreini
Department of Industrial Engineering
of Florence (DIEF),
University of Florence,
Via S. Marta 3,
Florence 50139, Italy
Combustion Diagnostics and
Emissions Measurements of a
Novel Low NOx Burner for
Industrial Gas Turbine Operated
With CO2 Diluted Methane/Air
Mixtures
While the employment of Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR) is a well-established technique
in Internal Combustion Engines to limit NOx emissions, its adoption in Gas Turbine engines
has not yet found a practical application due to its expensive and complex installation that
doesn’t justify the emissions reduction when compared to already established DLN
combustion technologies. EGR becomes an interesting option in GT engines considering the
possibility of increasing the CO2 content of the exhaust gases to improve the efﬁciency of
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) units. However, the decrease in oxygen content of the
combustion air is extremely challenging in terms of combustion stability and therefore of
engine operability. In the present work, a low NOx burner was studied at ambient pressure in
a reactive single burner test rig. The burner was fed with methane and characterized in terms
of emissions and stability limits at different operating conditions. In addition, the ﬂame
position and shape were studied through OH* chemiluminescence imaging together with the
ﬂow ﬁeld thanks to PIV measurements. The effects of CO2 addition on the ﬂame were then
investigated at different EGR increasing levels, highlighting the impact of the oxygen
content on the combustion reaction intensity. Variations in emissions and burner stability
limits in terms of maximum sustainable CO2 content were also studied, to detail the burner
operating window. Data have been thoroughly analyzed to gather information on the burner
behavior to support the design of new technical solutions capable of ensuring both proper
ﬂame stability and low CO and NOx emissions. [DOI: 10.1115/1.4064266]
Introduction
The continuous growth in energy demand will push the energy
production toward more sustainable, ﬂexible and highly efﬁcient
solutions, driving the greenhouse gases emission abatement and
limiting the negative effect on climate change.
Natural gas employment in the energy sector is expected to
increase thanks to its essential system ﬂexibility [1]. In advanced
economies, it represents the largest source of electricity and its share
is going to remain stable over the next decade despite the emerging
renewable sources. Therefore, increasing the use of Carbon Capture
and Utilization (CCU) and Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)
technologies is of fundamental importance to reduce greenhouse
gases emissions. In order to reduce the cost of CCS implementation
and to create an efﬁcient system, the CO2 content at the inlet of the
carbon capture unit must be maximized through the adoption of high
percentages of Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR). The EGR
employment as a mean to control the ﬂame temperature and limit
NOxemissions isa common practicein internal combustionengines.
However, due to the high costs and complexities related to its
installation, it hasn’t been considered for real applications to gas
turbine engines. Indeed, the achievable reduction in NOx emissions
doesn’t justify the power plant complexity, especially if compared to
the performance of modern Dry Low NOx (DLN) combustion
technologies which are usually able to provide close to single digit
emissions [2]. Thus, the most interesting EGR application to gas
turbines is related to the achievable increase of CO2 content in the
exhaust gases which would beneﬁt the CO2 sequestration both in
terms of costs and efﬁciency. On the other hand, such operating
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received August 28, 2023; ﬁnal manuscript received November 29,
2023; published online February 8, 2024. Editor: Jerzy T. Sawicki.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2024, Vol. 146 / 071007-1
Copyright V
C 2024 by ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 2 ---

conditions push conventional combustion systems to the limit
because of oxygen depletion.
Over the years, several studies have investigated the possibility of
combining EGR with lean premixed ﬂames in order to ensure the
proper ﬂame stability together with low CO/UHC (unburnt hydro-
carbons) and NOx emissions. In terms of NOx emissions, EGR
showed promising results. At constant ﬂame temperature and high
pressures, the EGR NOx reduction potential increases as the amount
of recirculating gas rises [3]. In addition, compared to standard air
cases, the NOx emissions reduction is even bigger at increasing
ﬂame temperatures [4]. The reason behind this behavior is related to
the driving NOx formation mechanism: EGR NOx potential
reduction is associated with the Zeldovich NOx formation pathway,
thus the reduction is effective only if this is the dominant formation
mechanism, so in high pressures and high temperatures conditions
[5]. This aspect was additionally investigated by several authors that
not only conﬁrmed this behavior but also found an inversion in the
NOx trend for extremely high EGR levels [6]. This NOx trend
inversion phenomenon was also investigated through numerical
simulations by Burnes et al. [7], who found a threshold in terms of
oxygen content of the incoming air above which the NOx emissions
starts rising again.
The real limiting factor associated with the EGR employment is
related to CO emissions [8]. The oxygen depletion caused by an
increased EGR level drifts the thermodynamic equilibrium toward
the CO production. Nevertheless, the CO emissions linked to the
equilibrium conditions are only a theoretical value, which is
expected to deviate noticeably as the lack of oxygen in the fresh
mixture increases [3]. Additionally, the increase in CO emissions is
supposed to be particularly pronounced at low loads engine
operating conditions, where the lack of oxygen effect overlaps
with a decrease in pressure. Different strategies have been explored
in order to extend the combustor operability window: the majority of
researchers studied the employmentof a small pilotﬂame toincrease
the ﬂame stability at high EGR content [8,9], while others explored
the possibility of employing staged combustion [3,4]. The EGR
impact on the combustion process has been mainly investigated
employing numerical methods, most of which are usually limited to
low ﬁdelity approaches such as simple one-dimensional studies
[10–12] or Reynolds-averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) simulations
[13–16]. Although Large Eddy Simulations (LES) would be
preferable in such conditions to provide a detailed understanding
of the interaction between the turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld and the ﬂame
characteristics, the available applications are limited to simple
combustor conﬁgurations due to the modeling high computational
costs [17–20]. Dedicated experimental investigations are required in
order to support the prediction of numerical models, and combustion
optical diagnostics have been successfully employed in this context.
A limited number of available studies investigated at atmospheric
pressure the effects of CO2 addition on the ﬂame behavior through
chemiluminescence measurements, yet considering simple burner
geometries [21,22].
The main objective of this work is therefore to contribute to the
development of new burner concepts, able to efﬁciently operate in
alternative operating conditions such as exhaust gas recirculation.
Speciﬁcally, optical diagnostics measurements have been per-
formed on an industrial burner at ambient pressure conditions to
investigate the complex behavior of real hardware components. To
this end, a ﬁrst test campaign is dedicated to the burner
characterization while the second part is focused on the assessment
of the actual capabilities of the currently employed burner, designed
to operate in standard gas turbine cycles.
After characterizing the ﬂow ﬁeld in both nonreactive and
reactive conditions, the burner ﬂame structure and position were
investigated through OH* chemiluminescence measurements. In
addition, NOx and CO emissions were recorded at the same time to
characterize the burner performance in terms of pollutant
emissions. For a complete characterization, the burner was also
studied from a stability point of view through lean blow out (LBO)
measurements.
The measurements will be used to study the involved combustion
phenomena and the complications related to the combustor
operability in vitiated air conditions, identifying the limitations of
the current technologies and testing the burner ability to adapt to
extreme operating conditions. In addition, the collected information
represent a good database to be employed for CFD codes validation.
Test Rig and Experimental Techniques
Burner Description. The investigated burner is a novel lean
premixed burner developed by Baker Hughes for industrial gas
turbine applications. A thorough description of the burner geometry
and its design can be found in the works of Cerutti et al. [23–25]. The
burner cross section is illustrated in Fig. 1.
The burner mainly consists of two different parts:
 Part 1 of Fig. 1 is the fuel injector, equipped with two
independent fuel injection circuits
 Part 2 of Fig. 1 is the premixer, composed by two independent
air ﬂow passages, each one providing a different amount of
swirl to the air-fuel mixtures
Each one of the fuel injection rows is independently fed and
regulated by a different fuel gas line. According to Fig. 1, a ﬁrst air
stream AA (Axial Air) enters the burner through an axial swirler and
mixes with the ﬁrst row of axial fuel injectors AF (Axial Fuel)
present within the external passage, just upstream the axial swirler,
creating a premixed ﬂame. The second air stream RA (Radial Air)
ﬂows through the internal vanes of the radial swirler before mixing
with the radial fuel stream RF (Radial Fuel) to feed the internal
premixed ﬂame. The following throat is properly sized to ensure an
appropriate mixture acceleration before the downstream sudden
section expansion, which corresponds to the ﬂame front developing
region. Regardless of the amount of residual ﬂow swirl, the ﬂame
stabilization mechanism is mainly driven by the inner throat size and
the law of cross-sectional area increase of the downstream dump
region. As pointed out from previous investigations [23–25], the
ﬂame stabilization process is also strongly affected by the amount of
overall thermal power released in each region through the dedicated
radial and axial fuel injections.
Test Rig Configuration. The burner was investigated in the
reactive test cell of the THT Lab of the University of Florence,
whose schematic layout is outlined in Fig. 2. Two screw
compressors deliver a maximum of 1 kg/s of compressed air to the
test cell at a maximum pressure of 10 barA. A modulating valve is
also integrated in the system to ensure a constant delivery pressure.
After the compression, the air ﬂows through various ﬁlters and an air
dryer (dew point 20 C) in order to eliminate any impurity and
humidity before entering the test cell. Right after, a 600 kW electric
heater heats up the air ﬂow at a maximum temperature of 400 C. To
keep a constant delivery temperature, a proportional integral
derivative system automatically controls the electric heater,
modulating its power input.
The air mass ﬂowrate is controlled through a globe valve
upstream of the electric heater, while the rig downstream pressure is
set acting on a high temperature control disk valve. A water jacket
exhaust duct is placed right after the rig to avoid any interference the
Fig. 1
Investigated burner architecture # 2023 Baker Hughes
Company - All rights reserved
071007-2 / Vol. 146, JULY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 3 ---

back-pressure valve might have on the combustion process. The
water jacket is a 1 m long straight duct with circular cross section
equipped with water sprayers, used to quench the hot gases and
control the ﬂow exit temperature.
The burner has been tested both in standard air conditions and
CO2 enriched mixtures, to simulate EGR like conditions. Recreating
real EGR conditions in lab scacle is quite challenging because of the
associted costs and the volumes involved; the same complications
are when employing N2 enriched mixtures. Therefore, CO2 enriched
mixtures are considered a good tradeoff for the design and primary
investigation phase. The CO2 employed for the tests in vitiated air
conditions is stored in a pressurized tank with a storage capacity of
about 6000 l. From the storage tank, the CO2 line directly enters the
main air ﬂow line upstream the electric heater, in order to deliver to
the test section an homogeneous mixture, both in terms of
temperature and composition. The amount of injected CO2 is
controlled through a dedicated valve and measured by a calibrated
oriﬁce ﬂowmeter.
As for the fuel line, the test cell is equipped with three natural gas
lines that deliver a maximum ﬂowrate of about 90 Nm3/h. The
natural gas directly coming from the local gas network is pressurized
from 20 mbar to about 16 bar through a dedicated screw compressor,
equipped with special ﬁlters to clean the gas from possible
impurities. A 200 liters tank is also present along the delivery line
to smooth out any pressure ﬂuctuation. Each fuel line is provided
with a globe valve to control the ﬂowrate and a shut off valve for
safety reasons, together with a Pt100 resistance temperature detector
probe, pressure gauges, and a speciﬁc mass ﬂowmeter.
The test article is designed to allow optical measurements on the
ﬂame region and it is characterized by a modular layout to adjust the
system to different burner concepts. A cross section of the test article
is shown in Fig. 3(a). It consists of two main parts: the casing, which
constitutes the enclosure that conﬁnes the air and the reactive
process ensuring a safe test operation, and the combustor, which is
the ﬂame enclosure system. The external casing consists of an
upstream vessel, through which the burner enters the test article, and
a downstream vessel, equipped with two perpendicular optical
windows for the ﬂame visualization. The combustor is made of a
2.5 mm thick cylindrical quartz liner, held in place thanks to a
blocking system made of four tie rods and four springs that connect
the dome to the following duct, used to convey the exhaust gases
toward the test rig exhaust system. The combustor length is
approximately 2.5 diameters, to ensure a complete ﬂame develop-
ment for a proper ﬂame visualization. In addition, special effort was
put in the optical accesses design to ensure a good visibility on the
dome and burner exit section, as well as the combustor terminal part,
to investigate any interaction it may arise between the ﬂame and the
dome surface.
The ﬂame tube is cooled by forced convection of a fraction of the
incoming air that ﬂows in the annulus between the liner and the
conﬁning vessel, not used in the combustion process. The same air is
also employed for the windows cooling, while the dome plate is
cooled through a series of inclined effusion holes. Dedicated ﬂow
checks were performed to estimate the effective areas of both the
burner and the cooling system, to allow the actual combustion air
feeding the burner to be evaluated.
In order to perform tests in reactive conditions, the rig is provided
with a spark plug to ignite the mixture, located along the ﬂame tube
downstream the optical liner (Fig. 3(b)).
Concerning the rig instrumentation, the test article is equipped
with various thermocouples and static pressure ports to monitor the
ﬂow conditions. An emission probe is also present, employed to
analyze the exhaust composition through a HORIBA PG250. The
probe is made of several radially spaced holes and it is plunged into
the ﬂame tube to extract the exhaust gases. After being extracted, the
gases reach a gas analyzer through a thermally insulated 6 mm teﬂon
pipeline thatkeeps the gas mixture at aconstant temperature of about
150 C. Before reaching the analyzer, a HORIBA PS200 refrigerator
is used to remove any trace of water vapor from the gas sample. The
gas analyzer is properly calibrated right before each test employing a
rack of calibrated gas mixture tanks.
An in-house LabVIEW software tool is used for real-time
monitoring of all the main rig parameters. The acquired data at each
test point are obtained by averaging the measured values for 30 s,
once reached the desired stationary conditions. A picture of the test
rig and the relative instrumentation is showed in Fig. 3(b).
Particle Image Velocimetry. The PIV investigations were
carried out employing the Dantec-Dynamics PIV system, where
the # Dantec-FlowManager software was used to control all the
instrumentation settings, as well as synchronization, acquisition and
postprocessing. The laser adopted in this test campaign is the Litron
LDY303, a Nd:YAG pulsed laser at a wavelength of 527 nm. The
laser beam is shaped into a thin laser sheet thanks to an optical trail,
made of a series of lenses. A ﬁnal mirror mounted on an adjustment
system is used to project the laser sheet into the test rig from the
Fig. 2
Combustion test cell sketch
Fig. 3
Test article cross section (a) and combustion test rig photo (b) at the THT Lab of the University of Florence
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2024, Vol. 146 / 071007-3
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 4 ---

upper window (Fig. 3(a)) and illuminate the central section of the
liner, at the burner symmetry plane.
The images were recorded through a Phantom MIRO M340
camera, coupled with a Micro-NIKKOR 60 mm f/2.8 lens and a
bandpass ﬁlter to cut out all the incoming light except for the laser
light scattered by the seeding particles. A polarizing ﬁlter is also
placed in front of the bandpass ﬁlter of the camera lens to better
manage the reﬂections caused by the cylindrical liner shape above
all. TiO2 particles (submicron mean size) were used to seed the air
ﬂow directly upstream the burner, using the Lavision Particle
Blaster 110. Both cold and reactive tests were conducted acquiring
images at a frequency of 400 Hz and the time delay between the two
laser pulses was varied between 7 and 9 ls. For each tested
condition, about 500 pair of images were acquired to assure
statistical convergence of the results. Background noise was
eliminated through a dedicated algorithm and the data were then
postprocessed using an adaptive grid iterative approach. Vectors
were validated applying peak validation on the image cross-
correlation and the Universal Outlier Detection algorithm [26].
OH* Chemiluminescence. Chemiluminescence measurements
of the OH* radical were employed to detect the reaction zone and its
position in various operating conditions, as its emission can be
considered a heat release marker [27–29]. In order to carry out this
type of measurements, a camera coupled with an image intensiﬁer
has been used. The same camera used for the PIV measurements, the
Phantom MIRO M340, was coupled with the Hamamatsu C16031-
311-Ax image intensiﬁer through a relay lens. In addition, a Nikon
UV 105 mm f=4:5 lens together with a bandpass ﬁlter (CWL ¼ 310
þ/ 2 nm; FWHM ¼ 10 þ/ 2 nm) were mounted on the image
intensiﬁer to be able to capture the OH* transition, which has its
peak emission intensity in the UV spectrum. OH* chemilumines-
cence images were acquired at 500 Hz recording about 900 images.
The instantaneous snapshots were averaged to remove the inﬂuence
of any unsteady phenomena and analyze the ﬂame steady-state
structure. In addition, the averaging process smooths out the
chemiluminescence intensity peaks associated with unsteady
structures and reduce the measurement noise. Throughout this test
campaign, the intensiﬁer gain was kept constant while the gate was
varied between 0.4 and 0.7 ms depending on the ﬂame luminosity (,
i.e., tested conditions). For the cases acquired with different
intensiﬁer gate values, each averaged test condition was normalized
over its maximum intensity value. Thanks to this operation, the
aforementioned cases were compared in terms of ﬂame shape and
position and extension of the reaction zone.
Tested Operating Conditions. The burner was tested in differ-
ent operating conditions in order to study the ﬂame changes in shape
and position through combustion diagnostics techniques. The
operating conditions are determined through the following main
control parameters:
 Ti is the combustor inlet temperature, set to 300 C to simulate
typical gas turbine compressor discharge temperatures
 Pi is the combustor air inlet pressure. As early mentioned, the
test campaign was conducted at ambient pressure
 DP=P is the pressure drop across the combustion chamber,
calculated as the differential pressure across the combustor
divided by the combustor inlet pressure. All tests were
performed at a DP of about 4.5% which was found to provide
stable low emission operating window with natural gas [23,25]
 Tflame is the ﬂame temperature, calculated as the adiabatic
ﬂame temperature assuming a perfect mixing between the
burner combustion air andthe total amount offuel injected. The
ﬂame temperature values are scaled with the typical ISO base
load ﬂame temperature for proprietary reasons
(Tflame=Tflame,ISO)
 RF, the fuel split between the radial and the axial fuel lines,
which is expressed as percentage of the total fuel amount per
each fuel injection row
 The air vitiation in close-to EGR conditions is expressed as
oxygen molar concentration (O2%), reached after the addition
of a certain amount of CO2 into the main air ﬂow entering the
test rig (O2 ¼ 21% for standard air).
Table 1 summarizes the tested operating points.The axial fuel line
was not fed further to not exceed the 40% RF–60% AF fuel split
conﬁguration, as it was selected as the most favorable in terms of
NOx emissions during the burner development process [23–25]. In
addition, the burner stability limits were investigated both in
standard and vitiated air conditions.
Burner Characterisation
Flow Field Results. The mean ﬂow ﬁeld has been measured on
the burner symmetry plane with PIV technique in both reactive and
nonreactive conditions. Figure 4 shows the time averaged velocity
magnitude of the nonreactive (up) and reactive (down) ﬂow ﬁelds,
normalized with the maximum velocity value of the reactive case.
For the reactive test, only the radial fuel line is fed and Tﬂame is equal
to 0.75, corresponding to case 1 of Table 1. The white solid lines
highlight the typical combustion chamber ﬂow ﬁeld for a swirl
stabilized ﬂame, and ﬂow vectors are also reported. In both
conditions, the swirling motion generated by the swirlers forces
the ﬂow to spread radially toward the chamber liner wall, creating a
low velocity outer recirculation zone (ORZ) in the corner between
the dome and the liner. The sudden expansion of the ﬂow causes an
Table 1
Burner operating conditions for the OH* chemilumines-
cence measurements
Case
Tflame
Fuel split (%)
O2 (%mol)
1
0.75
100% RF
21
2
0.86
100% RF
21
3
1
100% RF
21
4
1
60% RF–40% AF
21
5
1
50% RF–50% AF
21
6
1
40% RF–60% AF
21
7
1
100% RF
19.5
8
1
100% RF
19
9
1
100% RF
18.5
10
1
50% RF–50% AF
20
11
1
50% RF–50% AF
19.5
12
1
50% RF–50% AF
19
13
1
50% RF–50% AF
18.5
14
1
40% RF–60% AF
20
15
1
40% RF–60% AF
19.5
16
1
40% RF–60% AF
19
17
1
40% RF–60% AF
18.5
Fig. 4
Normalized meanvelocity contour with a schematic of the
typical ﬂow ﬁeld and ﬂow vectors in nonreactive conditions (up)
and reactive conditions (down)
071007-4 / Vol. 146, JULY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 5 ---

increase in the vortex size and consequently a pressure rise in the
vortex core, generating a positive pressure gradient in the central
region of the combustion chamber. The ﬂow ﬁeld istherefore subject
to a vortex breakdown, characterized by a negative axial velocity in
the central region of the combustion chamber [30,31]. As a result,
the ﬂow develops an inner recirculation zone (IRZ)at the central part
of the chamber, highlighted by the solid white line of the picture.
This region is fundamental for the ﬂame stabilization, as it
continuously supplies heat and activated radicals from the hot
combustion products toward the fresh mixture. In the area bounded
by the outer and inner recirculation zone, the ﬂow is accelerated and
forms a shear layer between the high and low velocity regions
generating high turbulence to enhance the mixing. The IRZ root and
its initial interaction with the jets is not visible as it is anchored in the
burner ﬁnal dump region, close to the burner exit section. Similarly,
it was not possible to collect information on the IRZ ﬁnal part as it is
located outside of the camera FoV, especially in reactive condition
where the extension of the inner recirculation zone gets slightly
larger.
Clearly, there is no big difference between nonreactive and reactive
conditions in terms of ﬂow ﬁeld features. The combustion process, thus
the increase in temperature, leads to higher velocities. Furthermore, the
thermal expansion and the lower densities of the reactive conditions
cause an increase in the extension of the IRZ, especially in the radial
direction. Also, in the reactive case, the ﬂow entrapped in the inner
recirculation zone moves back toward the burner with higher velocity
compared to the nonreactive case. This aspect together with the
resulting larger extension of the IRZ forces the incoming high velocity
jet outwards with a steeper angle. Consequently, the ORZ shortens and
it is pushed closer to the burner wall.
Nonreactive and reactive ﬂow ﬁeld measurements were also
performed at higher Tﬂame and with different fuel splits, but the
results are very similar to those presented above and have been
omitted for brevity.
OH* Chemiluminescence Results. The burner ﬂame structure
and position were investigated through OH* chemiluminescence
measurements at different operating conditions in terms of ﬂame
temperature and burner fuel ﬂow split. Figure 5 presents all the time
averaged OH* maps recorded with standard air (, i.e., without CO2
addition), corresponding to cases 1–6 of Table 1. Each image is
normalized with its own maximum value.
The effect of ﬂame temperature can be studied considering
images a-b-c,corresponding tocases 1–2–3, where the fuel ﬂowsplit
was kept constant, feeding only the radial fuel line. The main
reaction zone can be identiﬁed through the high OH* chemilumi-
nescence values. The ﬂame temperature is raised by increasing the
amount of fuel that ﬂows through the radial fuel line, leading to a
richer mixture. Although the equivalence ratio remained well below
the stoichiometric value for all the considered cases, the increase of
the jet penetration forced the OH* peak relocation downstream. In
particular, as the amount of fuel is increased it is supposed that a
larger portion of that interacts with the high velocity swirled air,
determining a heavy lifting effect and modifying the ﬂame
stabilization region (Fig. 4). As the jet penetration increases, the
ﬂame stabilizes further downstream the burner exit section
assuming the lifted shape visible in Fig. 5(c). As a result, the peak
of chemiluminescence intensity moves accordingly and it gets
closer to the liner walls. From case 1 to case 3, the shape of the
reaction zone ﬁrst gets slightly larger and bigger and then changes
shape, becoming more squeezed and moving away from the burner
tip.
To gain a better understanding of the ﬂame anchoring position,
OH* chemiluminescence map of case 1 is overlapped with PIV
velocity vectors measured at the same operating conditions, as
showed in Fig. 6. Since chemiluminescence is a line-of-sight
technique, the inverse Abel transform [32] has been applied to the
time averaged OH* map, recreating the intensity distribution on the
burner symmetry plane. The ﬂame clearly anchors in the inner shear
layer region where high turbulence is promoted through the
interaction between the IRZ and the jet ﬂow exiting the burner.
The effect of the burner fuel split between the axial and the radial
lines on the ﬂame structure was also investigated. Figures 5(c)–5(f)
were obtained keeping the ﬂame temperature constant at 1 and
Fig. 5
OH* chemiluminescence contours
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2024, Vol. 146 / 071007-5
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 6 ---

progressively decreasing the radial line content from 100% to 40%
and increasing the axial fuel lineconsequently. Asthe amount of fuel
ﬂowing through the radial line diminishes, the ﬂame anchors back in
the central region closer to the burner exit. This behavior endures
until the last tested fuel ﬂow split, where the amount of fuel through
the axial fuel line is greater than the radial one. This behavior is
driven by the fuel jet velocity of the radial line. When the total fuel
amount ﬂows through the radial line, the fuel velocity is higher than
the fresh air thus the ﬂame stabilization happens downstream the
burner exit section, assuming a lifted shape. In Figs. 5(d) and 5(e),
the fuel stream through the radial line decreases and its exiting
velocity is low enough for the fuel to get entrapped in the
recirculation zone created in the dump region of the burner
(Fig. 1). Indeed, the channel throat after the radial line location
provide the mixture with the proper acceleration through the
downstream sudden section expansion, where the ﬂame then
anchors. However, in the last case the radial line equivalence ratio
gets leaner and the ﬂame behavior starts shifting back toward a lifted
conﬁguration. Thus, in Fig. 5(f) the reaction zone lengthens,
relocating the ﬂame a little downstream. Also, the chemilumines-
cence intensity peak moves away from the liner wall as the radial
line fuel starts decreasing and start shifting again toward the liner
only in the last case. Actually, the ﬂame shape of Figs. 5(c) and 5(f)
are quite similar: the reaction zone gets shorter as it spreads more
radially, interacting more with the combustion chamber walls.
Emissions. Figure 7 show the CO and NOx emissions as a
function of the normalized ﬂame temperature at constant fuel split
(cases 1–3). As expected, CO emissions decrease at higher ﬂame
temperature. Recalling the chemiluminescence maps of Fig. 5, it is
clearly visible that at leaner conditions the ﬂame gets closer to the
burner exit section, creating an initial richer zone. In this area, the
poor fuel-air mixing is responsible for the evident increase in CO
emissions. At higher ﬂame temperature, even though the ﬂame
interacts with the liner wall that cools down the mixture blocking the
reaction progress, the ﬂame anchors in a different position and the
better mixing contributes to the CO emissions abatement. The trend
of NOx emissions remains almost ﬂat, assuming almost a constant
value around 11 ppm for the lowest and highest ﬂame temperature,
while a slight increase in NOx emissions is visible for the medium
case, ascribable to the slight reactivity increase found in the OH*
analysis.
The emissions trends were also analyzed at various fuel split
conditions at constant adiabatic ﬂame temperature (cases 3–6).
Figure 8 illustrates the CO and NOx emissions as a function of the
radial fuel line split. As it could be expected, the maximum CO
emissions is found at 100% RF. As it was explained for the trend
obtained at different adiabatic ﬂame temperatures, looking at the
chemiluminescence of Figs. 5(c)–5(f) it is possible to see the change
in shape that the ﬂame experiences from 100% to 40% RF. Moving
from case 3 to case 4, there is an initial marked drop in CO emissions
due to an enhanced mixing promoted by the axial stream. A further
increase in the axial fuel line content still beneﬁts CO emissions but
at a lesser extent and the trend assumes an asymptotic behavior.
Similarly, NOx emissions decrease as the AF contribution grows.
The favorable effect of the better mixing linked to the activation of
the axial fuel line can be appreciated already from small amount of
AF content, leading to a reduction in NOx emissions by a factor of 4
from 100% RF to 60% RF. The trend then stabilizes and reaches a
minimum at 40% RF. Therefore, a fuel split biased toward the axial
fuel line reduces the radial line equivalence ratio, which is
responsible for the majority of the NOx emissions formation.
However, as the radial line is mainly responsible for the ﬂame
anchoring and stabilization, a balance must be found to ensure a
stable combustion at the same time.
As mentioned before, the radial fuel line contribution was not
decreased further since from previous investigations an increase in
NOx emissions is expected at an axial fuel content greater than 60%
as well as a rise in thermoacoustic instabilities, which exclude this
region from the burner desirable operating conditions [23–25].
Lean Blow Out Margin. One of the most important aspects in a
burner design is its capacity to provide stable combustion. The
burner stability limits deﬁne its capacity to withstand variations in
terms of ﬂame temperature without the onset of combustion
instabilities or loss of ﬂame events. These limits become critical
Fig. 6
Abel transformed OH* chemiluminescence intensity
isolines of Case 1 superposed by the velocity contour with ﬂow
vectors of the PIV measurement
Fig. 7
CO and NOx emissions as a function of the adiabatic ﬂame
temperature at 100% RF
Fig. 8
CO and NOx emissions as a function the amount of fuel
ﬂowing through the radial fuel line (RF) at constant ﬂame
temperature (Tflame* 5 1)
071007-6 / Vol. 146, JULY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 7 ---

especially at high axial fuel content conditions. The blow out margin
deﬁnition is fundamental particularly during the gas turbine load
regulation, as often gas turbines are required to follow the frequent
variations of the grid power demand in an energy context where the
energy production share of renewable sources, characterized by an
irregular availability, is in continuous growth. In addition, wider
stability limits allow the combustor to operate in leaner conditions,
reducing thus the adiabatic ﬂame temperature while keeping low
NOx emission capability.
Lean blow tests were carried out to determine the burner stability
limits in different radial-axial split conﬁguration, namely, cases 3–6.
For each case, starting from stable conditions, the air mass ﬂowrate
was gradually increased while maintaining the pressure drop across
the combustion chamber within an acceptable range, until the ﬂame
extinguishes. The blow out event was detected observing the sudden
temperature drop from the thermocouples readings, installed in the
duct close to the liner exit section. For each test point, the blow out
test was performed three times showing a good repeatability.
Figure 9 shows the burner stability limits in terms of adiabatic
ﬂame temperature (Tﬂame) as a function of the radial fuel split (RF
%). Looking at the two limiting conditions, for the 100% RF case the
ﬂame remained stable until the adiabatic ﬂame temperature reached
a value below 0.65. Differently, only a Tﬂame of 0.85 was reached for
the 40% RF case. Indeed, as the axial line content increases, the blow
out margin decreases and the burner moves to a more unstable
condition. As derived from the chemiluminescence measurements,
the radial line is responsible for the ﬂame stabilization so when its
contribution diminishes the ﬂame is less stable and the blow out
margin decreases accordingly. Indeed, going from case 3 to case 6,
the raw OH* luminosity experience a considerable reduction
indicating a lower ﬂame reactivity that negatively affects the ﬂame
stability.
As seen in the emission section, case 6 which corresponds to the
minimum investigated RF content is the most promising in terms of
NOx emissions but on the contrary it is the worst conﬁguration in
terms of stability limits. The axial line globally provides a better
mixing achieving a more uniform fuel distribution, which is an
important aspect in terms of emissions but at the same time it is
detrimental for the ﬂame stability as richer regions are responsible
for the ﬂame stabilization. The drop in NOx emissions at around the
50% RF–50% AF fuel split and the corresponding almost linear
behavior of the lean blow margin offers a promising opportunity in
ﬁnding a tradeoff between these two characteristics.
Effect of CO2 Dilution
The present study aims at testing the burner adaptability at
different operating conditions and understands the potential
modiﬁcation needed to operate in an oxygen depleted environment.
As explained before, CO2 was added into the main airﬂow to
simulate EGR conditions. The CO2 content was gradually increased
to decrease the oxygen available for the combustion process. Four
different operating conditions in terms of available oxygen
concentration in the incoming airﬂow were tested, as reported in
Table 1. In order to derive a truthful comparison on the burner
behavior, the adiabatic ﬂame temperature was kept constant at all
conditions adjusting the fuel ﬂow. The air mass ﬂowrate was also
varied depending on the added CO2 in order to maintain the right
burner pressure drop.
Stability Limits. One of the principal issues related to the EGR
feasibility is the ﬂame stability. Indeed, the addition of CO2 into the
incoming airﬂow reduces the amount of available oxygen for the
combustion process, weakening the ﬂame stability.
Therefore, the ﬂame blow out margin was studied in order to
derive the maximum allowable CO2 concentration to ensure stable
combustion in different fuel ﬂow split conﬁgurations. Similarly to
the procedure adopted for the burner characterization, for each
tested condition, the fuel ﬂow was kept constant, and the CO2
content was increased until the ﬂame extinguished. Figure 10 shows
the burner blow out margins in terms of oxidant oxygen content as a
function of the fuel ﬂow split, expressed in terms of radial line
content. As the radial fuel ﬂow diminishes, the minimum oxidant
oxygen content increases to ensure ﬂame stability. Indeed, as shown
in the burner characterization both from chemiluminescence
measurements and stability limits, the radial fuel helps the ﬂame
anchoring and stabilization process. Thus, at 100% RF, the
minimum oxygen molar concentration in the oxidant mixture
reaches the lowest experienced value at about 18%. The oxygen
molar concentration necessary for a stable combustion increases as
the axial fuel stream grows, reaching a value of about 18.45% for the
40% RF - 60% AF fuel split case. Generally, the needed oxygen
content rises with a strong nonlinear behavior as the radial fuel
content decreases, with a markedly increase in the needed oxygen
content around the value of 50% RF.
This information was used to deﬁne the most interesting
conﬁgurations to be further analyzed in terms of ﬂame shape
through OH* chemiluminescence and pollutant emissions meas-
urements. As pointed out previously, the most unstable condition is
the one at greatest axial line content and it drives the maximum CO2
oxidant content tested. Therefore, to ensure stable combustion, a
18.5% oxygen molar concentration was chosen as lowest allowable
oxygen oxidant content to be investigated during the burner
characterization in vitiated air conditions.
OH* Chemiluminescence Results. Figure 11 presents OH*
chemiluminescence intensity averaged over the whole measurement
area for different fuel splits at decreasing oxygen content. The
intensiﬁer gate was kept constant with the purpose of illustrating the
Fig. 9
Lean blow out measurements expressed as correspond-
ing adiabatic ﬂame temperature as a function the amount of fuel
ﬂowing through the radial fuel line (RF)
Fig. 10
Lean blow out measurements expressed in terms of
oxidant oxygen content as a function of the amount of fuel
ﬂowing through the radial fuel line (RF)
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2024, Vol. 146 / 071007-7
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 8 ---

enormous difference in terms of chemiluminescence intensity.
Indeed, as the available oxygen diminishes, the chemiluminescence
intensity signiﬁcantly decreases for all fuel splits. An almost linear
dependence canbe identiﬁedbetween the average OH* intensity and
the oxygen content. As expected, the limited amount of oxygen
available for the combustion process reduces dramatically the
mixture reactivity.
For a better comparison, in Fig. 12, the normalized chemilumi-
nescence measurements in standard air condition and vitiated air for
each tested fuel ﬂow split are reported. Only the 19.5% oxygen
molar concentration maps are presented for the sake of brevity,
being a representative example of the oxygen depletion effects on
the ﬂame behavior.
This time the maps were normalized each one with its maximum
to deﬁne more clearly the combustion reaction zone.
Analyzing the 100% RF fuel ﬂow split, it is clearly visible that the
ﬂame stabilizes further downstream in the CO2 addition case. This
implies a lower reactivity that causes a slowdown in the chemical
reaction process. For the same reason, in terms of shape, the ﬂame
seems a little longer with no additional major differences. The same
conclusions can be drawn looking at the central image where the two
conditions for the 50% RF–50% AF case are reported. Small
differences can be appreciated in terms of ﬂame shape. With regards
to the last analyzed split, which was selected as the most promising
conﬁguration in terms of emissions during the burner characteriza-
tion, the ﬂame morphology experiences a radical change. The
combined effect of the axial fuel line increase and the oxygen
content depletion leads to a slowdown of the reaction process.
Indeed, the reaction zone becomes more widespread, reaching an
extension that almost covers the whole quartz combustion chamber.
In addition to the time-averaged maps of OH* chemilumines-
cence distribution, some considerations can also be made about the
ﬂame unsteadiness. Indeed, the standard deviation of the OH*
intensity over time was normalized for each pixel with the local
time-averaged value, in order to compare different ﬂow conditions.
The thus obtained spatial distribution is showed In Fig. 13 for some
representative cases. Figure 13(a) corresponds to case 2, where only
the radial fuel line is fed. The area where the ﬂame is stable (low
normalized standard deviation values) is short and compact, while
signiﬁcant oscillations are present both in the downstream region
and at the ﬂame root. Moving to case 5 (Fig. 13(b)), where the axial
line is also fed, ﬂuctuations are signiﬁcantly reduced, especially in
the downstream region. The effect of CO2 addition can be analyzed
looking at Fig. 13(c), which represent the normalized standard
deviation of case 11. In this case, oscillations are ampliﬁed at the
base of the ﬂame, while the normalized standard deviation are just
slightly higher in the downstream region than the corresponding
case in standard air conditions.
Emissions. Pollutant emissions were measured as well to assess
the impact of CO2 addition and the potential emission abatement
linked to the application of EGR to gas turbine engines. For the sake
of clarity, only the two extreme fuel line split cases are reported,
namely, the 100% RF split and the 40% RF–60% AF fuel split case,
to fully characterize the burner behavior. In this case data have been
reported as the raw measured value and not corrected at 15% of O2 at
the exhaust, because the O2 content of the inlet comburent air is
different for each case, and such comparison could lead to erroneous
conclusions.
Figure 14 shows the CO emissions as a function of the oxygen
molar concentration in the incoming mixture for the 100% RF fuel
split (cases 7–9) and the 40% RF–60% AF fuel line split (cases
14–17).Ina similarway,Fig.15reportsthe correctedNOxemissions
for the corresponding cases. In all cases, the measurements obtained
in normal air conditions (21% oxygen molar fraction) are reported as
well for a clearer comparison with the vitiated air cases.
Starting from CO emissions, as the available oxygen diminishes
the amount ofthe CO in the exhaust increases. This isone of the main
drawback of EGR and one of the main limitations in terms of EGR
applicability, apart from the ﬂame stability. Indeed, the low
Fig. 11
Average OH* chemiluminescence intensity for different
fuel splits at decreasing oxygen content and constant ﬂame
temperature (Tflame* 5 1)
Fig. 12
Comparison between OH* chemiluminescence meas-
urements at various fuel split in normal andvitiated air conditions
071007-8 / Vol. 146, JULY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 9 ---

availability of oxygen slows down the reactivity and the thermody-
namic equilibrium shifts toward a higher CO production. The
introduction of the axial fuel line helps to tackle this issue as long as
the injected CO2 amount is moderate. The CO rapidly increases in
the 60% AF case at 19.5% oxygen molar concentration due to the
lower oxidation rate, while in the 100% RF case the CO emissions
continuously grow.
An opposite trend can be found analyzing NOx emissions (Fig.
15). As pointed out also during the analysis of the OH radical
distribution, the CO2 injection leads to a lower reactivity that in turns
helps reducing NOx emissions. This favorable effect is particularly
evident at 100% RF where the NOx emissions were found to be
particularly high compared to the other tested splits because of the
poorer mixing. For the 40% RF–60% AF split case, the beneﬁts in
terms of NOx emissions at decreasing oxygen availability are less
evident. As pointed out before, the axial fuel line enhances the
mixing and drives the NOx abatement, overshadowing the effect
related to the decrease in oxygen content.
Conclusions
A novel lean premixed burner for industrial applications
developed by Baker Hughes has been thoroughly characterized
with combustion diagnostic techniques, emissions and stability
limits measurements in order to explore the feasibility of integrating
Exhaust Gas Recirculation.
The burner ﬂow ﬁeld has been studied through PIV measurements
in both reactive and nonreactive conditions, and the typical
recirculation zones of swirl stabilized ﬂames are clearly identiﬁed.
Thanks to OH* chemilumenescence measurements, when the solely
radial line is fed, a shift in the ﬂame position is observed as the ﬂame
temperature increases: the higher jet penetration moves the ﬂame
stabilization region further downstream the burner exit section and
the ﬂame assumes a lifted shape. Similarly, at constant ﬂame
temperature, changes in the fuel split affect the ﬂame anchoring
position: at high and low radial content the ﬂame is lifted, while at
more balanced splits the ﬂame anchors in the recirculation zone
inside the burner dump region. However, in terms of emissions, both
CO and NOx beneﬁt from an increase in the axial line content. On the
contrary, the burner stability limits worsen as the radial line content
is decreased, being responsible for the ﬂame stabilization process.
As expected, the progressive introduction of the axial line allows a
more uniform fuel distribution and a reduction of temperature peaks.
The burner was then tested in vitiated air conditions, at increasing
CO2 content. Chemiluminescence intensity drops as the oxygen
content decreases, indicating a lower ﬂame reactivity. As expected,
the burner performance in terms of stability worsens as the oxygen
available for the combustion process decreases. In vitiated air
conditions, the reaction process is globally slowed down and the
ﬂame position shifts downstream while maintaining the same shape.
However, at 40% RF–60% AF fuel split, the combined effect of the
axial fuel line increase and the oxygen decrease leads to an abrupt
change in the ﬂame shape: the reaction zone is widespread involving
almost the entire liner. In terms of emissions, one of the major
drawback of air vitiation is the increase in CO emissions. As the
oxidizer oxygen content decreases, the CO amount increases
accordingly and a beneﬁt from the 40% RF–60% AF fuel split is
still found. However, around 19% oxygen molar fraction, the
amount of CO emissions of the aforementioned fuel split almost
matches the 100% RF case. A similar behavior is found when
analyzing the NOx emissions trends. On the contrary, the 100% RF
case strongly beneﬁts from an oxidizer oxygen decrease. Therefore,
a fuel ﬂow split more biased toward the radial line could help the
ﬂame stability while not leading to such an increase in terms of
emissions.
At the most favorable conditions in terms of NOx emissions in
standard air conditions, the potential emission abatement of close to
EGR conditions was addressed in order to deﬁne a baseline for
further burner development. Although for the baseline only CO2 was
used instead of a realistic EGR mixture, future development will
Fig. 13
Maps of the normalized standard deviation of case 2 (a),
case 5 (b), and case 11 (c)
Fig. 14
CO emissions as a function of the oxygen molar
concentration for 100% RF and 40% RF - 60% AF fuel split case
at constant ﬂame temperature (Tflame* 5 1)
Fig. 15
NOx emissions as a function of the oxygen molar
concentration for 100% RF and 40% RF–60% AF fuel split case at
constant ﬂame temperature (Tflame* 5 1)
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2024, Vol. 146 / 071007-9
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 10 ---

beneﬁt from a deeper investigation on the implications of its
employment compared to N2 rich mixtures. In particular, the focus
will be on the impact that the different mixtures have on the ﬂame
reactivity.
Finally, the present study remarks the importance of dedicated
experimental investigations to understand the ﬂame behavior and to
have a better overview of new burner concept performance in terms
of emissions and stability limits. Chemiluminescence, being
relatively simple to implement, bares the potential for a ﬂame
diagnostics able to drive the burner design from the early phases of
the design process.
Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated and supporting the ﬁndings of this article
are obtainable from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.
Nomenclature
Acronyms
AA ¼ axial air
AF ¼ axial fuel
CCD ¼ charge-coupled device
CCS ¼ carbon capture and storage
CCU ¼ carbon capture and utilization
CFD ¼ computational ﬂuid dynamics
DLN ¼ dry low NOx
EGR ¼ exhaust gas recirculation
FoV ¼ ﬁeld of view
GT ¼ gas turbine
IRZ ¼ inner recirculation zone
ISL ¼ inner shear layer
LBO ¼ lean blow out
LES ¼ large eddy simulations
ORZ ¼ outer recirculation zone
OSL ¼ outer shear layer
PIV ¼ particle image velocimetry
RA ¼ radial air
RANS ¼ Reynolds-averaged Navier Stokes
RF ¼ radial fuel
UHC ¼ unburnt hydrocarbons
VB ¼ vortex breakdown
Symbols
DP=P ¼ combustor pressure drop (%)
Pi ¼ combustor air inlet pressure (Pa)
Ti ¼ combustor air inlet temperature (C)
Tﬂame ¼ ﬂame temperature (C)
Tﬂame,ISO ¼ ﬂame temperature at ISO base load (C)
Tflame ¼ normalized ﬂame temperature
References
[1] IEA, 2022, “World Energy Outlook 2022,” IEA, Paris, France, Report.
[2] Lieuwen, T., Chang, M., and Amato, A., 2013, “Stationary Gas Turbine
Combustion: Technology Needs and Policy Considerations,” Combust. Flame,
160(8), pp. 1311–1314.
[3] Guethe, F., de la Cruz Garcıa, M., and Burdet, A., 2009, “Flue Gas Recirculation in
Gas Turbine: Investigation of Combustion Reactivity and NOx Emission,” ASME
Paper No. GT2009-59221.
[4] Burdet, A., Lachaux, T., De La, C., Garcıa, M., and Winkler, D., 2010,
“Combustion Under Flue Gas Recirculation Conditions in a Gas Turbine Lean
Premix Burner,” ASME Paper No. GT2010-23396.
[5] Li, H., ElKady, A. M., and Evulet, A. T., 2009, “Effect of Exhaust Gas
Recirculation on NOx Formation in Premixed Combustion System,” AIAA Paper
No. 2009–226.
[6] Tanaka, Y., Nose, M., Nakao, M., Saitoh, K., Ito, E., and Tsukagoshi, K., 2013,
“Development of Low NOx Combustion System With EGR for 1700 C-Class Gas
Turbine,” Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Report No. 1.
[7] Burnes, D., Saxena, P., and Dunn, P., 2020, “Study of Using Exhaust Gas
Recirculation on a Gas Turbine for Carbon Capture,” ASME Paper No.
GT2020-16080.
[8] ElKady, A. M., Evulet, A., Brand, A., Ursin, T. P., and Lynghjem, A., 2008,
“Exhaust Gas Recirculation in DLN F-Class Gas Turbines for Post-Combustion
CO2 Capture,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-51152.
[9] Evulet, A. T., ELKady, A. M., Branda, A. R., and Chinn, D., 2009, “On the
Performance and Operability of GE’s Dry Low NOx Combustors Utilizing
Exhaust Gas Recirculation for PostCombustion Carbon Capture,” Energy
Procedia, 1(1), pp. 3809–3816.
[10] Giorgetti, S., De Paepe, W., Bricteux, L., Parente, A., and Contino, F., 2017,
“Carbon Capture on a Micro Gas Turbine: Assessment of the Performance,”
Energy Procedia, 105, pp. 4046–4052.
[11] Petersen, N. H., Bexten, T., Goßrau, C., and Wirsum, M., 2021, “Analysis of the
Emission Reduction Potential and Combustion Stability Limits of a Hydrogen-
Fired Gas Turbine With External Exhaust Gas Recirculation,” ASME Paper No.
GT2021-58674.
[12] Park, Y., Choi, M., Kim, D., Lee, J., and Choi, G., 2021, “Performance Analysis of
Large-Scale Industrial Gas Turbine Considering Stable Combustor Operation
Using Novel Blended Fuel,” Energy, 236, p. 121408.
[13] De Santis, A., Ingham, D. B., Ma, L., and Pourkashanian, M., 2016, “CFD
Analysis of Exhaust Gas Recirculation in a Micro Gas Turbine Combustor for CO2
Capture,” Fuel, 173, pp. 146–154.
[14] Cameretti, M. C., Tuccillo, R., and Piazzesi, R., 2013, “Study of an Exhaust Gas
Recirculation Equipped Micro Gas Turbine Supplied With Bio-Fuels,” Appl.
Therm. Eng., 59(1–2), pp. 162–173.
[15] Zhang, S., Li, Y., Wang, S., Zeng, H., Liu, J., Duan, X., and Dong, H., 2020,
“Experimental and Numerical Study the Effect of EGR Strategies on in-Cylinder
Flow, Combustion and Emissions Characteristics in a Heavy-Duty Higher CR
Lean-Burn NGSI Engine Coupled With Detail Combustion Mechanism,” Fuel,
276, p. 118082.
[16] Galindo, J., Climent, H., Navarro, R., and Garcıa-Olivas, G., 2021, “Assessment of
the Numerical and Experimental Methodology to Predict EGR Cylinder-to-
Cylinder Dispersion and Pollutant Emissions,” Int. J. Engine Res., 22(10), pp.
3128–3146.
[17] Gicquel, L. Y., Staffelbach, G., and Poinsot, T., 2012, “Large Eddy Simulations of
Gaseous Flames in Gas Turbine Combustion Chambers,” Prog. Energy Combust.
Sci., 38(6), pp. 782–817.
[18] Hasti, V. R., Lucht, R. P., and Gore, J. P., 2019, “Large Eddy Simulation of
Hydrogen Piloted CH4/Air Premixed Combustion With CO2 Dilution,” J. Energy
Inst., 93(3), pp. 1099–1109.
[19] Nassini, P. C., Pampaloni, D., Meloni, R., and Andreini, A., 2021, “Lean Blow-
Out Prediction in an Industrial Gas Turbine Combustor Through a LES-Based
CFD Analysis,” Combust. Flame, 229, p. 111391.
[20] Jaravel, T., Riber, E., Cuenot, B., and Bulat, G., 2017, “Large Eddy
Simulation
of
an
Industrial
Gas
Turbine
Combustor
Using
Reduced
Chemistry With Accurate Pollutant Prediction,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 36(3),
pp. 3817–3825.
[21] Guyot, D., Guethe, F., Schuermans, B., Lacarelle, A., and Paschereit, C. O., 2010,
“CH*/OH* Chemiluminescence Response of an Atmospheric Premixed Flame
Under Varying Operating Conditions,” ASME Paper No. GT2010-23135.
[22] De Persis, S., Cabot, G., Pillier, L., G€okalp, I., and Boukhalfa, A. M., 2013, “Study
of Lean Premixed Methane Combustion With CO2 Dilution Under Gas Turbine
Conditions,” Energy Fuels, 27(2), pp. 1093–1103.
[23] Cerutti, M., Roma, M., Picchi, A., Becchi, R., and Facchini, B., 2019, “Improving
Emission and Blow-Out Characteristics of Novel Natural Gas Low NOx Burners
for Heavy Duty Gas Turbine,” ASME Paper No. GT2019-91235.
[24] Cerutti, M., Riccio, G.,Andreini, A., Becchi, R., Facchini, B., and Picchi, A.,2019,
“Experimental and Numerical Investigations of Novel Natural Gas Low NOx
Burners for Heavy Duty Gas Turbine,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 141
(2), p. 021006.
[25] Cerutti, M., Nassini, P. C., Pampaloni, D., and Andreini, A., 2021, “Experimental
and Numerical Characterization of a Novel Natural Gas Low NOx Burner in
Gas Turbine Realistic Environment,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 143(7),
p. 071018.
[26] Dantec Dynamics, 2000, “FlowManager Software and Introduction to PIV
Instrumentation,” Software User’s Guide, Denmark.
[27] He, L., Guo, Q., Gong, Y., Wang, F., and Yu, G., 2019, “Investigation of OH*
Chemiluminescence and Heat Release in Laminar Methane–Oxygen co-Flow
Diffusion Flames,” Combust. Flame, 201, pp. 12–22.
[28] Guethe, F., Guyot, D., Singla, G., Noiray, N., and Schuermans, B., 2012,
“Chemiluminescence as Diagnostic Tool in the Development of Gas Turbines,”
Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 107(3), pp. 619–636.
[29] Sardeshmukh, S., Bedard, M., and Anderson, W., 2017, “The Use of OH* and CH*
as Heat Release Markers in Combustion Dynamics,” Int. J. Spray Combust. Dyn.,
9(4), pp. 409–423.
[30] Terhaar, S., Kr€uger, O., and Paschereit, C. O., 2014, “Flow Field and Flame
Dynamics of Swirling Methane and Hydrogen Flames at Dry and Steam Diluted
Conditions,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 137(4), p. 041503.
[31] Lefebvre, A. H., and Ballal, D. R., 2010, “Gas Turbine Combustion: Alternative
Fuels and Emissions,” Gas Turbine Combustion, 3rd ed., CRC press, Boca Raton,
FL.
[32] Montgomery Smith, L., Keefer, D. R., and Sudharsanan, S. I., 1988,
“Abel Inversion Using Transform Techniques,” J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat.
Transfer, 39(5), pp. 367–373.
071007-10 / Vol. 146, JULY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/7/071007/7243079/gtp_146_07_071007.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025
