
--- Page 1 ---

Paradigms in turbulent combustion research
R.W. Bilgera,*, S.B. Popeb, K.N.C. Brayc, J.F. Driscolld
a School of Aerospace Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
b Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
c 23, De Freville Ave, Cambridge CB4 1HW, UK
d Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
Abstract
The development of the basic conceptual viewpoints, or paradigms, for turbulent combustion in
gases over the last 50 years is reviewed. Signiﬁcant progress has been made. Recent successes in the
prediction of pollutant species and extinction/re-ignition phenomena in non-premixed ﬂames are seen
as the result of close interaction between experimentalists, theoreticians, and modellers. Premixed tur-
bulent ﬂames seem to be dependent on a much wider range of factors, and predictive capabilities are
not so advanced. Implications for large eddy simulation (LES) and partially premixed combustion are
outlined.
 2004 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
This week we celebrate a half-century of what
has been a remarkable, sustained endeavour to
surmount the challenges of combustion science
and application. The Combustion Institute was
formed to provide a permanent home for the mul-
ti-disciplinary community of scientists and engi-
neers that had grown together, after the Second
World War, with the common interest of grap-
pling at a fundamental level with the problems
of combustion processes in engines (spark-igni-
tion, diesel, gas-turbine, and rocket), furnaces,
explosions, and ﬁres, and the aero-thermochemis-
try of rocket nozzles and re-entry of objects from
earth orbit. This community had already pro-
duced the fabulous archive of its three post-war
symposia. It knew that it needed to sustain and
grow itself if it were to surmount the great chal-
lenges that lay ahead. How else to assimilate many
still-emerging sciences—thermochemistry, chemi-
cal kinetics, molecular transport phenomena,
heat, and mass transfer in single and multi-phase
systems, and laminar and turbulent ﬂuid ﬂow—in-
to a coherent science capable of application to
engineering problems?
Fifty years is a long time in science. Just look
at the biological sciences! Why have we not solved
the problem in this time? Surely, back then, our
founders projected a far shorter time frame than
half a century when seeking support for the ﬂedg-
ling Institute and for their own individual research
projects. The opening speeches at the Royal Insti-
tution in London for the 1958 Symposium make
interesting reading. Sir Cyril Hinshelwood, then
President of the Royal Society and winner, with
Semenov, of the 1956 Nobel Prize in chemistry
for his work on the chemical kinetics of combus-
tion, gives a sobering assessment [1] of the diﬃcul-
ties of achieving a satisfactory theory for laminar
ﬂames. It includes, by the way, a complete dis-
missal of any future for Zeldovichs asymptotics!
Lewis [2] bemoans the Edisonian approach, still
1540-7489/$ - see front matter  2004 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.273
* Corresponding author. Fax: +61 2 9351 7060.
E-mail address: bilger@aeromech.usyd.edu.au (R.W.
Bilger).
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
www.elsevier.com/locate/proci
Proceedings
of the
Combustion
Institute


--- Page 2 ---

universally used then in combustion development.
He cites the discovery of lead tetraethyl as an anti-
knock additive after an exhaustive and expensive
testing program. And further, in spite of much
continued eﬀort at a fundamental level, the sci-
ence behind this technology was still not under-
stood when Lewis was speaking 35 years later.
Surely, combustion science could eventually out-
reach such blind empiricism! Both Lewis and Hin-
shelwood knew that practical applications would
need the mastering of turbulence—a formidable
task in itself—and would need to be coupled to
all the intricacies of hydrocarbon chemical kinet-
ics that were then emerging. They did not explic-
itly mention this, however! Experts advising the
Australian government in the 1960s listed Com-
bustion as one of a few areas of research that
would not be cost-eﬀective!
Have we solved the problem? Laminar ﬂames?
On the whole, for simple fuels: yes—but we still
have many papers in this area! Hydrocarbon
kinetics? Well along the road, it would seem. Tur-
bulent combustion and its science-based applica-
tion
to
engineering
problems?
Not
yet,
but
signiﬁcant progress has been made.
At the 27th Symposium, Correa [3] reviewed
the remarkable progress that has been achieved
in gas turbine technology over the past 50 years.
To illustrate the value of combustion science, he
shows that CFD using PDF methods [4] can pro-
duce accurate calculations of the NO emissions
from combustors. This methodology is now grad-
ually being incorporated into commercial CFD
codes [5], and hence available for broader applica-
tion. We can also take heart that Michael Schum-
acher and the Ferrari Formula 1 team put their
trust in one of our combustion science community
[6]—Thierry Baritaud—for the most crucial as-
pects of their engine design! Over the last ﬁve, Fer-
rari-winning years, Thierry and the Ferrari team
have been able to get a 2–3% increase in peak
power every year. He makes use of CFD codes
for fuel mixing and evaporation, and advanced
turbulent combustion codes for ﬂame travel to
guide the empirical development of the combus-
tion design [7,8]. He looks forward to combustion
codes that can be even better predictors of ﬂame
travel and of the post-ﬂame reactions that also af-
fect performance.
Increasingly, advanced combustion modelling
is ﬁnding application across the broad range of
industry. Increasingly, such computational model-
ling is becoming more sound in its scientiﬁc base.
There is still a long way to go until it enjoys the
status of being an accurate predictive tool as is ﬁ-
nite element analysis in elasticity and conductive
heat transfer.
Turbulent combustion has been the subject of
regular invited lectures and topical reviews over
the last 20 years [9–19] of the biennial symposia
of The Combustion Institute. The Hottel Lecture
given by Ken Bray at the 26th Symposium [15] is
particularly comprehensive. It pre-empts any at-
tempt at such a comprehensive review for this
50th anniversary lecture.
Our approach is prompted, instead, by the out-
standing advances that have been made in recent
years in turbulent non-premixed combustion.
These advances have been closely associated with
a series of international workshops on turbulent
non-premixed ﬂames [20]. The aim of these work-
shops has been to foster close interaction between
experimentalists,
modellers,
and
theoreticians,
with a focus on elucidating the physics and com-
putational modelling of the chemistry–turbulence
interactions that occur, and on improving mea-
surement techniques. It is generally agreed that
advances here have been more rapid than in pre-
mixed turbulent ﬂames, and that this is partly be-
cause there exists a well-developed and widely
accepted hierarchy of experiments that is well
aligned with the capabilities of the modelling
and simulation. In contrast, there is no generally
accepted set of experiments for the study of turbu-
lent premixed ﬂames.
It is also widely held that premixed turbulent
combustion is inherently more complex than
non-premixed [21], and that this is because there
is a much stronger coupling between the chemistry
and the turbulence. Strong coupling also occurs in
piloted jet diﬀusion ﬂames at high turbulent mix-
ing rates such as in the Sandia [20,22] ﬂames E
and F where local extinction and re-ignition oc-
cur. Modelling of these ﬂames has, however, been
quite successful [23–27].
Our objective here was to explore possible rea-
sons for this disparity in achievement. We review
the historical development of the conceptual view-
points or paradigms associated with these two
branches of the subject. Thomas Kuhn argues
[28] that the most interesting aspects of scientiﬁc
enquiry are the paradigm shifts and the events
causing them, which may be experimental, theoret-
ical or sociological. We hope to gain insight into
new approaches for the study of turbulent pre-
mixed combustion and for the emerging subject
of partially premixed turbulent combustion. Much
that has been learned in the past must play a cen-
tral role in addressing todays problems of perfect-
ing large eddy simulation (LES) for combustion.
We limit our scope to the crucial issue of tur-
bulence-chemistry interactions in gases. We leave
questions of buoyancy, radiant loss, multi-phase
transport, etc., aside. The views presented here
are not intended to reﬂect the wide range of views
held within the turbulent combustion research
community as a whole. Rather they are intended
to reﬂect the views of the authors, who perhaps
represent a mainstream of the research commu-
nity. Furthermore, we have not tried to reach a
consensus, but present instead the spread of views
that we have among us.
22
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 3 ---

2. Non-premixed turbulent combustion
The major, well-founded paradigms in turbu-
lent non-premixed combustion that are considered
here are given in Table 1. These are categorised in
terms of their modelling of the chemistry and mix-
ing. These are discussed in more detail in the fol-
lowing sub-sections together with the innovative
experiments that have arisen from them or that
they suggest for future investigation.
2.1. The mixing-controlled paradigm
The original paradigm for turbulent non-pre-
mixed combustion has the viewpoint that such
combustion is basically mixing controlled. The
classical paper by Hawthorne et al. [29] appears
in the ﬁrst of the post-war combustion symposia.
In it, the ﬂame lengths and mean structure of tur-
bulent jet diﬀusion ﬂames are studied and are
found to correlate well with the mixing laws of
turbulent jets. The paradigm is closely related to
that for laminar diﬀusion ﬂames as studied by
Burke and Schumann [30] in the ﬁrst combustion
symposium held in 1928. In that early work, the
mixing is by molecular diﬀusion in laminar ﬂow,
and the ﬂame is situated at the surface where the
fuel and oxidant are in stoichiometric propor-
tions—the reaction zone, itself, being very thin
compared with the diameter of the ﬂame. The
main idea was that chemical rates were much fas-
ter than mixing by molecular diﬀusion. This con-
cept was carried across into the paradigm for
turbulent diﬀusion ﬂames—if fuel is in excess,
the mixture consists of products and excess fuel;
if oxygen is in excess, the mixture consists of prod-
ucts and excess oxidant. A variable, essentially the
same as todays mixture fraction [31], can be de-
ﬁned that describes the stoichiometry of the mix-
ture, and the instantaneous temperature and
composition of the mixture would be uniquely re-
lated to the mixture-fraction variable. In turbulent
ﬂow, the mixture fraction at a particular point has
random ﬂuctuations, but these have statistics sim-
ilar to those in non-reacting ﬂow. Mean values of
composition and temperature can be obtained by
weighting their instantaneous relationship to the
mixture fraction by the probability density func-
tion (PDF) of the mixture fraction. Such mean
values seem to show co-existence of fuel and oxi-
dant. This is not, however, due to the slowness of
chemical reaction, but due to the ﬂuctuating stoi-
chiometry: signiﬁcant concentrations of both fuel
and oxidant may exist at the same place, but not
at the same time.
Such a mixing-controlled paradigm immedi-
ately raises the question as to its range of validity.
If the mixing can be made fast enough, then surely
the reaction rates would be controlled by the
chemistry and not by the mixing. The well-stirred
reactor of Longwell and Weiss [32] used small so-
nic jets to produce what was thought to be a
homogeneous mixture of reactants and products
within the reactor. Would the length of jet diﬀu-
sion ﬂames be aﬀected by limits on the reaction
rate? In a little-known study, Hottel reports [33]
on experiments at MIT [34] where this was inves-
tigated by studying jet diﬀusion ﬂames at a range
of pressures from 0.3 to 6 atm. The original idea
was that chemical rates would go approximately
as the square of the pressure whereas the Rey-
nolds number would go linearly with pressure.
The ﬁndings were that the ﬂame lengths were still
controlled by mixing but that buoyancy was more
important in determining rates of mixing in such
ﬂames than was the Reynolds number. A modiﬁed
Froude number was needed to incorporate the ef-
fects of buoyancy on mixing.
In the early 1970s, interest was renewed in the
eﬀects of chemical kinetics, particularly for pollu-
tants such as nitric oxide. This interest came as a
result of sociological pressures for reduction in air
pollution emissions arising from combustion pro-
cesses. Nitric oxide is formed by relatively slow
reactions, and so could not come directly under
the mixing-controlled paradigm. Since the forma-
tion of nitric oxide was not important for the ma-
jor species and overall heat release, eﬀorts were
made to correlate its production with the convec-
tive and mixing time scales in the ﬂow. Early re-
sults on hydrogen jet diﬀusion ﬂames, with
Froude number held constant [35], suggested that
the reactive time scale had a minus half power
dependence on the Reynolds number—and so
proportional to the Kolmogoroﬀ, or ﬁne-scale
time scale of the turbulence. Later work [36] has
indicated that radiation and diﬀerential diﬀusion
eﬀects are also important, particularly in hydro-
Table 1
Paradigms in non-premixed turbulent combustion
Paradigm
Chemistry
Mixing
Mixing controlled
Fast for major species
Scaling laws/second-order closures
Laminar ﬂamelet
Precalculated tables/Lagrangian Pdes
Laminar counter-ﬂow/second-order
closure
PDF approach
Already closed/reduced mechanisms
Mixing models
Conditional moment closure
Closure in terms of conditional moments
PDF integrals
Multiple mapping conditioning
Closure in terms of conditional means
Mapping closure
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
23


--- Page 4 ---

carbon ﬂames, and such attempts at simple corre-
lation are not sustainable.
For a while in the 1960s and 1970s, the primary
emphasis was on how the rate of mixing was af-
fected, not only by buoyancy, but by density vari-
ations and/or ﬂuctuations, and by the postulated
phenomenon of ﬂame-generated turbulence [37].
Kent and Bilger [38] studied a horizontal round-
jet diﬀusion ﬂame of hydrogen into a co-ﬂowing
airstream, the main idea being that minimal
deﬂection of the ﬂame in the vertical direction
and, preservation, essentially, of axi-symmetry
would gainsay any eﬀects of buoyancy—the main
interest was in density eﬀects and ﬂame generated
turbulence. On the down side was the introduc-
tion of new non-dimensional parameters such as
the ratio of the jet to co-ﬂow velocity and the
probable increase in the inﬂuence of the boundary
layer characteristics at the jet nozzle exit—some-
thing that could involve a host of new non-dimen-
sional parameters. This development reﬂected the
new paradigm for the study of non-reacting tur-
bulence. The then classical work on self-preserv-
ing
ﬂows
and
equilibrium
ﬂows
was
being
superseded by attempts to describe the evolution
of turbulence by partial diﬀerential equations
involving several signiﬁcant terms such as produc-
tion, advection, turbulent diﬀusion, and dissipa-
tion [39]. These equations were derived from
Reynolds averaging of the Navier–Stokes equa-
tions. As Bray pointed out [40], many more terms
would be involved in ﬂows with strong density
ﬂuctuations. Density-weighted or Favre averaging
of the Navier–Stokes and species conservation
equations [41] appeared to be a way around this
problem and has enjoyed some success [42,43].
The modelling of chemistry was extended to in-
clude the concept of chemical equilibrium being
the fast chemistry limit so that the eﬀects of high
temperature dissociation could give estimates for
the concentrations of intermediate species and
radicals such as H, OH, and O. This was particu-
larly helpful for modelling nitric oxide. Early
work in hydrogen jet diﬀusion ﬂames [44] assumed
that the kinetics were essentially those of the Zel-
dovich reduced mechanism [45] and that the tem-
perature and oxygen concentrations were given by
the fast chemistry paradigm. Consequently, the
average production rate, needed in the Rey-
nolds/Favre-averaged equation for this species,
could be obtained by weighting instantaneous
reaction rates, derived from fast-chemistry theory
for the temperature and reactant species, by the
PDF of the mixture fraction [44].
A signiﬁcant result arising from this paradigm
was the discovery by analysis [46] that reaction
rates in ﬂames with fast chemistry are propor-
tional to the rate of scalar dissipation or the rate
of molecular mixing (of the mixture fraction). Sca-
lar dissipation rates in turbulent jets into still air
scale with the minus fourth power of the distance
from the nozzle exit—so ﬁnite-rate chemistry ef-
fects would be most apparent near the nozzle exit.
The bulk of the carbon monoxide burnout occurs
much further downstream where scalar dissipa-
tion rates are very low. No wonder that Hottel
[33] and Homsy [34] could ﬁnd no eﬀects of kinetic
rates on ﬂame lengths deﬁned in terms of CO
burnout!
An immediate upshot of this discovery was the
new viewpoint that the reactive species and tem-
perature should depend not just on mixture frac-
tion, as under the fast chemistry paradigm, but
also on local values of scalar dissipation. High
values of local scalar dissipation would need high
values of chemical reaction rates to balance the
high rates of reactant arrival in the reaction zone
from turbulent mixing. Tsuji and Yamaoka [47]
had shown, in a beautiful series of investigations
on laminar counter-ﬂow diﬀusion ﬂames, that
the composition and temperature were dependent
on the strain-rate in the ﬂow—a quantity linearly
related to the scalar dissipation of the mixture
fraction. At high strain rates (scalar dissipation
rates), temperatures are lowered, and there is in-
creased overlap in the proﬁles of fuel and oxidant
concentrations. At very high strain rates, extinc-
tion occurs.
Turbulent diﬀusion ﬂames of hydrocarbons
posed a great problem in these times. The fast
chemistry paradigm implied that chemical equi-
librium would be the limit applicable at low rates
of scalar dissipation. Experiments showed that
levels of CO concentration were far below those
predicted by full chemical equilibrium [48]. Anal-
ysis of experimental data on laminar diﬀusion
ﬂames [49] indicated that such equilibrium struc-
ture was not approached at the low strain rates
of interest—some sort of metastable state was in-
volved. It was proposed [49] that such experimen-
tal data could be used for turbulent ﬂame
calculations. Lieuw et al. [50] showed that CO lev-
els in turbulent diﬀusion ﬂames could be well
predicted
by
assuming
that
moderately
low
strain-rate data from laminar ﬂame calculations
could be used to predict CO levels in turbulent
(methane) ﬂames. These concepts [49,50] were
the forerunners of what has become known as
laminar ﬂamelet modelling (which is the subject
of the next sub-section).
The general idea of the chemistry being depen-
dent on the eﬀects of scalar dissipation rates in re-
gions where the mixture fraction is close to
stoichiometric led, eventually, to the now-much-
heralded Sandia experiments [20,22] on piloted-
jet diﬀusion ﬂames. Crucial to this experimental
concept was the notion that high scalar dissipa-
tion rates should not be at the nozzle exit where
the ﬂow was subjected to the detailed minutiae
of
the
initial
conditions
arising
from
the
upstream boundary layers in and outside of the
jet tube or subjected to transitional coherent
24
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 5 ---

structures. It would be better to have such high
scalar dissipation delayed to 10–20 diameters
downstream where the turbulence was more fully
developed and amenable to the then, currently
available, techniques for turbulence modelling. A
large pilot ﬂow with burned products at close to
stoichiometric mixture could provide such a
streamwise holiday for stoichiometric values of
the scalar dissipation that would, eventually, be
overcome by the dynamics of the turbulence,
and eventually give rise to rates high enough to
cause local extinction. An unenclosed jet ﬂow
was also amenable to the latest advances in la-
ser-diagnostic measurement. This experimental
conﬁguration was initially realised at the Univer-
sity of Sydney by Sta˚rner and Bilger [51]. The pa-
per in the Munich 1986 Symposium [52] involving
probe measurements was accorded the 1988 Silver
Medal of the Combustion Institute: the judges
were perhaps inﬂuenced by the oral presentation
by Assaad Masri that included later measure-
ments by Rayleigh/ Raman scattering made at
Sandia with Bob Dibble, and eventually published
in Combustion and Flame [53,54]. These laser-di-
agnostic measurements were, indeed, the ﬁrst of a
long series of collaborations between Sydney Uni-
versity and Sandia [20,55–57], initially with Bob
Dibble and then with Rob Barlow, that has led
to the superb experimental databases that are
the current benchmark for turbulent non-pre-
mixed combustion modelling [20]. Recognition is
needed for the vision of Sandia administrators,
Dan Hartley, Peter Mattern, and Bill McLean,
who have been strong supporters of this interna-
tional collaboration and the value of this experi-
mental endeavour. The TNF collaboration now
includes many groups around the world. The
database now comprises excellent measurements
for all the major species, temperature, and for
CO, OH, and NO for a wide range of jet and
bluﬀ-body ﬂames [20]. The high quality of the
data has put the onus onto the modellers to reﬁne
their models and onto theoreticians to develop
new paradigms.
2.2. The laminar ﬂamelet paradigm
A new paradigm appeared in the early 1980s
when Peters showed [58] that the species conserva-
tion equation can, locally and instantaneously, be
transformed into the so-called stationary laminar
ﬂamelet (SLFM) equation by assuming terms
involving transients and those involving gradients
parallel to the instantaneous surface of the mix-
ture fraction to be small. The underlying concept
is that ﬂame reaction zones are thin, and their
structure is essentially the same as in laminar
ﬂames subjected to the same scalar dissipation.
Pre-calculated libraries of quantities such as com-
position, temperature, and reaction rates, as func-
tions of mixture fraction and scalar dissipation,
are used to obtain closure for the chemistry–tur-
bulence interactions. Detailed chemical reaction
mechanisms and molecular diﬀusion processes
can be included in these laminar ﬂame calcula-
tions. A presumed joint PDF of mixture fraction
and scalar dissipation allows mean values to be
predicted [50], in a manner analogous to that
introduced
for
mixing-controlled
combustion.
However, the ﬂamelets are relatively insensitive
to variations in scalar dissipation, and adequate
predictions are sometimes obtained by assuming
a constant mean value.
This innovation has been taken up widely by
modellers because it provides a simple and easy-
to-implement physical picture of the turbulent
ﬂame structure. Within its range of validity, it
is an attractively simple way to include eﬀects
of complex chemistry in turbulent ﬂame calcula-
tions. An early success [50] was the improvement
in matching experimental CO concentrations, in
comparison with calculations assuming chemical
equilibrium. However, strong arguments have
also been put forward [59] against ﬂamelet mod-
els. These include the eﬀects of variations in sca-
lar
dissipation
through
ﬂamelets,
and
the
inﬂuence of neglected advection terms in the
transport equations. It is clear that the SLFM
paradigm cannot remain valid in the presence
of local extinction and re-ignition when unsteady
and ﬂame edge eﬀects [60] must become impor-
tant. Nevertheless, the whole question of the
range of validity of ﬂamelet models remains con-
troversial. It cannot be denied that the laminar
ﬂamelet
paradigm
can
provide
an
accurate
description for suﬃciently large turbulence scales
and low turbulence intensities for combustion
chemistry that is close to irreversible. It is equally
obvious that there is also a regime of intense tur-
bulence, whose length and time scales are small
relative to those of a laminar ﬂame, for which
laminar ﬂamelet models will not be appropriate.
But the range of validity of these models is not
yet agreed.
More recently, the SLFM has been modiﬁed to
include eﬀects of transients [61,62] and to incorpo-
rate a Lagrangian viewpoint [63,64], with associ-
ated treatment of the strong ﬂuctuations that can
occur in scalar dissipation, and to accommodate
the eﬀects of the advection terms parallel to the
surfaces of constant mixture fraction. These
changes can be helpful, particularly for extinction
and re-ignition processes, and for kinetically slow
species such as nitric oxide, carbon monoxide or
soot. Large eddy simulation incorporating such a
viewpoint has been successful [26]. New interpreta-
tions of the ﬂamelet paradigm continue to appear.
For example, Vervisch et al. [65] combines a ﬂam-
elet-generated chemistry tabulation with a simpli-
ﬁed Conditional Moment Closure model (see
Section 2.5) in which some conditional moments
are related to the ﬂame-tabulated chemistry.
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
25


--- Page 6 ---

Another factor that aﬀects the ﬂamelet para-
digm is the competition between the broadening
of ﬂamelets and their extinction, both of which
are governed by the local Damko¨hler number
and the level of mixture fraction ﬂuctuations
[11]. For the particular conditions of very high
turbulence levels reported by Ratner et al. [66],
the CH PLIF images indicate that the ﬂamelets
‘‘extinguish before they broaden.’’ When the
velocity ﬂuctuations exceeded 10 m/s, ‘‘shredded’’
ﬂamelets were observed, but each CH reaction
layer remained about as thin as a layer in a lami-
nar ﬂame (0.5–1 mm). This ﬁnding implies that,
for these speciﬁc conditions, the Damko¨hler num-
ber required to extinguish the ﬂamelet exceeds
that required to enter a distributed reaction re-
gime. However, most experiments to date have
been conducted using room temperature reactants
and relatively low gas velocities, which favor ﬂam-
elet formation. Additional work is needed at ele-
vated inlet temperatures and large mixing rates
to measure the boundaries between ﬂamelet and
non-ﬂamelet behavior.
Despite these developments the applicability of
ﬂamelet models to speciﬁc circumstances remains
controversial. The TNF Workshop has adopted
bluﬀ-body experiments to test Lagrangian ﬂam-
elet modelling, as it is not clear how widely appli-
cable this will be, for example, in a recirculation
zone, unless an LES approach is used.
2.3. The PDF approach
The mixing-controlled and stationary laminar
ﬂamelet models lead to the prediction that the
instantaneous composition at a point in a turbu-
lent ﬂame is uniquely determined by just one or
two variables, mixture fraction (for fast-chemis-
try), and mixture fraction and scalar dissipation
(for the steady ﬂamelet model). In the 1980s, sin-
gle-shot Rayleigh/Raman data capable of testing
these predictions became available and were pre-
sented in the form of scatter plots [53]. For hydro-
carbon ﬂames, the degree of scatter observed, and
especially the occurrence of compositions outside
those realised in steady laminar ﬂames, indicated
the need for a more general modelling approach
[67]. This was provided by PDF methods, whose
development for turbulent reactive ﬂows started
in the mid-1970s [68–70].
The primary advantages of the PDF approach
are that independent turbulent ﬂuctuations of all
species can be represented, and that the direct ef-
fects of reaction appear in closed form in the PDF
equations [4,12,71–73]. While no modelling is re-
quired of the reaction term in the PDF equations,
a mixing model is needed to account for mixing by
molecular diﬀusion.
The
development
of
Eulerian
[74]
and
Lagrangian [4] Monte Carlo particle methods en-
abled PDF calculations to be performed of pilot-
ed-jet ﬂames using 4-step reduced mechanisms
[67]. The resulting calculated scatter plots were,
in many respects, in qualitative agreement with
the measurements; but improvements in both cal-
culations and measurements were required to
draw ﬁrmer quantitative conclusions.
The improvements in laser diagnostics led to
more accurate measurements of the Sandia ﬂames
D, E, and F [22]; and the in situ adaptive tabula-
tion (ISAT) algorithm [75,76] facilitated the use of
more detailed chemistry [77]. At the 28th Sympo-
sium, quantitatively accurate calculations of these
ﬂames were reported [24,25] based on PDF com-
putations involving around 20 species. The PDF
calculations of Xu and Pope [23] accurately repre-
sent the level of local extinction in these ﬂames as
a function of jet velocity and axial distance—a
feat as yet unparalleled by other approaches. Pre-
dictions in methanol ﬂames [78] are also good,
even though the reaction zone is thinner.
In spite of the success of these PDF calcula-
tions, there remain signiﬁcant questions about
the physical realism of the mixing models. The
primary models used are: IEM [79] or, equiva-
lently, LMSE [68]; the modiﬁed Curl model
(MC) [80,81]; and the EMST model [82]. These
are found to yield substantially diﬀerent distribu-
tions (as revealed by scatter plots) [83], and also to
predict
extinction
at
substantially
diﬀerent
Damko¨hler numbers [83,84].
The three major issues with mixing models in
PDF methods are as follows. First, there is no ex-
plicit coupling between reaction and mixing;
although (especially in the EMST model) such
coupling is implicit through the shape of the
PDF. Second, the IEM and MC models are
non-local in composition space: even at high
Damko¨hler number, according to the models, rich
and lean mixtures can mix to form unreacted stoi-
chiometric mixtures [85]. The EMST model was
developed to overcome this shortcoming. Third,
none of the models includes a physically realistic
representation of the ﬂuctuations in scalar dissipa-
tion. Since our notions of local extinction are
based on extreme values of the scalar dissipa-
tion—many times the mean value—it remains a
puzzle that PDF models (which do not explicitly
represent the distribution of scalar dissipation)
are capable of calculating local extinction and
re-ignition in piloted jet ﬂames. An important
goal of research in this area is to delineate the re-
gimes of applicability of the diﬀerent models, and
of course to develop improved models. Some pro-
gress in this direction is discussed below in Section
2.5.
PDF methods have also been applied to the
more challenging bluﬀ-body stabilised jet ﬂames
[86] (including calculations with detailed chemis-
try [87,88]) and to the swirling bluﬀ-body ﬂames
[89]. For these complex recirculating ﬂows, the
primary issue is the extent to which the turbulence
26
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 7 ---

modelling in PDF methods is adequate, and when
it is necessary to account explicitly for the large-
scale turbulent motions (e.g., via unsteady RANS
or LES).
While still an active and fruitful area of re-
search, PDF methods have reached the level of
maturity that they are available in commercial
CFD
codes
for
use
both
in
research
(e.g.,
[90,91]) and in industrial applications. There are
still signiﬁcant areas requiring careful research,
however.
2.4. Conditional moment closure
Conditional moment closure (CMC) [92–94] is
a modelling viewpoint that has been inspired by
the laser-diagnostic measurements in jet diﬀusion
ﬂames [20] and by experiments in reactive mixing
layers [95]. It was apparent that ﬂamelet methods
would not be applicable in the latter case as the
reaction between nitric oxide and ozone was slow
and was occurring throughout the mixed ﬂuid.
The basic concept is that the ﬂuctuations in tem-
perature and composition that occur in turbulent
combustion can be closely cross-linked to the ﬂuc-
tuations in one or two key variables. In non-pre-
mixed combustion, mixture fraction is the key
variable of interest. In many such ﬂows, the tem-
perature and species mass fractions that exist are
found to have values that vary little from others
that have the same value of the mixture fraction.
The conditional average is deﬁned as the average
of all those members of the subset having the same
value of the mixture fraction. The known conser-
vation equations for species and enthalpy can be
reformulated in terms of such conditional aver-
ages. They involve important terms for the condi-
tional average reaction rates.
In CMC, it is necessary to close these condi-
tional average rates of reaction [94]. Fluctuations
about the conditional averages are often small,
and the conditional average reaction rates are well
approximated using the conditional average tem-
perature and species mass fractions. So-called
ﬁrst-order CMC achieves conditional reaction
rate closure by neglecting the contributions of
conditional variances and co-variances. Many
non-premixed problems, including ﬂows with
recirculation [96,97] and auto-ignition of sprays
[98], have been successfully modelled using ﬁrst-
order CMC.
In ﬂames with signiﬁcant local extinction and
re-ignition, it has been found [99] that such
ﬁrst-order closure is not suﬃciently accurate. Sec-
ond-order closure [94] incorporates the eﬀects of
conditional variances and co-variances in the
conditional reaction rates. Equations for these
conditional variances and co-variances can be for-
mulated from the conservation equations. To keep
the number of such equations small, a reduced
mechanism can be used for second-order correc-
tions to the reaction rates as done for hydrogen
by Kronenburg et al. [100] for improving predic-
tion of the temperature sensitive species NO. For
hydrocarbons, this approach has not, so far, been
successful. Kim and Huh have, instead, applied
second-order corrections to the forward rates of
only a few key reactions and achieved excellent re-
sults for piloted-jet diﬀusion ﬂames [27,101].
An alternative to second-order closure is to use
double conditioning. Kronenburg [102,103] uses
averaging conditional on both mixture fraction
and sensible enthalpy. Closure for conditional
reaction rates is found to be in excellent agree-
ment with DNS in homogeneous turbulence with
multi-step chemistry under conditions having
strong local extinction and re-ignition. Full clo-
sure will require models for other unclosed terms
such as the double conditioned dissipation terms.
Provided these challenges can be surmounted,
double-conditioning
CMC
has
considerable
promise for application to ﬂames and practical
combustors.
Recently, it has been found that, to satisfy
boundary conditions correctly, it is necessary to
use the fully conservative form of the CMC equa-
tion [104]. In this form [94], it is the conditional
average multiplied by the probability density that
appears as the dependent variable for which the
solution is being sought. Earlier work used the ﬁ-
nite-diﬀerence form of the CMC equation that is
closely similar to that of the unsteady laminar
ﬂamelet equation [64]. In the ﬁnite-diﬀerence
form, problems arise in parts of the ﬂow where
the probability density of the mixture fraction is
essentially zero for part of its range. The diﬃculty
with boundary conditions is most obvious in such
ﬂows as the auto-ignition of a jet in a hot co-ﬂow.
Although partially blocked by the turbulent diﬀu-
sion term including the PDF, computations in re-
gions with unmixed hot co-ﬂow may result in
signiﬁcant advection of heated mixture containing
radicals into regions where there should be little
progress in the reaction. There is then the problem
of deciding where to establish the upstream region
of the CMC computation. These problems are
readily resolved when using the fully conservative
form of the CMC equation [104].
A big advantage with CMC is that it uses con-
ventional turbulence models to predict the ﬂow
and mixing ﬁelds. For the CMC calculation to
be fully consistent with this CFD it is important
for the models for conditional velocity and condi-
tional scalar dissipation to be properly modelled.
In earlier work, a linear model has been used for
the conditional velocity [94], but this is inconsis-
tent with the gradient model commonly used for
closure of the turbulent ﬂux of the variance of
the mixture fraction. A gradient model for the
conditional velocity is fully consistent [105] with
conventional CFD modelling. It also leads to im-
proved modelling of the conditional scalar dissi-
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
27


--- Page 8 ---

pation [105] by integration of the PDF transport
equation using a presumed form of the PDF of
the mixture fraction [106].
In second-order closure and in double condi-
tioning, it is necessary to model the scalar dissipa-
tion ﬂuctuations. The root mean square (rms) of
the scalar dissipation divided by the unconditional
mean is known to increase with the Reynolds
number. Measurement of scalar dissipation re-
quires the spatial resolution to be ﬁner than the
Kolmogoroﬀscale [107]. Measurements being
made in ﬂames [108,109] have yet to achieve such
ﬁne resolution and may be under-estimating the
mean and rms of the scalar dissipation. Double-
conditioning closure [102,103] also requires mod-
els for the double-conditioned scalar dissipation
of mixture fraction, sensible enthalpy, and their
cross dissipation [102]. The laser measurements
will be of great assistance in developing models
for these.
CMC is showing some success in the predic-
tion of lifted diﬀusion ﬂames [110,111], the clas-
sical
model
problem
for
partially
premixed
combustion. A gradient model is being used for
the conditional turbulent scalar ﬂux, and this
allows stabilisation to occur. Modelling so far
uses ﬁrst-order closure and is not fully coupled
to the ﬂow and mixing ﬁeld, so the results so
far are very preliminary but are, nevertheless,
encouraging.
In summary, CMC has a very sound basis and
is capable of continued reﬁnement. It has already
achieved considerable success for a wide range of
problems and is providing stimulus for advanced
measurements in ﬂames.
2.5. Multiple mapping conditioning
While in the early stages of its development,
the approach of multiple mapping conditioning
(MMC) [112] holds the promise of unifying the
CMC and PDF approaches, and of providing a
more soundly based mixing model, stemming
from a generalisation of the mapping closure
[113,114]. In the ﬁrst-order CMC closure, all spe-
cies are assumed to take their mean values, condi-
tioned on mixture fraction. In MMC, in place of
mixture fractions, one considers a set of m ‘‘refer-
ence variables,’’ with m being speciﬁed between 1
and the number of species. The reference variables
may be of diﬀerent types, roughly related to mix-
ture fraction, the velocity, the scalar dissipation,
or other quantities. The distribution of composi-
tions is then represented by two quantities: the
joint PDF of the reference variables (which, by
construction, is a known joint normal); and the
mean of the species conditioned on the reference
variables, for which a consistent modelled trans-
port equation is obtained.
The initial applications of MMC are very
encouraging. An analytic solution is obtained
[112] for the three-stream mixing problem in iso-
tropic turbulence that is in excellent agreement
with DNS data [115]; whereas the existing models
(IEM, MC, and EMST) yield a qualitatively
incorrect behaviour for this test problem. The ef-
fects of ﬂuctuations in the scalar dissipation can
be incorporated [116], and the resulting model is
consistent with CMC and SLFM in the appropri-
ate limits.
Related to the concepts in MMC is the fol-
lowing fundamental question [103]: in the mul-
ti-dimensional composition space, what is the
shape and dimensionality of the region accessed
in turbulent combustion? Is it one- or two-di-
mensional as implied by CMC and SLFM? Or
does it have the full dimension of the space as
allowed by PDF methods? Theoretical argu-
ments [117] suggest that the dimensionality is in-
deed large, but that compositions lie close to a
low-dimensional
manifold,
as
assumed
in
MMC.
Very
accurate
simultaneous
measure-
ments of all species are necessary to determine
the dimensionality and geometry of the accessed
region,
and hence DNS
is better
suited
to
addressing these questions than is experimental
measurement.
Further development and application of the
MMC approach to simple ﬂows is needed to ex-
plore its potential and to gain experience of its
performance. A key issue is the development of
an accurate and eﬃcient particle method (or other
numerical method) so that MMC can be applied
in the computation of turbulent ﬂames.
2.6. Implications for LES
In the modelling approaches discussed above,
the primary focus is on the coupling between
reaction and molecular mixing, and the associ-
ated closure problem faced by statistical ap-
proaches. Until recently, these approaches to
turbulent combustion have been applied in con-
junction with conventional turbulence models
(i.e., at the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes
[RANS] level). Over the last decade, we have
seen the beginning of the application of large-
eddy simulation (LES) to turbulent combustion.
Does LES represent a new paradigm? Our an-
swer is: yes and no.
With respect to the treatment of the turbulent
velocity ﬁeld, LES emerged in the 1960s as a
new paradigm [118]. In place of a purely statistical
approach in terms of turbulent viscosity or Rey-
nolds stresses, in LES the large-scale unsteady
motions are explicitly represented. This seems to
be particularly beneﬁcial for the bluﬀ-body ﬂame
and swirling ﬂames in which such large-scale un-
steady motions are evident. Furthermore, the
inherently unsteady framework of LES makes it
more suitable for the study of combustion dynam-
ics and acoustics [119,120].
28
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 9 ---

With respect to the coupling between reaction
and molecular mixing, LES is not a new para-
digm. This is because these two coupled processes
occur, predominantly, at the smallest, unresolved
scales. Hence, to a large extent, LES faces the
same
closure
problem
as
RANS-based
ap-
proaches, and indeed similar models have been
used, e.g., ﬂamelet models [121,122]. The demands
on the models are often somewhat reduced, as the
amplitudes of the sub-grid ﬂuctuations are less
than those of the Reynolds-averaged ﬂuctuations.
Also, the resolved ﬁelds provide additional infor-
mation that can be incorporated in the modelling
[26]. Because of the substantial computational
requirements of LES, there has been a tendency
to use quite simple turbulent-combustion sub-
models; but we are beginning to see the combina-
tion of LES with more comprehensive submodels,
e.g., CMC [123], PDF [124], and linear eddy mod-
elling (LEM) [125,126].
While impressive LES calculations have been
performed of practical combustors [127–130] and
results validated against ﬂow-ﬁeld and tempera-
ture data, quantitative testing of the sub-grid
models for the chemistry against detailed Ray-
leigh/Raman data is at an early stage. Hopefully,
within this decade a clearer picture will emerge of
the relative merits and ranges of applicability of
RANS and LES methodologies. Crucial questions
are the abilities of the models to predict local
extinction and re-ignition, and the need and abil-
ity to represent the distribution of mixing rates
(e.g., ﬂuctuations in the scalar dissipation rate).
3. Premixed turbulent combustion
The major paradigms considered here are that
of Damko¨hler [131] and what are, essentially,
extensions of the Damko¨hler paradigm. Damko¨h-
lers paradigm is here considered to embody the
hypothesis that the turbulent ﬂame speed and
ﬂame structure can be related to correlations
and classiﬁcations dependent on a small number
of parameters. This is detailed in Section 3.1 to-
gether with experimental and DNS evidence for
the validity of such a hypothesis under wide
ranges of eﬀects of ﬂow geometry, Lewis number,
and other factors on turbulent ﬂame speed and
ﬂame-front structure. It seems that such simple
correlation and classiﬁcation may not be possible.
As with non-premixed turbulent combustion, the
way ahead seems to involve modelling of unclosed
terms in suitable forms of the known conservation
equations. In Sections 3.2, 3.3, and 3.5, we con-
sider such paradigms that involve thin ﬂame-front
concepts, including Bray–Moss–Libby modelling,
coherent ﬂame and ﬂame surface density model-
ling, and the level set approach. These paradigms
consider the chemistry to be fast and often to be
the same as that in stretched laminar ﬂames.
Means for directly calculating the eﬀects of turbu-
lence on the chemistry are not yet evident. This is
becoming an important shortcoming as signiﬁcant
eﬀects can be expected on prompt NO formation
and CO burnout in lean premixed combustors
such as those used in modern stationary gas tur-
bines. Addressing such questions seems to be
more tractable when turbulent mixing rates at
small scales become high compared with chemical
rates and the reaction zone becomes thickened—
Lewis number eﬀects should then be less signiﬁ-
cant. Such thickened ﬂame-front paradigms are
considered in Section 3.5. Conditional moment
closure appears to be a feasible approach at this
limit. Such issues, and new ideas on the design
of watershed experiments for turbulent premixed
combustion, together with new ideas on using
marker ﬁelds to link the CMC to the mixing
are outlined in this section. Finally, some implica-
tions for LES are considered in Section 3.6.
3.1. Damko¨hlers paradigm
The basic paradigm for turbulent premixed
combustion is that of Damko¨hler [131]. It has its
origins in the paradigm for laminar premixed
ﬂames. In laminar premixed ﬂows, the ﬂame front
is thin and propagates normal to itself at a speed
relative to that of the unburned mixture that is
primarily dependent on the state of the unburned
mixture (composition, temperature, and pressure).
In turbulent ﬂow, the large scales of the turbu-
lence wrinkle the ﬂame front, so increasing its
eﬀective area, and hence the rate of reactant con-
sumption and propagation of the mean front. If
the smallest scales of the turbulence are larger
than the ﬂame-front thickness, it is hypothesised
that the instantaneous front will propagate locally
at the laminar burning velocity. The turbulent
ﬂame will then propagate at a speed equal to the
laminar burning velocity multiplied by the ratio
of the wrinkled instantaneous front area to the
projected area. Small-scale turbulence, smaller
than the laminar ﬂame-front thickness, is hypoth-
esised to increase the propagation speed of the
instantaneous ﬂame–front by a factor equal to
the ratio of the eﬀective turbulent diﬀusivity of
the small scales to the molecular diﬀusivity raised
to the one-half power. Here, the paradigm is con-
sidered to embody the hypothesis that the turbu-
lent ﬂame speed and ﬂame structure can be
related to correlations and classiﬁcations depen-
dent on a small number of parameters.
These concepts have been applied, mainly, to
ﬂow situations, such as ﬂames propagating in
spark-ignition (SI) engines and ﬂames stabilised
on Bunsen-type burners, where the turbulence
present in the unburned mixture is signiﬁcant.
(This is in contrast to jet diﬀusion ﬂames in non-
premixed combustion where the turbulence is gen-
erated by shear in the ﬂow. We will later return to
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
29


--- Page 10 ---

premixed turbulent ﬂames where the turbulence is
dominated by generation from gradients.) Of ma-
jor interest is the prediction of turbulent ﬂame
speed. This determines ﬂame travel times in
spark-ignition (SI) engines and the length of
ﬂames on Bunsen-type burners. The Damko¨hler
paradigm suggested that, in problems of practical
interest, the degree of ﬂame wrinkling would be
the dominant eﬀect and that this should be largely
a kinematic eﬀect dependent on the ratio of a tur-
bulent velocity scale to the laminar burning veloc-
ity. The paradigm became focused on an ideal
turbulent ﬂame that was one-dimensional in the
mean and was statistically stationary in a refer-
ence frame moving with the turbulent ﬂame
brush. As in laminar ﬂows, it was assumed that
angled ﬂames could be treated by consideration
of propagation in the direction normal to the
mean front.
Eﬀorts have been made over 60 years (and still
continue) to correlate experimental data on turbu-
lent ﬂame speed in terms of this paradigm and
extensions of it. Extensions include dependence
on other parameters such as the turbulence length
scale and Reynolds number, the laminar ﬂame
thickness and volumetric expansion ratio, and
the eﬀects of non-unity Lewis number. Many
authors have claimed success. Their correlations
are limited, however, to a very limited number
of ﬂow conﬁgurations and their correlation coeﬃ-
cients are, even then, unsatisfactorily low. Results
seem to be particularly sensitive to the ﬂow
conﬁguration.
Some advances have evolved from a series of
workshops organised by R.K. Cheng and F.C.
Gouldin in association with the International
Combustion
Symposia.
The
workshops
have
identiﬁed several approaches to overcome the
diﬃculties that are speciﬁc to turbulent premixed
ﬂames, which include the determination of ‘‘ca-
nonical’’ ﬂame geometries to use for model vali-
dation, and an unambiguous deﬁnition of the
turbulent burning velocity. The workshop has
led to agreement that premixed turbulent ﬂames
should be separated into the ‘‘Oblique’’ category
(i.e., rod stabilised V-ﬂames), the ‘‘Envelope’’
category (i.e., Bunsen ﬂames that form an enve-
lope about all of the reactants), and the ‘‘Unat-
tached’’ category, which includes low-swirl ﬂat
ﬂames and counter-ﬂow ﬂames that do not at-
tach to burner hardware. Each category is asso-
ciated with diﬀerent boundary conditions and
has a diﬀerent ﬂame wrinkling process. For
example, extensive merging of ﬂamelets occurs
near the tip of a Bunsen ﬂame, but this degree
of merging does not occur in a counter-ﬂow
geometry. Therefore, it is recommended that
any scaling relation that is determined (from
computations or experiments) for one category
should be identiﬁed only with that category and
not applied to all categories.
It is noted that none of these ﬂow conﬁgura-
tions meet the ideal paradigm of one-dimensional-
ity in the mean and some are also not statistically
stationary in a framework moving with the ﬂame
brush. Insight into the limitations on application
of the ideal paradigm in turbulent ﬂows can be
gained from considering its mother paradigm—
that for premixed laminar ﬂames. Ideal behaviour
there is not exhibited where a characteristic length
scale of the ﬂow—ﬂame-ball diameter or distance
from a wall—is of the same order of magnitude as
the laminar ﬂame thickness or strain rate in the
ﬂow is comparable with the inverse of the convec-
tive time scale of passage through the laminar
ﬂame. Furthermore, initially planar ﬂames will of-
ten become highly distorted due to thermo-diﬀu-
sive instabilities. Accordingly, we should expect
that turbulent ﬂame speeds should strongly de-
pend on similar considerations. Flames stabilised
at ﬁxed locations (such as Bunsen-burner types,
V-ﬂames, etc.) should be sensitive to convective
time scales comparable to those for passage
through a normal turbulent ﬂame brush. Low
swirl ﬂames, counter-ﬂow ﬂames, and stagnation
ﬂames have mean strain rates that are often com-
parable with the mean convective time through
the turbulent ﬂame brush. There has been much
evidence that the external pressure gradients that
occur in such ﬂows aﬀect the turbulent burning
velocity to a signiﬁcant extent. This is probably
because the conditional momentum balance for
burned and unburned gases is crucial in determin-
ing the conditional velocities, which are closely re-
lated with the turbulent burning velocity.
To properly deﬁne the turbulent burning veloc-
ity, it has been proposed [132] that one should use
the consumption speed rather than the displace-
ment speed that has been reported in the past.
Consumption speeds are determined by deﬁning
a control volume (which can be a local control
volume [132] or a global control volume [133])
and computing or measuring the mass ﬂowrate
of reactant that crosses all boundaries, including
the mass ﬂowrate associated with density–velocity
correlations. Displacement speed is deﬁned as the
velocity of the wave (which is the velocity of an
iso-surface of the mean reactedness) with respect
to the gas velocity ahead of the wave, in the direc-
tion normal to the wave. It is diﬃcult to exactly
deﬁne where the gas velocity ahead of the wave
should be determined, and this leads to large
uncertainties. Thus, the use of a displacement
speed is not recommended.
If turbulent ﬂame speeds are not easily corre-
lated by such a simple paradigm as that of
Damko¨hler, perhaps the structure of the turbulent
ﬂame could be so captured. So-called Borghi dia-
grams have proliferated [134,64] in which the
ﬂame-front structure is mapped onto a two-di-
mensional plane with axes of relative velocity
scales versus relative length scales, turbulent to
30
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 11 ---

laminar (or of Damko¨hler number versus Rey-
nolds number). Such diagrams could, perhaps,
also be applicable in ﬂows with gradient-gener-
ated turbulent mixing where the concept of a tur-
bulent ﬂame speed is less meaningful. Regions
identiﬁed on these diagrams are given names such
as ‘‘wrinkled laminar ﬂamelets,’’ ‘‘corrugated
ﬂamelets,’’ ‘‘distributed reaction zone,’’ ‘‘thin
reaction zone,’’ ‘‘quenched reaction zone,’’ etc.
This is often done on the basis of scaling
arguments, and on experimental observations
[135–137] and DNS [138] for two-dimensional
laminar ﬂame–vortex interactions. Two-dimen-
sional turbulence lacks the vortex stretching phe-
nomena present in three-dimensional turbulence.
Vortex stretching is likely to be important as it
is a means by which the turbulence can be kept
at high intensity in the presence of large dilatation
and an order of magnitude increase in kinematic
viscosity. DNS for three-dimensional turbulence
with realistic chemistry and turbulence Reynolds
numbers
is
still
beyond
present
capabilities
although some results for special geometries are
becoming available [139]. Experimental measure-
ments in fully turbulent ﬂames have been limited
by spatial resolution requirements that are more
severe than in non-premixed turbulent ﬂames.
Credible experimental results that have been ob-
tained so far do not present clear conﬁrmation
that ﬂame structure can be correlated on the basis
of a few parameters such as envisaged by Borghi
diagrams.
Several experimental investigations using pla-
nar Rayleigh scattering have been made with the
object of determining the limit of validity of the
‘‘wrinkled laminar ﬂamelet’’ regime. Recent work
by Shepherd, et al. [140] using the low-swirl stabi-
lised burner ﬁnds no eﬀect of high turbulence
intensity on the thickness of the preheat zone of
the instantaneous ﬂame front. This contradicts
the ﬁndings of OYoung and Bilger [141] made
with a two-sheet technique in a very similar ﬂame,
and Chen and Bilger in Bunsen-type ﬂames
[142,143] and stagnation-plate stabilised ﬂames
[144] where progress variable gradients are found
to be decreased by high turbulence levels. Soika
et al. [145] ﬁnd ﬂame-front thinning at high turbu-
lence levels for very lean ﬂames. All of these re-
sults
discussed
so
far
are
for
hydrocarbon
ﬂames,
mainly
methane.
For
lean
hydrogen
ﬂames, Chen and Bilger [146] ﬁnd that ﬂame
fronts remain thin up to high turbulence levels,
but local extinction occurs at the trailing cusps.
Lewis number eﬀects are clearly important. Planar
laser-induced ﬂuorescence of OH [142,143] and
CH [133,147] radicals shows little eﬀect of turbu-
lence intensity on gradients of these species in
measurements made to date. This has been taken
as evidence for the ‘‘thin reaction zones’’ regime of
the ﬂame-front structure proposed by Peters [64].
Peters proposal seems to be founded on an esti-
mate of the fuel-consumption layer thickness in
a
premixed
laminar
ﬂame
being
around
0.018 mm [64] for a stoichiometric methane ﬂame
at 1 atm and 300 K. This estimate is an order of
magnitude smaller than the thickness of the ﬂame
derived from its maximum temperature gradient.
It is also, however, an order of magnitude smaller
than the fuel reaction layer thickness obtained in
full ﬂame calculations, and so the Peters structure
is clearly questionable. Further investigation of
the eﬀect of high turbulence on ﬂame structure is
needed to clarify these issues.
There also appears to be close coupling be-
tween the overall ﬂow ﬁeld and the detailed struc-
ture of the instantaneous ﬂame front. This is
exempliﬁed
by
the
ﬁndings
of
Swaminathan
et al. [148]. They show, analytically, that the scalar
turbulent ﬂux (a macro-scale quantity) in statisti-
cally one-dimensional ﬂames is inherently linked
to
the
structure
of
the
instantaneous
ﬂame
front—very much important at the micro-scale le-
vel. This has been conﬁrmed by reference to DNS
[148] that are one–dimensional in the mean. Flow
divergence present in Bunsen and stagnation plate
ﬂows introduces other terms in the analysis, and
these ﬂames do not show such behaviour [149].
Whatever the explanation for these eﬀects, it is
apparent that the overall ﬂow ﬁeld can have
marked eﬀects on the instantaneous ﬂame-front
structure.
It appears that the Damko¨hler paradigm may
not lead to simple correlations for turbulent ﬂame
speeds or for classiﬁcation of the structure of the
instantaneous ﬂame front. In the much more trac-
table case of turbulent non-premixed combustion,
we have seen that eﬀorts to correlate the coupled
turbulence–chemistry interaction eﬀects on minor
species, such as nitric oxide, using appropriate
non-dimensional parameters have not been suc-
cessful. Too many phenomena are involved. In
that case, a strategy that has had some success
has been to adopt paradigms that are not based
on ﬂow-geometric and dimensional reasoning
but rather on concepts that involve modelling-clo-
sures for terms that appear in suitable forms
(ﬂamelet, PDF, and CMC) of the known conser-
vation equations. Such paradigms have also been
explored in turbulent premixed combustion, par-
ticularly for ﬂows in which the chemistry is
thought to be relatively fast. These approaches
have embodied closure assumptions that assume
that the instantaneous ﬂame front is thin, and its
ﬁne-scale structure is like that in a (stretched) lam-
inar ﬂame. Thickened ﬂame-front paradigms, on
the other hand, are for ﬂows in which mixing rates
associated with the small scales of the turbulence
are high compared with chemical reaction rates.
They have received little attention, probably be-
cause they have been thought to be of little prac-
tical importance. They may, however, be more
tractable theoretically.
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
31


--- Page 12 ---

Laminar ﬂamelet and other thin ﬂame-front
models of turbulent premixed combustion are an
extension of the Damko¨hler paradigm for the
wrinkled laminar ﬂame mode. The instantaneous
ﬂame front is assumed to be thin and is often as-
sumed to behave as a stretched laminar ﬂame.
Various means are used to incorporate this con-
cept into appropriate closures of the known con-
servation equations. In the Bray–Moss–Libby
(BML) (Section 3.2) approach, the focus is on
making closure of the unconditional moment
equations for the progress variable. In coherent
ﬂame models and ﬂame surface density models
(Section 3.3), equations are formulated for the
area of ﬂame front per unit volume. In the level
set approach (Section 3.4), moment equations
are formulated for a conserved scalar, G, that is
zero at the ﬂame surface and propagates at this
surface at the laminar ﬂame speed modiﬁed for
stretch eﬀects.
3.2. BML modelling
Bray–Moss–Libby (BML) models [150–155]
invoke simplifying assumptions enabling the ther-
mochemical state of the mixture to be expressed in
terms of a single quantity, the progress variable
c(x,t). This is deﬁned either as a normalised tem-
perature or as a normalised product concentra-
tion. Mean quantities can then be written in
terms of a PDF P(c;x), which is expressed in three
parts, representing pockets of unburned reactants
and fully burned products, with probabilities a(x)
and b(x), respectively, and a partially burned mix-
ture with probability c(x). In the fast-chemistry or
thin-ﬂame combustion regime, in which a turbu-
lent ﬂame brush consists of unburned and fully
burned gases separated by thin burning zones, it
is found that c = O(1/Da)  1, where Da is a
Damko¨hler number representing a ratio of turbu-
lence and chemical times. The novel conceptual
viewpoint following from this formulation sees
all mean quantities as being the sum of three con-
tributions. These are the conditional means in reac-
tants
and
products,
weighted
by
their
probabilities, a and b, respectively, together with
a burning zone contribution with weight c. To
the leading order in an expansion in powers of c
[151], the mean values of quantities such as veloc-
ity or progress variable are simply weighted aver-
ages of their conditional means in reactants and
products, and are independent of c. On the other
hand, reaction rates and reactant concentration
gradients are zero everywhere, except in the thin-
ﬂame reaction zones, so their means are propor-
tional to c.
This perspective has proved valuable in devel-
oping new closures for the second-order Favre-
mean turbulence equations that form the basis
of BML models. These closures identify and de-
scribe consequences of heat release in the turbu-
lent ﬂow. In the fast-chemistry limit, with c  1,
turbulent transport is represented in terms of con-
ditional means and variances in reactants and
products, allowing processes of ﬂame-generated
turbulence
[153]
and
counter-gradient
scalar
transport [152] to be described. Mean dissipation
terms are partitioned into their three conditional
contributions, proportional to a, b, and c, respec-
tively [156]. Thus, for example, the viscous dissi-
pation can be described in terms of conditional
dissipations in reactants and products together
with a contribution from the thin reaction zones
(dilatation dissipation), which is proportional to
the mean reaction rate. The mean scalar dissipa-
tion for ﬂuctuations in progress variable, which
is proportional to the mean square gradient of
c(x,t), has no contributions from reactants and
products, and so is proportional to c. Both analy-
sis [157] and physical arguments [158] then show
that the mean reaction rate in the fast-chemistry
limit is proportional to the mean scalar dissipa-
tion, a ﬁnding analogous to Bilgers result [46]
for
non-premixed
combustion.
As
such,
the
BML PDF decomposition does not provide an
expression for the mean reaction rate nor does it
involve any necessary assumption that thin-ﬂame
reaction zones consist of laminar ﬂamelets. Both
algebraic models [155] and transported ﬂame sur-
face density models [159] have been used.
The BML PDF decomposition paradigm has
been experimentally explored and in DNS. Early
experiments by Moss [160] in 1980 show good
agreement with predictions of ﬂame-generated
turbulence [153] and counter-gradient transport
[152]. DNS [161] conﬁrms the occurrence of
counter-gradient
transport
at
low
turbulence
intensities and large values of heat release, and
shows that a transition to gradient transport takes
place at higher turbulence intensities. This transi-
tion
has
also
been
experimentally
observed
[162,163]. Experiments in ﬂames stabilised in
counter-ﬂows [164] and ﬂows impinging on plates
[165–167] provide a large database for ﬂames at
relatively low turbulence intensities. These ﬂames
have been successfully simulated in a series of pa-
pers [168–170] in which systematic use is made of
a small parameter characterising the turbulence
intensity. It is interesting to note that the turbu-
lence and scalar ﬂux within the ﬂame are brought
into excellent agreement with the experiments only
after new reacting ﬂow models for the pressure
gradient covariance terms in the transport equa-
tions are introduced [169]. These models [171],
which are well supported by DNS [65,171], are
based on BML PDF decomposition, and the pres-
sure gradient within the ﬂame brush is found to
have an important role. Lindstedt and Vaos
[172] include eﬀects that may be important in
ﬂows featuring combustion oscillations. The ﬁnal
paper in this series [170] tests various previously
published models for the mean heat release rate,
32
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 13 ---

and none are found to provide good agreement
with the available experimental data.
It may be seen that BML models concentrate
attention on the ﬂuid mechanics of premixed tur-
bulent combustion, and considerable progress
has been made in this area. A satisfactory descrip-
tion of the mean rate of heat release, applicable in
a wide range of circumstances, remains elusive.
3.3. Coherent ﬂamelet and ﬂame surface density
models
The coherent ﬂamelet model (CFM) [173,138]
is based on the concept that the mean chemical
reaction rate per unit volume is the product of
two quantities: the reaction rate per unit area of
the ﬂamelets and the average ﬂamelet area per
unit volume. The ﬁrst quantity is assumed to be
proportional to the laminar burning velocity; the
second quantity is the ﬂame surface density. It
has been used to simulate turbulent premixed
spherical ﬂames [175], V-ﬂames [176], Bunsen
ﬂames [177], and ﬂat ﬂames [178,179]. It has also
been combined with the KIVA code to design
complex internal combustion engine geometries
[180]. If conditions favour the existence of ﬂam-
elets, the reaction rate can be expressed in terms
of the ﬂame surface density (FSD); therefore, a
balance equation for the ﬂame surface density is
solved. The source terms in the FSD equation
are based on a model of the average stretch rate,
and the destruction terms are based on a model
of ﬂamelet merging and extinction. The approach
is a physically based one because the exact conser-
vation equation for the FSD can be derived from
ﬁrst principles [174,179,138], and each of the
terms consists of quantities that can be directly
measured or simulated with DNS. Therefore, a
number of fundamental modelling assumptions
can be assessed, and not just the ﬁnal results. It
is interesting to note that there are similarities be-
tween
the
FSD
and
the
PDF
approaches
[174,181], and the mathematical analysis that re-
lates the FSD evolution equation and the PDF
transport equation is described in Vervisch et al.
[181]. The source term in the FSD equation has
been modelled by Cant et al. [179], and by Mene-
veau and Poinsot [138]; one term accounts for the
stretching of the ﬂame front due to the mean ﬂow
velocity gradients, and a second term accounts for
small-scale stretch rates. A third term accounts for
the destruction of ﬂame surface area due to merg-
ing of ﬂamelets and extinction. This term is as-
sumed to be proportional to the square of the
ﬂame surface density.
An appealing aspect of the coherent ﬂamelet
paradigm is the way it rigorously incorporates
information from direct numerical simulations as
well as from experiments into submodels for
stretch rate and extinction. The submodel for
the mean stretch rate is based on the Stretch
Eﬃciency Function, which has been determined
from many previous measurements and simula-
tions of stretch rates. These values were deter-
mined for laminar counterﬂow conditions, for
unsteady
ﬂame–vortex
interactions
[136–138],
and
for
some
fully
turbulent
conditions
[133,182]. The Stretch Eﬃciency submodel is
based on the fundamental concept that the
ﬂame–vortex interaction is the basic building
block of the structure of turbulence–chemistry
interactions. It accounts for the way that each
eddy stretches the ﬂamelet, increases the area of
the reaction zone, and changes the local scalar
gradients.
However, this approach requires that some
improvements be made to properly model diﬀer-
ential diﬀusion. It has been experimentally shown
that the importance of diﬀerential diﬀusion is not
limited to laminar or transitional conditions; for
high-Reynolds
number
turbulent
premixed
ﬂames, it has been shown that the turbulent burn-
ing velocities diﬀer by a factor of 2 when all con-
ditions are held constant, except for the Markstein
number [183]. Also of importance is the unsteady
nature of the stretch rate. It has been shown that
premixed [133] and non-premixed [147] turbulent
ﬂames experience rapid-changing stretch rates
and do not respond to the high-frequency compo-
nents of the stretch. For this reason, they do not
extinguish, even when the average stretch rate
exceeds that required for extinction for the stea-
dy-state case. The Coherent Flamelet approach
attempts to account for the unsteadiness by using
unsteady
ﬂame-vortex
interaction
information
that is integrated over all eddy sizes in the turbu-
lence energy spectrum [138].
The Coherent Flamelet Model also simulates
the loss of ﬂamelet area due to merging and
extinction, which can be signiﬁcant near walls or
the tip of a Bunsen ﬂame. An interesting ﬁnding
is that the ﬂamelet merging submodel successfully
explains the well-known non-linear relation be-
tween the turbulent burning velocity and the tur-
bulence intensity, which has been extensively
studied in the past and has been called the ‘‘bend-
ing’’ phenomenon. For suﬃciently large turbu-
lence intensities, the rate of destruction of ﬂame
surface density is found to exceed the rate of cre-
ation, and this tends to reduce the turbulent burn-
ing velocity [178].
A subgrid model for Large Eddy Simulations
[184,185] has included many of the concepts in
the Coherent Flamelet Model, including the
Stretch Eﬃciency Function. However, it becomes
increasingly diﬃcult to assess the validity of this
approach at the subgrid scale, since measurements
of subgrid surface density are not yet available.
Furthermore, premixed ﬂames normally do not
form subgrid scale wrinkles that are smaller than
approximately ten times the laminar ﬂamelet
thickness [186]. This is because of the large dilata-
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
33


--- Page 14 ---

tion velocities of the products that move away
from the ﬂame front as the product gases expand.
So, it is not expected that the Stretch Eﬃciency
Function that is determined at large scales will
be valid at small scales.
3.4. The level set approach
In the level set approach, which has been de-
scribed in detail by Peters [64], the ﬂame surface
is identiﬁed by deﬁning a function G(x,t) such
that G(x,t) = G0 on the ﬂame, which is usually,
but not necessarily, assumed to have negligible
thickness. As it is, only the surface G(x,t) = G0
that is of interest, the variation of G(x,t) at other
locations is assumed to be able to be chosen for
convenience. The question of how such ﬁeld vari-
ation of G is matched to the surface variation at
G = G0
seems
to
be
unresolved.
Values
of
G > G0 are taken to represent fully burned gas
while G < G0 describes unburned mixture. Kine-
matic considerations lead to a transport equation
for G. When turbulent ﬂow is to be considered,
this equation is averaged, and closures are re-
quired for the resulting transport equations for
the mean and variance of G. This approach is in
many ways similar to the ﬂame surface density
formulation, which provides the basis for the
Coherent Flame Model [138]. The ﬂame surface
density can be shown [187] to be proportional to
the mean of the modulus of the gradient of
G(x,t). Furthermore, in both cases, the reaction
zone is considered to have negligible thickness,
and the chemical closure problem is replaced by
the need to specify the propagation speed of this
reacting surface. If the propagation speed is not
constant, then its covariances with other variables
must also be speciﬁed.
Peters [64] describes how these closures are
developed and interpreted for the level set ap-
proach using a combination of analysis and data
from DNS. He considers two sets of circum-
stances, in the ﬁrst of which the turbulence cannot
penetrate the interior of the laminar ﬂamelet, and
the propagation speed is then that of a stretched
laminar ﬂame, while the second case is one where
turbulence disrupts the preheat zone but the reac-
tion zone remains thin and intact. Recent experi-
mental data [188] illustrate the second of these
cases. Finally, a single set of closed mean and var-
iance equations are proposed [64] for application
in both these regimes. It is argued [64] that, be-
cause the eﬀects of gas expansion through the thin
ﬂame are explicitly considered, complications
associated with countergradient transport are
avoided. The analytical relationship between level
set and BML models is set out in the review by
Bray and Peters [187].
In his book [64], Peters describes applications
of his level set model to the prediction of turbu-
lent burning velocities and to the simulation of
a turbulent Bunsen ﬂame stabilised on a slot
burner and, in both cases, agreement with avail-
able experimental data may be judged as being
satisfactory. If we conﬁne our attention to cir-
cumstances where laminar ﬂamelet models are
applicable, then level set models and ﬂame sur-
face
density
models
(such
as
the
Coherent
Flame Model) make the same basic assump-
tions, and should give similar predictions for
RANS closures. In LES, the broad ﬁeld charac-
teristics of the level set approach may have
advantages, even though there may be funda-
mental problems with the basic assumptions of
the model.
3.5. Thickened ﬂame-front paradigms
Although thin ﬂame-front paradigms may be
the closest to what is of practical importance, they
may not be the most tractable, theoretically. Le-
wis number eﬀects are likely to be very important
in thin ﬂame fronts, but much less so in thickened
ﬂame fronts where turbulence within the front de-
creases these eﬀects. Even when the Lewis num-
bers of reactant and product species are close to
unity, diﬀerential-diﬀusion eﬀects may be impor-
tant due to the crucial role that molecular hydro-
gen has in determining radical levels. The work of
Chen and Bilger [146] in lean premixed hydrogen
ﬂames indicates that chemical time scales can be
greatly aﬀected. Similar eﬀects seem likely to be
present in hydrocarbon ﬂames. In non-premixed
combustion, it seems that diﬀerential diﬀusion ef-
fects are reduced at high Reynolds number [189].
There, the appropriate length scale is clearly that
of the large eddies. In premixed combustion, the
important length scale is probably that of the
instantaneous ﬂame front. Accordingly, theoreti-
cal development in premixed combustion may be
simpliﬁed under conditions where the eﬀects of
small-scale turbulence thicken the instantaneous
ﬂame front, and Lewis number eﬀects on trans-
port within the ﬂame front are reduced. In non-
stoichiometric ﬂames, the laminar ﬂame thickness
can be greatly increased, particularly for rich mix-
tures, and thick ﬂame paradigms may be of direct
importance.
With Damko¨hler number, Da, deﬁned as a
large-scale turbulence time scale divided by a
chemical time scale associated with overall heat
release, it is seen that thickened ﬂame fronts are
favoured by low Da, but also by high Reynolds
number of the turbulence, Re. At high Re, the
reaction zone is thickened by the small-scale tur-
bulence, even though Da is not small. The thick-
ness may still be small compared with the
integral length scales of the turbulence, and the
PDF of the progress variable may still be domi-
nated by spikes at zero and unity, so that BML-
type models are still applicable to the ﬂuid
mechanics.
34
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 15 ---

In non-premixed turbulent combustion, it is
found that there is a fast-chemistry limit under
which rates of chemical reaction are determined
by ﬂuid mechanics alone [46]. The fast-chemistry
limit in premixed turbulent combustion appears,
however, to be dependent on chemical time scales.
In the previous section on thin ﬂame-front para-
digms, candidate closures for the chemical source
term involve chemical time scales. Perhaps, this
arises from the low turbulence Re of the experi-
mental database being addressed.
There appears to have been little experimental
work on premixed combustion under high turbu-
lence Re conditions. Spalding [190] considers
ﬂame spread in a duct for a ﬂame stabilised be-
hind a V-gutter. The data of Wright and Zukoski
[191] show little inﬂuence of approach velocity
and temperature, or of stoichiometry, on the
ﬂame spread rate. Spalding ﬁnds that an eddy
break-up model gives good predictions. This mod-
el does not involve chemical time scales. Reaction
rates are largely governed by the rate of entrain-
ment arising from the turbulence generated by
the strong shear developed in the ﬂow due to heat
release. In non-premixed combustion, the Spal-
ding eddy break-up model for mean reaction rate
is clearly linked to the fast chemistry paradigm
[192]. Brays result [157] linking the mean reaction
rate to the mean scalar dissipation rate is an
important step in this regard. There is yet no evi-
dence, however, that the mean rate of dissipation
of the progress variable will become independent
of chemical time scales at high Re and Da. The
mixing-controlled limit for the mean reaction rate
may apply at high Da, but only when the instan-
taneous reaction zone is thickened by the small-
scale turbulence. It may be that ﬂow geometry
and ﬂow-induced mean pressure gradients are also
important.
Pope and Anand [193] use Monte-Carlo simu-
lation of the PDF transport equation to investi-
gate premixed ﬂames at both the ﬂamelet and
distributed reaction zone limits. They use one-
step kinetics with unity Lewis numbers so that
reaction rates are an immutable function of the
progress variable. At the distributed reaction lim-
it, the mixing model is expressed in terms of tur-
bulence scales, alone. They present results for the
width of the turbulent ﬂame brush and for the
variance of the progress variable ﬂuctuations as
a function of the Damko¨hler number. Presum-
ably, the distributed reaction model could be used
to address questions arising for multi-step kinetics
including prompt NO formation in lean ﬂames
and post-ﬂame reactions in systems with rich mix-
tures. Recent work by Vicente et al. [194] makes
predictions for CO and NO in a turbulent pre-
mixed ﬂame behind a bluﬀ-body stabiliser using
such methods. Interestingly, they incorporate a
distribution of mixing time scales into their
mixing model.
The experiments of Magre et al. [195] address
premixed combustion under conditions that are
not those of fast chemistry. Their Coherent
Anti-Stokes Raman (CARS) measurements in a
planar mixing layer between hot products and
cold premixture show high levels of carbon mon-
oxide. These appear to be much higher than can
be explained by ﬂamelet models. Modelling of
these data has been addressed by few investigators
and remains a challenge to theoreticians and
modellers.
Conditional moment closure has been formu-
lated for turbulent premixed combustion [196,94]
but little further development has occurred. Mar-
tin et al. [197] have made a start with application
to an idealised lean premixed gas turbine combus-
tor. This general lack of development for pre-
mixed is largely because of eﬀorts being directed
to the more tractable application in non-premixed
combustion. CMC can predict only the eﬀects of
turbulence on species relative to the progress var-
iable. Closure for the progress variable statistics is
still required. This could be achieved by coupling
CMC with moment closure methods such as PDF
methods. At low Damko¨hler numbers, closure
may also be possible using the new concept of a
marker ﬁeld [199].
Marker ﬁelds, denoted as S, can be generated
by two diﬀerent methods [199]. In modelling and
simulation, the marker S obeys the usual trans-
port and diﬀusion equation with a simple source
term. In experiments, an inert species such as NO
is seeded into the ﬂow in a time-varying manner.
Unlike Peters G ﬁeld [64], the S ﬁeld is not
locked (by assumption) to the progress variable,
C, ﬁeld at the centre of the ﬂame reaction zone.
How the C ﬁeld maps onto the S ﬁeld is a matter
of considerable interest. The characteristics of
the marker ﬁeld are expected to be close to
Gaussian with a monotonically varying mean
gradient in a simple, statistically stationary one-
dimensional ﬂow. At low Damko¨hler numbers,
a ﬁrst-order conditional moment closure seems
possible leading to plausible results for the turbu-
lent ﬂame speed and for the structure of the tur-
bulent ﬂame. DNS of turbulent premixed ﬂames
with the marker ﬁeld is under study in current re-
search. Experimental implementation will be at-
tempted ﬁrst on the stagnation plate burner
used in earlier studies of turbulent premixed
ﬂame structure [144,163], and the extension of
this approach to more complex ﬂow geometries
and to ﬂames with complex chemistry will be
attempted.
The CMC formulation is also leading to new
experimental endeavours in premixed turbulent
combustion. As in the non-premixed case, a term
appears in the premixed CMC equations that in-
volves the product of the conditional scalar dissi-
pation rate for the progress variable times the
second derivative of the conditional average mass
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
35


--- Page 16 ---

fraction of individual species with respect to the
progress variable. It seems that this term can give
us insight into the eﬀects of ﬂow geometry and of
Da on turbulent ﬂame brush width and extinction
phenomena:
•
For the classical one-dimensional turbulent
ﬂame (one-dimensional in the mean), the tur-
bulent ﬂame brush becomes wider than the
integral length scale as Da is lowered at low
Da, as has been found by Pope and Anand
[193]. Within the ﬂame brush, the PDF of
the progress variable is no longer U-shaped
and trends to an increasingly narrow distri-
bution around the local mean. Assuming,
for the moment, that the chemical structure
of the ﬂame as a function of the progress
variable is not greatly aﬀected, the decrease
in Da is largely due to decrease in the turbu-
lence time scale. If the unconditional scalar
dissipation is now controlled by turbulent
mixing laws, it will remain approximately
constant, due to reduction in both the pro-
gress variable variance and in the turbulence
time scale. The conditional scalar dissipation
rate for the progress variable will also remain
approximately constant and proﬁles of condi-
tional average species mass fractions against
progress variable (and their second deriva-
tives) will also remain approximately con-
stant, as has been assumed. Decreasing Da
just broadens the turbulent ﬂame brush, and
rates of molecular mixing remain at the level
at which the chemistry can cope. No extinc-
tion occurs.
•
For ﬂames in shear layers, such as the Magre
experiment [195] or a high velocity jet of pre-
mixture into a co-ﬂow of hot products, and
in counterﬂow and stagnation plate ﬂames,
the width of the ﬂame brush is limited by the
laws of turbulent mixing. At low Da, further
decrease in Da by increase in velocity leads to
no increase in the ﬂame brush width or reduc-
tion of the progress variable variance. Uncon-
ditional
and
conditional
scalar
dissipation
rates will increase to a level where the chemical
reactions will no longer be able to cope with
such high rates of molecular mixing. Local
extinction will eventually occur. Full extinction
will manifest itself as all species mass fractions
are linear functions of the progress variable,
including H2 and other intermediates, and the
chain carrying radicals H, OH, and O. The
mass fractions of these intermediates and radi-
cals will be limited by their equilibrium values.
Partial extinction will involve high levels of
intermediates such as H2 and CO, as found in
the Magre experiment [195]. Downstream in
these ﬂows the ﬂame brush will broaden, and
scalar dissipation rates will drop allowing re-ig-
nition of the ﬂame.
Clearly, ﬂame structure at low Da will strongly
depend on the ﬂow geometry.
These ideas have given rise to attempts at the
University of Sydney to develop a premixed jet
burner that is the analogue of the piloted-jet
diﬀusion ﬂame burner that has proved to be
such an important asset in the development of
non-premixed combustion modelling. The con-
ﬁguration is, once again, of a small central
high-velocity jet, this time of combustible pre-
mixture, an annulus of slowly moving radical-
rich combustion products and an outer high
temperature co-ﬂow. Near the central jet exit,
scalar dissipation rates of the progress variable
are low in the annulus that is rich in radicals
and intermediates. This ensures that combustion
of ad-mixed jet ﬂuid occurs. Further down-
stream, the inﬂuence of the annulus ﬂow has
gone, mean gradients in progress variable be-
come steep, and scalar dissipation rates soar.
Local extinction or partial extinction becomes
apparent. Further downstream, mean gradients
of the progress variable drop, scalar dissipation
rates fall, and robust combustion is resumed.
This experiment is still in early stages of devel-
opment. Further details may be found on the
web [198]. It is expected that advanced laser
diagnostic line measurements and imaging in
such ﬂames will guide development of advanced
paradigms and models for ﬁnite-rate chemistry
eﬀects in turbulent premixed ﬂames.
3.6. Implications for LES
LES appears to be especially promising for the
simulation of premixed combustion because it
explicitly resolves the large-scale unsteady mo-
tions that are known to play a signiﬁcant role
when the reactants are premixed. Premixed ﬂames
are sensitive to the burner geometry and to large-
scale, unsteady phenomenon such as the existence
of an anchoring point, the passage of vortices,
ﬂame-wall interactions, and the merging of adja-
cent ﬂame brush regions, such as those near the
tip of a Bunsen ﬂame. These factors are important
because they control the large-scale wrinkling of
the reaction surface.
LES for premixed has the problem that the
ﬂame usually lies within one grid cell, and this cre-
ates numerical problems. One approach to sub-
grid scale modelling has been to artiﬁcially thicken
the ﬂame front [184,185], as has, been mentioned
already in the sub-section on ﬂame surface density
modelling.
Other
ﬂame
surface
density
ap-
proaches include the work of Cant and co-work-
ers
[200–202].
Sub-grid
models
have
been
proposed, which assume that a sub-grid turbulent
burning velocity exists and that this velocity de-
pends on certain fractal properties of the subgrid
ﬂame surface area [189]. However, it has not yet
been experimentally determined if the sub-grid
36
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 17 ---

ﬂame surface area is fractal, since the ﬂame wrin-
kling process may not be scale-independent. For
example, premixed ﬂames, in general, do not form
wrinkles smaller than several times the laminar
ﬂame thickness because there is rapid gas expan-
sion at the ﬂame front that prevents the reaction
zone from rolling up. Another sub-grid model
[203] requires that a diﬀerential equation for the
sub-grid ﬂame surface density be solved.
DNS is beginning to play a role in the simula-
tion turbulent premixed combustion: recently, a
turbulent ﬂat ﬂame was simulated on a 3-D grid
(8 mm · 8 mm · 16 mm) with a spatial resolution
of 31 lm, which is less than half of the laminar
ﬂame thickness [204]. The complex methane-air
chemistry mechanism included 20 species and 84
reactions. It is immediately apparent from these
results that the eﬀects of Lewis number and ﬂame
stretch rates are signiﬁcant. Although such resolu-
tion is as yet insuﬃcient, it can be expected that
DNS will play an even more important role in
the future, because many practical premixed com-
bustion devices do not operate at excessively large
Reynolds numbers. Laboratory experiments and
automotive
IC
engines
typically
have
small
dimensions and only a limited time for the ﬂame
to wrinkle, so future application of DNS appears
promising. For other practical devices, such as the
premixed gas turbine engine, the Reynolds num-
bers are large, so LES should continue to have
an inherent advantage.
4. Partially premixed turbulent combustion
In many practical combustion systems, includ-
ing some types of reciprocating and gas turbine en-
gines, it cannot be assumed that combustion meets
the most basic assumption of either classical pre-
mixed or non-premixed combustion theories. The
reason is that the combustible gases entering local-
ised reaction zones are not fully premixed to a uni-
form composition, and nor do pure fuel and pure
oxidiser enter reaction zones from opposite sides.
Combustion is then sometimes described as par-
tially premixed. It is helpful to distinguish between
diﬀerent categories of partial premixing: the most
important distinction is between non-uniform
combustible mixtures in which the range of com-
positions excludes stoichiometric mixtures and
those in which stoichiometric mixtures do occur.
(It is noted that some partially premixed ﬂames,
such as the Sandia A–F series [22], have a fuel
stream that is so fuel rich that they may be treated
as non-premixed [20–26]: we will not be concerned
further with such ﬂames in this section.)
Situations where the non-uniform combustible
mixture is either all fuel-rich or all fuel-lean, and
stoichiometric mixtures do not occur, will be re-
ferred to as stratiﬁed premixed ﬂames. In the ab-
sence of stoichiometric mixture, local combustion
zone structure may be expected to resemble pre-
mixed burning because fuel and oxidiser will enter
from the same side. However, composition varia-
tions will lead to local ﬂuctuations in burning rate,
and thus provide an additional mechanism for
ﬂame wrinkling. If the composition of the combus-
tible mixture includes stoichiometric as well as fuel-
lean and fuel-rich mixtures, then the possibility
exists that local burning zone structures may resem-
ble both premixed and non-premixed ﬂames. This
more challenging situation will be called pre-
mixed/non-premixed combustion.
Pollution control strategies often lead design-
ers to favour stratiﬁed premixed combustion.
However, the requirement to limit combustion
instabilities in gas turbine engines, together with
other factors, such as the need for rapid mixing
rates to eliminate localised fuel-rich and stoichi-
ometric pockets left by the evaporation of liquid
fuel
droplets,
implies
that
premixed/non-pre-
mixed burning is hard to avoid. What laboratory
experiments and DNS geometries allow these
two diﬀerent types of partial premixing to be
studied? The standard test case for premixed/
non-premixed turbulent combustion is the lifted
jet ﬂame [205]; here, triple ﬂames and edge ﬂames
provide the paradigm shift that appears able
[206] to reconcile competing claims of earlier the-
ories to predict the lift-oﬀheight, based on fully
premixed or strictly non-premixed burning mod-
els. Triple ﬂames are found to play a key role in
DNS of turbulent autoignition in mixtures con-
taining fuel-rich and fuel-lean pockets [207] but
the results may be an artefact of the one-step
Arrhenius kinetics that is used. DNS of lifted
hydrogen jet ﬂames [208] indicates a far more
complex structure involving edge ﬂames, turbu-
lent
premixed
ﬂames,
and
ﬂoating
diﬀusion
ﬂames. Bunsen ﬂames and V ﬂames will involve
mixture fraction variations if, as often happens,
the combustion zone overlaps with the mixing
layer between the combustible gases and the sur-
rounding co-ﬂow or ambient air. The partially
premixed burning will be of the stratiﬁed pre-
mixed type if the premixed ﬂow is fuel-lean,
and the surrounding gas is air, whereas a fuel-
rich
premixed
ﬂow
will
lead
to
premixed/
non-premixed
combustion.
Other
convenient
geometries
include
counterﬂows
[209]
and
a
dump combustor [210] fed with two parallel
streams with diﬀerent compositions. The fuel jet
in a vitiated co-ﬂow as studied by Cabra et al.
[211] is interesting as it appears to be a lifted
ﬂame in the classical ﬂame-propagation sense un-
der low jet velocity and high co-ﬂow temperature
conditions, and as a non-premixed auto-ignition
ﬂow under high jet velocity, lower co-ﬂow tem-
perature conditions: modelling and experimental
investigation [91,198] are continuing.
Current modelling strategies are related to
those developed for fully premixed and non-pre-
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
37


--- Page 18 ---

mixed combustion. For example, ﬂamelet ap-
proaches for premixed/non-premixed situations,
using both RANS [64,212] and LES [206], in-
volve a combination of premixed and non-pre-
mixed ﬂamelets. It is not yet clear to what
extent it is necessary to take the local reaction
zone structure explicitly into account in, for
example, models for the various scalar dissipa-
tions or equivalent terms that appear in most
models. As we have seen, PDF methods yield
excellent predictions of the Sandia non-premixed
jet ﬂames, even in cases where signiﬁcant local
extinction is known to occur. Local extinction
allows reactants to partially mix before they
burn, and the success of the current generation
of PDF models implies that their mixing clo-
sures provide an adequate description of the lo-
cal reaction zone structure at least for these
particular experiments. For practical combus-
tors, PDF methods have the advantage that they
are able to handle many diﬀerent inﬂow streams
of
unrelated
temperature
and
composition.
CMC, which also contains no representation of
triple ﬂames or edge ﬂames, nevertheless makes
adequate predictions of the lift-oﬀheight of a
lifted jet ﬂame [110,111]. It must be concluded
that we do not yet know how much detail of lo-
cal ﬂame structure is required, and we cannot
yet determine the range of applicability of the
various modelling approaches for partially pre-
mixed turbulent combustion. Recent advanced
work on DNS of lifted diﬀusion ﬂames involv-
ing more than 200 million mesh points and mul-
ti-step
kinetics
for
the
hydrogen
fuel
[213]
promises to yield more insight than can be ob-
tained from advanced laser measurements. It is
apparent that such DNS will play an important
role in enhancing our capability in modelling
turbulent partially premixed combustion.
5. Concluding remarks
Over the 50 years of the Combustion Insti-
tute,
great
progress
has
been
made
in
our
understanding
of
turbulent
combustion,
although this understanding remains far from
complete. Only partially do we have answers
to the following, fundamental questions (appli-
cable to both premixed and non-premixed com-
bustion) which have been asked since the earliest
investigations.
1. What diﬀerent regimes of turbulent combus-
tion can be identiﬁed? And where, in a multi-
parameter space, are the boundaries between
diﬀerent regimes?
2. In a given regime, what is the instantaneous
spatial structure of the ﬂame?
3. Can the local properties of the instantaneous
ﬂame be characterised by a few variables?
4. How can a statistical model (applicable in
RANS or LES) be constructed based on a
characterisation of the instantaneous ﬂame
structure (or otherwise)?
For non-premixed combustion, the sequence
of
modelling
paradigms—mixing-controlled,
laminar ﬂamelets, CMC, and PDF—seeks to de-
scribe
successively
more
challenging
regimes,
from the ﬂame-sheet regime to ﬂames with sub-
stantial local extinction. In the simpler regimes,
mixture fraction and scalar dissipation arise nat-
urally in all approaches as the primary quanti-
ties
determining
the
local
properties.
The
understanding gained of the connection between
scalar dissipation and local extinction led to the
piloted jet ﬂames (and other conﬁgurations) for
the study of more challenging regimes. Here,
experiments and DNS are beginning to address
questions 2 and 3, above.
For premixed combustion, controversy re-
mains on the existence and nature of some com-
bustion regimes, such as a thin-reaction zone
regime and a thickened ﬂame-front regime. It ap-
pears that a large number of parameters may be
needed to delineate the space for many regimes
including parameters describing the ﬂow geometry
and method of stabilisation. In the most-studied
thin ﬂame-front regime, the behaviour of the
instantaneous ﬂame is characterised by the pro-
gress variable and the ﬂame stretch but the limita-
tions on the range of validity of such modelling
remains controversial. The ﬂame surface density
(FSD)
provides
a
statistical
framework
for
describing turbulent premixed ﬂames. But, be-
cause the ﬂame surface is not passive (it propa-
gates and is subjected to instabilities), model
equations for the FSD involve more uncertainty
than its non-premixed counterpart (i.e., the joint
PDF of mixture fraction and scalar dissipation).
This approach, and the other statistical frame-
works described above, may eventually incorpo-
rate enough of the complexity in the physics to
throw light on the nature and boundary of the
various combustion regimes.
Well before the centennial of the Combustion
Institute we will, surely, have conquered turbulent
combustion in gases and also in multi-phase ﬂows.
The increasing power of laser diagnostics and
DNS can be applied to thoughtfully designed con-
ﬁgurations to reﬁne our understanding of the fun-
damental questions posed above. The increasing
power of computers and algorithms will allow suf-
ﬁciently comprehensive statistical approaches to
accurately describe turbulent combustion pro-
cesses in the diﬀerent regimes. We shall then have
fulﬁlled the vision of the Combustion Institutes
founders, to have predictive methods based on
fundamental principles, which can be applied to
the development of improved combustion equip-
ment for the beneﬁt of society.
38
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 19 ---

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Australian
Research Council, by the US Air Force Oﬃce of
Scientiﬁc Research under Grant No. F-49620-00-
1-0171 and by the US Department of Energy
under Grant No. DE-FG02-90ER14128. Contri-
butions and comments from Drs. Robert Barlow,
Thierry Baritaud, and Yasuhiro Mizobuchi and
from Profs Kang Huh, Thierry Poinsot, Peter
Lindstedt, Luc Vervisch, Johannes Janicka, and
Heinz Pitsch are gratefully acknowledged.
References
[1] C.N. Hinshelwood, Proc. Combust. Inst. 7 (1958)
xxvii–xxix.
[2] B. Lewis, Proc. Combust. Inst. 7 (1958) xxxi–xxxv.
[3] S.M. Correa, Proc. Combust. Inst. 27 (1998)
1793–1897.
[4] S.B. Pope, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 11 (1985)
119–192.
[5] Fluent 6.1. Available from http://www.ﬂuent.com/
software/ﬂuent/focus/reacting.htm.
[6] T.A. Baritaud, J.M. Duclos, A. Fusco, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 26 (1996) 2627–2635.
[7] S. Henriot, D. Bouyssounnouse, T. Baritaud, SAE
Technical Paper 2003-01-1845 (SP-1795), 2003.
[8] G. Cantore, N. Pini, G.M. Bianchi, T. Baritaud, A
3D CFD analysis of the Premixed Combustion
Process in High Performance Engines, SAE-NA
2003-01-013, 2003. Available from f.corcione@
im.onr.it.
[9] W.P. Jones, J.H. Whitelaw, Proc. Combust. Inst.
20 (1984) 233–249.
[10] N. Peters, Proc. Combust. Inst. 21 (1986) 1231–1250.
[11] R.W. Bilger, Proc. Combust. Inst. 22 (1988)
475–488.
[12] S.B. Pope, Proc. Combust. Inst. 23 (1990) 591–612.
[13] D.
Bradley,
Proc.
Combust.
Inst.
24
(1992)
247–262.
[14] T.
Takeno,
Proc.
Combust.
Inst.
25
(1994)
1061–1073.
[15] K.N.C. Bray, Proc. Combust. Inst. 26 (1996) 1–26.
[16] T.
Poinsot,
Proc.
Combust.
Inst.
26
(1996)
219–232.
[17] L. Vervisch, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28 (2000) 11–24.
[18] G.I. Sivashinsky, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002)
1737–1761.
[19] A.R. Kerstein, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002)
1763–1773.
[20] TNF Workshop web site. Available from http://
www.ca.sandia.gov/TNF, Sandia National Labo-
ratories, 2003.
[21] S.B. Pope, Annu. Review Fluid Mech 19 (1987)
237–270.
[22] R.S. Barlow, J.H. Frank, Proc. Combust. Inst. 27
(1998) 1087–1095.
[23] J. Xu, S.B. Pope, Combust. Flame 123 (2000)
281–307.
[24] Q. Tang, J. Xu, S.B. Pope, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28
(2000) 133–139.
[25] R.P. Lindstedt, S.A. Louloudi, E.M. Vaos, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 28 (2000) 149–156.
[26] H.
Pitsch,
Proc.
Combust.
Inst.
29
(2002)
1971–1978.
[27] S.H. Kim, K.Y. Huh, Combust. Flame 138 (2004)
336–350.
[28] T.S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions.
University of Chicago Press, 1962.
[29] W.R. Hawthorne, D.S. Weddell, H.C. Hottel,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 3 (1948) 266–288.
[30] S.P. Burke, T.E.W. Schumann, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 1 (1928) 2–11.
[31] S.R. Turns, An Introduction to Combustion: Con-
cepts and Applications. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1996.
[32] J.P. Longwell, M.A. Weiss, Ind. Eng. Chem. 47
(1955) 1634–1643.
[33] H.C. Hottel, in: W.G. Berl (Ed.), International
Symposium on Models in Fire Research, Publica-
tion 746, National Academy of Sciences—Nation-
al Research Council, Washington, DC, 1961.
[34] C.A. Homsy, Similitude in turbulent free-jet diﬀu-
sion ﬂames, Sc.D. thesis, Chemical Engineering,
November,
1959.
Available
from
http://
theses.mit.edu.
[35] R.W. Bilger, R.E. Beck, Proc. Combust. Inst. 15
(1974) 541–552.
[36] J.F. Driscoll, R.-H. Chen, Y. Yoon, Combust.
Flame 88 (1992) 37–49.
[37] R. G}unther, Progr. Energy Combust. Sci. 9 (1983)
105–154.
[38] J.H. Kent, R.W. Bilger, Proc. Combust. Inst. 14
(1972) 615–625.
[39] B.E Launder, D.B. Spalding, Mathematical Models
of Turbulence. Academic Press, New York, 1972.
[40] K.N.C. Bray, AASU Report No. 330, 1973,
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
University of Southampton.
[41] R.W. Bilger, Combust. Sci. Technol. 11 (1975)
215–217.
[42] R.W. Dibble, W. Kollmann, M. Faraschi, R.W.
Schefer, Proc. Combust. Inst. 21 (1988) 1329–1340.
[43] R.W. Dibble, W. Kollmann, M. Faraschi, R.W.
Schefer, Proc. Combust. Inst. 21 (1988) 1329–1340.
[44] J.H. Kent, R.W. Bilger, Proc. Combust. Inst. 16
(1976) 1643–1656.
[45] C.T. Bowman, Proc. Combust. Inst. 24 (1992)
859–878.
[46] R.W. Bilger, Combust. Sci. Technol. 13 (1976)
155–170.
[47] H. Tsuji, I. Yamaoka, Proc. Combust. Inst. 12
(1968) 997–1005.
[48] R.E. Mitchel, A.F. Saroﬁm, L.A. Clomberg,
Combust. Flame 37 (1980) 197.
[49] R.W. Bilger, Combust. Flame 30 (1977) 277–284.
[50] S.K. Lieuw, K.N.C. Bray, J.B. Moss, Combust.
Sci. Technol. 27 (1981) 69–83.
[51] S.H. Sta˚rner, R.W. Bilger, Combust. Flame 61
(1985) 29–38.
[52] A.R. Masri, R.W. Bilger, Proc. Combust. Inst. 21
(1986) 1511–1520.
[53] R.W. Dibble, A.R. Masri, R.W. Bilger, Combust.
Flame 67 (1987) 189–206.
[54] A.R. Masri, R.W. Dibble, R.W. Bilger, Combust.
Flame 74 (1988) 267–284.
[55] A.R. Masri, R.S. Barlow, R.W. Dibble, Progr.
Energy Combust. Sci. 22 (1996) 307–362.
[56] M.S. Mansour, R.W. Bilger, R.W. Dibble, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 22 (1988) 711–719.
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
39


--- Page 20 ---

[57] B.B. Dally, A.R. Masri, R.S. Barlow, G.J. Fiecht-
ner, Combust. Flame 114 (1998) 119–148.
[58] N. Peters, Combust. Sci. Technol. 30 (1983) 1–17.
[59] R.W. Bilger, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 26 (2000)
367–380.
[60] V. Favier, L. Vervisch, Combust. Flame 125 (2001)
788–803.
[61] N. Peters, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 10 (1984)
319–339.
[62] D.C. Haworth, M.C. Drake, S.B. Pope, R.J. Blint,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 22 (1988) 589–597.
[63] F. Maus, D. Keller, N. Peters, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 23 (1990) 693–698.
[64] N. Peters, Turbulent Combustion. Cambridge, 2000.
[65] L. Vervisch, R. Hauguel, P. Domingo, M. Rul-
land, J. Turbulence 5 (2004) 2–36.
[66] A. Ratner, J.F. Driscoll, J. Donbar, C. Carter, J.
Mullin, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28 (2000) 245.
[67] J.-Y. Chen, R.W. Dibble, in: M.D. Smooke (Ed.),
Reduced
Kinetic
Mechanisms
and
Asymptotic
Approximations for Methane–air Flames. Springer,
Lon, 1991, p. 193 (Chapter 9).
[68] C. Dopazo, E.E. OBrien, Acta Astronaut. 1 (1974)
1239–1266.
[69] V.A. Frost, Fluid Mechan. 4 (1975) 124–133.
[70] S.B. Pope, Combust. Flame 27 (1976) 299–312.
[71] C. Dopazo, in: P.A. Libby, F.A. Williams (Eds.),
Turbulent Reacting Flows, vol. 375. Academic
Press, New York, 1994 (Chapter 7).
[72] S.B. Pope, Turbulent Flows. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2000.
[73] R.O. Fox, Computational Models for Turbulent
Reactive Flows. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 2003.
[74] S.B. Pope, Combust. Sci. Technol. 25 (1981)
159–174.
[75] S.B. Pope, Combust. Theory Modelling 1 (1997)
41–63.
[76] J.-Y. Chen, Combust. Sci. Technol. 176 (2004)
1153–1169.
[77] C.J. Sung, C.K. Law, J.-Y. Chen, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 27 (1998) 295–304.
[78] R.P. Lindstedt, S.A. Louloudi, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 29 (2002) 2147–2154.
[79] J. Villermaux, J.C. Devillon, in: Proceedings of the
2nd International Symposium on Chemical Reaction
Engineering, 1972, pp. 1–13.
[80] R.L. Curl, AIChE J. 9 (1963) 175–181.
[81] J. Janicka, W. Kolbe, W. Kollmann, J. Non-
Equilib. Thermodyn. 4 (1977) 47–66.
[82] S. Subramaniam, S.B. Pope, Combust. Flame 115
(1998) 487–514.
[83] Z. Ren, S.B. Pope, Combust. Flame 138 (2004)
208–216.
[84] S. Subramaniam, S.B. Pope, Combust. Flame 117
(1999) 732–754.
[85] A.T. Norris, S.B. Pope, Combust. Flame 83 (1990)
37–42.
[86] B.B. Dally, D.F. Flectcher, A.R. Masri, Combust.
Theory Modelling 2 (1998) 193–219.
[87] K. Liu, Ph.D. Thesis, Cornell University, 2004.
[88] T.S. Kuan, R.P. Lindstedt, Proc. Combust. Inst.,
2004, to appear.
[89] A.R. Masri, S.B. Pope, B.B. Dally, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 28 (2000) 123–131.
[90] A.R. Masri, R. Cao, S.B. Pope, G.M. Goldin,
Combust. Theory Modelling 8 (2004) 1–22.
[91] R.Gordon, A.R. Masri, S.B. Pope, G.M. Goldin,
Combust. Theor. Model., 2004, submitted.
[92] A.Yu. Klimenko, Fluid Dyn. 25 (1990) 327–334.
[93] R.W. Bilger, Phys. Fluids A 5 (1993) 436–444.
[94] A.Y. Klimenko, R.W. Bilger, Prog. Energy Com-
bust. Sci. 25 (1999) 595–687.
[95] R.W. Bilger, L.V. Krishnamoorthy, L.R. Saetran,
J. Fluid Mech. 233 (1991) 211–244.
[96] S.H. Kim, L. Tao, K.Y. Huh, Combust. Flame 120
(2000) 75–90.
[97] M.J. Cleary, J.H. Kent, R.W. Bilger, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 29 (2002) 273–279.
[98] W.T. Kim, K.Y. Huh, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29
(2002) 569–576.
[99] M.R. Roomina, R.W. Bilger, Combust. Flame 125
(2001) 1176–1195.
[100] A. Kronenburg, R.W. Bilger, J.H. Kent, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 27 (1998) 1097–1104.
[101] S.H. Kim, C.H. Choi, K.Y. Huh, Second-order
conditional moment closure modelling of a turbu-
lent CH4/H2/N2 jet diﬀusion ﬂame, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 30 (2005) 735–742.
[102] A. Kronenburg, Phys. Fluids 16 (2004) 2640–2648.
[103] A. Kronenburg, A.E. Papoutsakis, Conditional
moment
closure
modelling
of
extinction
and
reignition in turbulent non-premixed ﬂames, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 759–766.
[104] M.J. Cleary, J.H. Kent, A numerical method for
conditional
moment
closure,
2003
Australian
Combustion
Symposium
and
8th
Australian
Flame Days, Monash University, December 2003.
[105] M. Mortensen, Chem. Eng. Sci., in press.
[106] C.B. Devaud, R.W. Bilger, T. Liu, Phys. Fluids 16
(2004) 2004–2011.
[107] R.W. Bilger, Some aspects of scalar dissipation,
Flow, Turbul. Combust., in press.
[108] A.N. Karpetis, R.S. Barlow, Proc. Combust. Inst.
29 (2002) 1929–1936.
[109] A.N. Karpetis, R.S. Barlow, Proc. Combust. Inst.
30 (2005) 665–672.
[110] C.B. Devaud, K.N.C. Bray, Combust. Flame 131
(2003) 102–114.
[111] I.S. Kim, E. Mastorakos, Proc. Combust. Inst. 30
(2005) 911–918.
[112] A.Y. Klimenko, S.B. Pope, Phys. Fluids 15 (2003)
1907–1925.
[113] H. Chen, S. Chen, R.H. Kraichnan, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 63 (1989) 2657–2660.
[114] S.B. Pope, Theor. Comput. Fluid Dyn. 2 (1991)
255–270.
[115] A. Juneja, S.B. Pope, Phys. Fluids 8 (1996)
2161–2184.
[116] A.Y. Klimenko, in: 2003 Australian Symposium on
Combustion and the 8th Australian Flame Days,
Monash University, 2003.
[117] S.B. Pope, Flow, Turbul. Combust, in press.
[118] J. Smagorinsky, Mon. Weather Rev. 91 (1963) 99.
[119] C. Stone, S. Menon, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002)
155–160.
[120] B. Varoquie´, J.P. Le´gier, F. Lacas, D. Veynante, T.
Poinsot, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002) 1965–1970.
[121] H. Pitsch, H. Steiner, Phys. Fluids 12 (2000)
2541–2554.
[122] A. Kempf, A. Sadiki, J. Janicka, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 29 (2002) 1979–1985.
[123] W.K. Bushe, H. Steiner, Phys. Fluids 11 (1999)
1896–1906.
40
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42


--- Page 21 ---

[124] M.R.H. Sheikhi, T.G. Drozda, P. Givi, F.A. Jaberi,
S.B. Pope, Proc. Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 549–556.
[125] S. Menon, W. Calhoon, Proc. Comb. Inst. 26
(1996) 59–66.
[126] V.K. Chakravarthy, S. Menon, Flow, Turbulence
Combust. 65 (2000) 133–161.
[127] W.-W. Kim, S. Menon, H.C. Mongia, Combust.
Sci. Technol. 143 (1999) 25–62.
[128] P. Moin, Progr. Comput. Fluid Dyn. 4 (2004) 3.
[129] F. di Mare, W.P. Jones, K.R. Menzies, Combust.
Flame 137 (2004) 278–294.
[130] L. Selle, G. Lartigue, T. Poinsot, R. Koch, K.-U.
Schildmaker, W. Krebs, P. Kaufmann, D. Veyn-
ante, Combust. Flame 137 (2004) 489–505.
[131] G. Damko¨hler, Z. Electrochemie und angewandte
Physikalische Chemie, 46 (1940) 601-626. NACA
TM No. 1112, 1947.
[132] R.K. Cheng, I.G. Shepherd, Combust. Flame 85
(1991) 7.
[133] S. Filatyev, J.F. Driscoll, C. Carter, J. Donbar,
Combust. Flame, to appear.
[134] R. Borghi, Progr. Energy Combust. Sci. 14 (1998)
245–292.
[135] J.-M. Samaniego, T. Mantel, Combust. Flame 118
(1999) 537–566.
[136] C.J. Mueller, J.F. Driscoll, D.L. Reuss, M.C.
Drake, M. Rosalik, Combust. Flame 112 (1998) 342.
[137] J.O. Sinibaldi, J.F. Driscoll, C. Mueller, J. Don-
bar, C. Carter, Combust. Flame 133 (2003) 323.
[138] C. Meneveau, T. Poinsot, Combust. Flame 86
(1991) 311.
[139] T. Hasegawa, K. Nishikado, J. Chomiak, Com-
bust. Sci. Technol. 108 (1995) 67–80.
[140] I.G. Shepherd, R.K. Cheng, T. Plessing, C. Kortsc-
hik, N. Peters, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002) 1833.
[141] F. OYoung, R.W. Bilger, Combust. Flame 109
(1997) 682–700.
[142] Y.-C. Chen, R.W. Bilger, Combust. Sci. Technol.
167 (2001) 187–222.
[143] Y.-C. Chen, R.W. Bilger, Combust. Flame 131
(2002) 400–435.
[144] Y.-C. Chen, R.W. Bilger, Proc. Combust. Inst. 30
(2005) 801–808.
[145] A. Soika, F. Dinkelacker, A. Leipertz, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 27 (1998) 785–792.
[146] Y.-C. Chen, R.W. Bilger, Combust. Flame 138
(2004) 155–174.
[147] J.M. Donbar, J.F. Driscoll, C. Carter, Combust.
Flame 125 (2001) 1239.
[148] N. Swaminathan, R.W. Bilger, G.R. Ruetsch,
Combust. Sci. Technol. 128 (1997) 73–97.
[149] Y.-C. Chen, P.A.M. Kalt, R.W. Bilger, N. Swami-
nathan, Proc. Combust Inst. 29 (2002) 1863–1871.
[150] K.N.C. Bray, J.B. Moss, Acta Astronaut. 4 (1977)
291.
[151] K.N.C. Bray, in: P.A. Libby, F.A. Williams (Eds.),
Turbulent Reacting Flows. Springer, Berlin, 1980.
[152] K.N.C. Bray, P.A. Libby, AIAA J. 19 (1981) 205.
[153] K.N.C. Bray, G. Masuya, J.B. Moss, P.A. Libby,
Combust. Sci. Technol. 25 (1981) 127.
[154] K.N.C. Bray, J.B. Moss, P.A. Libby, Combust.
Flame 61 (1985) 87–102.
[155] K.N.C. Bray, P.A. Libby, in: P.A. Libby, F.A.
Williams
(Eds.),
Turbulent
Reacting
Flows,
Academic Press, New York, 1994, pp. 115–150.
[156] K.N.C. Bray, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 451 (1995)
231–256.
[157] K.N.C. Bray, Proc. Combust. Inst. 17 (1979) 223.
[158] K.N.C. Bray, P.A. Libby, Combust. Flame 39
(1980) 33.
[159] A.-S. Wu, K.N.C. Bray, Combust. Flame 109
(1997) 43–64.
[160] J.B. Moss, Combust. Sci. Technol. 22 (1980)
119–129.
[161] D. Veynante, A. Trouve´, K.N.C. Bray, T. Mantel,
J. Fluid Mech. 332 (1997) 263–293.
[162] P.A.M. Kalt, J.H. Frank, R.W. Bilger, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 27 (1998) 751–758.
[163] P.A.M. Kalt, Y.-C. Chen, R.W. Bilger, Combust.
Flame 129 (2002) 401–415.
[164] L.W. Kostiuk, I.G. Shepherd, K.N.C. Bray, Com-
bust. Flame 118 (1999) 129–139.
[165] R.K. Cheng, I.G. Shepherd, Combust. Flame 85
(1991) 7.
[166] E.J. Stevens, K.N.C. Bray, B. Lecordier, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 27 (1998) 949–955.
[167] S.C. Li, P.A. Libby, F.A. Williams, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 25 (1994) 1207.
[168] K.N.C. Bray, M. Champion, P.A. Libby, Com-
bust. Flame 112 (1998) 635–654.
[169] K.N.C. Bray, M. Champion, P.A. Libby, Com-
bust. Flame 120 (2000) 1–18.
[170] K.N.C. Bray, M. Champion, P.A. Libby, Com-
bust. Flame 127 (2001) 2023–2040.
[171] P. Domingo, K.N.C. Bray, Combust. Flame 121
(2000) 555–574.
[172] R.P. Lindstedt, E.M. Vaos, Combust. Flame 116
(1999) 461–485.
[173] F.E. Marble, J.E. Broadwell, The Coherent Flame
Model of Turbulent Chemical Reactions, TRW
Report, 1977.
[174] S.B. Pope, Int. J. Eng. Sci 26 (1988) 445.
[175] S.B. Pope, W.K. Cheng, Proc. Combust. Inst. 22
(1988) 781.
[176] D. Veynante, J.M. Duclos, J. Piana, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 25 (1994) 1249.
[177] R. Prasad, J.P. Gore, Combust. Flame 116 (1999) 1.
[178] J.M. Duclos, D. Veynante, T. Poinsot, Combust.
Flame 95 (1993) 101.
[179] R.S. Cant, S.B. Pope, K.N.C. Bray, Proc. Comb.
Inst. 23 (1990) 809–815.
[180] P. Boudier, S. Henriot, T. Poinsot, T. Baritaud,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 24 (1992) 503.
[181] L. Vervisch, E. Bidaux, K.N.C. Bray, W. Koll-
mann, Phys. Fluids 7 (1995) 2496.
[182] J.-H. Chen, T. Echekki, Combust. Flame 116
(1999) 15.
[183] M.S. Wu, S. Kwon, J.F. Driscoll, G.M. Faeth,
Comb. Sci. Technol. 73 (1990) 327.
[184] F. Charlette, C. Meneveau, D. Veynante, Combust.
Flame 131 (2002) 159.
[185] O. Colin, F. Ducros, D. Veynante, T. Poinsot,
Phys. Fluids 12 (2000) 1843–1863.
[186] H. Kobayashi, H. Kawazoe, Proc. Combust. Inst.
28 (2000) 375–382.
[187] K.N.C. Bray, N. Peters, in: P.A. Libby, F.A.
Williams
(Eds.),
Turbulent
Reacting
Flows.
Academic Press, New York, 1994, pp. 63–113.
[188] C. Kortschik, T. Plessing, N. Peters, Combust.
Flame 136 (2004) 43–50.
[189] A. Kronenburg, R.W. Bilger, Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol. 166 (2001) 175–194.
[190] D.B. Spalding, Proc. Combust. Inst. 13 (1970)
649–657.
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
41


--- Page 22 ---

[191] F.H. Wright, E.E. Zukoski, Proc. Combust. Inst. 9
(1962) 933–943.
[192] E.A. Brizuela, R.W. Bilger, Combust. Flame 104
(1996) 208–212.
[193] S.B. Pope, M.S. Anand, Proc. Combust. Inst. 20
(1984) 403–410.
[194] W. Vincente, M. Salinas, E. Barrios, C. Dopazo,
Combust. Sci. Technol. 176 (2004) 585.
[195] P. Magre, P. Moreau, G. Collin, R. Borghi, M.
Pe´alat, Combust. Flame 71 (1988) 147–168.
[196] R.W. Bilger, in: T. Takeno (Ed.), Turbulence and
Molecular Processes in Combustion (Sixth Toyota
Conference).
Elsevier,
Amsterdam,
1993,
pp.
267–285.
[197] S.M. Martin, J.C. Kramlich, G. Kosa´ly, J.J. Riley,
J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power: Trans. ASME 125 (2003)
895–900.
[198] Available
from:
<www.aeromech.usyd.edu.au/
thermoﬂuids>.
[199] R.W. Bilger, Combust. Flame 138 (2004) 188–194.
[200] E.R Hawkes, R.S. Cant, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28
(2000) 51–58.
[201] E.R. Hawkes, R.S. Cant, Combust. Flame 126
(2001) 1617–1629.
[202] S. Tullis, Large eddy simulation of scalar ﬂux in
turbulent premixed ﬂames, Ph.D. thesis, University
of Cambridge, August 2003.
[203] R. Knickker, D. Veynante, C. Meneveau, Proc.
Comb. Inst. 29 (2002) 2105.
[204] J.B. Bell, M.S. Day, J.F. Grcar, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 29 (2002) 1987–1993.
[205] W. Pitts, Proc. Comb. Inst. 22 (1988) 809–816.
[206] P. Domingo, L. Vervisch, K. Bray, Combust.
Theory Modelling 6 (2002) 529–551.
[207] L. Vervisch, Proc. Combustion Inst. 28 (2000)
11–24.
[208] Y. Mizobuchi, S. Tachibana, J. Shinio, S. Ogawa,
T.
Takeno,
Proc.
Combust.
Inst.
29
(2002)
2009–2015.
[209] E. Mastorakos, A.M.K.P. Taylor, J.H. Whitelaw,
Combust. Flame 91 (1992) 40–54.
[210] M. Besson, P. Bruel, J.L. Champion, B. Deshaies,
J. Thermophys. Heat Transfer 14 (2000) 1.
[211] R. Cabra, T. Myhrvold, J.-Y. Chen, R.W. Dibble,
A.N. Karpetis, R.S. Barlow, Proc. Combust. Inst.
29 (2002) 1881–1888.
[212] J. Helie, A. Trouve´, Proc. Combustion Inst. 28
(2000) 193–201.
[213] Y. Mizobuchi, J. Shinjo, S. Ogawa, T. Takeno,
Understanding of combustion phenomena in a
hydrogen jet lifte ﬂame by use of DNS with
hundred millions of grid points, in: Sixth World
Congress on Computational Mechanics, Beijing,
September 2004, to appear.
42
R.W. Bilger et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 21–42
