
--- Page 1 ---

 
GE Global Research 
 ______________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Technical Information Series
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hydrogen Enrichment Impact on Gas 
Turbine Combustion Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
Bassam Abdelnabi, Ahmed Elkady, Keith Mcmanus, 
Anthony Brand and Daniel Cuppoletti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2015GRC0945, December 2015 
Public (Class 1) 


--- Page 2 ---

 
ii 
 
Copyright© 2015 American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). 
Used with permission. 
 
 


--- Page 3 ---

 
iii 
 
GE Global Research 
Technical Report Abstract Page 
 
Title 
Hydrogen Enrichment Impact on Gas Turbine Combustion Characteristics 
 
Author(s) 
Bassam Abdelnabi 
SSO 
200019195 
Ahmed Elkady 
 
200013789 
Keith Mcmanus 
 
200005585 
Anthony Brand 
 
200003039 
Daniel Cuppoletti1 
 
-- 
 
Component 
Emissions & Fuel Flexibility Laboratory, Niskayuna 
 
 Report 
Number 
2015GRC0945 
Date 
December 2015 
 
Number  
of Pages 
11 
Class 
Public (Class 1) 
  
Key Words: Hydrogen enrichment, Hydorgen doping, Fuel Flexibility, NOx and CO, emissions, 
Gas Turbine combustion 
 
Abstract: The current research provides the impact of H2 enrichment on gas turbine combustion 
characteristics while isolating parameters that influence mixing performance. Aerodynamic 
effects are isolated by using a perforated plate burner to provide simple flame structure (as 
compared to swirling flow). Also, the study is conducted under perfectly premixed conditions to 
isolate the effect of unmixedness. Hydrogen enrichment is varied from 0 to 25 percent by volume. 
The experiments are carried out over a wide flame temperature range that extends from the LBO 
limit up to extreme temperatures. NOx, CO emissions, LBO limits as well as flame luminosity are 
reported with a combustor pressure of 185 psi. 
 
 
Manuscript received Dec 15, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Prioir intern at GE 


--- Page 4 ---

 
1    INTRODUCTION 
In recent decades, gas turbine combustor development has been heavily influenced by 
increasingly stringent emissions requirements. Conventional (non-premixed) combustors have 
wide flex fuel capability, but emissions are a major challenge. The development of the Dry Low 
Emissions (DLE) and Dry Low NOx (DLN) technologies enabled low NOx emissions, but also 
added the risk of flashback, flame holding and combustion dynamics. In addition, flexible fuel 
operation becomes a challenge as a change in fuel propertied may result in a change in the 
operational characteristics of the combustor. It may be a favorable or an adverse change, but it 
needs to be studied carefully and quantified. This research is focused on the impact of H2% on 
emissions (NOx and CO) and LBO. 
The impact of H2 addition on NOx emissions appears to be contradictory in published 
literature.  Griebel et. al  reported similar NOx emissions with and without H2 doping (also 
known as addition or enrichment) for perfectly premixed fuel air mixture [1]. However, they 
showed that H2 piloted operation (H2 not premixed with the fuel air mixture) significantly 
increase the NOx concentrations. Han S. Kim et. al [2] reported an increase in NOx with H2 
addition in premixed mode. The experimental setup of Han S. Kim et. al doesn’t appear to yield 
a perfectly premixed air/fuel mixture. Cozzi F. reported NOx increase with H2 addition for non-
premixed mode of operation [3].  
With regards to impact on Lean Blow Out (LBO), Hydrogen addition to natural gas fired 
combustors was shown to extend the LBO limit [4-6]. Flame imaging studies shows that the 
chemical as well as the physical characteristics of the flame is strongly influenced with H2 
addition [4, 6-8]. This was demonstrated in terms of the change of the location of the heat release 
zone due to increased reactivity. Detailed velocity field investigations showed that with H2 
addition, near LBO, the flame anchoring extends to relatively higher velocity regions (compared 
to no H2 addition) [4, 7-9]. However, all aforementioned studies are conducted under 
atmospheric conditions which provide limited insight on the actual behavior of a pressurized 
combustor. Dagaut and Dayma  showed that, under pressure of 10 bar, OH radical concentration 
increases significantly with H2 enrichment and this explains the increased mixture reactivity 
[10]. P. Griebel et. al showed that increasing the H2 content from 0-20% (by volume) results in a 
linear decrease of the LBO limit [1]. Interestingly, this was reported at pressures of 5 and 14 bars 
and the LBO limits were almost identical with an H2 content of 15-20%, for both pressures. 
They also showed that significant reduction in CO is achieved with H2 enrichment, near the 
LBO limit. 
The combustor under investigation has been extensively tested in the past with studies on 
emissions entitlement, impact of acoustics, kinetics modelling validation, impact of Exhaust Gas 
Recirculation (EGR) as well as 3D CFD validation [11-18]. This research is aimed at evaluating 
the effect of H2 enrichment on the combustion characteristics of a gas turbine combustor burning 
natural gas over a wide flame temperature range that extends from the LBO limit up to 3300 F. 
NOx, CO emissions, LBO limit as well as flame luminosity are reported under a pressure and a 
pre-heat temperature of 185 psia and 600 F respectively. Hydrogen enrichment is varied from 0 
to 25% percent by volume. The study is conducted under perfectly premixed conditions to isolate 
the effect of unmixdness from the results.  
 
 
 
 
 
1


--- Page 5 ---

 
2    NOMENCLATURE 
P3 
= Combustor inlet pressure 
T3 
= Combustor air/Fuel mixture inlet temperature 
TC 
= Thermocouple 
P 
= Pressure 
P/P 
= Percentage pressure drop across Combustor 
NOx 
= Nitric Oxides 
CO 
= Carbon Monoxide 
O2 
= Oxygen 
CO2 
= Carbon dioxide 
H2 
= Hydrogen 
ppmvd 
= Particle per million volume dry 
Tflame  
= Flame temperature based on O2 emissions 
ms 
= millisecond 
ppm/ms  = Particle per million per millisecond 
ft/s 
= Velocity in feet’s/second 
 
 
3     EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND TEST CONDITIONS: 
3.1 Experimental facility 
The test setup is very similar to that of Elkady et. al [14]. The ASME stamped pressure 
vessel has a diameter of 8’’ with pressure and temperature ratings of 300 psia and 1100°F, 
respectively. Details of the pressure vessel with air, fuel, water and exhaust connections are 
shown in Figure 1. Air is supplied through two independent feeds for combustion and cooling 
which are metered separately. High-pressure, preheated combustion air is connected to a T-
connection where the fuel is injected. Prior to entering the combustor, the fuel and air mixture 
passes through a tube bundle, as shown in Figure 2, having a length greater than 200 tube 
diameters to achieve condition close to perfect mixedness. A number of thermocouples are 
installed on the tube surface to monitor for auto-ignition and flashback. These T/C’s, along with 
combustor inlet temperature (T3) T/C, are connected to an interlock system that shuts down the 
fuel supply if auto ignition or flashback occurs (in the tube bundle or at the nozzle inlet). The 
cooling air is directed to the outer side of the combustor to balance the pressure across the liner. 
The exhaust gases emanating from the liner are mixed with the spent cooling air in the exhaust 
plenum where cooling water is injected to reduce the exhaust temperatures upstream of a throttle 
pressure control valve. The cooled exhaust gases are directed through the exhaust piping and 
released to the atmosphere. 
The fuel used in this study is a typical pipeline natural gas having a methane content of 
approximately 96% doped with H2 ranging from 0-25%. Preheated 565°F is utilized to provide 
both combustion and liner cooling air.  The total preheated air mass flow rate ranges between 1-
2.4 lbm/sec depending on the operating conditions. Flame temperatures are varied from lean 
blow-out (LBO) up to 3300 F. Combustion air is metered using a venturi with an accuracy of 
better than 1%. Fuel is metered using a Coriolis type mass flow meter with an accuracy of 
0.05%.  
 
2


--- Page 6 ---

 
 
Figure 1.  Pressure vessel and air/fuel connections. 
 
 
Figure 2. Air /Fuel mixing tube with surface temperature monitoring 
3.2 Combustor and Optical access 
The combustor assembly is illustrated in Figure 3. The assembly comprises an inlet manifold 
with a conical entrance, burner, dome flange, quartz liner, cooling air sleeve and a mounting 
plate to assemble the combustor to the high pressure vessel. The air fuel mixing tube is 
connected to the conical entrance of the inlet manifold to straighten the reactant stream prior to a 
perforated plate that stabilizes the flame in the combustor. Measurements of combustor inlet 
pressure (P3) and inlet temperature (T3) are made at the inlet cone. Combustor is designed with a 
residence time of 20ms. 
Details of the perforated flame stabilizer are shown in Figure 4. The stabilizer also serves as 
a flame arrestor, preventing flashback of the flame into the inlet manifold. The flame arrestor 
tubes have a diameter of 0.06 inch while the flame stabilizer tubes have a diameter of 
0.125’’(3.175 mm) arranged in a manner similar  to the one used by Leonard et al. [1] and 
Elkady et al. [14]. The perforated plate is made of Inconel 718 and has 36 holes arranged as 
shown in Figure 4. The tube spacing is ¼’’ (6.35 mm) with the center hole designed to fit a ¼ 
inch igniter (hydrogen torch).  
3.3 Emissions Sampling 
Combustion products are sampled using a water-cooled gas sampling probe placed on an 
axial traverse. The sample is then transferred to the sample-conditioning unit via heated line 
passing through a heated filter. A stream of the sample is then cooled, dried, and sent to a gas 
sampling system for CO2, O2, UHC, and CO measurement. The other stream remains heated 
before entering the NOx analyzer to eliminate loss of NO2 The gas sampling unit is calibrated 
3


--- Page 7 ---

 
using standard calibration gases. The analyzers are spanned prior to tests and then checked 
during and after the experiments to ensure no drift.  A recent gauge repeatability and 
reproducibility analysis (gauge R&R) was performed on the NOx analyzer confirming a 
measurement accuracy of +/- 1 ppm of the full range. In this report, NOx emissions are corrected 
and reported to a 15% O2 level by volume. 
  
 
Figure 3. Combustor with Quarts liner 
 
 
Figure 4. Perforated flame burner. 
 
3.4 Test conditions and data acquisition 
Experiments are conducted at P3 of ~185. The combustor residence time is ~14 ms. The 
combustor pressure drop (P/P3) depends on operating conditions. The stabilizing jet velocity 
(calculated based on preheated air flow) varied in the range of 44-50 ft/s (13.41-15.23 m/s) 
depending on the test conditions. 
Real-time data is acquired at a frequency of 1Hz. Reported data point represent an average of 
8-10 consecutive data samples. Maximum NOx standard deviation is roughly ±0.8ppm (1.9% 
mean value). The reported average P3 and T3 has a typical standard deviation of ±1.2 psi (0.08 
bar) and ±4F (2.2 K) respectively.  Flame temperatures are calculated using fuel-air ratios based 
on metered air and fuel flows or the O2 and/or CO2 percentages in the sampled combustor 
products.  The latter technique is valid when complete combustion occurs; i.e., at flame 
temperature above the LBO limits.  In this study, the flame temperature based on O2 and CO2 
typically match to within 10-15 degrees.  In addition, the flame temperature based on metered air 
4


--- Page 8 ---

 
and fuel matches with the temperature based on O2 emissions within 1%. In this paper, reported 
flame temperatures are calculated based on O2 concentrations.  The uncertainty in flame 
temperatures is estimated to be ±40F (22.2 K). 
4     RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
4.1 Impact of H2 doping on NOx emissions  
Figure 5 shows the effect of hydrogen addition on NOx emissions corrected to 15% exhaust 
O2.  The results demonstrate that there is minimal to no effect of H2 enrichment on the NOx 
levels (up to 25% addition). To provide an insight on this behavior, it is of importance to study 
the impact on H2 addition on Tflame.  
Figure 6 shows the Tflame vs equivalence ratio for H2 blends ranging from 0 -100%. The 
temperatures calculated from equilibrium assumption are similar to the experimentally 
determined values.  The flame temperatures with hydrogen addition are higher than the pure 
natural gas flames, but there is very little difference in flame temperature below 50% hydrogen.  
The difference is around 15 degrees with 25% hydrogen. However, the increase is dramatic 
beyond that regime.  
This impact of H2 on Tflame provides possible explanation on why published data appears to 
be contradictory when it comes to impact on NOx emissions. For example, taking close look at 
the data published by Han S. Kim et. Al [2], we notice that they reported NOx increase under 
premixed mode, but the H2 percentage was between 40-60%. It appears that the difference is 
driven by the Tflame difference. 
The sensitivity to flame temperature is because the dominant reaction in the thermal NOx 
generation mechanism (O + N2 ↔ NO + N) is dependent on flame temperature. A closer look at 
the Figure 5 shows that the NOx emissions are fraction of a ppm higher with Hydrogen 
enrichment. This is attributed to the increased OH concentration which contributes to the NOx 
generation through the extended Zeldovich mechanism (N + OH ↔ NO + H).  
It is of prime important to maintain constant Tflame while doing such comparison. Several 
publications donot to take that into consideration even when studying the impact of air preheat 
temperature. Actually, air preheat temperature has a pronounced effect on Tflame so a 
comparison under the same equivalence ratio doesnot provide back to back comparison.  
 
 
Figure 5. Impact of H2 % on NOx emissions 
 
5


--- Page 9 ---

 
 
Figure 6. Impact of H2 addition on flame temperature 
4.2 Impact of H2 doping on CO emissions and LBO.  
Flame shape provides valuable information when it comes to understanding flame CO and 
LBO behavior. Figure 7 shows the flame structure for the natural gas flame (left) and the 
hydrogen enriched natural gas flame with 25% H2 addition (right).  The flame resides slightly 
closer to the burner with hydrogen due to the increase in flame speed.  The most notable 
difference is that the hydrogen enriched flame appears blurrier than the natural gas flame due to 
the dilution of the CH radical.  The overall flame structure does not change dramatically for the 
hydrogen amounts considered in this study.  At the highest hydrogen volume fractions used some 
flashback was experienced at high temperatures where the flame speed is highest.   
Figure 8 presents the effect of H2 enrichment on CO emissions. There is no effect on the CO 
emissions with hydrogen enrichment until the LBO limit is approached.  Up to this point the 
main generation mechanism for CO is dissociation which is driven by Tflame and hence no 
effect on CO in this regime. However, the story is different once LBO is approached.  
Figure 8 shows that at a temperature of 2640 F, addition of H2 reduces the CO concentration 
from 500 ppm to single digit ppm even if the H2 percentage is as low as 5%. Figure 9 shows the 
flame shape with and without H2 addition under such conditions. Operating under this regime, 
close to the LBO limit, the flame temperature is low and most of the oxidation reactions rates 
decrease significantly. However, the increase in OH concentration that associates H2 addition 
promotes oxidation reactions (CO+OH=CO2+H) and CO is oxidized to CO2. This explanation is 
supported by flame images given in Figure 9. It is clear that flame stability is significantly 
improved (anchoring toward stabilizer) and flame length is also shorter with H2 addition.  
For design purposes, it is important to translate that behavior in terms of impact on LBO. 
Figure 10 shows the impact of H2 addition on LBO. The curve shows a straight line relationship 
for the range of H2 concentrations used in this study. On average there is ~ 7% decrease in LBO 
temperature per percent H2 added.  
  
 
Figure 7. Flame luminosity images (a) NG/Air flame and (b) NG+25%H2/Air flame at 3250 F. 
6


--- Page 10 ---

 
     
 
 
Figure 8. Impact of hydrogen addition on CO emissions (corrected to 15% oxygen). 
 
 
Figure 9. Flame luminosity near LBO (a) NG/Air flame and (b) NG+H2/Air flame. 
 
 
Figure 10. Impact of H2 addition on LBO. 
4.3 Chemical Kinetics modelling  
A chemical network reacting model was constructed to be utilized to understand the impact 
of H2 enrichment on NOx generation. The simplified model is shown in Figure 11. The network 
consists of an inlet, a Perfectly Stirred Reactor (PSR) and a Plug Flow Reactor (PFR).  A major 
simplification in the model is possible since the air and fuel are perfectly premixed before being 
introduced to the nozzle. Table 1 shows a summary of the input to the reactor network. The 
reactor network was run for all cases and all flame temperatures of interest. 
Figure 12 shows a comparison between the NOx emissions collected from the experiments 
and reactor network model. Only the data with no hydrogen (pure natural gas) is shown. Also, a 
correction of flame temperature due to heat loss is provided on the plot. It is clear that the model 
7


--- Page 11 ---

 
is capable of predicting the NOx emissions as long as the flame temperature is defined properly. 
Elkady et. al did detailed analysis on this combustor and provided detailed heat loss analysis. 
However, both combustors are not identical as the data presented here is for 14 ms while the data 
they discussed was for 20 ms and did not include H2 enrichment data as we will discuss shortly. 
Figure 13 shows the impact of H2 enrichment using the constructed reactor model. It is clear 
that there limited to no impact as we observed from the experimental data. However, for all the 
cases we ran the PSR residence time was fixed to 0.5 ms. While the experimental data does show 
that there is a limited impact but a close look at the data shows that there is a slight increase in 
the NOx emissions (around 0.5 ppm). The cost of running reactor network model to understand 
this problem is much less than running expensive experiments with laser diagnostics. Therefore, 
the reactor network model was further used to shed more light on this behavior. 
Flame luminosity images (see Figure 7) suggest that there are differences in the flame 
size/location with and without H2 enrichment. Close look at the images shows that the flame is 
pulled back around 20%. This 20% corresponds to ~ ½’’ or 1 ms. Therefore, we increase the 
PFR residence time by 0.5 ms and rerun the model. Figure 8 shows a comparison for the 20% H2 
enrichment case with the standard 0.5 ms and extended residence time with 1 ms. The curve 
shifted with around 0.3 ppm in agreement with the slight increase that was observed form the 
experimental data.  
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Chemical kinetic reactor network for emissions modelling 
 
 
Table 1: Run conditions for chemical kinetics model 
 
PARAMETER 
VALUE 
UNITS 
Total residence time 
14 
ms 
T3 
633 
K 
P3 
12.3 
atm 
Baseline CH4% 
0.95486 
By mass 
Baseline C2H6% 
0.037916 
By mass 
Baseline CO2% 
0.001181 
By mass 
Baseline N2% 
0.00434 
By mass 
H2% 
0-0.04 
By mass 
PSR
PFR
PSR
PFR
Premixed 
Fuel+ Air
PSR
PFR
PSR
PFR
Premixed 
Fuel+ Air
8


--- Page 12 ---

 
 
Figure 12.  Comparison between NOx emissions measured from the experiments vs. modeled using chemical 
kinetics. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Impact of H2 enrichment using chemical kinetics (reactor model). 
 
 
Figure 14.  Impact of effective residence time on NOx emissions using reactor network modelling. 
 
9


--- Page 13 ---

 
5     CONCLUSIONS 
H2 enrichment up to 25% has limited impact on NOx emissions for perfectly premixed 
combustion. This was shown both from the experimental data that was collected under high 
pressure in a perfectly premixed combustor as well as from a reactor network model. The slight 
increase may be attributed to the change in flame shape and hence the change in effective 
residence time since H2 addition typically results in flame sitting closer to the fuel nozzle. Flame 
luminosity images show this behavior for the combustor under investigation. The discrepancy in 
published literature is due to comparison at non-identical flame temperature conditions.  At a 
given equivalence ratio the flame temperature changes slightly with and without H2 addition 
only up to ~30% beyond which the change is dramatic. H2 enrichment has significant impact on 
extending the LBO limit. Data shows that the derivative is ~ 7% decrease in LBO temperature 
per percent H2 added. 
 
 
10


--- Page 14 ---

 
6     REFRENCES 
 
1. 
Griebel, P., E. Boschek, and P. Jansohn, Lean Blowout Limits and NOx Emissions of Turbulent, 
Lean Premixed, Hydrogen-Enriched Methane/Air Flames at High Pressure. Journal of 
Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 2007. 129(2): p. 404. 
2. 
Kim, H., V. Arghode, and A. Gupta, Flame characteristics of hydrogen-enriched methane–air 
premixed swirling flames. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2009. 34(2): p. 1063-1073. 
3. 
Cozzi, F. and A. Coghe, Behavior of hydrogen-enriched non-premixed swirled natural gas 
flames. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2006. 31(6): p. 669-677. 
4. 
Schefer and R., Hydrogen enrichment for improved lean flame stability. International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy, 2003. 28(10): p. 1131-1141. 
5. 
Nguyen, O. and S. Samuelsen. The Effect of Discrete Pilot Hydrogen Dopant Injection on the 
Lean Blowout Performance of a Model Gas Turbine Combustor. in The International Gas 
Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition. 1999. Indianapolis. 
6. 
Jackson, G.S., et al., Influence of H2 on the Response of Lean Premixed CH4 Flames to High 
Strained Flows. Combustion and Flame, 2003. 132(3): p. 503-511. 
7. 
Tuncer, O., S. Acharya, and J. Uhm, Dynamics, NOx and flashback characteristics of confined 
premixed hydrogen-enriched methane flames. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2009. 
34(1): p. 496-506. 
8. 
Schefer, R.W. Combustion Of Hydrogen-Enriched Methane In A Lean Premixed Swirl Burner. in 
Proceedings of the 2001 DOE Hydrogen Program Review. 2001. 
9. 
Wicksall, D., et al., The interaction of flame and flow field in a lean premixed swirl-stabilized 
combustor operated on H/CH/air. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 2005. 30(2): p. 2875-
2883. 
10. 
Dagaut, P. and G. Dayma, Hydrogen-enriched natural gas blend oxidation under high-pressure 
conditions: Experimental and detailed chemical kinetic modeling. International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy, 2006. 31(4): p. 505-515. 
11. 
Leonard, G. and S. Correa. NOx Formation in Premixed High-Pressure Lean Methane Flames. in 
Fossil Fuel Combustion Symposium: 13th Annual Energy-Sources Technology Conference and 
Exhibition. 1990. New Orleans, USA. 
12. 
ElKady, A.M., et al., Application of Exhaust Gas Recirculation in a DLN F-Class Combustion 
System for Postcombustion Carbon Capture. Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 
2009. 131(3): p. 034505. 
13. 
Evulet, A.T., et al., On the Performance and Operability of GE’s Dry Low NOx Combustors 
utilizing Exhaust Gas Recirculation for PostCombustion Carbon Capture. Energy Procedia, 
2009. 1(1): p. 3809-3816. 
14. 
Elkady, A.M., et al. Gas Turbine Emission Characteristics In Perfectly Premixed Combustion. in 
Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo 2011: Power for Land, Sea and Air. 2011. Vancouver, 
Canada: GT2011-46470. 
15. 
Ahmed, M.E., et al. Exhaust Gas Recirculation in DLN F-Class Gas Turbines for Post-
Combustion CO2 Capture. in ASME Turbo Expo 2008: Power for Land, Sea, and Air. 2015: 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
16. 
Elkady, A.M., et al. Exhaust Gas Recirculation Performance in Dry Low Emissions Combustors. 
in ASME 2011 Turbo Expo: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition. 2015: American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
17. 
Graham, G., et al. Modeling CO With Flamelet-Generated Manifolds: Part 2 — Application. in 
ASME Turbo Expo 2012: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition. 2015: American Society 
of Mechanical Engineers. 
18. 
Karim, G.G., et al. Modeling CO With Flamelet-Generated Manifolds: Part 1—Flamelet 
Configuration. in ASME Turbo Expo 2012: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition. 2015: 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
11
