
--- Page 1 ---

Section III
Burner Designs
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 2 ---

11 High-Velocity Burners
Tom Robertson, Todd A. Miller, and John Newby
CONTENTS
11.1 
Introduction 
11.2 
Types of High-Velocity Burners
11.2.1 
Premix Burners
11.2.2 
Conventional Nozzle Mix Burners
11.2.3 
Iso-Jet Burner
11.2.4 
Air-Staged Nozzle Mix High-Velocity Burner
11.2.4.1 “Jet Can” Burner
11.2.4.2 “Cup” Burner
11.2.5 
“Tube Burners” with Thin-Walled, Self-Supporting Tiles
11.3 
Jet Theory
11.3.1 
Free Turbulent Jets 
11.3.2 
Some Example Calculations
11.3.3 
High-Velocity Burner Installation and Chamber Effects
11.3.3.1 Recessed Burners
11.3.3.2 Tile Exit Geometry 
11.3.4 
Effect of Multiple Burners
11.3.4.1 Centerline Spacing
11.3.4.2 Opposed vs. Staggered Wall Placement
11.4 
High-Velocity Burner Design 
11.4.1 
Delayed Mixing/Cup Style Air Staging Designs
11.4.2 
Fast Mixing Designs
11.4.3 
Ignition: Direct Spark, Premix Pilots
11.4.4 
Flame Supervision
11.4.5 
Tiles
11.4.6 
Light Oil, High-Velocity Burners
11.5 
Heat Transfer
11.5.1 
Burner Selection and Sizing
11.5.2 
Material Heating Approaches with High-Velocity Burners
11.5.2.1 Solid and Large-Shape Heating
11.5.2.2 Densely Packed Loads
11.5.2.3 Well-Spaced Loads or Open Settings
11.5.2.4 The Fired Chamber as the Load
11.6 
Control of High-Velocity Combustion Systems
11.6.1 
Fuel/Air Ratio Control
11.6.2 
Fixed Fuel/Air Ratio Turndown (On Ratio Turndown)
11.6.3 
Variable Ratio or “Thermal” Turndown
11.6.4 
Pulse-Firing Input Control
11.6.5 
High-Velocity Oil Burner Control
References
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 3 ---

11.1 INTRODUCTION
The term “high-velocity burner” typically implies a burner with a tile outlet port sized to provide
an exit velocity exceeding 300 ft/s to the combustion products passing through it, with nominal
values in the 400- to 500-ft/s range for commercial products. A high-velocity burner system is
usually conﬁgured to allow the momentum of the burner’s exit combustion product stream to entrain
fully reacted products of combustion (POCs) from the ﬁred chamber. This promotes POC circulation
within the ﬁred chamber with the aim of enhancing temperature uniformity and heat transfer.
High-velocity burners have been extensively used in metallurgical, ceramic, and process appli-
cations since the 1960s. For gas burners, both premix and nozzle-mixing conﬁgurations have been
developed and deployed, while oil burners are only made with nozzle-mixing conﬁgurations.
Although high-velocity burners are often thought of as providing more beneﬁts in low-temperature
applications where the convective heat transfer component is dominant, they have shown themselves
to be equally capable of providing value to high-temperature processes. Fuel efﬁciency, particularly
expressed in terms of speciﬁc fuel consumption (BTU/lb), or speciﬁc fuel consumption rate
(BTU/lb/h), is frequently enhanced over conventionally ﬁred systems. This is especially true where
the ﬁnal exhaust gas temperatures leave the ﬁred chamber closer to the load temperature. In addition,
heating is often accomplished more quickly because the time required for the coldest part of the
load to reach target temperature is reduced.
Economic drivers for the adoption of high-velocity burners include system capital and main-
tenance costs in addition to the efﬁciency, productivity, and quality aspects from improved heat
transfer and temperature uniformity. In many cases, fewer strategically placed high-velocity burners
can provide equivalent or better performance than conventional low- to medium-velocity burner
systems. Given that the costs of the necessary ﬂame supervision and safety controls of a burner system
are a signiﬁcant part of both the capital and ongoing maintenance costs, this potential reduction in
the number of burners alone can provide justiﬁcation for their use.
Modern nozzle mix burners may use excess air to provide a “low-temperature head” jet of
combustion products to heat and stir a low-temperature application. With high-velocity burners,
less excess air is required than would be needed with low- or medium-velocity burners in such an
application, because the high-velocity burner’s jet temperature is diluted faster by entrainment of
cooler products of combustion from the furnace. The momentum of the gas stream from a high-
velocity burner can be used to drive heat into closely packed loads such as brick hacks or piles of
aluminum scrap. It can also be used to advantage to promote jet mixing with surrounding gases in
such applications as cupola afterburners and other fume incineration processes.
Transportable high-velocity burner systems are widely used for the on-site dryout and preheat
of refractory structures such as glass tanks after reconstruction, and the on-site heat treatment of
large, welded steel structures such as high-pressure gas storage tanks, where the steel structure is
externally insulated with slab or blanket and the burner ﬁred inside the vessel, essentially turning
the workpiece into the furnace.
High-velocity burners present challenges to the burner designer. Designers must consider the
characteristics of the required combustion product jet. Many factors inﬂuence the design of the
burner and the selection of its materials of construction, including the temperature of the outlet
stream, the size of the ﬂame envelope in the ﬁred chamber, the jet momentum required to provide
the target process heating, and the target emissions level for NOx, CO, VOCs and HCs for the burner
and the resulting ﬁred process. High temperatures and/or pressures within the burner are signiﬁcant
considerations both for the burner construction and the design and conﬁguration of its mounting
into the ﬁred structure. Burner tile outlet shapes other than the conventional round port can be used
to impart speciﬁc characteristics to the jet.
To take advantage of the jet characteristics requires study of the aerodynamics within the ﬁred
chamber and also of its thermal characteristics. The aerodynamics will be inﬂuenced by the size
and shape of the chamber and the load to be heated, the placement of the burners and exhaust ports
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 4 ---

g
y
leading to the ﬂues, and the control strategy employed. The thermal characteristics will be inﬂuenced
by the heat capacity and losses of the furnace and the load, their distribution relative to the heat
source provided by the burners, the placement and nature of the sensors used to provide the inputs
to the control system, and the actions of the outputs of that system. Optimization of the design and
operation of a high-velocity burner system requires appropriate synergy between all these elements.
Although capable of effective use with most conventional thermal input and fuel/air ratio control
strategies, special systems have been designed to complement the characteristics of the high-velocity
burner’s jet — generically known as “pulse ﬁring systems.” They are available with many proprietary
algorithms to enhance the heating and uniformity of the ﬁred application. Special ﬂow control
hardware has been developed to reliably translate the output of these control systems into air and
fuel ﬂows fed to the high-velocity burners.
Other high-velocity burner characteristics that may be useful to the user include the high excess
air capability of many of the nozzle-mixing designs, which allows their use as self-contained direct
ﬁred air heaters, or the “integral combustion chamber” conﬁguration that can provide assured high
levels of completion of combustion for sub-stoichiometric ﬁring applications such as those where
signiﬁcant free oxygen in the combustion products has an undesirable reaction with the load.
11.2 TYPES OF HIGH-VELOCITY BURNERS
11.2.1 PREMIX BURNERS
In the early 1900s, gas became widely available, and with that came “aerated burners” for higher
input industrial use. Premix (or “air blast”) gas burners were one of the early practical types of
high-input, high-stability burners — with 100% of air and fuel intimately mixed before the point
of ignition and ﬂame attachment within the burner.
The sealed tile premix burner, often called a “tunnel burner” (Figure 11.1) contains the great
majority of the combustion within the tile and thus has a very high outlet temperature for its
combustion gases. The high volume resulting from the high-temperature expansion imparts a high
velocity to the gas stream. Hence, premix burners may be said to be inherently high-velocity burners.
However, they are of limited size, turndown range, and stability and have the disadvantage that the
high heat release inside the tile is taxing for the refractory. The size limitation typically leads to
the use of large numbers of premix burners in a given application. The risk of ﬂashback into large
premix manifolds has made such burner systems unpopular except for applications where their
ability to provide predictably reacted combustion product streams has value. One such application
is a copper shaft melting furnace, running with a sub-stoichiometric fuel/air ratio, where any
signiﬁcant level of free O2 in the products of combustion must be avoided.
FIGURE 11.1 Premix tunnel burner.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 5 ---

11.2.2 CONVENTIONAL NOZZLE MIX BURNERS
The introduction of nozzle mix burners greatly simpliﬁed the control and construction of industrial
combustion systems and furnaces over those using premix burners, because they had a much wider
operating range and could be safely used at much larger thermal inputs.
All burners must operate within the ﬂammability limits of the fuel they are burning. While
true premix burners must operate in a single, narrow ﬂammability window, nozzle mix burners
(Figure 11.2) can have many fuel/air ratio regions within the combustion space of their tiles,
with only the region at the point of ignition being required to be within the ﬂammability limits.
Heat released from regions within ﬂammability limits broadens the limits of adjacent fuel/air
regions permitting them to also burn. It can thus appear that a nozzle mix burner is operating
outside the normal ﬂammability limits of the supplied fuel based on the total fuel and air supplied
to the burner.1
Because nozzle mix burners can run under signiﬁcant excess air conditions, the burner’s air
supply can be set at the maximum setting and the gas ﬂow simply reduced to meet the temperature
demand. The burner air and gas may still have to be turned down during times of low heat demand,
but adding excess air will provide higher velocity than is possible with an equivalent premix
burner at low ﬁre. When fuel was inexpensive, there were few objections to the resulting low
efﬁciency of heating large amounts of excess air to process temperature. Combustion system
designers enjoyed the excess air capability of nozzle mix burners, because the extra velocity allowed
the use of fewer burners to achieve temperature uniformity, reducing costs for larger furnaces.
Combustion system designers also enjoyed the wider stability range of the nozzle mix burners
that introduced a cushion to the previously difﬁcult issue of accurately sizing a combustion system
within the limited turndown range of the premix burner. Nozzle mix burners also introduced the
possibility of ﬁring oil in the same burner structure as gas, resulting in the development of both
oil and dual fuel versions.
In the early to mid-1960s, burner manufacturers started to add restrictions to the tile exits of
their conventional nozzle mix burners (Figure 11.3) to increase exit velocities.2 The higher tile exit
velocity increased the POC circulation in the furnace by entrainment, reducing the amount of excess
air required to achieve good temperature uniformity over that of the conventional nozzle mix burner.
Many nozzle mix burners of this type had very fast fuel/air mixing and provided a clean-burning,
well-deﬁned ﬂame. This is a very desirable characteristic for the heating process but puts a great
deal of thermal stress on the tile refractory. The conventional way of overcoming this problem is
to use an alloy jacket around the tile to contain, support, and seal the refractory against cracks and
leakage of hot gases into the surrounding furnace structure.
FIGURE 11.2 Nozzle mix jet tube burner.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 6 ---

g
y
11.2.3 ISO-JET BURNER
In 1958, the Bickley Iso-Jet® (Nutec Bickley, Philadelphia, PA) burner was introduced as an integral
component of Bickley’s batch kilns.3 The original Iso-Jet consisted of a premix burner core with
secondary air piped through a surrounding tile structure (Figure 11.4) that tempered the hot products
of combustion from the premix core during lower-temperature operations. The resulting high-
velocity jet provided high convective heating and excellent temperature uniformity with a maximum
tile velocity much higher than the nozzle mix burners of the day.
To adjust the furnace temperature, the burner’s control system would balance the premix and
secondary air ﬂows. Gradually reducing the secondary air ﬂow would increase the chamber tem-
perature. To reach high furnace temperatures, the secondary air was turned completely off, while
the premix core continued to operate alone. In this mode, the high-velocity feature was not available,
and temperature uniformity was largely dependent on radiation. This made the Iso-Jet best suited
for batch furnaces with ﬁring schedules requiring long cycle times at low furnace temperatures.
The premix burner core of the Iso-Jet was later replaced with a nozzle mix design to widen its
operating capabilities (Figure 11.5). 
11.2.4 AIR-STAGED NOZZLE MIX HIGH-VELOCITY BURNER
11.2.4.1
“Jet Can” Burner
In the early 1960s, a signiﬁcant amount of development of high-velocity air-staged nozzle mix
burners was carried out by the gas industry in Britain. A commercial burner arising from this work
was the Hotwork High Velocity Burner.4 Based on a design concept similar to a gas turbine combustion
FIGURE 11.3 Nozzle mix burner with restricted tile
exit.
FIGURE 11.4 Iso-Jet (premix core). (Courtesy of Nutec Bickley.3 With permission.)
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 7 ---

chamber, the burner consists of an air body containing a perforated high-temperature alloy can
with a refractory lining followed by a metal-encased high-temperature refractory tile (Figure 11.6).
All fuel enters from the rear of the can where it mixes with a portion of the air circulating from
the impinging jets formed by the rows of perforations in the metal can. The impinging air jets
create a high degree of internal recirculation of the combusting products as they move forward to
meet further air introduced to the can. This design is highly stable and operates at a very high
combustion intensity. The entire structure is designed to complete approximately 85% of the
combustion of a gaseous fuel before the tile exit, and 60% for diesel oil. The hot combustion product
stream exits the reduced port tile at a design velocity around 450 ft/s, with signiﬁcant momentum
and a high entrainment capability. This produces high potential recirculation of the gases within
the furnace with a relatively small ﬂame envelope. These attributes allowed small numbers of these
burners to be used to replace large numbers of then-conventional burners on high-performance
furnaces requiring good temperature uniformity. The high excess air capability of the burner also
allows it to be used as a high-velocity hot gas generator for drying and preheating applications.
11.2.4.2
“Cup” Burner
In 1969, the authors’ company introduced the Tempest® (The North American Manufacturing
Company, Ltd.) high-velocity burner. Similar to earlier high-velocity burners, it was a nozzle mix
burner with a restricted tile exit, which made it possible to produce good temperature uniformity
with less excess air at high ﬁre, but with a number of unique features.
FIGURE 11.5 Iso-Jet III (nozzle mix core). (Courtesy of Nutec Bickley.3 With permission.)
FIGURE 11.6 Jet can burner. (Courtesy of Hotwork Combustion Technology Ltd.4 With permission.)
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 8 ---

The Tempest burner was relatively inexpensive, had a square refractory tile, and integral air and
gas ﬂow metering elements to reduce installation costs. The tile was partially jacketed with metal
to prevent hot gases from leaking out into the surrounding refractory of the furnace. An internal
cup-shaped stabilizer shielded the refractory from the base ﬂame, and staged the air introduction to
the fuel inside the tile (Figure 11.7). As the overall fuel/air ratio approached stoichiometric, more
of the combustion would take place outside the tile in the furnace, which suppressed internal
temperatures and reduced the duty requirement of the tile refractories over those of a design such
as the “Jet Can” described above. The excess air limit was also very high, making it possible to hold
a furnace temperature below 200°F simply by reducing the fuel rate (thermal turndown) while the
air remained at its maximum setting.
During the 1970s, the Tempest burner became very popular for ﬁring tunnel kilns in brick
manufacture because the burner’s jet ﬂame could penetrate and release heat deep into a brick hack.
This meant wider furnaces and kilns could be built without temperature uniformity sacriﬁces.
Tempests have also been used as auxiliary “stirring” burners while larger, more luminous ﬂame
burners provide the majority of the heat input to the furnace. During the 1980s and 1990s, most
manufacturers of high-velocity burners embraced the high-velocity cup burner concept and devel-
oped similar designs that continue to be popular. New features of updated Tempests and similar
burners include self-supporting tiles, metal tiles, shaped tile exits, and dual fuel capability.
11.2.5 “TUBE BURNERS” WITH THIN-WALLED, SELF-SUPPORTING TILES
Ceramic ﬁber wall construction became an alternative to hard refractory walls in the 1970s. Ceramic
ﬁber is unable to support a conventional refractory burner tile, requiring the use of tile jackets or
other similar measures. Advances in ceramic materials and fabrication techniques have made it
possible to produce thin-section, self-supporting high-velocity burner tiles. Thin and uniform tile
sections are much more resistant to thermal shock than thick nonuniformly walled ceramic struc-
tures. The new ceramic materials are denser, stronger, and have lower porosity than traditional
refractory, which makes them ideal for containing the hot reacting gases produced inside high-
velocity burners. Reaction-bonded silicon carbide and alumina composites are the most often used
materials for self-supporting tiles. Heat-resisting metal alloys are also used in low-temperature
applications.
The self-supporting tile is also used to reduce the overall size and weight of the extended-length
burners required for thick-walled structures such as those typical of tunnel kilns. The geometry of
the ﬂame stabilizer in a “tube burner” is best described as a disk centered in the tile with one or
FIGURE 11.7 Nozzle mix cup burner.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 9 ---

more rows of holes through it and air passages around it. A central fuel nozzle supplies fuel to the
burner head. In some respects, these burners’ ﬂame stabilizers and resultant ﬂames are similar to
those of the early nozzle-mix high-velocity burners previously discussed. They have similar excess
air limits and burn a similar proportion of the fuel within their tiles, but their designs are much
more reﬁned and they are of much lighter weight (Figure 11.8).
Ignition and ﬂame detection must take place in front of the ﬂame stabilizer disk. For ignition,
long, single-electrode spark igniters are fed through from the burner back plate to the front of the
stabilizer with the spark gap grounding to the stabilizer or fuel tube. Flame rods for ionization
ﬂame detection are common with tube burners and are of similar construction to the spark igniter,
but with an electrode typically extending further past the stabilizer air disk.
Most high-velocity burners are designed to ﬁt 9- to 12-inch-thick walls. Extended-length burners
are available for mounting in thicker furnace walls. These burners have a design emphasis on small-
diameter extension tubes and tiles to simplify installation. Standard insertion lengths vary from 12
to 48 inches, with longer special lengths available. Extended-length tube burners can have an
extended metal body, an extended self-supporting tile, or both, to pass through these thick walls
(Figure 11.9). To reduce the heated length of the assembly, the burner’s stabilizer may be well
inside the tile. The length of the tube may be engineered to ﬁt a speciﬁc wall thickness, or made
with some means of adjusting the length.
Extended-length burners can be retroﬁtted to existing thick-wall kilns with little or no downtime
by normal core-drilling techniques. These eliminate the need for access to the inside of the kiln or
furnace for refractory modiﬁcations.
11.3 JET THEORY
The foundation of all beneﬁts associated with high-velocity burners is rooted in ﬂuid dynamics
and, more speciﬁcally, in turbulent jet theory. While it is not within the scope of this text to fully
develop the mechanics of free turbulent jet ﬂow, it is important to provide the reader with a
fundamental understanding of the ﬂuid behavior. More thorough treatment can be found in reference
texts5–10 on this subject.
FIGURE 11.8 Nozzle mix tube burner with self-supporting tile.
FIGURE 11.9 Nozzle mix tube burner with extended self-supporting tile.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 10 ---

11.3.1 FREE TURBULENT JETS
To simplify this presentation, certain assumptions must be made regarding the character of the jet
ﬂow. Free jets are those that are not acted upon by their surroundings. Other than that through
which the jet emanates, there are no walls or surfaces that can constrain the ﬂow ﬁeld. A typical
arrangement for a free turbulent jet is shown in Figure 11.10.
As shown, the emerging jet carries with it some of the surrounding ﬂuid, which was originally
at rest, due to the friction developed on its periphery. The turbulent shear created by the two ﬂuids
moving at different velocities deﬁnes the jet boundary. As the ﬂow progresses in the x-direction,
the mass ﬂow within the jet boundary increases due to the turbulent shear. As the same time, the
centerline velocity decays with distance. The jet itself is the only source of momentum in the ﬂow
ﬁeld and that momentum must be conserved at each point. Hence, as the jet spreads out, its mass
ﬂow increases and its velocity decreases, but the total jet momentum remains constant. For a given
application, the most interesting parameters to determine are the centerline velocity u(x), the width
of the jet δ(x), the mass ﬂow m(x), and the entrainment rate E(x).
While the near-ﬁeld area of a jet can be quite complex, looking at the far-ﬁeld ﬂow dynamics
results in a powerful simplifying assumption. In this case, the density ρ is assumed equal to the
entrained ﬂuid density ρ∞. The conservation of the source momentum ﬂux Jo then dictates the
other properties as a function of distance from the nozzle. From the cited reference sources,5,8,9
we have:
(11.1)
The ﬂow width is proportional to distance x, and speciﬁcally:
(11.2)
Also, the decay of the centerline velocity is:
where
 
(11.3)
FIGURE 11.10 Diagram of a free turbulent jet.
u(x)
J
x
o
1
=




∞
−
7 2
1 2
.
/
ρ
δ( )
x
0.44 x
=
u(x)
u
6.5
x
d
o
1
*
=




−
d
m
J
o
o
∗
∞
=
2
1 2
(
) /
πρ
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 11 ---

Any arbitrary source produces a far-ﬁeld ﬂow equivalent to that produced by a circular nozzle of
diameter d* issuing ﬂuid at a uniform velocity uo and density ρ. When the jet is circular with a
uniform exit velocity proﬁle, the expression for d* reduces to:
(11.4)
Also, the resultant mass m(x) and entrainment relationships can be determined:
 
(11.5)
(11.6)
An often-surprising result is that the entrainment rate is independent of position downstream of
the nozzle.
Finally, by shifting coordinates upstream in the ﬂow ﬁeld from the plane of the jet exit, a single
point source can be deﬁned. This point source is called the virtual origin of the jet. It is located at
a position x = 3.14 d* upstream from the jet exit plane.
One other deﬁned jet parameter that is frequently used is the potential core length. It is
essentially the point downstream of the jet exit plane at which the centerline velocity begins to
decay. This point is typically ﬁve to eight jet diameters downstream of the exit, depending on the
geometry of the jet exit. These jet parameters are illustrated in Figure 11.11.
While the formulas and calculations can be daunting, the insights gained from them are
powerful. Perhaps the ﬁrst and simplest involves the jet spread δ(x). Looking at the inverse tangent
of 0.44 (Equation 11.2), the free jet expands at an angle of just over 23° or an 11.5° half angle.
This expansion becomes important when looking at burner-to-burner interactions as well as when
making quick estimations of impingement locations in conﬁned jet problems.
11.3.2 SOME EXAMPLE CALCULATIONS
Now that the basis for high-velocity burner ﬂow ﬁelds is deﬁned, a few speciﬁc examples should
help quantify the implications of the theory.
For the base case, mass ﬂow and jet exit pressure are representative of conditions found in a
1.0-MMBTU/h high-velocity burner operating with 10% excess air at 60°F with 0.5 psig of upstream
nozzle pressure. Case 5 is a simpliﬁed example of a partially combusted high-velocity burner, much
FIGURE 11.11 Virtual origin and potential core of a free jet.
d
d
* = 



∞
ρ
ρ
0
1 2
0
/
m(x)
0.282(
J )
x
o
1/2
=
∞
ρ
E(x)
m(x
dx) – m(x)
dx
d
dx m(x)
0.282(
J )
o
1/2
≡
+
=
=
∞
ρ
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 12 ---

like the cup burner described previously. Likewise, Case 6 represents the “jet can” burner. It is
important to note that the continuing chemical reaction alters the rate of entrainment along the
burner axis and these changes are not predicted by the cases shown below. They do, however,
provide directional insights into burner behavior. Readers are referred to Tachina and Dahm9 for a
more complete theoretical development of reacting jet ﬂows.
The base parameters for each case are deﬁned in Table 11.1. Making the calculations for mass
ﬂow and centerline velocity results in the derived data of Table 11.2. Table units are mass ﬂow,
slugs/s; velocity, ft/s; distance, ft; pressure, psig; temperature, °F.
Cases 1 through 3 are all isothermal so d = d* for each. The jet parameters are self-similar and
scale directly with x/d. For each case, the velocity drops by half at x/d = 9.6 and the mass ﬂow
doubles at x/d = 3.14. Case 4 shows the jet change that occurs when a cold jet penetrates a hot
environment. The centerline velocity maintains a higher value for a greater distance compared to
the base case. Additionally, it takes a much greater distance to achieve the same mass ratio between
the jet ﬂuid and the entrained ﬂuid. Compared to the base case, the jet entering an 1800°F
environment must travel 2.08 times further to achieve similar effects. This entire change is seen in
the scaling translation from d to d*.
TABLE 11.1
Sample Jet Conﬁgurations
Case
Description
1. Base case
1.0 MMBTU/h fuel with 10% excess air, nonreacting, delivered to a nozzle at 60°F and 
0.5 psig upstream pressure into a 60°F furnace environment
2. Low velocity
Same as base but with velocity equal to one half of base case exit velocity
3. Increased mass ﬂow
Same as base but with mass increased to represent 4.0 MMBTU/h
4. Hot furnace
Same as base but with an 1800°F furnace environment
5. Low reaction progress
Same as base but with a partially reacted 900°F gas mixture, 17% of stoichiometric fuel 
combusted at tile exit
6. High reaction progress
Same as base but with a mostly reacted 2600°F gas mixture, 63% of the stoichiometric
fuel combusted at tile exit
TABLE 11.2
Mass and Velocity Calculations for Sample Jet Conﬁgurations
1. Base Case
   2. Low 
    Velocity
 3. Increased 
   Mass Flow
   4. Hot 
   Furnace
   5. Low 
   Reaction 
   Progress
   6. High 
   Reaction 
   Progress
Mass Flow, mo
0.007212
0.007212
0.028848
0.007212
0.007212
0.007212
Velocity, uo
200
100
200
200
325
487
Nozzle ID, do
0.1416
0.2006
0.2832
0.1416
0.1801
0.2206
Nozzle Pressure
0.5
0.125
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
To
60
60
60
60
900
2600
Tinf
60
60
60
1800
1800
1800
Jo
1.4467
0.7215
5.7869
1.4467
2.3419
3.5128
d*
0.1416
0.2006
0.2832
0.2952
0.2322
0.1896
Virtual origin
−0.445
−0.630
−0.889
−0.927
−0.729
−0.595
x at u = u/2
1.36
1.92
2.72
2.84
2.23
1.82
x at m = 2*mo
0.446
0.631
0.89
0.929
0.73
0.596
x at m = 5*mo
1.78
2.52
3.56
3.71
2.92
2.38
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 13 ---

Cases 5 and 6 are representations of actual high-velocity burners. Different high-velocity burner
designs use different stabilizing techniques that result in widely varying combustion reaction
progress, or degree of completion, at the tile exit. In the cup-stabilized burner, only about 15 to
30% of the combustion is complete at the tile exit, whereas a jet can type burner may have over
60% complete. As the reaction progress goes up, the tile exit diameter must also increase. This is
due to the initial requirement of a constant upstream pressure; thus, the greater the degree of reaction
completeness, the larger the exit diameter. However, at the same time, the exit velocity increases.
All these changes are reﬂected appropriately in d*; the greater the degree of reaction completion,
the smaller the value of d*. As shown in the Table 11.2, there is a big difference in performance
between these cases and Case 4. At every point downstream, the jet with the higher exit temperature
has entrained more mass and maintained a higher centerline velocity.
11.3.3 HIGH-VELOCITY BURNER INSTALLATION AND CHAMBER EFFECTS
While the free turbulent jet analogy provides useful insight, the application of high-velocity burners
in operating furnaces creates additional challenges. In many of these applications, temperature
uniformity, without product overheating, is the desired objective. In these cases, entrainment of
large volumes of furnace gas limit the temperature of the overall ﬂame envelope while providing
enhanced convective heat transfer. Optimization of these effects must be considered on a case-by-
case basis, but there are some universal approaches to maximizing the beneﬁt.
11.3.3.1
Recessed Burners
In many applications, the distance from the burner outlet to the product being heated is very short.
This is typically due to efﬁcient furnace construction and loading where little chamber volume is
wasted. In these applications, burners are frequently recessed into the burner wall. This approach
effectively moves the virtual origin and exit plane of the burner away from the work and allows
for a greater amount of entrainment in the limited space available. This results in a lower overall
temperature of the combustion product gas, but with greater mass ﬂow, impacting the load. Based
on typical wall thickness, a recess distance of as much as 12 in. can be achieved.
There are several limitations that must be considered with this technique. First, the technique
is best used when the jet is free to entrain the furnace atmosphere from all directions. If any lateral
conﬁnement of the jet is present near the original jet exit position, it may not be possible to entrain
additional products of combustion. Second, the recess cannot be so deep as to permit the jet to
fully expand into the space created by the exit relocation. For example, let’s look at a 1-in. diameter
circular jet, retracted 6 in. into a wall, but with only a 3-in. diameter hole at the wall plane
(Figure 11.12a).
Using the rule-of-thumb for jet expansion (23°), such a jet would expand and impinge inside
the recess at a position roughly 5 in. from the jet exit. Once this occurs, all of the initial jet mass
requirements are fulﬁlled by the recirculation of the jet itself, not by outside combustion product
gases. Additionally, instead of having a high-velocity, 1-in. diameter jet emanating from the wall,
we now have a 3-in. diameter, low-velocity jet producing far less bulk ﬂuid motion and resulting
in an elevated ﬂame temperature. The condition of jet attachment within the burner recess must be
prevented or, not only will the beneﬁts of recessing be lost, but performance will be reduced beyond
that of the base case. Figure 11.12b shows a burner properly recessed in the chamber wall. In some
cases, a divergent taper in the sides of the recess can be advantageous. Not only does it eliminate
jet attachment, but also opens up the area around the exit, allowing more combustion product gases
to have access to the base of the burner jet. Finally, when considering a recessed jet, the chamber
wall operating temperature capability must be considered. “Pulling the ﬂame back” within the wall
to a new position without appropriate adjacent insulating material can cause localized furnace wall
and shell material overheating.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 14 ---

A further caution on this technique is the need to consider the possibility of the deposition of
material from the furnace gases drawn into the recess in front of the jet. Not only can such accumulation
render further recirculation impossible, but it can also cause the concentration of undesirable elements
or compounds in a hot environment and lead to corrosion damage of the surrounding materials.
11.3.3.2
Tile Exit Geometry
Local entrainment can be increased by jet exit geometry changes and exit treatments. The most common
exit geometry change is from a round burner jet discharge to a slotted shape (Figure 11.13). This change
to the exit shape maintains the jet mass and momentum, but redistributes it in another conﬁguration.
As higher aspect ratio designs are considered, the ratio of jet perimeter to area increases. Consider
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 11.12 Schematic of a recessed burner installation.
FIGURE 11.13 Round and slotted high-velocity burner tile exits.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 15 ---

a 1-in. diameter jet exit with an area of .785 sq. in. Creating a slot of the same area with an aspect
ratio of 5:1 results in an increase of jet discharge perimeter of over 50% compared to the round
exit. This results in quicker dissipation of the potential core and faster jet breakup. The effects of
entrainment act more quickly on the long side of the exit while reducing entrainment on the short
side.
The slotted exit is ideal for several chamber geometries. If constraints such as walls or supports
are present in the chamber, the slot can optimize the product gas entrainment along an axis normal
to the direction of conﬁnement. One example is a case where burner-to-burner spacing is too close
and jets tend to interfere with one another. If sufﬁcient room is present above and below the burner
exit, a slotted tile can be used to draw more product gas from these regions and reduce the burner
interference. Another example is a case where the work is arranged in narrow ﬁring lanes and tight
temperature uniformity is required. A slotted exit can be used to entrain greater quantities of product
gas in the direction of the work, reducing the temperature of the gases in contact with the load.
This both promotes uniformity and prevents product overheating. Shaped exits are not as good as
round exits for penetrating dense loads and ﬁring wide furnaces.
With the improvements in materials technology during the past few years, new approaches to
jet breakup and enhanced entrainment continue to be explored. Many of these techniques use tabs
or other small devices to introduce vortices into the jet ﬂow at the burner exit plane. Even small
serrations applied to a round exit can have an effect on the core breakup.
11.3.4 EFFECT OF MULTIPLE BURNERS
The full beneﬁts of enhanced convective heat transfer and a high level of temperature uniformity
can only be achieved by proper burner placement. Our analysis thus far has been limited to a single
free jet. But as we look to apply jet dynamics to our heating system, burner placement and burner-
to-burner effects, as well as the geometry of the chamber and properties of the material to be heated,
must all be considered. It is important to properly space the burners in both the horizontal and
vertical planes of the chamber in order to get as even heating as possible.
11.3.4.1
Centerline Spacing
The ﬁrst consideration in placing burners on an application is the development of the reacting gas
jet. In the sections above, it was demonstrated that a typical free jet expands with δ(x) = 0.44x, or
just over a 23° included angle. This parameter is used to set burner-to-burner centerline spacing in
high-velocity applications.
Looking ﬁrst at the effect of burners adjacent to each other, either horizontally or vertically,
where the intersection of the jet streams will determine the overall effectiveness of the burner
velocities. Figure 11.14 shows the positions of paired burners on three different centerline spacings.
At a burner centerline spacing of 2 ft, the hot gas “cones” meet approximately 4.5 ft from the
hot face of the burner tile, assuming a point source. In real jets, the spacing will be reduced by the
diameter of the actual jet initial diameter, shortening the intersection distance. As the streams merge,
they are unable to entrain additional product gas at the intersection point and temperatures will not
diminish as rapidly. This can create hot spots in the load. Further, depending on the location of the
load, the two jets may begin to look much more like a single, low-velocity jet. In fact, this is exactly
how such an arrangement is treated on a theoretical basis. The two jets merge together as one, with
a combined mass ﬂow based on the total mass at the point of intersection and new virtual origin.
At burner centerlines of 3 ft and 4 ft, the jet intersection distances are 6.8 ft and 9.1ft, respectively.
It is important to note that the region between burners does not provide for good recirculation
and reduction in temperature for either of the two jets. Each jet has its own mass entrainment
requirements and the two compete for this particular volume. In satisfying this requirement, the
jets will tend to turn toward each other and, in the case of a burner jet, recirculate hot, reacting
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 16 ---

gases back into the ﬂame envelope. Experimental studies3,5 have shown that if burner nozzles are
separated by at least 18 nozzle diameters, no interaction in the ﬂame front will occur. More recent
work has shown that this actually depends on the fuel type, and it has also been shown7 that at
least 26 diameters are required for methane fuel.
11.3.4.2
Opposed vs. Staggered Wall Placement
Under all conditions, the location of burners relative to the load and to each other is important in
achieving the most beneﬁt from the investment in high-velocity burners. For many years, one
practice had been to oppose high-velocity burners to promote a vertical circulation of the hot gases
through the center of the chamber. This works well if the furnace is wide and the burners have
been properly sized to allow the gases to turn upward as they meet (Figure 11.15).
However, in a narrow furnace chamber, the gases impact upon each other, resulting in a stagnant
ﬂow area at the center of the furnace. The impacting gases are the high-temperature, centerline
portion of the combustion jet, resulting in an overheated region of the furnace. For this reason, it
is often advantageous to offset or stagger the burner placement to allow the burner gases to sweep
the full distance across the chamber and be recirculated for improved temperature distribution.
FIGURE 11.14 Effect of burner centerline spacing.
FIGURE 11.15 Typical buoyant jet pattern of an unopposed burner.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 17 ---

Figure 11.16 shows this effect on burners located across the chamber from each other, on 3-ft
and 4-ft centerlines and at 8-ft and 6-ft chamber widths. It shows the relative positioning that must
be considered for the burners to promote good ﬂow across the kiln and load. If the burners are too
close together in either of the arrangements, interference from the turbulent interaction of the gas
streams can be counterproductive to the goals of high-velocity heating. When ﬁring large open
volumes, it is important to remember that staggering the burners will not always provide the best
result. Burners on opposite walls still create dead zones, where gases move slowly or are stagnant
in the region between staggered expanding jets. In this particular case, locating burners to promote
bulk motion of the gases typically provides the best result.
It is also very important to examine the load setting when placing high-velocity burners. Too
little space between the wall and the work will not allow for proper recirculation of the product
gases. Raising the work off the ﬂoor also helps promote good gas recirculation and even heating.
Appropriate product spacing is also important to achieving improved product temperature unifor-
mity by enhanced entrainment and gas recirculation.
Proper ﬂue locations are also critical. Essentially, one must consider the “sinks” in the ﬂow
ﬁeld as well as the “sources.” A poor ﬂue location can cause the high-velocity streams to short-
circuit the furnace chamber, effectively heating only the ﬂue. High-velocity combustion can offer
many beneﬁts, but can only be brought to fruition by a well-designed heating process.
11.4 HIGH-VELOCITY BURNER DESIGN
High-velocity burner design is an exercise in compromise. The most basic difference between the
various designs lies in how the high velocity is achieved. All high-velocity burners have some
amount of tile restriction after the ﬂame stabilizer arrangement. Making the tile exit smaller
increases the exit velocity. The reaction progress inside the tile also affects the exit velocity. As
more combustion is completed in the tile, the gas temperature rises and the gas volume expands,
which increases velocity. The optimum balance between tile exit size and the amount of combustion
allowed to complete in the tile is application and control system speciﬁc.
The amount of the fuel combusted within the burner before the tile exit is a function of the
design of the mixing and ﬂame stabilizing sections of the burner. While more intense mixing will
increase gas outlet temperatures and provide a higher-velocity ﬂame, the internal tile pressure will
also rise, requiring higher inlet pressures for air and fuel to maintain the same ﬂow rate. So, as
fuel is throttled off, airﬂow through the burner will increase due to lower pressures in the tile. The
differences in ﬁring vs. not-ﬁring airﬂow rates are greater in burners that have higher percentages
of combustion taking place in their tile.
FIGURE 11.16 Effect of centerline spacing on opposed burners.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 18 ---

Because of the airﬂow changes due to the ratio settings, high-velocity burners are typically
installed with air and gas ﬂow meters to aid in setting the fuel/air ratio. Oriﬁce meters can be built
into the burner, but external meters are normally more accurate because “ﬂow-smoothing” space
is not restricted.
11.4.1 DELAYED MIXING/CUP STYLE AIR STAGING DESIGNS
All delayed mixing or cup style high-velocity burners have at least one central stabilizer cup where
all of the gas is mixed with a portion of the combustion air. The ﬂame that exits the cup tends to
stay fuel-rich in the center of the tile as it meets the remaining air passing around the outside of
the cup stabilizer. Most of the individual air and gas jets inside the burner run substantially parallel
to each other, slowing the fuel/air mixing. The amount of burning that takes place in the tile depends
on the tile volume and the geometry of the stabilizer. The reacted products and the remaining fuel
and air exit the tile and entrain furnace atmosphere while the balance of the combustion takes place
in the furnace.
The stabilizer cup allows the burner to achieve very high excess air rates by initially shielding
the gas from most of the air. Even with the airﬂow at a high rate, the fuel can be reduced to a rate
where the ﬂame will shift completely into the base of the cup and remain stable. The air outside
the cup and the hot gases from inside the cup are mixed in the tile before exiting. Excess air
capabilities for delayed mixing burners are typically in the range of 3000 to 5000% excess air
(equivalence ratio = 0.03–0.02).
Allowing combustion to complete in the furnace has a number of advantages. Because the
delayed mixing design is less dependent on expanding combustion products, the tile exit velocity
will not fall off markedly when running at high excess air rates. The tile and the burner’s internal
parts are also less thermally stressed as the air passing around the outside of the cup cools the cup
and shields the inside surface of the tile from the centrally concentrated ﬂame. Combustion is
completed in an environment containing entrained products of combustion from the furnace cham-
ber resulting in inherently low NOx emissions.
Designing for signiﬁcant combustion outside a high-velocity burner has the potential disadvan-
tage that the combustion reaction may be quenched when the ﬁred chamber is cold, resulting in
incomplete combustion of the fuel, with the presence of fuel fragments, CO, and aldehydes in the
combustion product gases.
11.4.2 FAST MIXING DESIGNS
Fast mixing high-velocity burners are designed to burn as much of their fuel in the tile as possible.
This may be achieved with either the “jet can” style burner or with a disk-shaped stabilizer, combined
with an appropriate internal volume. The fast mixing designs require a high-integrity tile structure
of low porosity and high resistance to thermal shock. Self-supporting, reaction-bonded silicon carbide
tiles are often used because they meet these requirements and have a high thermal conductivity.
A cast refractory tile for this duty will typically be contained in a heat-resisting alloy jacket to maintain
the refractory under compression and minimize the potential for the escape of the very hot internal
gases into the surrounding structure through cracks.
The disk stabilizer style has fewer stabilizing zones than the “can type” stabilizer, leading to
more limited excess air capabilities typically in the 500 to 1000% air range (equivalence ratio =
0.17–0.09). Burners of this style can be controlled by pulse ﬁring or time-proportioned control
systems that do not rely on high excess air capability for the complete combustion system to provide
a high level of turndown.
Allowing more of the fuel and air to mix and combust within the burner has the advantage of
a higher tile exit velocity for a given exit diameter. It also suppresses the potential for CO, aldehyde,
and other unburned hydrocarbon emissions when run with an excess of air, although NOx emissions
can increase as a result of the higher internal tile temperatures and the lack of dilution from cooled
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 19 ---

combustion products. The fast mixing style is the burner of choice for sub-stoichiometric ﬁring
applications where the burner is required to operate as a reactor and provide a hot, low-oxygen
combustion product stream to the ﬁred process.
11.4.3 IGNITION: DIRECT SPARK, PREMIX PILOTS
High-velocity burners require an ignition source inside the burner to ignite the fuel/air mixture. The
high velocity at the restriction of the tile exit typically prevents an external ﬂame from propagating
back through the tile port to the burner’s intended stabilization zone. Hot furnaces, externally
applied torches, (and ﬂaming oily rags) will not reliably light high-velocity burners. Attempting
torch lighting through a shutter at the back of the burner is not recommended, because the high
internal tile pressure inside a high-velocity burner may cause a “stinger” — a direct ﬂame risk to
the operator.
The most common methods of lighting high-velocity burners are direct spark igniters and
premix pilots. Direct spark ignition is the most popular for gas burners. It has the advantages of
simplicity and lower cost over premix pilot systems, but the location of the spark gap inside the
burner is critical to achieving reliable lighting. As the best location may be in an area of continuous
combustion, the igniter design for long life can be challenging.
Premix pilot burners deliver much more energy than spark igniters and have a much larger
zone of inﬂuence. Being burners in their own right, they project a ﬂame into the combustion space
of the high-velocity burner, and may be located external to the main combustion space and thus
less subject to thermal deterioration. Accordingly, they are chosen for larger-capacity gas burners
and most oil burners. The fuel supplying a premix pilot must be turned off once the main burner
is ignited (an “interrupted pilot”) for safe operation of any burner system with ﬂame supervision.
Doing so also allows the pilot combustion air to cool the pilot tip.
There are many different styles of direct spark igniters, most speciﬁc to the burner in which
they are being used. They range from simple industrial spark plugs (Figure 11.17) to extended
versions that perform as ﬂame rod ﬂame detectors when the burner is lit (Figure 11.18).
11.4.4 FLAME SUPERVISION
Note: This section is not intended to act as a speciﬁc guide to the use of ﬂame supervision systems
for high-velocity (or any other) burners. The reader is referred to the applicable international,
national, local, and insurance industry codes, standards, requirements, etc. for appropriate infor-
mation on this subject.
FIGURE 11.17 Industrial spark plug.
FIGURE 11.18 Combination ﬂame rod igniter.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 20 ---

A reliable ﬂame supervision system will reduce the incidence of combustion-related accidents.
At the most basic level, well-sighted observation ports will allow operating personnel to conﬁrm
ignition and the establishment of combustion. The geometry of the burner will dictate how good
the observation will be, shorter burners typically having better observation capability than the long
tube-style burners. Care should be taken during burner installation to ensure that the operator’s
view down a burner observation port is not restricted by piping or other obstructions.
The most common methods of electronic ﬂame supervision are the use of ultraviolet (UV)
scanners and ﬂame rods. Some high-velocity burners are designed to have the capability to use
either, leaving the choice to the system designer. Other designs can use only one.
UV scanners have the advantage that they mount externally to the burner and need only a UV
source in their line of sight. Their disadvantages are higher initial system costs and their potential
for failure into an unsafe “ﬂame detected” condition. Codes and standards typically require that
“self-checking” UV scanners be used for continuously operating burners, or mandate a frequent
safety check of “non-self-checking scanners” to reduce the risk of undetected failure. A UV
scanner’s “eye” must be kept clear of obstruction (such as dirt and water vapor) to prevent nuisance
shutdowns. It should also be recognized that water vapor, CO2, and many gaseous fuels absorb UV
light. UV scanners will not reliably detect ﬂame through long columns of these gases, making them
unsuitable for use with burner designs where this condition might arise.
Flame rods cost less than UV cells and fail a “no ﬂame detected mode.” Most burners must be
speciﬁcally designed to permit the use of a ﬂame rod, normally require the use of a ﬂame rod
speciﬁc to the burner, and incorporate an appropriate electrical grounding path for the ﬂame. Many
tube-style, high-velocity burners have “twin igniter/ﬂame rods” where the igniter and ﬂame rod
are identical electrode structures and are thus interchangeable. Some electronic ﬂame ignition/detec-
tion systems allow a single rod to be used as the igniter and the ﬂame rod with an appropriately
designed burner.
11.4.5 TILES
The tile serves as the interface between the burner ﬂame holder and the furnace. The restricted exit
is the most obvious common feature in all high-velocity burners.
A tile of high integrity is a prime requirement for a high-velocity burner to prevent the high-
temperature, high-pressure combusting gases within the tile from reaching the surrounding furnace
structure. High thermal shock resistance is required to minimize reliance on the conduction of the
surroundings to reduce the material stress effects of sudden tile material temperature changes.
There are many tile material choices available for high-velocity burner applications, each having
advantages in different situations. They include molded refractory, cast refractory concrete, high-
performance ceramics (for self-supporting tiles), and cast or fabricated heat-resisting metal.
Molded refractory and cast refractory concrete tiles are relatively inexpensive and can be made
with simple tooling. Properly designed and manufactured, they can withstand very high temperatures
and have some resistance to mechanical stress and abuse. Refractory material is very dense and
somewhat subject to stress cracking. For these reasons, refractory tiles typically rely on external
support for integrity. There are a number of ways to reduce the chance of hot combusting gases
leaking out through cracks in the tile. Simply making the tile walls thicker will help, but the tile
will become heavier and take up more space. Adding a metal jacket to the outside of the tile is
very effective at stopping leaks by keeping the refractory under compression and providing support.
However, the jacket may be subject to rapid degradation from the furnace environment by conduc-
tion through the walls or direct exposure to products of combustion from gaps in the insulation
structure. In most cases, jackets are designed to stop short of the hot face of the furnace wall,
leaving some portion of the refractory concrete tile unprotected.
Round refractory tiles with their uniform wall thickness are not as prone to stress cracking as
square tiles of the same material. However, square refractory tiles have been a popular choice for
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 21 ---

smaller-capacity, high-velocity burners, especially for installation in furnaces built from brick where
special cutting is reduced. In both cases, these tiles are typically made from very dense refractory
concrete cast directly into a metal mounting plate or box, or from a preformed tile cemented into
a mounting.
High-performance self-supporting ceramic tiles (Figure 11.19) are light in weight with relatively
thin, uniform wall thickness. No external support is required for these materials other than that of
the ﬁxing of the burner mounting plate to the furnace wall. They are well suited for use in ceramic
ﬁber-lined furnaces.
Such tiles are typically produced from reaction-bonded silicon carbide or other ceramic com-
posites that resist high-temperature oxidation and thermal shock. The reaction-bonded silicon
carbide tiles have very low porosity and high thermal shock resistance — ideal for containing the
high-temperature products of combustion in high-velocity burner tiles. They also permit stabilizer
designs that allow more combustion inside the tile without risk of damage to it. They are more
expensive than refractory tiles and are more susceptible to mechanical damage. Silicon carbide
tiles may require an air gap between the tile and furnace wall to prevent overheating the tile material.
Rolled heat-resistant stainless steel, heat-resistant cast iron, or investment cast alloys can be
used for high-velocity tiles in lower-temperature applications. Metal tiles have the advantage of
high resistance to mechanical damage and do not have porosity or thermal shock issues. Not only
are they self-supporting, but they can be designed to support the entire weight of the burner. High-
velocity burners with cup-style stabilizers are well suited for metal tiles, because they release less
heat inside the tile, and the same air that keeps the cup cool also helps control the temperature of
the tile. Some designs are fabricated with double skins with forced air-cooling between them. Metal
tiles need to be chosen carefully, depending on the intended application temperature. They are not
generally thought suitable for “clean” applications where metal oxide shed from the surface would
spoil the product being heated.
11.4.6 LIGHT OIL, HIGH-VELOCITY BURNERS
Although most high-velocity burners are gas ﬁred, oil-ﬁred high-velocity burners are available.
Most of them are “dual-fuel” versions with the ability to ﬁre with diesel oil or gas (Figure 11.20).
Air atomization is used to provide suitably ﬁne oil droplets to the combustion process to reduce
the potential for carbon formation in the reduced port tiles. Both compressed air and low-pressure
air at pressures around 1.5 psig are commonly used for this atomization.
When compared with gas-ﬁred high-velocity burners, their oil-ﬁred versions have less turndown
capability, are very difﬁcult to light reliably with direct spark ignition, have signiﬁcantly less excess
air capability, and are prone to carbon formation in the tile if the appropriate fuel/air ratios are not
FIGURE 11.19 High-performance self-supporting ceramic tile.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 22 ---

maintained. Low atomizing air pressure and oil of much greater viscosity than diesel can also lead
to carbon formation in the tile.
11.5 HEAT TRANSFER
Most of the impetus for applying high-velocity burners revolves around increased convective heat
transfer. Increasing convection results in better temperature uniformity in the ﬁred chamber, local-
ized uniformity improvements in the heated work, and can result in improvement in product quality
and reduced cost of production. The purpose of this section is to provide the framework to achieve
these beneﬁts for various heating applications.
11.5.1 BURNER SELECTION AND SIZING
Earlier sections indicated the importance of relative burner placement for optimum performance
in a given application. The selection of the number of burners and their individual heat input
requirement is inevitably linked to the ﬁnal system performance by those considerations. The total
number of burners used in a furnace is determined by factoring the furnace input capability and
the input of the particular burner sized for optimum ﬁring of the product. A larger burner will tend
to throw heat a greater distance while a smaller burner will have the centerline velocity dissipate
more quickly. To choose the optimum burner size, the length of the ﬁred path on the burner axis
must be considered. These choices, in conjunction with the reaction progress at tile exit and
associated exit velocity, determine the heat ﬂux proﬁle from the burner.
Selection of an oversized burner can create signiﬁcant problems in the heating application. One
area of particular concern is the opposite (or target) wall across the furnace from the burner. Excessive
centerline velocity and temperature will create hot spots on the refractory surfaces opposite the
burner. This can result in refractory damage as well as localized overheating of the product due to
re-radiation. Additionally, furnace seals can be over-pressured, potentially directing hot gases into
undesirable areas, such as between the wall plates and refractories or into areas where structural
members are located. Over time, this might lead to a catastrophic failure of the furnace.
With oversized burners, it is not simply a matter of turning down the burner ﬁring rate. At
turndown, the velocity of the burners is reduced, resulting in reduced entrainment of furnace gases
with a connected loss of convective heat transfer capability. Oversized burners can also degrade
product quality, counteracting one of the primary beneﬁts of high-velocity ﬁring.
If burners are undersized based on the width of the chamber, although they have sufﬁcient total
input among them, the area of optimal heat release may not be located in the proper part of the
FIGURE 11.20 High-velocity dual-fuel burner.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 23 ---

load. For example, the burners may dissipate most of their heat in the near ﬁeld, leaving the hard-
to-heat areas cold, such as the bottom center of a brick hack.
11.5.2 MATERIAL HEATING APPROACHES WITH HIGH-VELOCITY BURNERS
11.5.2.1
Solid and Large-Shape Heating
High-velocity combustion is often utilized to heat large shapes to uniform temperatures. One
example is the heating of steel ingots prior to forging. In demanding aerospace applications, the
temperature uniformity requirement may be as tight as ±15°F throughout the entire chamber volume.
These applications can use high-velocity burners to stir the products of combustion and produce
very uniform temperatures. Although most of the heating at the target temperatures occurs by
radiation, high-velocity burners bring all the radiating refractory and metal surfaces to a uniform
temperature.
When heating solids, the best strategy is often large-scale (“bulk”) furnace gas movement. A
row of high-velocity burners mounted on one furnace wall at a high level above the work can create
the desired recirculation. If the work can be elevated on piers or other furniture above the hearth,
a second row of smaller high-velocity burners can be added at hearth level on the wall opposite
the other burners (Figure 11.21). Careful consideration should be given to the position of the ﬂue
exit ports from the furnace. Wherever possible, the ﬂue ports should be located low in the furnace
wall. This will ensure that good furnace pressure is maintained and that the furnace exhausts the
coolest gases for best fuel efﬁciency. This approach eliminates the inﬁltration of ambient air, which
affects temperature uniformity and fuel economy. It also helps overcome any buoyancy effects of
hotter gases that exist, despite the stirring of the high-velocity burners. This combination will
reinforce the bulk recirculation pattern and aid in increasing the convective heat transfer to the
piece and creating the most uniform refractory temperature possible. Although much of this heating
may occur at relatively high temperatures, some variation in excess air level can still be utilized
to create even greater temperature uniformity, where the value of the load and elimination of rejects
may far outweigh the fuel cost associated with increased excess air.
FIGURE 11.21 High-temperature heating of a large shape.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 24 ---

11.5.2.2
Densely Packed Loads
Another common application for high-velocity burners is the ﬁring of densely packed loads, such
as brick hacks. The heating of brick must follow a very speciﬁc time and temperature proﬁle to
achieve organic material burnout and proper ceramic bonding. A single brick can be ﬁred to the
desired properties in a very short time in a laboratory test furnace — typically less than 2 hours.
However, production at industrial levels requires the ﬁring of large hacks of formed and dried
bricks in tight stacking arrangements. Every brick within these hacks must follow the same
prescribed time and temperature proﬁle. This creates signiﬁcant difﬁculty as exterior bricks are
heated more quickly than those in the interior of the hack. The time to successfully ﬁre a brick
hack increases substantially over the laboratory cycle, often to 40 to 60 hours, dependent on the
actual time to heat the coldest brick in the hack.
Because they drive hot combustion products to the innermost bricks of a hack, high-velocity
burners have become the burner of choice for ﬁring brick tunnel kilns (Figure 11.22). Without the
velocity from the burners, interior bricks would essentially be heated only by conduction, a very slow
and inefﬁcient means. The majority of the burners in the ﬁring zones of a tunnel kiln are typically
mounted low in the sidewalls, with a combination of staggered and opposed arrangements. The opposed
burners provide heat release in the center of the load while the staggered burners sweep across the
hacks, distributing heat across the setting. The intent is to get the heat to penetrate the load evenly,
especially to the normally cold bottom of the hack. This is difﬁcult to impossible with conventional
low- or medium-velocity burners, regardless of the position of burners or type of control system.
A smaller quantity of high-velocity burners placed at intervals in the upper sidewall can also
help in breaking up “crown drift” in tunnel kilns. This phenomenon occurs when hot products of
combustion migrate to the low-ﬂow-resistance area at the rooﬂine of the kiln above the hacks and
travel toward the exhaust at the cold end of the kiln, thus “bypassing” the area of the kiln cross
section occupied by the hacks. It reduces the overall efﬁciency of the heating process and can affect
the optimum control of the kiln. High-velocity burners placed high in the side walls, ﬁring above
the hacks, will entrain these stratiﬁed products of combustion and push them downward at the
opposite wall to be entrained by the lower burners and allow their heat content to be put to useful
work within the hacks. High-velocity burners ﬁring vertically downward from the roof can also be
FIGURE 11.22 Typical tunnel kiln for brick production. 
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 25 ---

used for a similar purpose, particularly in wide kilns where side-mounted burners do not have the
drive to create signiﬁcant recirculation across the full width of the kiln.
High-velocity burners are also very effective in the low-temperature preheat zone at the entry end
of a tunnel kiln.11 These burners are typically ﬁred at elevated excess air rates to achieve the lowest
possible temperature difference between the resulting entrained gases and the bricks, while pro-
viding the required heat input to match the curve. This approach ensures that the bricks will be
uniformly heated in an oxidizing environment conducive to the controlled burnout of any organic
material in the clay. The entire hack can then pass into a more highly ﬁred zone without risk of
affecting product quality and yield of saleable product from the kiln. Adding high velocity burners
to tunnel kiln zones, which previously relied on recirculating fans, can signiﬁcantly increase the
production capability of a brick kiln. By maintaining better temperature uniformity throughout the brick
hacks in the preheat zones, less time is required to heat the interior bricks in the high temperature
heating zones. Therefore, if the burners in the early part of kiln properly condition the load, the hot
zone burners need only to maintain the temperatures required for the ﬁnal material properties to develop.
11.5.2.3
Well-Spaced Loads or Open Settings
Firing of ceramics such as dinnerware, cookware, sanitary ware, and technical materials typically
falls into the category of heating a well-spaced load. In these instances, the individual pieces are
spaced on support structures without piece-to-piece contact. This minimizes imperfections in the
ﬁred part and allows for the high degree of temperature uniformity desired in these applications.
Because nearly all of the surface area of the load is swept by combustion product gases, uniformity
as close as ±10°F can be achieved. High-velocity burners, often running with excess air, move large
volumes of products of combustion between and across the pieces of the load. Because the support
structures form part of the load to be heated, the quantity of supports and the spacing between the parts
must be minimized for best economic use of the kiln interior space and fuel utilization (Figure 11.23).
These applications frequently arrange the material into lanes, several pieces high. When ﬁring
such an arrangement, it is important to understand the spread of the high-velocity burner jet and
its rate of entrainment of surrounding gases in order to reduce hot spots on the load. The combustion
envelope must not overheat pieces sitting close to the burner wall. The combination of excess air,
FIGURE 11.23 Typical china setting.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 26 ---

distance to the part, jet spread, and spaces between the parts affects the temperature of the products
of combustion as they sweep across the ﬁred piece. High-velocity burners with slotted tile exits
may offer distinct advantages in ﬁring narrow lanes in such circumstances. Its elevated rate of near-
ﬁeld entrainment and preferential vertical entrainment can aid in the movement of gases through
the kiln while minimizing the temperature gradients at the work.
11.5.2.4
The Fired Chamber as the Load
The high excess air capability and high-velocity combustion product jets of lightweight, air-cooled
tile, high-velocity burners are the accepted method of dryout and preheat of large refractory
structures and are also applied to the on-site heat treatment of large welded structures. The
equipment and technology for such applications is generally provided by refractory dryout/heat
treatment specialist companies as a contract service.
Using temporarily mounted lightweight 10 million BTU/hr burners of the jet-can type with
double-skinned air cooled outlets, jets of dilute POC from 200°F to 2500°F are projected into the
structure to be heated, the jet temperature being controlled according to the required program for
the particular treatment. The number of burners to be used is evaluated based on the heat requirement
of the cycle determined by the temperature curve to be followed, the size and shape of the space
being heated, and the amount of water vapor to be removed in case of a dryout. The temporary
burners are conﬁgured to produce a POC circulation pattern conducive to achieving the best
temperature uniformity in the volume of the ﬁred space. As the burners’ access points to the interior
of the structure are frequently not in “ideal” locations, the art and ingenuity of the contractor’s
experience is an important element in the conﬁguration exercise. A means of controlling the exhaust
rate from the space is installed so that the volume can be pressurized relative to atmospheric pressure
to prevent the ingress of ambient air in the interests of control of uniformity and elimination of
waste of the ﬁred fuel.
For a refractory dryout, large volumes of water can be removed at low temperature differences
with the refractory surface, thus allowing a closely controllable rate of temperature increase to
eliminate explosive spalling caused by trapped steam.
In the heatup of sensitive materials such as the silica bricks and fused-cast refractories used in
glass tank construction, close control of temperature uniformity is required to prevent damage to
the structure from differential thermal expansion and/or spalling. The convective heating provided
by the high-velocity burner jets and their entrainment of circulating products of combustion gives
operators the ability to control the rate of change of temperature to a few degrees per hour with
single-digit temperature differentials at the materials’ transition points.
Large, fabricated structures such as gas storage tanks, chemical process equipment, and pressure
vessels frequently require stress relieving in situ. The use of high-velocity burners offers an
alternative to the highly labor-intensive and expensive electrical method of strapping resistance
heaters to the exterior surface. The subject structure is temporarily externally insulated, and one
or more burners installed to ﬁre into the internal space. In some extreme cases of thin-walled vessels
and high-temperature treatments, the internal pressure created by the combustion process has been
consciously employed to prevent collapse of the vessel.
Figure 11.24 shows the use of a single burner on an aluminum melter heatup, and Figure 11.25
shows multiple burners in use on the heatup of a steel plant coke oven battery.12
11.6 CONTROL OF HIGH-VELOCITY COMBUSTION SYSTEMS
Burner control techniques have evolved along with furnaces and high-velocity burners. To best
utilize the high-velocity burner’s jet properties, the heat input and fuel/air ratio control system
should generally be chosen to operate the burner(s) at the maximum input rate for the longest
possible time in any heating cycle. The particular application will dictate the best choice for a given
furnace, considering the type of product being heated, the type of furnace, the degree of temperature
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 27 ---

uniformity required, the desired atmospheres, and the prevailing economics (usually an evaluation
of product value and quality vs. the cost of the energy to produce it).
Most modern furnaces have multiple control zones, each monitored by a temperature-measuring
element such as a thermocouple or infrared scanner. Each zone may have multiple burners controlled
as a group to meet the demands of the zone controller. The fuel input to the burners is varied, either
by continuous modulation or pulse-width modulation, to maintain a desired furnace temperature.
All burners have some capability to operate at lower fuel rates than their design maximum.
The amount a burner can turn down is often referred to as its “turndown ratio,” deﬁned as the
maximum ﬁring rate divided by the minimum ﬁring rate. With continuous modulation, the higher
the turndown ratio, the greater the range of temperatures that can be maintained in the furnace. For
pulse-width modulation, the burners are typically operated at a ﬁxed rate, and the ﬁring time at
that rate is adjusted to change the heat input. Differences in the control methods affect the means
by which the output of a group of burners is reduced within a control zone.
All of the piping examples shown in this section are intended to illustrate control concepts
only. They do not show ﬂow meters, manual or electrical shutoff vales, and other components
needed for normal operation or to meet applicable safety codes. Valves must be “approved” for
fuel shutoff service as required by the regulatory authority having jurisdiction.
11.6.1 FUEL/AIR RATIO CONTROL
Each control zone or individual burner must have a means of fuel/air ratio control for efﬁcient
operation. While electronic controls are available for this purpose, the most prevalent method of
fuel/air ratio control is the cross-connected ratio regulator.
FIGURE 11.24 A single temporary burner on an aluminum melter heatup. (Courtesy of Hotwork—Division
of Fosbel, Inc. With permission.)
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 28 ---

The function of a cross-connected ratio regulator system is based on the principle that the
internal air and gas oriﬁces of a burner are ﬁxed resistances to ﬂow, such that the ﬂow and pressure
are related by the “square root law:”13
(11.7)
The cross-connected ratio regulator (Figure 11.26) is designed to maintain a fuel outlet pressure
that matches the combustion air pressure to the burners. A pressure sensing line is run from the
burner combustion air line to the regulator’s main diaphragm case to provide an opening force to
the regulator’s gas valve. An internal gas outlet pressure sensing port applies that gas pressure to
FIGURE 11.25 Multiple temporary burners in use on the heatup of a steel plant coke oven battery. (Courtesy
of Hotwork—Division of Fosbel, Inc. With permission.)
FIGURE 11.26 Cross-connected ratio regulator with limiting oriﬁce valve.
Q
Q
P
P
1
2
1
2
=
∆
∆
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 29 ---

the other side of the main diaphragm as an opposing, closing force. A plug valve attached to the
diaphragm adjusts the gas pressure exiting the regulator to maintain a pressure balance. As the
regulator only controls pressure directly — not the actual ﬂow — a downstream variable resistance,
such as a limiting oriﬁce valve, is required in the gas line to adjust the actual ﬂow at the high ﬁre rate.
A biasing spring in the regulator is used to set the low-ﬁre fuel/air ratio. A negative bias can
be applied to the ratio regulator by tensioning the diaphragm spring. This makes the fuel/air ratio
“leaner” at low ﬁre without signiﬁcantly affecting the high-ﬁre setting.
Some high-velocity burners have gas pressure requirements that are higher than their air pressure
requirements. The simple cross-connected regulator described above, supplying fuel at the same
pressure as the air, will not be able to supply sufﬁcient gas pressure to operate the burner near the
stoichiometric conditions. There are a number of options for ratio control in these cases. Multiplying
regulators that provide gas pressure at a multiple of the air pressure, or electronic fuel/air ratio
systems, can be used. If there is sufﬁcient air pressure available, an oriﬁce can be put in the burner
air supply to raise the air pressure to the point where it is at least 25% greater than the required
fuel pressure, allowing a simple cross-connected regulator to function properly.
It is common to use a single cross-connected regulator to control the gas ﬂow for an entire
zone of premix or conventional nozzle mix burners. However, the restricted tile outlets and tile
back pressures of high-velocity burners will accentuate any pressure variations occurring in the tile
as a result of combustion. These are manifested as variations in air and fuel ﬂows to the burner,
and, when high-velocity burners are on a common control manifold, a pressure disturbance in one
burner can affect the others. This may initiate additional sympathetic pressure variations to the
degree that the entire group of burners will display erratic behavior. The effect of feedback of tile
pressure ﬂuctuations can be minimized by using an individual ratio regulator for each high-velocity
burner, and by placing the limiting oriﬁce valve as close as possible to the burner gas inlet and
taking the highest possible pressure drops allowed by the system across it and the burner air valve.
11.6.2 FIXED FUEL/AIR RATIO TURNDOWN (ON RATIO TURNDOWN)
Fixed fuel/air ratio control using cross-connected regulators is the most prevalent control system
style for high-velocity burners. This is the only control method available for the early premix
systems that required the fuel/air ratio to be set near stoichiometric at all ﬁring rates and is often
called “on ratio turndown.” In this control scheme (Figure 11.27), the zone temperature controller
positions a motorized air valve to vary the airﬂow into the burner. The ratio regulator delivers fuel
to maintain the appropriate fuel/air ratio at any airﬂow rate. The air valve can be continuously
modulated or operated in a high/low mode.
Fixed fuel/air ratio systems optimize fuel efﬁciency but do  not maximize the potential of the
high-velocity burner. Velocity decreases as the burner turns down and the entrainment capability
of the jet is reduced. A common way to maximize the time at high ﬁre is the use of “high/low”
FIGURE 11.27 Fixed fuel/air ratio control schematic.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 30 ---

control, where the motorized air control valve is either at the maximum setting or the minimum.
This method of control maximizes the time the burners are at high ﬁre, which maximizes the
entrainment and recirculation beneﬁts, but may create difﬁculties for furnace pressure control, as
all the burners in a control zone cycle ﬁring rates simultaneously.
11.6.3 VARIABLE RATIO OR “THERMAL” TURNDOWN
Nozzle mix high-velocity burners have a wide fuel/air ratio capability that can be used to advantage
in ratio control systems. To maintain burner nozzle velocity with reducing input requirement, the
fuel ﬂow can be reduced faster than the airﬂow, the increase in the excess air rate resulting in a
lower temperature ﬂame. If there is enough burner capacity available, the high ﬁre ratio can be
made “leaner” to force the burner to spend more time at high ﬁre where the velocity is highest.
This concept taken to its extreme is known as thermal turndown.
In the extreme thermal turndown system, the airﬂow remains ﬁxed at the maximum setting
while only the fuel ﬂow is reduced when temperature demand drops. This method of control
maintains the highest velocity for any ﬁring rate and is useful for applications that require the
ultimate temperature uniformity. At intermediate ﬁring rates, the hot-mix temperature exiting the
burner may only be a few degrees higher than the furnace setpoint, which provides for very even
heating. Furnace pressure control is simpliﬁed because the amount of air introduced into the furnace
remains relatively constant at all ﬁring rates. The disadvantage of thermal turndown systems is the
loss in fuel efﬁciency resulting from heating the excess air to the furnace temperature.
To use a thermal turndown control system, the burner must be capable of running at high
enough excess air rates that the minimum temperature requirement for the furnace can be maintained
without overshooting. The Bickley Iso-Jet burner described previously is an exception in that it
has a premix or nozzle mix core (depending on the vintage) that runs close to stoichiometric ratio
while additional air is added around the primary burner to temper the resulting hot mixture to the
desired temperature.
There are a number of ways to set up a zone of burners with thermal turndown control. One
popular method is to pipe the burners in the same manner as for on ratio control but to control
temperature with a motorized control valve that bleeds off some of the impulse pressure feeding
the cross-connected regulator instead of a motor that reduces main air ﬂow (Figure 11.28). Note
that a main air control valve may still be required to meet an enforced low-ﬁre start requirement
of a safety code. 
FIGURE 11.28 A typical method of thermal turndown control schematic.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 31 ---

11.6.4
PULSE-FIRING INPUT CONTROL
As earlier stated, high-velocity burners are most effective when operated at high ﬁre where the
velocity and mass ﬂow are the highest. A pulse-ﬁring system reduces input in a zone by selectively
turning down individual burners in the zone to low ﬁre while the other burners remain at their
maximum ﬁring rate. As the required input decreases, more burners are turned off and fewer are
left on. One such example would be that at 50% ﬁring rate, half the burners will be at their full
ﬁring rate and the other half at low ﬁre. The selection of high and low ﬁring burners is continuously
changed by the pulse-ﬁring system logic in order to step the required heat input around the total
number of burners and create temperature uniformity in the ﬁred chamber.
Pulse-ﬁring has the advantages of better potential temperature uniformity and more consistent
furnace pressure control than modulated or high/low ﬁxed fuel/air ratio control systems, and has
better fuel efﬁciency than thermal turndown systems.
Pulse-ﬁred systems use fast operating air cycle valves to switch from high ﬁre to low ﬁre.
A small amount of air is allowed to pass through or around the closed valve position to provide
the low ﬁre air. Fuel is commonly controlled with a conventional cross-connected regulator
having its spring set for a negative bias to close the valve seat at low ﬁre, with a low-capacity
bypass to set the low-ﬁre gas rate (Figure 11.29). This arrangement typically provides more
consistent minimum ﬂow conditions than does relying on the regulator to accurately position for
very low ﬂows. Cross-connected ratio regulators are designed to constantly adjust gas ﬂow, so
they are well-suited for use as cycle valves in applications that do not require a gas-tight seal in
the closed position. This may eliminate the use of a dedicated electrical or pneumatic valve where
individual automatic gas valves have not been used to interrupt the gas ﬂow for the pulse-ﬁring
system.
11.6.5
HIGH-VELOCITY OIL BURNER CONTROL
While high-velocity oil burners can be controlled by methods similar to those described above, oil
burners do not typically have turndown capabilities as high as gas burners.14 Their low-ﬁre input
cannot be turned down as far using ﬁxed fuel/air ratio control, nor do they have wide excess air
capability, thereby limiting the degree to which thermal turndown can be employed. It may be
necessary to use a high/low/off control with oil burners if high turndown is required. Spark-ignited
gas pilots are often used for improved reliability over direct-spark ignition.
FIGURE 11.29 Typical pulse ﬁring control schematic.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC


--- Page 32 ---

REFERENCES
1. North American Combustion Handbook, Volume 2, third edition, The North American Manufacturing
Company, Ltd., Cleveland, OH, 1995.
2. Watson, J., Personal communication, 2002.
3. Gray, M., Personal communication, Nutec-Bickley, 2002.
4. Crowther, B., Personal communication, Hotwork Combustion Technology Limited, 2002.
5. Beer, J. M. and Chigier, N. A., Combustion Aerodynamics, Robert E. Krieger, Malabar, FL., 1983.
6. Dahm, W. J. A. and Dimotakis, P. E., Measurements of entrainment and mixing in turbulent jets, AIAA
J., 25, 1216–1223, 1987.
7. Dahm, W. J. A., Personal communication, University of Michigan, 2002.
8. Eickhoff, H. and Lenze, B., Grundformen von strahlammen, Chemie Ingeniuer Technik 20, 1095–1099,
1969.
9. Schlicting, H., Boundary Layer Theory, seventh edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1987.
10. Tachina, K.M. and Dahm, W. J. A., Effects of heat release on turbulent shear ﬂows. 1. A general
equivalence Principle for non-buoyant ﬂows and its application to turbulent jet ﬂames, J. Fluid Mech,
415, 23–44, 2000.
11. Lukacs, J. J., Personal communication, The North American Manufacturing Company, Ltd., 2002.
12. Cobane, I., Personal communication, Hotwork—Division of Fosbel Inc., 2002.
13. North American Combustion Handbook, Volume 1, third edition, The North American Manufacturing
Company, Ltd., Cleveland, OH, 1986.
14. Fuel Oils for Industrial Burners, The North American Manufacturing Company, Ltd., Cleveland, OH,
Handbook Supplement 113, 1998.
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC
