
--- Page 1 ---

2117
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Volume 28, 2000/pp. 2117–2123
REACTION ZONE STRUCTURE IN FLAMELESS COMBUSTION
KAORU MARUTA,1 KATSUTOSHI MUSO,2 KOICHI TAKEDA1 and TAKASHI NIIOKA2
1Faculty of Systems Science and Technology
Akita Prefectural University
84-4 Tsuchiya-Ebinokuchi, Honjyo, Akita 015-0055, Japan
2Institute of Fluid Science
Tohoku University
2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba, Sendai 980-8577, Japan
We present a study of the combustion limit and reaction zone structure of non-premixed counterﬂow
ﬂames of highly preheated air and methane diluted with nitrogen.
First, we measured the ﬂammable region experimentally in the range of air temperatures up to 800 K.
In the case of ﬂame stretch rates smaller than 20 s1, experiments were conducted under microgravity.
All the microgravity tests were conducted at the JAMIC drop tower facility in Hokkaido, Japan. The results
show that the extinction limits become broader with increasing air temperature. All the extinction curves
are C-shaped and exhibit the radiation extinction branch. That is, the conﬁgurations of the extinction curves
are the same as those of conventional combustion at air temperatures from 300 K to 800 K.
Second, we computed the ﬂammable region and reaction zone structure of these ﬂames by using the
conventional one dimensional ﬂame code with detailed chemistry. The ﬂammable regions obtained by
experiment agree with the computated ones. This shows that the present computation could also represent
the phenomena well for high-temperature air combustion. Based on this, computation was extended to
higher air temperatures (up to 1900 K) at which microgravity experimentation is not possible.
When the air temperature was higher than 1300 K, extinction limits disappeared. In this temperature
range, combustion continues even under extremely fuel-lean conditions such as 1% methane in nitrogen.
Reaction zones without any temperature peaks were observed. Methane and oxygen leakage through the
ﬂame occurred, and they coexisted there. This is like the Lin˜a´n’s premixed ﬂame regime, in other words,
a reaction-time-dominated reaction zone structure. In these regions, NOx emission is very low, and this
may lead to the low levels of NOx emission of high-temperature air combustion.
Introduction
So-called high-temperature air combustion [1,2] is
the combination of highly preheated air and exhaust
gas recirculation that provides high thermal efﬁ-
ciency and low NOx emission in practical furnaces.
Pressing, Peters, and Wuenning [3] have shown
the temperature uniformity and weak reaction of
this combustion mode by means of laser optical
measurements and have called this phenomenon
ﬂameless combustion. To adopt this new combustion
technology for wider practical use, much more fun-
damental knowledge on high-temperature air com-
bustion is needed.
Hasegawa et al. [4], Katsuki and Ebisui [5], and
Sato [6] demonstrated the characteristics of high-
temperature air combustion, such as low luminosity,
a uniform temperature ﬁeld, low levels of tempera-
ture ﬂuctuation, low pollutant emissions, and high
efﬁciency. Ju [7] clariﬁed the NOx formation mech-
anism of the high-temperature air combustion up
to 1300 K by using a counterﬂow non-premixed
ﬂame conﬁguration. Fujimori et al. [8] examined
the relation between the lift-off height of a turbu-
lent jet ﬂame and NOx reduction and showed that
a highly lifted ﬂame is the key to a drastic decrease
in the emission index of NOx in high-temperature
air combustion. They also suggested that the for-
mation of the lean mixture due to the ﬂame lift
might contribute to the lower NOx level. Ishiguro
et al. [9] also conﬁrmed the homogeneity and sta-
bility of high-temperature air combustion experi-
mentally.
As clearly mentioned in the literature [3], this
combustion mode in furnaces is established only by
lifted-jet geometry. This makes laminar-ﬂame-based
fundamental research difﬁcult and has resulted in
very limited quantitative knowledge concerning this
new combustion technology.
As pointed out by Fujimori et al. [8], a high-speed
lifted jet ﬂame is indispensable for establishing the
low NOx emission. This may be because the lifted
jet ﬂame suppresses the formation of a thin, intense
reaction zone. The lifted ﬂame improves the dilution
of the combustible mixture that leads to slow reac-
tion and temperature uniformity.


--- Page 2 ---

2118
LAMINAR DIFFUSION FLAMES—Other Flame Conﬁgurations
Fig. 1. Structure of the burner
with an electric heater.
Fig. 2. Extinction curve obtained under microgravity.
To resolve these processes and to understand
high-temperature air combustion further, laminar-
ﬂame-based fundamental research on high-tempera-
ture air combustion is needed. In addition to that,
because the ﬂow ﬁeld inside the furnace is not al-
ways highly turbulent, high-temperature air com-
bustion in low-speed and low-strained ﬂow ﬁelds
should be clariﬁed to reproduce the excellent emis-
sion characteristics.
For all these reasons, a combination of micrograv-
ity experiment and computation with detailed chem-
istry on low-stretch, counterﬂow, non-premixed
ﬂames was employed. Because the low-stretch coun-
terﬂow ﬂame technique under microgravity [10] is
one of the best methods to observe combustion lim-
its and to examine characteristics of near-limit com-
bustion experimentally, we have tried to clarify the
extinction limit, combustion characteristics, and re-
action zone structure of high-temperature air com-
bustion, especially in the fuel-lean region.
Microgravity Experiments
Because the details of the experimental setup have
been described elsewhere [10], only an outline is
given here. The system consisted of a counterﬂow
pipe burner (16 mm in diameter), electric mass ﬂow
controllers, a notebook PC, digital/analogue and an-
alogue/digital converters, a thermocouple for re-
cording gas temperature at the burner exit, air and
fuel containers, and a video system. The ﬂow rate of
the gas mixture was previously programmed and
controlled by the digital/analogue converter and
ﬂow controller. One side of the burner had an elec-
tric heater to heat the air, as shown in Fig. 1. To
obtain sufﬁcient heat exchange between heater and
air ﬂow, the inner diameter of the heater part was
thinner than the burner exit. To minimize heat loss
from this burner, the burner body was covered with
a heat insulator. Stable airﬂow with temperatures
higher than 800 K was obtained with the present
burner. The air temperature was regulated to within
5.
Counterﬂow ﬂames of air, whose temperature
ranged from 300 K to 800 K, and methane diluted
with nitrogen were employed for the present inves-
tigation. For ﬂame stretch rates below 20 s1, mi-
crogravity experiments were conducted at the
JAMIC drop tower facility in Hokkaido, Japan. Ten
seconds of microgravity during 490 m free-fall is
available in this facility. Because of the difﬁculty of
velocity measurement under microgravity, stretch
rate was estimated by the nominal value given by
Seshadri and Williams [11].
Computation
One-dimensional
computation
with
detailed
chemistry covered a wider air temperature range
than did the experimental conditions. The numerical
codes used [12,13] were based on the work by Giov-
angigli and Smooke [14]. An optically thin radiative
heat loss from CO2 and H2O was taken into account
because it would not be negligible at small stretch
rates [10,12,15]. The CHEMKIN [16] code and an
appropriate chemical mechanism were chosen. For
the calculation of extinction limits, a C1 elementary
reaction mechanism [14] which involves 58 reactions
and 18 species was used. For the calculation of the
NOx emission, GRI-Mech 2.11, whose validity for
combustion in high-temperature air was conﬁrmed
by experiment [17], was employed.
Results and Discussion
Microgravity Experiments
Figure 2 shows extinction curves obtained in the
microgravity experiments. For air temperatures of
300 K to 800 K, C-shaped extinction curves with a
radiation extinction branch were observed. Flam-
mable regions were extended with increase in the air


--- Page 3 ---

REACTION ZONE STRUCTURE IN FLAMELESS COMBUSTION
2119
Fig. 3. Extinction curve obtained by computation with
C1 chemistry.
Fig. 4. Temperature proﬁle along the x axis at an initial
air temperature of 1500 K.
temperature. The result for an air temperature of
300 K was identical to the data reported previously
[15]. For comparison, the computational results as
well as the experimental ones are indicated in the
same ﬁgure. Both sets of results agree qualitatively
with each other, conﬁrming the validity of the pres-
ent computation.
Computational Results
Extinction curves obtained by computation are
shown in Fig. 3. The range of preheated air tem-
perature has been widened to 1800 K. Extinction
curves for air temperatures higher than 800 K are
available only by calculation because of experimental
limitations. The dotted lines do not denote extinc-
tion limits but rather the points where the preheated
air temperature and peak of the reaction zone tem-
perature become equal. When the air temperature
is higher than 1300 K, extinction limits disappear
because the preheated air carries enough energy
into the reaction region. The general trend of the
extinction characteristics was the same as that for the
air temperature of 300 K as far as the combustion
limit existed.
To explain the disappearance of the extinction
limit, the temperature distribution along the axis is
shown in Fig. 4. This ﬁgure shows the temperature
distribution when the air temperature is 1500 K and
the stretch rate is 11 s1. The methane mole fraction
of the fuel ﬂow, Cfuel, is varied as a parameter. When
Cfuel is larger than 7%, a temperature peak due to
the exothermic reaction can be observed. However,
the temperature peak reduces with the decrease of
Cfuel and cannot be seen when Cfuel is smaller than
5%. However, a moderate chemical reaction is going
on for those conditions. Other intermediate species
concentration distribution, such as of CH, CO, and
H, proved the continuation of the reaction, although
they are not shown here. Fuel concentrations at the
disappearance of the temperature peak are shown as
dotted lines in Fig. 3. Combustion of counterﬂow
non-premixed ﬂames of highly preheated air in the
fuel-lean region is characterized by this disappear-
ance of extinction limits and chemical reaction with-
out an obvious temperature rise.
In considering the nature of a ﬂame without a
temperature peak, which we call ﬂameless combus-
tion, we follow Pressing et al., who also used this
term for combustion in highly preheated air [3]. To
answer the question of why the reaction proceeds,
we consider a peculiarity of high-temperature air
combustion. In conventional combustion, some of
the loss mechanism is responsible for the existence
of combustion limits. For instance, conduction heat
loss to the wall, ﬂame stretch, and radiation heat loss
are the reasons why combustion limits always exist.
However, it always depends on the balance between
heat generation and heat loss. High-temperature air
combustion is a kind of excess enthalpy combustion
[18]. Because of this, the balance needed for extinc-
tion could not be established in a situation like that
indicated in Fig. 4.
When the fuel entering the reaction zone is de-
creased in the fuel-lean regime the heat release rate
due to reaction might be further decreased. To
quantify this, the dependence of the total heat re-
lease rate on Cfuel at the same air temperature and
the stretch rate is plotted as shown in Fig. 5. The
total heat release rate is deﬁned as k hk•
dX,
˙xk
where hk and
are the enthalpy of the kth species
˙xk
and the production rate of the kth species, respec-
tively. The total heat release rate decreases with de-
creasing Cfuel. Especially when Cfuel is smaller than


--- Page 4 ---

2120
LAMINAR DIFFUSION FLAMES—Other Flame Conﬁgurations
Fig. 5. Variation of total heat release rate with fuel con-
centration.
Fig. 6. Variation of the total radiation heat loss with fuel
concentration.
Fig. 7. Variation of radiation fraction with fuel concen-
tration.
Fig. 8. Proﬁles of methane and oxygen mole fractions
along the x axis.
5%, the gradient of the decrease of the total heat
release rate becomes steeper. This tendency implies
the temperature distribution shown in Fig. 4.
Because radiation heat loss often dominates the
ﬂame characteristics close to the combustion limit,
total radiation heat loss from the reaction zone was
plotted in Fig. 6 to examine the characteristics
shown in Fig. 4. However, since the stretch rate is
constant, the total amount of the radiation heat loss
mostly depends on the heat generation in this case.
The total radiation heat loss decreases with decreas-
ing fuel concentration, Cfuel, which shows that the
radiation heat loss is not the relevant mechanism of
the trend shown in Fig. 4. The radiation fraction [12]
deﬁned by the ratio of the total radiation loss to the
total heat release rate is shown in Fig. 7. The radi-
ation fraction also decreases with the fuel concen-
tration, Cfuel, because the stretch rate is kept con-
stant, which shows that the radiation loss does not
dominate the low heat release rate in the fuel-lean
region.
To examine the moderate reaction region ob-
served when Cfuel is smaller than 5%, the concen-
tration distribution of major species such as methane
and oxygen are shown in Fig. 8. As is clearly shown
in the ﬁgure, the thin ﬂamelet assumption stands
only when Cfuel is greater than 5%, that is, methane
and oxygen are consumed at the thin ﬂame region
and the reaction rate can be regarded as sufﬁciently
high. However, oxygen and methane concentration
distributions cross over when Cfuel is less than 5%.
This region is similar to the so-called Lin˜a´n’s pre-
mixed ﬂame regime [19]. Although Lin˜a´n’s premixed


--- Page 5 ---

REACTION ZONE STRUCTURE IN FLAMELESS COMBUSTION
2121
Fig. 9. Proﬁles of CO, CO2, H, HO2, and CHO mole
fractions along the x axis.
Fig. 10. Emission index and peak concentration of NO.
ﬂame regime is approached only close to the com-
bustion limit, the present fuel and oxygen leakage
never led to extinction, since the energy that high-
temperature air brings into the reaction zone is high
enough to sustain a weak reaction.
From discussion based on timescales such as the
reaction and residence times, this premixed ﬂame-
like regime appears at very fuel-lean conditions
where the reaction time is larger than the residence
time. Hence this can be regarded as a reaction-con-
trolled phenomenon. The timescale of this condition
is around 100 ms, so the present reaction time is
larger than this value. One previous study [3] clearly
states that “the highly preheated air combustion is
mixing controlled,” and another [8] notes that “pre-
mixture properties of fuel, air and also pyrolysate
fuel gas may affect the emission characteristics of
high-temperature air combustion,” which implicitly
suggests that it is a reaction-controlled system. The
present premixed ﬂame regime may be somewhat
relevant to the mechanism of high-temperature air
combustion.
For comparison of the fuel concentrations of Cfuel
for 15% and 3%, chemical species concentrations
such as CO2, CO, H, CHO, and HO2 are shown in
Fig. 9. CO and CO2 concentrations in those two
cases do not differ greatly from each other. However,
the peak concentration of H for Cfuel of 15% is 1
order of magnitude larger than that at Cfuel of 3%.
In addition to this, the conﬁgurations of the HO2
distributions are quite different from each other.
When Cfuel is 15%, it has two peaks, but when it is
3%, it has only one peak. This suggests that there
might be some differences in chemical reaction for
these two cases. H  O2  M →HO2  M might
play some role in this, because the peak concentra-
tion of HO2 at Cfuel 3% is 10 times larger than that
at Cfuel 15%, while the peak concentration of H has
the opposite tendency.
The NOx emission characteristics of these ﬂames
were examined by using GRI-Mech 2.11 for the
same conditions as for the above computation. The
results of temperature and major species distribu-
tion were conﬁrmed to be almost the same as those
obtained by using C1 chemistry. Fig. 10 shows the
emission index of NO and its peak concentration
along the axis. Because the concentrations of the
NO2 and N2O are at least 2 orders of magnitude
smaller than that of NO, the present NO emission
index could be a measure of the total NOx emission
index of the present combustion system. As shown
in the ﬁgure, the emission index of NO and its peak
concentration have the almost same trend with the
fuel concentration. Both decrease with decreasing
fuel concentration, and the emission level of NO was
very low especially in the smaller fuel concentration
region. However, no signiﬁcant changes of emission
characteristics were observed at the boundary of the
thin ﬂamelet region and reaction-controlled ﬂame


--- Page 6 ---

2122
LAMINAR DIFFUSION FLAMES—Other Flame Conﬁgurations
region discussed above. Although much of the oxy-
gen coexists with the fuel in the reaction-controlled
region, the thermal mechanism might not be so ac-
tive because of the low temperature. A discussion of
the mechanism of NO formation in high-tempera-
ture air combustion appears in Ref. [7].
In this study, low oxygen concentration that might
be the model for exhaust gas recirculation is not
computed. Although the relation between the pres-
ent ﬂameless combustion and the so-called high-
temperature air combustion remains unclear, we
have shown that low fuel concentration and high
temperature air exhibit the favorable characteristics
of high-temperature air combustion using atmo-
spheric air.
In furnaces operated under conditions of high-
temperature air combustion, heat transfer to the
load to be heated is better than for conventional
combustion. One reason for this characteristicmight
be the effect of radiation heat transfer. Another ef-
fect may be the uniform temperature distribution.
The existence of a weak reaction zone may play some
role in the uniform temperature distribution.
Yoshida et al. [20] described ﬂame structure and
emission characteristics in a jet-stirred reactor. They
used a highly preheated inlet air jet and strong ex-
haust gas recirculation in the intensely turbulent
zone. The nature of the combustion ﬁeld is very
similar to that of ﬂameless combustion in the fur-
nace, except for the high turbulence level. They
found several speciﬁc characteristics in the jet-
stirred reactor such as the coexistence of fuel and
oxygen, and extremely low levels of NOx emission.
The emission index of NOx ranged from 0.01 to 0.5
g/(kg-fuel). These two combustion characteristics
are exactly the same as those of the present coun-
terﬂow ﬂameless combustion in the laminar ﬂow
ﬁeld, perhaps because of its very slow reaction time.
Conclusions
Microgravity experiments and computation em-
ploying detailed chemistry were carried out to ex-
amine the combustion characteristics and reaction
zone structure of high-temperature air combustion
in a counterﬂow non-premixed ﬂame. The main re-
sults are as follows:
1. Radiation extinction occurred and C-shaped ex-
tinction curves were obtained at air temperatures
of 300 K, 500 K, and 800 K.
2. At air temperatures higher than 1300 K, the ex-
tinction limit disappeared because of the high en-
ergy that the high-temperature air carried into
the reaction zone.
3. Moderate reaction without any temperature peak
was observed under fuel-lean conditions where
the NO emission is very low.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Profs. Hideaki Kobayashi and Yig-
uang Ju of Tohoku University for their stimulating discus-
sions, and Mr. Susumu Hasegawa for his assistance with
the microgravity experiments. This work was performed
under the management of the Japan Space Utilization Pro-
motion Center as a part of an R&D project on advanced
furnaces and boilers supported by the New Energy and
Industrial Technology Development Organization.
REFERENCES
1. Katsuki, M., and Hasegawa, T., Proc. Combust. Inst.
27:3135–3146 (1998).
2. Niioka, T., Proceedings of the Fifth ASME/JSME Joint
Thermal Engineering Conference, San Diego, CA,
1999, pp. 1–6.
3. Pressing, T., Peters, N., and Wuenning, J. G., Proc.
Combust. Inst. 27:3197–3204 (1998).
4. Hasegawa, T., Tanaka, R., and Niioka, T., in Proceed-
ings of the International Joint Power Generation Con-
ference EC-Vol. 5, Book No. G017072, (Sanyal et al.,
eds.), ASME International, 1997, pp. 259–266.
5. Katsuki, M., and Ebisui, K., in First Asia-Paciﬁc Con-
ference on Combustion, The Australia/New Zealand,
Chinese, Chinese Taipei, Japanese and Korean Sec-
tions of the Combustion Institute, 1997, pp. 294–297.
6. Sato, J., in First Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Combus-
tion, The Australia/New Zealand, Chinese, Chinese
Taipei, Japanese and Korean Sections of the Combus-
tion Institute, 1997, pp. 286–289.
7. Ju, Y., in First Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Combustion,
The Australia/New Zealand, Chinese, Chinese Taipei,
Japanese and Korean Sections of the Combustion In-
stitute, 1997, pp. 460–463.
8. Fujimori, T., Riechelmann, D., and Sato, J., Proc.
Combust. Inst. 27:1149–1155 (1998).
9. Ishiguro, T., et al., Proc. Combust. Inst. 27:3205–3213
(1998).
10. Maruta, K., Yoshida, M., Ju, Y., and Niioka, T., Proc.
Combust. Inst. 26:1283–1289 (1996).
11. Seshadri, K., and Williams, F. A., Int. J. Heat Mass
Transfer 21:251–253 (1978).
12. Guo, H., Ju, Y., Maruta, K., Niioka, T., and Liu, F.,
Combust. Flame 109:639–646 (1997).
13. Ju, Y., Guo, H., Maruta, K., and Liu, F., J. Fluid Mech.
342:315–334 (1997).
14. Giovangigli, V., and Smooke, M. D., Combust. Sci.
Technol. 53:23–49 (1987).
15. Maruta, K., Yoshida, M., Guo, H., Ju, Y., and Niioka,
T., Combust. Flame 112:181–187 (1998).
16. Kee, R. J., Grcar, J. F., Smooke, M. D., and Miller,
J. A., Sandia report SAND85-8240, 1994.
17. Fuse, R., Kobayashi, H., Ju, Y., Maruta, K., and Niioka,
T., Thirty-Seventh Symposium (Japanese) on Combus-
tion, Japanese section of the Combustion Institute,
1999, pp. 459–460.


--- Page 7 ---

REACTION ZONE STRUCTURE IN FLAMELESS COMBUSTION
2123
18. Hardesty, D. R., and Weinberg, F. J., Combust. Sci.
Technol. 8:201–214 (1974).
19. Lin˜a´n, A., Acta Astronaut. 1:1007–1039 (1974).
20. Yoshida, A., Naito, H., and Narisawa, M., Thirty-Sev-
enth Symposium (Japanese) on Combustion, Japanese
section of the Combustion Institute, 1999, pp. 11–12.
COMMENTS
Bassam Dally, University of Adelaide, Australia.
1. In furnace-type applications, where this combustion re-
gime is most prominent, the initiation process plays an
important role. Have you considered mixing your oxi-
dant stream with combustion products?
2. You used the GRI mechanism in your calculations. How
applicable is this mechanism to temperatures below
1400 K?
Author’s Reply.
1. Yes. In fact, mixing oxidant with combustion products
is one of the key processes for the high-temperature air
combustion mode. But note that the present research
tries to examine the sole effect of air preheating on fun-
damental aspects of non-premixed combustion. The re-
sults showed the appearance of a reaction-controlled re-
gime without mixing of combustion products. To
examine the effects of combustion products, treatment
of radiation reabsorption that is strongly dependent on
the system characteristic scale remains.
2. Our ground-based species measurements [1] on the
same conﬁguration showed that this mechanism has
well predicted the measured data. From this, we con-
clude it can be applicable down to this temperature
range.
[1] Submitted to Combustion and Flame.
●
Roman Weber, International Flame Research Founda-
tion, The Netherlands. What have you gained by conduct-
ing your experiments in microgravity?
Author’s Reply. As shown by our previous work [1], only
microgravity experiments could show the existence of ra-
diative extinction. Under the effects of gravity, you could
not extract this ﬂame nature because of the disturbance
due to the effect of buoyancy. For examining ﬂame char-
acteristics near their limits, such as the disappearance of
extinction limits, discussion without considering radiative
heat loss on the near-limit ﬂame does not make sense. For
this reason, microgravity conditions are indispensable.
REFERENCE
1. Maruta, K., Yoshida, A., Guo, H., Ju, Y., and Niioka, T.,
Combust. Flame 112:181 (1998).
●
Bradley Williams, Naval Research Laboratory, USA.
Does the long residence time for your ﬂame conditions
preclude the formation of superequilibriumconcentrations
of the major ﬂame radical species (H, O, and OH)? If so,
what effect does this have on the ﬂame chemistry, particu-
larly NOx formation?
Author’s Reply. Our recent NOx measurements showed
that the present modeling well predicted NOx formation
for non-premixed ﬂames in highly preheated air and fuel
diluted with nitrogen. It might have an effect, but it seems
not to be signiﬁcant.
●
Anthony Hamins, NIST, USA. The very careful experi-
ments and calculations show that the turning point strain
rate is nearly invariant with air preheating. Does this sug-
gest that the radiant fraction at the turning point is invar-
iant for this system?
Author’s Reply. The turning point strain rates slightly
increased with the increase of the preheated air tempera-
tures. This might be the result of the balance between (1)
the incoming ﬂow carrying larger enthalpy to the system
for higher air temperature, and (2) lower fuel concentra-
tion leading to a lower amount of the radiating species.
