
--- Page 1 ---

 
-PUBLIC- 
 
GE Research 
Technical publication 
 
 
Impact of High Hydrogen Operation on 
Combustor Performance 
 
PUBLIC
November 2021 
                                                                                                                
Bassam Sabry Mohammad Abdelnabi (abdelnab@ge.com) 
Nicholas Arthur Magina (nicholas.magina@ge.com) 
Brian Volk (volk@ge.com) 
Keith McManus (mcmanus@ge.com) 
Thermosciences 
 
 
 
Abstract 
As the interest in high hydrogen operation is gaining momentum, this paper quantifies the impacts 
associated with switching from natural gas to 100% hydrogen, leveraging both modelling techniques and 
experimental data. From the modeling standpoint, a perfectly stirred reactor network model was setup in 
Cantera. Flame speed increases of up to 50 times that of natural gas were observed with increasing 
hydrogen content, indicating a significant increase in flashback propensity. This suggests that DLE 
combustion systems might offer an advantage over RQL systems, operating at low equivalence ratios 
where the flame speed impact is milder. Additionally, the model shows that the blow off time can be used 
to classify hydrogen operation into three regimes. With increasing hydrogen content, the BOT begins 
similar to that of propane and declines at different rates in each regime, establishing the added operational 
challenges associated with high hydrogen content operation. Equivalence ratio dependencies were 
investigated along with NOx penalties, where a predicted penalty of ~40-65% was observed within the 
flame temperature range of 1750-1950K. Experimentally, a new advanced mixer was used, enabling 
operation of the full spectrum of natural gas and hydrogen blends up to 100% hydrogen. The impact of 
hydrogen content on NOx emissions for a representative operating condition was investigated. 
Comparisons with the model predictions were made, revealing minor discrepancies, which were 
investigated and justified thru a mixedness and residence time framework. Finally, the authors show that 
the proper way to regulate future combustors running with 100% hydrogen should be based on NOx and 
not NOx15. The findings reported here help clarify and shape the future hydrogen enabling technologies, 
reaffirming the need for compact and shorter combustors than are used in current technologies. 
 
 
Keywords 
NOx emissions, NOx design curve, Hydrogen, Blow Off time, DLE, DLN, PFR, PSR, Emissions, Flashback, 
Auto-Ignition 
 
 
This publication is intended for external publication: 
TurboExpo 2022 
 
2021072677338 


--- Page 2 ---

 
2 
 
 
 
 
CLASSES OF GENERAL ELECTRIC 
TECHNICAL REPORTS 
CLASS 1 — PUBLIC (CLASS 1) - GENERAL INFORMATION 
Available to anyone on request. GEGR management, and relevant Company component 
reviews are required before publication. 
CLASS 2 — GE INTERNAL (CLASS 2) - GENERAL COMPANY INFORMATION 
Available on request to any GE employee or employee of a GE subsidiary company that has 
executed a non-disclosure agreement with GE. 
CLASS 3 — GE CONFIDENTIAL (CLASS 3) - LIMITED AVAILABILITY INFORMATION 
Original distribution limited to those individuals with specific need for the information. 
Subsequent Company availability requires originating component approval. 
CLASS 4 — GE RESTRICTED (CLASS 4) - HIGHLY RESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION 
Original distribution to those individuals personally responsible for the Company’s interests 
in the subject. Copies are serially numbered and assigned, and the recipients’ names are 
recorded. Knowledge of existence and material content is restricted to the copy holder. 
 
Class 2, 3, and 4 reports may be subject to Export Control, depending on 
subject matter. 
 
In addition to the limitations above, distribution of Class 2, 3 and 4 information may be 
controlled by Export Control laws or Regulations.  Consult your Export Control representative 
or the GEGR Export Control Manager whenever you have a question in 
this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 3 ---

 
 
3 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
GE Global Research 
 
 
Title: IMPACT OF HIGH HYDROGEN OPERATION ON COMBUSTOR PERFORMANCE 
 
Author(s) 
 
 
Bassam Mohammad Abdelnabi 
 
Phone: 518-387-5472 
 
 
Nicholas Magina  
 
 
Phone: 518-387-5437 
Keith McManus  
 
 
Phone: 518 387 6597 
 
 
Brian Volk 
 
 
 
Phone: 518 387 4675 
 
Report Number 2021GRCXXX 
Date 
07/26/2021 
Number of Pages 15 
Class 
GE Public (Class 1) 
 
 
 
Key Words: NOx emissions, NOx design curve, Hydrogen, Blow Off time, DLE, DLN, PFR, PSR, emissions, flashback, auto-ignition 
 
 


--- Page 4 ---

 
 
4 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
Distribution List  
 
Full Name 
SSO ID 
Department 
Location
John Herbon
GEA
US
Keith R McManus
200005585
GEGR-GRC Combustion Systems
US
Robert Zacharias
204019226
GE Global Research
US
Giri Manampathy
210027548
GEA
US
Nan Zong
204047377
GEA
US
David Lind
210027653
GEA
US
 
 
 


--- Page 5 ---

 
 
5 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo 2022: Power for Land, Sea and Air 
ASME Turbo Expo 2022 
June 22-26, 2022, Rotterdam, The Netherlands 
GT2022-xxxx
IMPACT OF HIGH HYDROGEN OPERATION ON COMBUSTOR PERFORMANCE 
 
 
Bassam S. Mohammad, Nicholas Magina, Brian Volk, and, Keith McManus  
General Electric Research Center 
Niskayuna, NY 12309, USA 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
As the interest in high hydrogen operation is gaining 
momentum, this paper quantifies the impacts associated with 
switching from natural gas to 100% hydrogen, leveraging both 
modelling techniques and experimental data. From the modeling 
standpoint, a perfectly stirred reactor network model was setup 
in Cantera. Flame speed increases of up to 50 times that of 
natural gas were observed with increasing hydrogen content, 
indicating a significant increase in flashback propensity. This 
suggests that DLE combustion systems might offer an advantage 
over RQL systems, operating at low equivalence ratios where the 
flame speed impact is milder. Additionally, the model shows that 
the blow off time can be used to classify hydrogen operation into 
three regimes. With increasing hydrogen content, the BOT 
begins similar to that of propane and declines at different rates in 
each regime, establishing the added operational challenges 
associated with high hydrogen content operation. Equivalence 
ratio dependencies were investigated along with NOx penalties, 
where a predicted penalty of ~40-65% was observed within the 
flame temperature range of 1750-1950K. Experimentally, a new 
advanced mixer was used, enabling operation of the full 
spectrum of natural gas and hydrogen blends up to 100% 
hydrogen. The impact of hydrogen content on NOx emissions for 
a 
representative 
operating 
condition 
was 
investigated. 
Comparisons with the model predictions were made, revealing 
minor discrepancies, which were investigated and justified thru 
a mixedness and residence time framework. Finally, the authors 
show that the proper way to regulate future combustors running 
with 100% hydrogen should be based on NOx and not NOx15. 
The findings reported here help clarify and shape the future 
hydrogen enabling technologies, reaffirming the need for 
compact and shorter combustors than are used in current 
technologies. 
 
 
 
1    NOMENCLATURE 
P3 
= Combustor feed pressure 
T3 
= Combustor inlet air and fuel temperature 
TC 
= Thermocouple 
P/P 
= Operating pressure drop across nozzle 
NOx 
= Nitrogen Oxides 
CO 
= Carbon Monoxide 
O2 
= Oxygen 
CO2 
= Carbon Dioxide 
H2 
= Hydrogen 
ppmvd 
= Particle per million volume dry 
Tflame  
= Flame temperature-based on mixer air only 
TExit  
= Combustor exit temperature (overall air/fuel) 
ms 
= Combustor residence time in millisecond 
p’ 
= Thermo-acoustic instabilities pressure fluctuation 
in psi 
pk-pk 
= Pressure fluctuations peak to peak 
BOT 
= Blow off time 
DLE 
= Dry Low Emissions combustion systems 
EPA 
= Environmental protection agency 
GER 
= General Electric Research 
PSR 
= Perfectly stirred reactor 
RQL 
= Rich-quench-lean combustion systems 
(     )15 
= Species corrected to 15% oxygen 
 
2    INTRODUCTION 
Hydrogen economy is currently being shaped and 
investigated as an enabler for a greener future. We read in 
industry the term “zero” associating any discussion on hydrogen 
as a potential fuel to be widely used in future. It is true that 
switching to 100% hydrogen means zero carbon dioxide and 
carbon monoxide, but not necessarily zero pollutant emissions. 
The primary remaining pollutant is NOx, where literature shows 
contradictory conclusions on the impact of hydrogen on NOx 
emissions. Some studies reported an increase, others reported a 
decrease, and some reported no change.  


--- Page 6 ---

 
 
6 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
Mohammad et al. [1] reviewed the different studies in the 
published literature. There work showed limited to no impact at 
up to 25% Hydrogen using an entitlement combustor (perfectly 
premixed). York et al. [2] reported a decreased of NOx emissions 
compared to natural gas operation. Luckerath et al. [3] reported 
a significant NOx increase with increase in hydrogen in the range 
of  20% -40%. However, there data shows a wide uncertainty in 
flame temperature estimation in addition to variation in air 
preheat temperature. Lantz et al.  [4] reported an increase in NOx 
emissions but the burner was run at atmospheric conditions 
which limits the benefit of the data collected. Han S. Kim et  al. 
[5] reported similar conclusions, but with a non-perfectly 
premixed system so the impoact of premixing is unknown. Peter 
Therklsen et  al. [6] did a pathway study in an attempt to pinpoint 
the reason behind the NOx increase without conclusive results. 
Griebel et  al. [7] reported that for a perfectly premixed case the 
NOx emissions are similar. Also, they showed that diffusion 
flame significantly results in higher NOx concentrations. Cozzi 
[8] reported similar results on a diffusion flame type combustor. 
Combustion emissions are sensitive to almost all operating 
conditions. This paper is focused on NOx and CO, which are 
both sensitive to operating pressure, temperature, mixedness, 
residence time, flame temperature, diffusion portion of the 
flame, fuel composition and non-uniformities in the flow. 
Several authors documented the impact of pressure on 
combustion emissions [9-12]. The higher the flame temperature 
the higher the NOx emissions penalty at elevated pressure. CO 
decreases with pressure. Residence time effect on NOx emissions 
is documented in few publications, but was not thoroughly 
studied in a way that provides combustor designers to make the 
best selection based on target cycle conditions [6, 13, 14].  
Perfectly premixed data are of extreme importance in 
quantifying gas turbine emissions as they isolate the impact of 
mixing from the data. This concept of entitlement data was 
introduced by Leonard and Correa [9] in the nineties. The system 
was simply a perforated flat pate burner running under perfectly 
premixed conditions. Elkady et. al  [14] used a similar system to 
study the impact of operating conditions as well as to establish 
the most representative chemical reactor network model that can 
be used to model this flame . Mohammad et. al used the same 
system to show the impact of acoustics on the entitlement curve 
[15].  Also, Elkady et. al used it to study the impact of  exhaust 
gas recirculation (EGR) on combustion emissions [16]. The rig 
data was also used for successful CO modeling close to lean 
blow out (LBO) [17, 18]. However, perfectly premixed data is 
not enough to quantify the changes that associates fuel changes 
in the field since the mixedness also changes. Fuel composition 
changes are typically associated with fuel jet momentum ratio 
changes which derives a change in mixing. Using perfectly 
premixed data to quantify the changes is not sufficient in this 
case as they don’t capture the impact of mixedness.  
This paper is focused on reporting the impact of switching 
from natural gas operation to 100% hydrogen operation on an 
actual industrial gas turbine DLE system. Recent studies have 
presented the results for blahblah. Here, two DLE mixers are 
used in a two-cup rig arrangement to quantify the result of 
switching from natural gas to 100% hydrogen on NOx and CO 
emissions. A reactor network perfectly premixed model is also 
used to quantify the impact and explain the experimental data. 
As high NOx were observed as the combustor was switched to 
hydrogen operation, a potential mitigation strategy is presented 
at the end of the paper. The mitigation for high NOx is suggested 
to be primarily through residence time reduction. 
 
3     EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND TEST CONDITIONS: 
3.1 Test facility capability 
The experimental data was acquired at the General Electric 
Research (GER) combustion test facility. This facility is used to 
develop future combustion technologies, enhance current 
technologies, as well as diagnose issues for systems in the field. 
The test facility is comprised of three large air compressors, 
two gas compressors, a propane vaporizer, fuel blending station,  
bottle pack and trailer farm, boost air compressor and liquid fuel 
tank farm with different tanks that fit multiple liquid fuels 
including crude oil, JetA, Norpar, Diesel, Distillate and empty 
tanks for any liquid fuel of interest to be studied. The test facility 
is designed to enable testing for land based or aircraft engine-
based combustion systems.  
3.2 Test cell capability 
An operational schematic of the test cell used for this study 
is illustrated in Figure 1. The main feed of natural gas can be 
mixed with other gaseous fuels. In this case, the natural gas 
stream was mixed with hydrogen from the fuel blending station. 
The mixing happens on the fly inside the test cell using a set of 
control valves and flow meters. The mixture is then routed to the 
combustor through different fuel lines. In this case, only two 
gaseous fuel circuits were required to run the system. The length 
of the tubes after mixing is larger than 200 L/D which ensures 
that the natural gas and hydrogen mixture is homogenous before 
it reaches the combustion space.  
The test cell is capable of running liquid fuel and multiple 
air streams and there are several other gaseous fuel circuits, but 
they were not needed for this specific test.  
3.3 Problem definition and combustor design 
The combustion system utilized in this study is shown in 
Figure 2. The system is a two-cup based DLE combustion 
system. The cups are inserted in position through a heat shield 
assembly. The heat shield is cooled through impingement 
cooling. The flame tube is a bathtub shaped structure. It is back 
side cooled to limit the impact of secondary air on combustion 
emissions [19]. The liner back side cooling starts with a baffle 
that impinges air on the back of the liner and then the flow 
develops and flow in the sleeve to cool the liner aft portion down 
through convective cooling. The secondary air injector shown on 
the figure is sealed and not used for this study. The igniter on the 
side is a half inch hydrogen-based igniter that is water cooled. 
There are four emissions rakes installed at the combustor exit. 
Each rake has 5 sampling holes. Therefore, there are 20 sampling 


--- Page 7 ---

 
 
7 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
ports distributed on the combustor exit to enable high quality and 
spatially diverse emissions sampling.  
The combustor structure here is maintained constant without 
any changes while varying the fuel from natural gas to hydrogen. 
The design is capable of handling any temperature spikes or shift 
in the heat transfer. It is important to freeze all these variables to 
isolate the quantified variables to only the variation of natural 
gas to hydrogen.  
 
 
Figure 1. 
Test cell operational schematic layout  
 
 
Figure 2. 
Combustor layout 
 
3.4 Combustor instrumentation 
The combustor is instrumented with thermocouples and 
pressure measurements points to ensure that all parameters of 
interest are running within the operating range and acceptable 
operating conditions.  
There are several thermocouples on the liners to ensure that 
the metal temperature does not exceed the acceptable operating 
temperatures for the liner material, Hast Alloy X in this case. 
Also, the heat shield is instrumented with several thermocouples 
for the same reason. 
There are 4 pressure measurement points on the combustor 
and two quarter inch tubes used for monitoring static and 
dynamic pressures to ensure that the amplitude of combustion 
acoustics will not result in mechanical failure. Typically, a limit 
is set for the high frequency dynamics (1000-6000 Hz) at 5 psi 
pk-pk and for the low frequency dynamics (0-1000 Hz) at 12 psi 
pk-pk.  
The four static pressure measurement points provide an 
average pressure in the combustion zone that is used to estimate 
the amount of air flowing in each mixer, based on the mixer 
pressure drop. Based on these measurement values and the 
amount of fuel flow prescribed, the fuel-air ratio (FAR) can be 
estimated, and hence the flame temperature for each mixer. 
The metered air, metered fuel, estimated mixer air, and 
emissions, specifically the oxygen and carbon dioxide balance, 
are used to calculate multiple closures that are used to assess the 
integrity and quality of the test. The main quality metrics are air 
closure, fuel closure, oxygen closure and carbon dioxide closure.  
Also, methane closure is used before light up to ensure that the 
light up will be safe and within expectations. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 
Flow path, static and dynamic pressure 
measurement locations 
3.5 Emissions sampling system 
The emissions samples collected thru the rake sampling 
holes flow through an electrically heated hose that help maintain 
the sample temperature at 422K. This temperature ensures no 
condensation of the water in the sample gas will occur before 
feeding the sample to the analyzer. This is important as NO2 is 
water soluble. If water condensation occurs, then NO2 may be 
lost and hence the total NOx measured will be in error. The 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) method 7E is of 
extreme importance to be referred to by researchers and 
industrial entities performing emissions sampling [20]. 
The emissions stand is composed of a series of analyzers 
that are used to measure all major components of the sampled 
gas stream. Mainly we are interested in oxygen (O2), nitric 


--- Page 8 ---

 
 
8 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
oxides (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO), unburned hydrocarbons 
(UHC), methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2). NOx15 refers 
to the standard correction of the NOx emissions to 15% oxygen. 
The same terminology applies for CO. 
3.6 Operating conditions, data storage and reporting 
This study, both modeling and experimentally, is performed 
at representative gas turbine operating conditions summarized in 
Table 1. The target residence time is ~ 8 ms at the design point 
operating conditions. An increase of the pressure drop to 8.75% 
changes the residence time to roughly 5.6 ms, information which 
will be useful in Section 4.5. The fuel is pumped to the 
combustion system without pre-heating. There are two mixers 
installed in the system and both were operated at identical 
conditions (no burner bias for this study). That is the global FAR 
per mixer was the same and is equal to the system global FAR. 
Reported data is logged at a rate of 1 Hz. The data presented here 
is collected at steady state where each point is an average of at 
least 10 seconds worth of data.   
 
Table 1.     Baseline Operating Conditions 
Parameter
Value
P3
23 atm
T3
785 K
P/P
4% 
 
4     RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
4.1 Impact of 100% hydrogen operation on flame speed 
and Blow Off Time  
The laminar flame speed (SL) is of prime importance in 
understanding the propensity of DLE mixers to flashback. In 
addition, it dictates the flame area and overall length as it 
describes the consumption rate of the air and fuel mixture. 
However, the flow is primarily turbulent in practically all 
industrial combustion systems, therefore a useful quantity is the 
turbulent flame speed (ST) which is typically correlated to SL. 
One sample formula is given in Eq.(1) where U’ is the fluctuating 
component of the velocity [21]. The ratio can be between 2-50 
depending on the problem being solved. 
 
⁄
 ~ 	 
′
 



/   
           (1) 
To investigate these trends, a perfectly stirred reactor (PSR) 
network model was setup in Cantera and exercised at the 
operating conditions listed in Table 1. The PSR residence time 
was set to 0.5ms. Figure 4 shows the variation of the laminar 
flame speed with equivalence ratio for methane and hydrogen 
flames. An alternate representation, in terms of ratio of hydrogen 
laminar flame speed to methane laminar flame speed, is shown 
on the secondary axis. A major challenge of burning hydrogen is 
apparent from the figure as the hydrogen flame speed velocity is 
orders of magnitude larger than methane. As equivalence ratio 
increases so does this flame speed ratio, representing increased 
sensitivity and susceptibility to flash back. This suggests that 
leaner combustion systems would have an advantage when 
switching to burning hydrogen, having more modest flash back 
characteristics. For example, DLE combustion systems, typically 
operating at equivalence ratios less than 0.75, will have fewer 
hydrogen related flash back issues than diffusion based or RQL 
combustion systems, which operate at the larger equivalence 
ratios. In addition, combustor part durability is also a concern 
with increasing flame speed as the flame is expected to sit much 
closer to the hardware or attachment surfaces. Thus, this is one 
of the few cases where lean burn systems burning hydrogen can 
be more advantageous when compared to rich burn systems. 
 
Figure 4. 
Laminar flame speed of hydrogen (H2) and 
Methane (CH4) vs equivalence ratio (Phi) 
 
Gas turbine manufacturers typically test mixers in a 
controlled environment at representative operating conditions of 
the machine for flame holding. These tests confirm the ability of 
the mixer to both stabilize a flame in the designed reaction zone 
and to clear a flame that is induced into the mixer, irrespective 
of the reason it was induced. Field experience has shown that this 
is a key performance parameter that can result in millions of 
dollars in losses if not tackled properly. Blow off time (BOT), 
defined as the minimum PSR residence time required for the fuel 
air mixture to have reaction or heat release, can be used to 
numerically confirm that the mixer will be resistant to flame 
holding events. Blouch et. al showed that for propane and ethane 
operation, BOT was a very accurate indicator of flame holding 
acceptability limits for GE LM2500 and LM6000 machines 
using DLE1.5 mixers technology [22]. If the BOT is higher than 
the residence time in the mixer then there is no risk of flame 
holding, and if BOT is lower than the mixer residence time then 
flashback or flame holding becomes an issue.  
The PSR network model was once again leveraged to 
investigate BOT trends for various fuel blends at the operating 
conditions listed in Table 1. The equivalence ratio of interest is 
assumed to be unity to represent flame holding events close to 
the fuel injection orifices inside the mixer. The model was run 
for various natural gas blends of propane (serving as a baseline) 
and hydrogen ranging from 10% to 100%. Figure 5 shows a 


--- Page 9 ---

 
 
9 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
direct comparison of the BOT for these concentration sweeps. 
The extremely low values with significant hydrogen 
concentration indicate large flame holding and flashback risk, 
being yet another challenge with high hydrogen content 
combustion. For example, the BOT at 100% propane is 
equivalent to that at 43% hydrogen (roughly 3.5 micro-seconds). 
Propane was chosen as the baseline for comparison as it is known 
to be already sensitive to flashback and flame holding. The data 
shows that at 80% hydrogen the BOT is roughly 1 micro-second, 
establishing an extremely aggressive requirement. However, up 
to as high as 30% hydrogen operation there is no significant 
difference between propane and hydrogen trends, suggesting that 
the operation of the combustor free of flame holding or flashback 
events should be relatively easily achieved in this range.  
Based on these curves, three operational regimes can be 
defined. First is the easiest which is up to 30% concentrations, 
where the trends are almost identical to that of propane. Next, is 
between 30-80% where both concentration increases lead to 
decreasing BOT values, albeit at different rates. Finally, at 
concentration blends higher than 80%, propane seems to level 
off while hydrogen continues to decline, indicating increasingly 
challenging operating requirements.  
 
 
Figure 5. 
Hydrogen vs Propane BOT sweeps, where 
vertical dashed lines denote the regime boundaries 
 
0 shows the sensitivity of BOT to operating pressure and 
temperature variations well within the realm of possibility for 
fielded systems. The data shows that the air preheat temperature 
has a very strong effect on reducing the BOT, and therefore 
engines running at higher pressure ratios have an added level of 
difficulty. This becomes an increasing concern as our technology 
is driving towards higher pressure ratios as we strive for higher 
efficiencies. The impact of higher operating pressure was much 
more minor. 
 
 
Figure 6. 
Sensitivity of BOT to operating pressure and 
temperature for different hydrogen blends 
 
Figure 7 shows the variation of BOT with equivalence ratio for 
a 100% hydrogen air mixture running at ~23 atm and 785K. In 
the previous concentration sweep studies, it was mentioned that 
the PSR network model was set to an equivalence ratio of unity. 
This curve shows that the BOT only recovers to the value 
observed for pure propane at equivalence ratio values lower than 
0.42 or higher than 6. Within the range 0.47-1.5 the BOT is 
extremely low (less than 1 micro-seconds). This indicates that 
hydrogen combustion systems running under partially premixed 
or close to perfectly mixed conditions will require additional 
hardware design features to avoid flame holding, rather than 
relying on chemistry as is standard with traditional fuels. The 
work of York et al. shows one such example of a system 
redesigned to be able to operate at 100% hydrogen. However, 
operating pressures and temperatures are also an important factor 
in the performance evaluation of systems intended to operate 
under 100% hydrogen [2]. 
 


--- Page 10 ---

 
 
10 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
 
Figure 7. 
Impact of equivalence ratio (Phi) on the BOT 
for 100% hydrogen at 23 atm and 785K. 
4.2 Impact of 100% hydrogen operation on NOx 
emissions using chemical kinetics  
Previous model results shown so far in this work have 
leveraged a PSR network model, however, to investigate the 
chemistry of these simplified combustion systems now a joint 
PSR and plug flow reactor (PFR) network model will be 
leveraged. This is a common practice and will be denoted PSR-
PFR in this work. Elkady et al. used a similar network model to 
predict the emissions of a perforated entitlement burner running 
with natural gas (perfectly premixed) [23] and achieved very 
good agreement with experimental data. The sensitivity of the 
model was evaluated using different reaction mechanisms and at 
different operating conditions, having widespread agreement 
with the experimental data. Mohammad et al. [15] used the same 
version of this combustion system to study the impact of 
hydrogen enrichment, however only up to 25% hydrogen by 
volume and showing very limited impact on NOx emissions. 
Figure 8 schematically depicts the PSR-PFR network model 
constructed and leveraged to compare predicted emissions under 
natural gas and hydrogen operation. Two different chemical 
mechanisms were initially investigated; an industry standard, 
GRI3.0, and a more aggressive chemical detailing, MFC2. This 
was done to gain understanding into the sensitivity of hydrogen 
content combustion metrics on the mechanism used. Figure 9 
shows the laminar flame speed computed for each mechanism 
across hydrogen content sweeps. It can be observed that the 
flame speed is estimated to increase between 2-6 times as the 
flame transitions from natural gas to 100% hydrogen content (at 
this specific flame temperature. Figure 4 shows the general trend 
with equivalence ratio). Aside from Figure 9, all subsequent 
results for laminar flame speed throughout this paper will utilize 
the GRI3.0 mechanism as it is the current industrial standard. 
 
Figure 8. 
Schematic of the PSR-PFR network model 
ran at baseline conditions (See Table 1) 
 
 
Figure 9. 
Laminar flame speed vs hydrogen content by 
volume for different chemical mechanisms at Tflame 
~1950K and baseline conditions (Table 1) 
 
Along with laminar flame speed, another important 
parameter in the network model are the residence times. To 
assess the impact of the PSR-PFR residence time split, the PSR 
size is assumed to inversely change with the laminar flame speed 
squared. This results from the chemical time scale, CTS, being 
inversely proportional to the square of the laminar flame speed 
as follows:  
 
            τCTS
 Cp


To

  
 
           (2) 
 
For the subsequent model results shown, the residence time 
split between the PSR and PFR was kept equal, at 0.5ms/7.5 ms 
each (for an overall system residence time modeled of 8 ms). 
This was justified with accompanying numerical investigations 
which showed the impact of the PSR residence time on NOx 
emissions to be so minor that it was essentially negligible. For 
example, it was observed that decreasing the size of the PSR, for 
hydrogen operation, to 20% that of the natural gas operation 
resulted in roughly a 1% reduction in NOx. Thus, for simplicity 
they were kept equal. 
Figure 10 shows the PSR-PFR network model results, 
comparing NOx values for natural gas and hydrogen flames.  
These curves show the typical exponential NOx growth, as is 
common and expected, versus flame temperature (denoted 
TFlame in the figure). A significant NOx penalty can be observed 


--- Page 11 ---

 
 
11 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
as the fuel is switched from natural gas to hydrogen. This penalty 
becomes more obvious when the ratio of NOx is plotted, and thus 
NOxH2/NOxCH4 is also shown in Figure 10. Most modern DLE 
combustion systems operate with flame temperatures in the 
range of 1750-1950 K, corresponding to a model predicted NOx 
penalty in the range of ~65-40%. Also, it is observed that as the 
temperature increases the percentage penalty decreases. This 
effect might be attributed to the decreases in prompt NOx as 
temperature increases, resulting in decreasing flame lengths. 
 
Figure 10. Model prediction of hydrogen vs natural gas 
NOx15 operation for a 23.8 atm, 783.1K and 8 ms 
4.3 Impact of 100% hydrogen operation on DLE 
combustion systems 
Having gained some preliminary insight into the impact of 
hydrogen content on NOx emissions from the network model 
framework, the next step is to investigate the experimental 
results. The combustion system shown in Figure 2 was used to 
experimentally quantify the impact of hydrogen on emissions 
thru various hydrogen content sweeps; specifically the system 
was run at hydrogen percentages of 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 and 100% 
with flame temperature of 1935 K. Additionally, two temperature 
sweeps were conducted at 50% and 100% hydrogen in order to 
study the impact of operating temperature on NOx growth. These 
were performed by varying the flame temperature while keeping 
everything else the same and collecting data, resulting in curves 
commonly known as NOx design curves. These NOx design 
curves provide combustor designers with critical information 
required to target and achieve emissions requirements and thus 
are highly sought after in industry.  
As a brief aside, it is important to recognize that the FAA 
NOx and CO regulations actually regulate NOx15 and CO15, 
rather than NOx and CO. These modified emissions metrics 
represent the respective species emissions corrected to 15% 
oxygen using the following formula: 
 
!.#$ 
!.#$% &%( ∗ &**+(  
          (3) 
where X denotes the species concentration in ppm and O2 is the 
nominal oxygen percentage in the original measurement. 
Therefore, often results will be presented against and discussed 
with respect to this modified metric. 
Figure 11 shows the three NOx design curves obtained, one 
for natural gas and the two hydrogen sweeps at 50% and 100% 
respectively. It can be observed that as the hydrogen content 
increases, the NOx emissions increase significantly following a 
second-degree polynomial. As a note, this figure shows the 
design curves plotted against TO2, being the temperature 
measured at the exit of the combustor. In this work we will utilize 
Tflame, obtained from model results, and TO2, measured from 
experiments, interchangeably.  
 
 
Figure 11. NOX15 Emissions data for natural gas and 
hydrogen. Shown are three NOx design curves and a 
hydrogen content sweep at 1935K. 
 
Figure 12 shows the hydrogen content sweep, which is also 
denoted on Figure 11 by the dashed line, establishing a transfer 
function for the impact of hydrogen on NOx emissions. Using 
the regimes defined in Figure 5 for BOT, it can be observed that 
at low hydrogen percentages there is very limited impact of 
increasing hydrogen content on NOx. Above this regime 
however, the impact is significant. In the middle regime, the 
increase in NOx with hydrogen content seems exponential, while 
in the final high content regime the increase appears linear.  
By referring to Figure 10, comparisons between the network 
modeling framework and experimental data can be made. 
Extracting the values at 1935 K, the model shows a predicted 
NOx increase of ~45%, being equivalent to the 100% hydrogen 
content point in Figure 12,  while the experimental data shows 
an increase of ~1200%. This massive difference can be attributed 
to the hydrogen NOx prediction from the model being well 
below the experimentally observed values. Notice how the 
natural gas prediction seems reasonable, while the hydrogen 
prediction is almost an order of magnitude off. Physically, this 
can be attributed to the model inability to capture the variation 


--- Page 12 ---

 
 
12 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
in mixing or the flame-flow interaction impact that is associated 
with hydrogen addition, effects that will be further explored next.  
 
 
Figure 12. Impact of hydrogen addition on NOx15 
emissions measured experimentally 
 
Although NOx is the primary emission discussed when 
referring to pure hydrogen combustion due to the absence of 
carbon atoms, however, when dealing with hydrogen blends CO 
is still a concern requiring attention. Figure 13  shows the impact 
of hydrogen content (blended with natural gas) on CO. The 
observed absence of CO at 100% hydrogen was expected and 
serves as mental grounding, however, at 50% hydrogen the trend 
is very interesting. With 50% hydrogen, there is just 30 ppm 
CO15 at 1700K which corresponds to 465K of turn down 
capability.  The elevated levels of NOx and significant reduction 
in CO points us towards the solution to enable 100% hydrogen 
with emissions compliance. It is known that CO levels decrease 
with longer residence times, however, due to the large margin 
here with the 50% blend (or complete absence of CO with 100% 
hydrogen), this points towards using shortened combustors or 
combustors with faster residence times as to limit the amount of 
NOx formation.  
 
Figure 13. Impact of hydrogen addition on CO15 at 8.5 
ms 
 
As a final point on these experimental emissions trends, 
upon close inspection of Figure 11 and Figure 13, it can be 
observed that for the natural gas data there are actually two sets 
of results plotted. Low and high emission branches exist for CO 
and NOx at low and high temperature values, respectively. For 
each of these dataset pairs, the same data was acquired, however 
the temperature sweeps were done from different sides, one 
increasing and one decreasing. The resulting behavior is the 
hysteresis phenomena associated with the flame shape changes 
as the temperature is approached from the lower side or the 
higher side (also commonly known as bifurcations or bi modal 
behavior in combustion). It can be seen that the bifurcation point, 
i.e. temperature, appears to be around 3025F. 
*Add equivalent of Figure 12 but for CO? 
4.4 Incorporating effect of un-mixedness in chemical 
kinetics model 
Published research has shown that the PSR-PFR reactor 
network model approach is able to capture, with high accuracy, 
the NOx emissions of simple natural gas jet flames that are 
perfectly premixed [14]. From Figure 10 it can be observed that 
at a flame temperature of 3025F, the reactor network predicts 
NOx15 to be 12.5 ppm under natural gas operation, while 
experimental data shows emissions values between 8.5pm-
12ppm (depending on hysteresis direction or flame shape). This 
implies that the system with natural gas is running in an 
operational mode close to perfectly premixed. 
Recall the previous discission regarding the large deviations 
between network model NOx predictions and experimental 
results. The jet momentum ratio of the pure hydrogen fuel, 
relative to pure natural gas, is 1.25, suggesting that a significant 
impact on mixing is to be expected when switching from natural 
gas to hydrogen operation. As a result of this higher fluid 
momentum, the mixing profile likely becomes more center 
peaked with hydrogen. While this may help with flash back and 
flame holding, it will also drive higher NOx emissions due to 
blahblah.  
To capture this impact and remedy some of the model 
deficiencies, we propose a simple framework to estimate and 
incorporate the un-mixedness effect into the modelling results. 
The reactor network model can be used to predict NOx for any 
equivalence ratio of interest if it is assumed to be uniform across 
the flow. Thus, for the proposed framework, we will assume that 
the NOx emissions for the combustion system shown in Figure 
2 are a mixture of perfectly premixed emissions and a hot spot, 
representing a localized region of high fuel content, operating at 
an equivalence ratio of unity; chosen as this represents the worst-
case scenario with maximum adiabatic flame temperature. At the 
baseline condition, now assuming an equivalence ration of unity, 
the model predicts NOx values of roughly ~3733.3 ppm while 
burning pure hydrogen. Experimentally, there is 259.7 ppm NOx 
generated at the same conditions of interest where the model 
predicts 43 ppm. The split is roughly 5.75%. Therefore, the 
deterioration of un-mixedness as we switch from natural gas to 
hydrogen can be quantified at roughly 6%.  
This framework assumes that the kinetics model fully 
captures the proper physics and that deviations can exclusively 
be attributed to un-mixedness that takes place as a result of the 
burner design not being intended for 100% hydrogen operation. 
Another important factor that could contribute is the residence 


--- Page 13 ---

 
 
13 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
time impact in the post flame zone. One method to confirm this 
assumption would be to have dynamic fuel orifice holes such that 
the momentum ratio is constant with various hydrogen content 
blends; enlarged holes for higher hydrogen contents. However, 
these hardware modifications and test reruns are beyond the 
scope of the current work. This work is focused on simply 
quantifying the changes that associate switching from natural gas 
operation to hydrogen content blends, up to 100% hydrogen. The 
results confirm that NOx emissions will increase significantly 
either way. As was shown by Figure 12, NOx15 can increase as 
much as 1200% when switching from natural gas to pure 
hydrogen operation. Restoring the mixedness will help reduce 
the impact but will never eliminate it fully. In the next section a 
simple method will be used to show how to reduce NOx15 
without hardware changes. 
4.5 Abatement of NOx15 via pressure drop (residence 
time decrease) 
The increase in NOx levels associated with moderate to high 
hydrogen concentrations is of concern. An attempt to reduce the 
NOx can be made by increasing the pressure drop, i.e.  reducing 
the residence time, so that thermal NOx has less time to form. 
However, along with negatively impacting CO for carbon 
containing fuels, reductions in the residence time also impacts 
the degree of mixing. Unlike the jet momentum theory, 
investigating this effect does not require hardware modifications, 
only an operational condition change. Therefore, another round 
of experimental data was obtained, for both natural gas and 
hydrogen content and temperature sweeps, at a larger pressure 
drop of 8.75%, i.e. reduced residence time. Recall, as was 
denoted in Table 1, Figure 11 and Figure 13 displayed results for 
the design point with a pressure drop of 4%. This elevated 
pressure drop value corresponds to a reactor residence time of 
5.6ms, which is roughly a 2.5ms reduction from the baseline 
case. 
Figure 14 and Figure 15 show the NOx and CO emissions 
trends for natural gas, hydrogen, and, various representative 
hydrogen content blends at the elevated pressure drop. As was 
expected, compared to the baseline conditions the NOx values 
are significantly lower overall. Additionally, for the partial 
hydrogen blends and natural gas data, the CO emissions values 
are higher. However, interestingly the ratio of NOx increase 
associated with switching from natural gas to pure hydrogen 
operation is roughly the same under both pressure drops which 
indicates limited impact on mixing in this case. Figure 16 can be 
used to estimate the impact of residence time under 100% 
hydrogen operation. The impact is huge. It is roughly 20 ppm / 
ms. That is for every ms reduction in residence time there is an 
equivalent reduction in NOx 15 emissions by 20 ppm. This 
derivative is at roughly 1900 K. The impact of residence time is 
expressed in ppm/ms since this rate is function of the flame 
temperature.  
 
 
Figure 14. Impact of hydrogen addition on NOx15 
emissions at 8.75% DP/P which is equivalent to 5.6ms 
 
Figure 15. Impact of hydrogen addition on CO15 
emissions at 8.75% DP/P which is equivalent to 5.6ms 
 
Figure 16. Impact of residence time on NOx15 under 
100% hydrogen operation 
 
4.6 NOx vs NOX15 
The EPA regulations regulate NOx15 and CO15, rather than 
NOx and CO. These modified emissions metrics represent the 


--- Page 14 ---

 
 
14 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
respective species emissions corrected to 15% oxygen using the 
following formula: 
 
!.#$ 
!.#$% &%( ∗ &**+(  
          (3) 
where X denotes the species concentration in ppm and O2 is the 
nominal oxygen percentage in the original measurement. 
Figure 17 shows the oxygen content in the exhaust for 
natural gas and pure hydrogen flames (data taken from the PSR-
PFR model results discussed in section 4.2). It is evident that 
natural gas flames have on average 2% less oxygen than 
respective hydrogen flames. This means that the actual impact 
on NOx is lower than the reported impact on NOx15. Figure 18 
shows the impact of hydrogen addition on NOx vs NOX15. It is 
approximately 50% of the impact we discussed throughout the 
paper. Therefore, therefore authors suggest that the emissions 
regulations should be based on NOx and not NOx15 for 
combustors burning 100% hydrogen. Eventually, NOx is the 
final pollutant that is released to atmosphere. In this case, 
correcting to 15% Oxygen actually penalizes the system with no 
benefit.  
 
 
Figure 17. Oxygen percentage for natural gas vs 
hydrogen flames under same TFlame.  
 
Figure 18. Impact of hydrogen addition on NOx and 
NOX15 
5     CONCLUSIONS 
Reactor network modelling and experimental data are used to 
show the challenge that associates hydrogen combustion up to 
100%. Modelling shows that interms of flash back, DLE systems 
offers advantages over RQL combustion systems as the flame 
speed gores significantly with higher equivalence ratio until the 
ratio to natural gas peaks at around 50:1. Also, Blow Off Time 
(BOT) shows that the problem of burning hydrogen can be 
classified into three regions. First region is up to 25% hydrogen 
where the BOT is very similar to propane. Second region is 25%-
80% where the BOT significantly drops lower than propane. 
Finally, more than 80% where the propane BOT levels at 3.5 
micros seconds but the hydrogen BOT continues to drop to lower 
than 1 micro seconds. Therefore, the DLE system should be 
design with features that can enable high hydrogen without flame 
holding. The model predicts a penalty in emissions that decreases 
with the increase in flame temperature. It ranges between 65-
40% within the temperatures of interest. Experimental data on an 
advanced mixer shows even higher penalty. A proposed frame 
work shows that a drop in mixedness by ~6% can explain this 
additional increase in NOx. That is the mixer was used as is 
without restoring the jet momentum ratio back to the design point 
under hydrogen operation (the mixer is designed to burn natural 
gas). The system residence time was dropped from 8 ms to 5.5 
ms and therefore more than 60% drop in NOx emissions was 
achieved. The data presented here shows that the future direction 
for combustors that will enable high hydrogen operation is 
compactness and short residence time for true near zero 
emissions or at least to maintain the level of NOx similar to 
natural gas operation.  
6     REFRENCES 
 
[1] Mohammad, B. S., McManus, K., Brand, A., Elkady, A. M., 
and Cuppoletti, D., "Hydrogen Enrichment Impact on Gas 
Turbine Combustion Characteristics," Proc. ASME Turbo Expo 
2020: 
Turbomachinery 
Technical 
Conference 
and 
ExpositionV04BT04A005. 
[2] York, W. D., Ziminsky, W. S., and Yilmaz, E., 2013, 
"Development and Testing of a Low NOx Hydrogen Combustion 
System for Heavy-Duty Gas Turbines," Journal of Engineering 
for Gas Turbines and Power, 135(2). 
[3] Lückerath, R., Meier, W., and Aigner, M., 2008, "FLOX® 
Combustion 
at 
High 
Pressure 
With 
Different 
Fuel 
Compositions," Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and 
Power, 130(1). 
[4] Lantz, A., Collin, R., Aldén, M., Lindholm, A., Larfeldt, J., 
and Lörstad, D., 2014, "Investigation of Hydrogen Enriched 
Natural Gas Flames in a SGT-700/800 Burner Using OH PLIF 
and Chemiluminescence Imaging," Journal of Engineering for 
Gas Turbines and Power, 137(3). 
[5] Kim, H., Arghode, V., and Gupta, A., 2009, "Flame 
characteristics of hydrogen-enriched methane–air premixed 
swirling flames," International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 
34(2), pp. 1063-1073. 


--- Page 15 ---

 
 
15 
Copyright © 2022 by ASME 
[6] Therkelsen, P., Werts, T., McDonell, V., and Samuelsen, S., 
2009, "Analysis of NOx Formation in a Hydrogen-Fueled Gas 
Turbine Engine," Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and 
Power, 131(3). 
[7] Griebel, P., Boschek, E., and Jansohn, P., 2007, "Lean 
Blowout Limits and NOx Emissions of Turbulent, Lean 
Premixed, Hydrogen-Enriched Methane/Air Flames at High 
Pressure," Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 
129(2), p. 404. 
[8] Cozzi, F., and Coghe, A., 2006, "Behavior of hydrogen-
enriched 
non-premixed 
swirled 
natural 
gas 
flames," 
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 31(6), pp. 669-677. 
[9] Leonard, G., and Correa, S., "NOx Formation in Premixed 
High-Pressure Lean Methane Flames," Proc. Fossil Fuel 
Combustion 
Symposium: 
13th 
Annual 
Energy-Sources 
Technology Conference and Exhibition, pp. 69-74. 
[10] Bhargava, A., Kendrick, D. W., Colket, M. B., Sowa, W. A., 
Casleton, K. H., and Maloney, D. J., "Pressure Effect on NOx 
and CO Emissions in Industrial Gas Turbines," Proc. ASME 
Turbo Expo 2000: Power for Land, Sea, and AirV002T02A017. 
[11] Rutar, T., and Malte, P. C., 2002, "NOx Formation in High-
Pressure Jet-Stirred Reactors With Significance to Lean-
Premixed Combustion Turbines," Journal of Engineering for Gas 
Turbines and Power, 124(4), p. 776. 
[12] Biagioli, F., and Guthe, F., 2007, "Effect of pressure and 
fuel–air unmixedness on NOx emissions from industrial gas 
turbine burners," Combustion and Flame, 151(1-2), pp. 274-288. 
[13] Rutar, T., Horning, D. C., Lee, J. C. Y., and Malte, P. C., 
"NOx Dependency on Residence Time and Inlet Temperature for 
Lean-Premixed Combustion in Jet-Stirred Reactors," Proc. 
ASME 1998 International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine 
Congress and ExhibitionV003T06A036. 
[14] Elkady, A. M., Herbon, J., Kalitan, D. M., Leonard, G., 
Akula, R., Karim, H., and Hadley, M., 2012, "Gas Turbine 
Emission Characteristics in Perfectly Premixed Combustion," 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 134(6). 
[15] Mohammad, B. S., Balasubramanyam, P., McManus, K., 
Ruszczyk, J., Elkady, A. M., and Mueller, M. A., "Combustion 
Dynamics Diagnostics and Mitigation on a Prototype Gas 
Turbine Combustor," Proc. ASME Turbo Expo 2012: Turbine 
Technical Conference and Exposition, pp. 383-389. 
[16] Elkady, A. M., Brand, A. R., Vandervort, C. L., and Evulet, 
A. T., "Exhaust Gas Recirculation Performance in Dry Low 
Emissions Combustors," Proc. ASME 2011 Turbo Expo: Turbine 
Technical Conference and Exposition, American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, pp. 1183-1192. 
[17] Graham, G., Zhuyin, R., Hendrik, F., Liuyan, L., Venkat, T., 
and Hasan, K., "Modeling CO With Flamelet-Generated 
Manifolds: Part 2 — Application," Proc. ASME Turbo Expo 
2012: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition, American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, pp. 1177-1184. 
[18] Karim, G. G., Zhuyin, R., Hendrik, F., Liuyan, L., Venkat, 
T., and Hasan, "Modeling CO With Flamelet-Generated 
Manifolds: Part 1—Flamelet Configuration," Proc. ASME Turbo 
Expo 2012: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition, 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, pp. 1141-1151. 
[19] Mohammad, B. S., Volk, B., and McManus, K., "Impact of 
Secondary Air Flow on Combustor Emissions," Proc. ASME 
Turbo Expo 2020: Turbomachinery Technical Conference and 
ExpositionV04BT04A007. 
[20] 
Agency, 
E. 
P., 
"Method 
7e," 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-
08/documents/method_7e.pdf. 
[21] Kerstein, A. R., and Ashurst, W. T., 1992, "Propagation rate 
of growing interfaces in stirred fluids," Physical Review Letters, 
68(7), pp. 934-937. 
[22] Blouch, J., Li, H., Mueller, M., and Hook, R., 2012, "Fuel 
Flexibility in LM2500 and LM6000 Dry Low Emission 
Engines," Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 
134(5). 
[23] Elkady, A. M., Kalitan, D. M., Herbon, J., Leonard, G., 
Akula, R., Karim, H., and Hadley, M., 2012, "Gas Turbine 
Emission Characteristics In Perfectly Premixed Combustion," 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 134(6). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
