
--- Page 1 ---

Oliver Lammel1
e-mail: oliver.lammel@dlr.de
Harald Schütz
Guido Schmitz
Rainer Lückerath
Michael Stöhr
Berthold Noll
Manfred Aigner
German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Institute of Combustion Technology,
Pfaffenwaldring 38-40,
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
Matthias Hase
Werner Krebs
Fossil Power Generation Division,
Energy Sector,
Siemens AG,
45473 Mülheim an der Ruhr, Germany
FLOX® Combustion at High Power
Density and High Flame
Temperatures
In this contribution, an overview of the progress in the design of an enhanced FLOX®
burner is given. A fuel ﬂexible burner concept was developed to fulﬁll the requirements of
modern gas turbines: high speciﬁc power density, high turbine inlet temperature, and low
NOx emissions. The basis for the research work is numerical simulation. With the focus
on pollutant emissions, a detailed chemical kinetic mechanism is used in the calculations.
A novel mixing control concept, called HiPerMix®, and its application in the FLOX®
burner are presented. In view of the desired operational conditions in a gas turbine
combustor, this enhanced FLOX® burner was manufactured and experimentally investi-
gated at the DLR test facility. In the present work, experimental and computational
results are presented for natural gas and natural gashydrogen combustion at gas
turbine relevant conditions and high adiabatic ﬂame temperatures (up to Tad2000 K).
The respective power densities are PA13.3 MW/m2 bar (natural gas (NG)) and PA
14.8 MW/m2 bar NGH2, satisfying the demands of a gas turbine combustor. It is
demonstrated that the combustion is complete and stable and that the pollutant emissions
are very low. DOI: 10.1115/1.4001825
Keywords: FLOX®, HiPerMix®, ﬂameless combustion, gas turbine combustion, high
temperature gas turbine, fuel ﬂexibility, hydrogen combustion, numerical simulation, high
pressure test rig, laser diagnostics
1
Introduction
The concept of lean premixed combustion in stationary gas tur-
bines has led to a signiﬁcant reduction in nitrogen oxide emissions
in comparison to nonpremixed gas turbine combustion 1–3.
However, its liability to thermoacoustic instabilities, the risk of
ﬂashback, and its sensitivity with respect to changes in the fuel
composition are limitations for a safe and reliable operation 4–7.
To meet future goals of power generation, which include low NOx
and CO emissions at high gas turbine efﬁciency and especially
high fuel ﬂexibility due to the need to burn fuels stemming from
all kind of sources and CO2 sequestration, the potential of new
burner concepts is investigated and evaluated. Here, the FLOX®
8 combustion technology, also termed ﬂameless, volume, or
mild combustion 9–12, presents an attractive alternative for low-
emission combustors.
The term FLOX® is an acronym for “ﬂameless oxidation.” The
initial atmospheric FLOX® design was characterized by a nonvis-
ible ﬂame 10. The reaction zone was widely distributed. There-
fore, the intensity of the visible chemiluminescence in a furnace
with hot luminous walls went below the visibility limit. Operated
at high pressures, the ﬂame in a FLOX® combustor with optical
access is observable.
The presented burner using the FLOX® principle is character-
ized by high momentum jets of a partially premixed fuel air mix-
ture, which are discharged through oriﬁces arranged on a circle
see Fig. 4. The axial high momentum jet ﬂow provides intense
mixing, which reduces peak temperatures in the downstream
ﬂame relevant for high NOx emissions Fig. 1. High ﬂashback
resistance is obtained through the absence of low velocity zones in
the applied burner concept, which favors this concept for multi-
fuel application requested in next generation gas turbines.
A ﬁrst result from numerical simulation is shown in Fig. 1,
where a longitudinal sectional drawing through the combustor
axis and two opposite jet nozzles is displayed to demonstrate the
FLOX® principle. The streamlines represent the ﬂow, and we rec-
ognize a strong inner recirculation zone. In view of the pollutant
formation, the molar fraction distribution of CO and NO is shown
on the upper and the lower half of Fig. 1, respectively. At ﬁrst
glance, we observe that the reaction zone is far detached from the
nozzle exit.
The FLOX® combustor investigated at the test facilities of the
DLR Institute of Combustion Technology, in conjunction with nu-
merical simulations, is a can combustor with 12 individual jet
nozzles equidistantly arranged on a concentric circle on the com-
bustor dome. For burner nozzle diameters of 4.5 mm and 6 mm, it
could be demonstrated in a previous work 13–15 that the
FLOX® concept performs very well in a wide operational range
for pressure up to 30 bars and air to fuel excess ratio up to 
=3.0 as well. If the gas velocity at the burner nozzle exit is
limited to vnozzle150 m/s by reason of the burner pressure loss,
the speciﬁc thermal power density for natural gas combustion is
about PA=2.6 MW/m2 bar related to the dome area or PV
=13.2 MW/m3 bar related to combustor volume, respectively.
However, in a gas turbine combustor, a value of at least PA
=10 MW/m2 bar is required. Accordingly, the dump ratio dome
area related to the accumulated cross sectional area of the burner
nozzles has to be decreased to a value of 6.4 corresponding to a
burner nozzle diameter of 12 mm. In this case, the original
FLOX® burner does not comply with the above-mentioned re-
quirements of a “FLOX®-type combustion” resulting in stability
problems and elevated pollutant emissions.
With the aid of numerical simulations, a novel burner was de-
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute IGTI of ASME for pub-
lication in the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript
received April 8, 2010; ﬁnal manuscript received April 13, 2010; published online
August 25, 2010. Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 121503-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

veloped, which implements HiPerMix® 16 in the FLOX® burner
concept. The characteristic feature of this HiPerMix® burner is the
distinct control over the mixing performance.
2
Numerical Simulations
2.1
CFD Code and Combustion Model. The novel burner
presented in this paper is completely designed on the basis of
numerical simulations carried out by the DLR Institute of Com-
bustion Technology. For this purpose, the BLUEFLAME code is ap-
plied. BLUEFLAME is a newly realized F90 ﬁnite volume computa-
tional ﬂuid dynamics CFD code based upon the material volume
formulation of the balance equations for compressible ﬂuids. In its
basics, the numerical solution procedure is similar to the arbitrary
Lagrangian–Eulerian ALE method developed by Hirt et al. 17
and Pracht 18, which is also used in a series of KIVA codes 19.
The Lagrangian approach implies a truly unsteady solution proce-
dure where the ﬁnite mesh volumes move with the ﬂuid under the
constraint that there is no convective ﬂux between the computa-
tional cells. Inherent to this formulation is the fact that the
Navier–Stokes equations are not explicitly nonlinear in the veloc-
ity and that they are not explicitly coupled with the species mass
transport equations by convective terms. As a consequence, the
species densities may be sequentially computed within each time
step in a decoupled mode from the Navier–Stokes solution. This
particular feature allows the trouble-free incorporation of complex
chemistry mechanisms with any arbitrary number of species and
reactions into the simulation of combustion processes. Further-
more, numerical experiments demonstrate a robust and accurate
solution behavior in a wide range of Mach numbers between al-
most 0 and 25 of hypersonic ﬂow. Finally, turbulence is accounted
for by the “traditional” Reynolds averaging of the unsteady trans-
port equations URANS supplemented by the k- equations. This
approach is a simple representation of the turbulent length scale
spectrum by an integral measure. In this regard, it seems to be
physically more appropriate to directly simulate the large eddies
by a solution of transport equations and to model only the scales
not resolved by the computational mesh. This hybrid procedure is
known as the very large eddy simulation VLES model 20 also
available in the BLUEFLAME code.
The data structure underlying the BLUEFLAME code is on the
basis of polygonal face elements with either two associated poly-
hedral cell elements if the face is an internal face or only one
associated cell if the face is external. This makes the code ex-
tremely ﬂexible with respect to its application to geometrically
complex conﬁgurations. The ﬁnite approximation is of second or-
der in space and time. All the physical quantities are discretized in
the centers of the polyhedral cell elements that constitute the con-
trol volumes in the ﬁnite volume approach. In particular, the de-
scribed data structure allows the use of computational meshes
from any mesh generator and gives easy access to the dynamic
local mesh adaption as well as to the dynamic load balancing in
the context of parallel computing. These are very important as-
pects in the practical application of the code to real combustor
conﬁgurations.
In the present paper, a computation of combustion is performed
using the combustion code IGNIS This is a powerful chemistry
simulation package, which includes different turbulent combus-
tion models. IGNIS may be coupled with any arbitrary CFD code
via user-deﬁned functions supplying the internal energy and spe-
cies densities transport equations with the appropriate source
terms. If coupled with BLUEFLAME, the communication is via F90
modules. Within one computational time step, each cell is consid-
ered as a closed reactor where the combustion is independently
computed likewise under isochoric or isobaric conditions. The
code kernel is a highly optimized F90-routine solving complex
chemical systems of elementary Arrhenius-type reactions for the
production and consumption rate of the involved species. The as-
sociated matrix of the nonlinear system of equations is very
“stiff,” covering characteristic chemistry times of fastest and
slowest reactions in a typical range of 10−9–106 s. Due to this
stiffness, the fully implicit solution of the matrix equation apply-
ing a Newton–Raphson procedure is difﬁcult and may fail for
certain compositions. On the other hand, the fully explicit solution
though very simple is strongly time step dependent and frequently
leads to an unphysical solution negative species densities. A
feasible compromise between implicit and explicit solution proce-
dures is a semi-implicit solution procedure according to the so-
called “reference species technique” 19, which in all our simu-
lations has shown a very robust solution behavior. Here, the basic
idea is to linearize the nonlinear matrix only with respect to the
species, which for each elementary reaction is in greatest danger
of being driven negative. In the IGNIS code, chemistry is ﬁrst
solved within each computational cell using the implicit Newton–
Raphson procedure. If this fails to converge, the reference species
technique, which always yields a result, is applied.
From a previous work 14, we know that the FLOX® combus-
tion is notably dominated by ﬁnite rate chemistry effects. With our
focus on the pollutant emission, we decided to use the complex
GRI3.0 reaction mechanism comprising 325 elementary reactions
and 53 species for the natural gas combustion. In practice, the
solution of a very complex chemistry system is prohibitive for the
concurrent use of an elaborate turbulence/chemistry interaction
model for example, the presumed probability density function
pdf approach by reason of the computational cost. Therefore,
the simple partially stirred reactor PaSR model 14,21 is ap-
plied in the present computations, which is similar to the eddy
dissipation concept EDC model 22.
2.2
The HiPerMix® Burner. As stated in Sec. 1, it was nec-
essary to increase the speciﬁc thermal power density of an en-
hanced FLOX® burner by at least a factor of 4 to fulﬁll the re-
quirements of modern gas turbines. This led to a scale-up of the
jet nozzles to a diameter of 12 mm, which was accompanied by
stability problems and elevated pollutant emission. The reason is
that the axially injected fuel jet is not sufﬁciently mixed with the
surrounding air prior to combustion. Consequently, a new burner
has to be developed with improved mixing performance.
The result of this development is the HiPerMix® high perfor-
mance mixing burner 23 designed within an evolutionary pro-
cess of numerical simulations. Basically, the burner consists of a
rectangular inlet channel annular clearance passing into a circu-
lar mixing pipe. A schematic of the burner is displayed in Figs. 2
and 3.
Channel and pipe axes are coincident, constituting the burner
axis. The fuel is axially injected in line with the burner axis at the
transition between channel and mixing pipe see Fig. 2c. It is
essential that the channel height is smaller than the diameter of the
Fig. 1
Enhanced FLOX® burner with high power density oper-
ated with natural gas at 7 bars with a high adiabatic ﬂame tem-
perature of 1996 K. Results from numerical simulation. Flow
ﬁeld indicated with streamlines. Molar fraction distribution of
CO at the top and of NO at the bottom.
121503-2 / Vol. 132, DECEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

mixing pipe whereas the channel width is larger. The consequence
of this is the formation of four counter-rotating axial vortices in
the mixing pipe. The center lines of these vortices are parallel and
symmetric to the mixing pipe axis. In this way, the four vortices
dilute the fuel jet and distribute the fuel in transverse direction.
The strength of the secondary vortices, which proportionally af-
fects the mixing performance, depends on the aspect ratio of
height to width of the inlet channel. For clariﬁcation, the second-
ary ﬂow on a cross sectional slice in the mixing pipe is visualized
by a vector plot in Fig. 3b. A perspective impression of the ﬂow
is given by the streamline representation in Fig. 3c. Furthermore,
the color distribution on the slices is a measure for the local fuel
concentration see the color legend of Fig. 3.
We observe that in the case of a quadratic channel Fig. 3a,
the secondary ﬂow is almost zero and the initially high fuel con-
centration is largely preserved downstream in the mixing pipe. In
contrast to this, the fuel is essentially more distributed at the same
axial position if the aspect ratio of channel height to width is, for
example, chosen to be 1/2. On the one hand, this is due to the
convective transport of the fuel by the secondary vortices. On the
other hand, the appearance of the secondary vortices further in-
creases the turbulent dispersion of the fuel by ampliﬁcation of the
turbulence production processes. However, it should be kept in
mind that the improvement of the turbulent transport is always
accompanied by an increase in the pressure loss due to turbulent
dissipation.
Summing up, we may state that the mixing performance of the
HiPerMix® burner is reliably and steplessly variable to meet the
fuel distribution requirements of a stable and low-emission com-
bustion. So far, we have illustrated the effectiveness of the
HiPerMix® concept. A schematic of its use in a can combustor
investigated at our test facilities is shown in Fig. 4, where 12
burners are equidistantly mounted on a concentric circle around
the combustor axis.
3
High Pressure Tests
The high pressure tests carried out during the development of
an enhanced FLOX® burner were performed at the high pressure
combustion test rig of the DLR Institute of Combustion Technol-
ogy in Stuttgart HBK-S. Extensive combustion diagnostic tech-
niques were applied for the basic characterization of the combus-
tor’s operation and for the measurement of validation data sets for
the numerical simulation.
3.1
High Pressure Test Rig and Combustor. The high pres-
sure combustion test rig HBK-S is used for the investigation of
scaled combustors at gas turbine relevant conditions. It is charac-
terized by an extensive optical access for laser diagnostics eight
planar high pressure windows in four radial directions in two axial
positions with a size of 160140 mm2 of each window. In ad-
dition, a conventional exhaust gas analysis is available ABB Li-
mas 11, ABB URAS 14, and ABB Magnos 16. The test rig can be
operated with pressures up to 40 bars and provides a maximum air
mass ﬂow of 1.3 kg/s, which can be electrically preheated up to
1000 K. The fuel supply allows experiments with different gas-
eous and liquid components natural gas, with propane and butane
admixtures, kerosene, and synthesis gases containing hydrogen,
carbon monoxide, and nitrogen. Additional information can be
found in Ref. 24.
Inside the high pressure housing, a test carrier is used, consist-
ing of a supporting frame, elements for air ﬂow guidance, an
additional air preheater close to the burner, and the combustor
itself. The test carrier possesses numerous temperature and pres-
sure instrumentation locations.
The combustion chamber provides optical access through six
quartz glass windows Fig. 5. Its hexagonal shape is a compro-
mise between the desired cylindrical form for the can liner and
plane windows for the application of laser diagnostic techniques.
The dimensions of the combustion chamber are an axial length of
170 mm burner front plate to exhaust gas nozzle, a radial win-
dow distance of 100 mm, and a frame distance of 111 mm. The
exhaust gas nozzle has an outlet diameter of 50 mm.
The enhanced FLOX® burner consists of 12 single nozzles in
one nozzle row on a pitch circle diameter of 84.5 mm. The details
Fig. 2
Schematic of the HiPerMix® burner: „a… perspective
view, „b… cross sectional slice, and „c… longitudinal slice
Fig. 3
Computational result of ﬂow and fuel concentration dis-
tribution „fuel concentration „%…… in the HiPerMix® burner. „a…
Quadratic inlet channel, „b… rectangular inlet channel „aspect
ratio height to width=1/2…, and „c… perspective streamline
representation.
Fig. 4
Dome of a can combustor with 12 HiPerMix® burner
nozzles equidistantly mounted on a concentric circle around
the combustor axis
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 121503-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

of the burner’s fuel injection HiPerMix® nozzle design are de-
scribed in the previous section. The ﬂames are ignited by a small
additional burner, which is located in the center of the nozzle
arrangement. This ignition burner is switched off during the op-
eration of the FLOX® burner. The burner front plate is cooled by
impingement.
During the experiments, four different versions of the burner
were investigated. Results for the subversions 2A and 2D are
shown in this paper. The nozzle length for both combustors is 28
mm. The enhanced FLOX® burner, version 2A, has a nozzle di-
ameter of 12 mm dump ratio of 6.4. The nozzle diameter of
version 2D is decreased to 10 mm; therefore, the dump ratio rises
from 6.4 to 9.2.
3.2
Operating Conditions. As described in the previous sec-
tions, the enhanced FLOX® burner with 12 mm HiPerMix®
nozzles is designed on the basis of numerical simulation for an
operating point of pressure p=7 bars, nozzle exit velocity
vnozzle=90 m/s, air preheat temperature T=673 K, and equiva-
lence ratio =1.6 with natural gas as its fuel. The calculated value
for adiabatic ﬂame temperature at that point is 1723°C 1996 K,
and the area speciﬁc power density is PA=13.3 MW/m2 bar.
For the characterization of the burner in the high pressure test
rig, different operating conditions were applied. Air to fuel excess
ratio sweeps were performed at different pressure levels, nozzle
exit velocities, air preheat temperatures, and different fuel compo-
sitions, respectively. An overview is given in Table 1.
3.3
Measurement Methods Overview. In a ﬁrst step, basic
combustion diagnostic techniques were applied. For each operat-
ing point, the size and position of the ﬂame zone were observed
with OH chemiluminescence OH-CL. The concentrations of
O2, CO, CO2, NO, and NO2 in the exhaust gas were recorded
continuously. Dynamic pressure in the combustion chamber was
determined with piezoelectric pressure transducers and was evalu-
ated by fast Fourier transformation FFT once per second.
In addition, extensive data sets were measured for selected op-
erating conditions, which can be used for a detailed view and
understanding of the combustion behavior and for the quantitative
validation of numerical simulations. In this context, the composi-
tion of the natural gas was analyzed, and ﬂow ﬁelds and tempera-
tures were measured with laser diagnostic techniques.
3.4
OH Chemiluminescence Imaging (OH-CL). The sig-
nal intensity of the OH chemiluminescence depends on the con-
centration of the electronically excited OH radicals where the
superscript
 denotes the electronically excited state of the OH
radical. These radicals are formed by chemical reactions predomi-
nantly via H+O+M→OH+M 25. Due to the short lifetime of
OH at the investigated pressures, the chemiluminescence origi-
nates only from the reaction zone. Therefore, this technique yields
information about the size and position of the ﬂame zone 26.
The signal was detected through a side window with a charge
coupled device CCD camera gate time of 40 s and an ach-
romatic 100 mm UV lens f/2, Halle Nachf. with an UV interfer-
ence ﬁlter =31220 nm. Because the signal originated from
the entire combustion chamber, the camera recorded an image that
is spatially integrated in the depth line of sight.
3.5
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV). In this work, two-
component velocity ﬁelds in two planar sections through the com-
bustion chamber were measured using particle image velocimetry
PIV. The PIV method determines local ﬂuid velocities by ana-
lyzing the displacement of small seeding particles during a short
time span. For measuring this displacement, the particles in a
planar section are illuminated twice by a double-pulsed laser with
an appropriate separation time. A schematic of the PIV setup is
shown in Fig. 6. A dual-cavity ﬂashlamp-pumped neodymium
doped yttrium aluminum garnet Nd:YAG laser emits two pulses
=532 nm, pulse energy of 120 mJ, and pulse duration of 5 ns
that are triggered synchronously with the exposure gates of the
PIV
camera.
Two
cylindrical
lenses
f1=−12.7 mm,
f2
=200 mm convert the laser beam into a 140 mm wide laser
sheet.
Behind
the
cylindrical
lenses,
a
spherical
lens
f3
=1000 mm focuses the sheet and reduces its planar divergence.
A large bending mirror guides the laser sheet vertically through
the combustion chamber. The lens of the PIV camera focal length
Fig. 5
Combustor for high pressure test rig HBK-S. Enhanced
FLOX® burner, version 2A, and hexagonal combustion chamber
with quartz glass walls for optical access.
Table 1
Operating condition overview. Range or maximum
value for pressures p, nozzle exit velocities vnozzle, air preheat
temperature T, air mass ﬂows Qair, natural gas mass ﬂows QNG,
H2 and C3H8 fuel content f, and thermal power „absolute value
P, per area pressure PA, and per volume pressure PV… for en-
hanced FLOX® burner versions 2A and 2D
2A
2D
nozzle mm
12
10
p bar
5–7
7
vnozzle m/s
70–150
90–133
T K
673–773
673
Qair g/s
660
460
QNG g/s
26
19
fH2 vol %
0–50
0–100
fC3H8 vol %
0
0–20
P MW
0.6–1.3
1
PA MW/m2 bar
10–23
16
PV MW/m3 bar
53–117
81
Fig. 6
Schematic of setup for PIV measurements
121503-4 / Vol. 132, DECEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

of 50 mm, F5.6 is covered with a narrow band interference ﬁlter
532 nm, reducing the inﬂuence of broadband light sources such
as the ﬂame. An air ﬂow seeded with titanium dioxide particles
nominal diameter of 1 m is generated by a ﬂuidized bed
seeder and then fed into the main air ﬂow. The seeded air ﬂow is
only applied during the PIV measurements because it reduces
window transmittance see below. The recording rate of the PIV
system is 5 double frames/s. The separation time between the two
laser pulses was chosen between 4 s and 8 s depending on the
operating condition.
The PIV measurements are encumbered by the harsh conditions
of the high pressure test rig. Temporal ﬂuctuations of temperature
and density in the combustion chamber degrade planeness and
homogeneity of the laser sheet. As temperatures in the combustion
chamber rise above 1600°C, the windows of the chamber have to
sustain very high heat loads. The glass begins to soften, and its
surface becomes rough and increasingly opaque. Furthermore,
during the PIV measurements the window staining was signiﬁ-
cantly increased by seeding particles adhering to the quartz glass.
This is a major problem for the PIV technique because the stray
light formed at the window surface has the same wavelength as
the light scattered by the particles. The increasing stray light due
to window coating leads to a continuously decreasing quality of
the particle images. After a total of 5 min of seeded air ﬂow, the
stray light was too strong to allow further imaging of seed par-
ticles. The test rig was then shut down, and the windows were
cleaned or replaced.
As a ﬁrst step, particle images were preprocessed in order to
remove stationary patterns caused by light reﬂections or impuri-
ties on the windows. Velocity ﬁelds were determined from the
preprocessed images using commercial software DAVIS 7. For
good quality images low stray light, instantaneous velocity ﬁelds
were calculated using an interrogation window size of 64
64 pixel corresponding to a spatial resolution of 77 mm2
and 50% overlap. Below a certain image quality, the cross-
correlations calculated for a single image pair were too erroneous
to determine the correct instantaneous velocity ﬁeld. For the de-
termination of average velocities, this problem was bypassed by
applying a method called “ensemble correlation” or “sum of cor-
relation” SOC. This method ﬁrst sums up the cross-correlations
of all single shots and calculates the vector ﬁeld afterward 27,28.
The so calculated velocity ﬁelds are practically equivalent to the
temporal average and will be referred to as the average ﬂow ﬁeld
in the following.
Velocity ﬁelds were measured in two planar sections through
the combustion chamber with different azimuthal orientations of
the burner Fig. 7. The coordinates x, y, and z are deﬁned in the
streamwise direction horizontal, in the horizontal direction per-
pendicular to x, and in the vertical direction, respectively Figs. 7
and 9a. The vertical direction is also named as the height h=z.
The position x=y=z=0 mm is located at the intersection point of
the central axis of the burner and the plane with 12 mm distance
to the burner front plate. For a conﬁguration of 0 deg, the mea-
surement plane is located downstream of two neighboring
nozzles. Due to strong internal reﬂections of laser light in the
upper part of the area z	0, velocities were determined only in
the lower part −25 mmz−5 mm. The range in streamwise
direction was 0 mmx140 mm. For a conﬁguration of 15
deg, the burner was rotated by 15 deg around the central axis of
the burner, and the measurement plane is located in the center of
the combustion chamber. Here, velocities were determined for
−5 mmz20 mm and −5 mmx140 mm.
3.6
Coherent Anti-Stokes
Raman
Scattering
(CARS).
CARS spectroscopy has been established in the past as a laser-
based, nonintrusive temperature measuring method for combus-
tion processes in a practical environment using mainly N2 as the
indicator molecule 29,30. The CARS signal is coherently gener-
ated and emitted in a laserlike beam. Using a broadband CARS
technique allows us to detect an entire N2 Q-branch spectrum in a
snapshot generated with a single laser pulse lasting about 10 ns.
Because the spectral distribution of the Q-branch displays the
population of the rotational and vibrational states, the temperature
can be determined directly from the spectrum without calibration.
Usually, the temperature is derived from the comparison of the
shape of computed and experimental N2 Q-branch spectra. Single
shot measurements can be carried out with the repetition rate of
the laser 10 Hz. Typically, 1200 single shot measurements were
performed at each measuring location. The individual, instanta-
neous temperature values measured at the same location can be
represented in the form of a histogram, from which temperature
ﬂuctuations can be read. In addition, statistical information as
mean temperature Tmean and most probable temperature Tmopro
were evaluated. With this pointwise measuring technique, differ-
ent temperature proﬁles were recorded.
The mobile CARS apparatus of the DLR Institute of Combus-
tion Technology has been designed for single shot N2 thermom-
etry in an industrial environment. It consists of a pulsed Nd:YAG
laser operated at =532 nm termed pump laser with a repetition
rate of 10 Hz and a broadband dye laser at =607 nm termed
Stokes laser. The USED-CARS arrangement was employed to
overlap the two exciting laser beams at the measuring location
compare Fig. 8. In the overlapping volume, the CARS signal is
generated, and it thus represents the size of the measuring volume
and the spatial resolution. The spatial resolution is deﬁned as the
length of the measuring volume in beam direction in which 95%
of the CARS signal is generated. From a measurement without
ﬂame, the spatial resolution was found to be L95%=4.2 mm. The
diameter of the probe volume was approximately 300 m.
The signal receiving optics at the opposite side of the combus-
tion chamber separated the CARS signal from the laser beams and
Fig. 7
Arrangement of burner and measurement plane for con-
ﬁgurations of 0 deg and 15 deg
Fig. 8
Cross sectional view of the combustion chamber with
the enhanced FLOX® burner. The two exciting CARS laser
beams „pump laser; ring on the left side; Stokes laser: spot on
the left side… were focused with a lens to the probe volume. The
generated CARS signal „narrow outer ring on the right side… is
collected with a second lens.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 121503-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

focused it into an optical ﬁber with a core diameter of 600 m
and a length of 20 m. At the end of the ﬁber, the signal was
coupled into a spectrometer and was detected with an intensiﬁed
gateable diode array camera.
After correcting each single shot spectrum, a contour ﬁt of the-
oretical spectra to experimental data was performed to deduce the
single shot temperatures. To accelerate the data analysis, a library
of theoretical spectra is calculated for the expected temperature
range with temperatures in steps of 50 K. The start temperature
for the library-based least-squares ﬁtting routine is given by a
quick ﬁt method e.g., using the ratio of the integrated intensity of
the fundamental and the ﬁrst excited vibrational band. A more
detailed description of the data evaluation procedure is found in
Ref. 31. The temperature accuracy of the mobile CARS system
was tested in an isothermal furnace for single shot measurements
and is in the range of 3%. Due to the high turbulence in the high
pressure ﬂames, investigated beam steering effects caused by ﬂuc-
tuating density gradients led to a strong degradation of the align-
ment of the overlapping laser beams and decreased the CARS
signal intensities considerably. Therefore, the accuracy for the ex-
periments presented in this paper was approximately 5% for the
mean temperatures. In some measuring positions, strong tempera-
ture ﬂuctuations and especially temperature gradients occurred.
The spatial resolution L95%=4.2 mm without ﬂame is impaired
by the ﬂuctuation and is expected to be in the range of about 5–10
mm depending on the magnitude of the beam steering effects.
If cold and hot regions are simultaneously present in the mea-
suring volume, the single shot CARS spectrum consists of super-
imposed spectral parts of different temperatures mixed spec-
trum. This problem in ﬂames with strong temperature gradients is
discussed in the literature as mixed spectra 32 or as spatial av-
eraging 33. Due to the nonlinearity of the CARS process, the
resulting evaluated temperature from the single shot CARS spec-
trum does not represent the mean mass- or volume-averaged tem-
perature. The evaluated temperature is strongly biased to low tem-
peratures; e.g., it is in the range of temperatures in the cold region
even if the cold volume is only about 20% of the total probe
volume 33,34.
The temperature distributions were measured in a vertical plane
through the axis of the burner. The positions could be changed by
moving the optics on both sides of the combustion chamber with
computer controlled translation stages. The uncertainty in posi-
tioning the measuring volume was estimated to be less than 1
mm, which depends mainly on the thermal expansion of the test
rig. The position x=0 mm was checked with the laser beams
during operation.
4
Results
4.1
Flame Position. Images of the line of sight integrated
OH chemiluminescence signals taken at different operating con-
ditions are shown in Fig. 9. The pressure p=7 bars, the nozzle
exit velocity vnozzle=90 m/s, and the air preheat temperature T
=673 K were kept constant. In Fig. 9c, natural gas with 
=1.6 is used as fuel. Figure 9d displays two results for natural
gas+50 vol % hydrogen, with =1.6 and =2.0, respectively.
As mentioned before, the chemiluminescence is spatially inte-
grated in depth; i.e., all nozzles in the combustor contribute to the
recorded intensity. Figures 9b and 9c illustrate the positions of
the nozzles and their horizontal projections relating to the signal
intensity. During the operation of the combustor, the quartz
glasses are stained due to the high temperatures near the walls.
The change in their transparency is inhomogeneous. As a conse-
quence, this window clouding causes gaps in the recorded inten-
sity of the chemiluminescence.
The ﬂame position and size in the enhanced FLOX® combustor
are different for natural gas and natural gas with 50 vol % hydro-
gen. The ﬂames for hydrogen containing fuel mixtures are shorter,
and their distance to the burner nozzles is smaller due to the
shorter ignition delay time of hydrogen compared with natural
gas. The higher reactivity of hydrogen leads to combustion under
locally smaller air equivalence ratios local than the air equiva-
lence ratio of the global mixture global the chemical time scale
decreases, relating to the time scale of the mixing in the combus-
tion chamber. In all cases, the ﬂames lift off the burner front
plate, and ﬂashback is not detected.
4.2
Pressure Dynamics. Two typical frequency spectra of the
high pressure tests are given in Fig. 10. The burner was operated
with a pressure of p=7 bars, an air preheat temperature of T
=673 K, and natural gas as fuel. The curve in Fig. 10a corre-
sponds to a nozzle exit velocity of vnozzle=120 m/s; the line in
the lower diagram corresponds to vnozzle=70 m/s Fig. 10b.
The periodic peaks at 50 Hz, 150 Hz, etc., are caused by elec-
tronic interferences. For 120 m/s, the measured dynamic pressure
amplitudes rms value stay below 10 mbars. For low nozzle exit
velocities, a peak at 634 Hz can be observed. At vnozzle=70 m/s,
the amplitude rises to 20.7 mbars, which is equivalent to 2.96% of
the pressure in the combustor. In general, the pulsation amplitudes
are very low even if the nozzle exit velocity falls below the design
point.
4.3
Flow Field. Computational results for the ﬂow ﬁeld are
given in several drawings Figs. 1, 11a, 12b, and 13 where
streamlines represent the averaged global ﬂow. A strong inner
recirculation zone dominates the ﬂow. The outer recirculation
Fig. 9
Flame position and size for different fuels and air
equivalence ratios for enhanced FLOX® burner, version 2A. „a…
Conﬁguration of the combustor: 15 deg, indication of the size
and the position of the chemiluminescence image plane; „b…
front view of the burner, projection of the positions of the
nozzles. Measurements for „c… natural gas and „d… natural gas
+50 vol % hydrogen.
121503-6 / Vol. 132, DECEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

zone present in former versions of the FLOX® combustor see
Ref. 13 is missing due to the increased pitch circle diameter of
the jet nozzles.
Figure 11b shows four instantaneous velocity ﬁelds in the
conﬁguration of 15 deg of the enhanced FLOX® burner, version
2A, operated at a pressure p=7 bars, nozzle exit velocity vnozzle
=90 m/s, and air preheat temperature T=673 K with natural gas.
The size and the position of the accessible area for the measure-
ments are indicated by a dashed frame in Fig. 11a. In the area
x50 mm, the velocity ﬁelds are characterized by an upstream
recirculation that ﬂuctuates strongly both in magnitude and in
length. For x	70 mm, the ﬂow is mostly stable and homoge-
neous in the positive x-direction, and the volumetric ﬂow rate
increases in the downstream direction. Stagnation points axial
velocity u=0 are most frequently found in the range 40 mm
x60 mm. In the upper left corners, velocities are often ﬂawed
due to very low concentrations of seeding particles in this region.
Streamline plot images of the average ﬂow ﬁeld from the high
pressure test and the numerical simulation for the same operating
conditions are compared in Fig. 12. The experimental data shown
are a result of the SOC method described in the previous section.
The positions of the stagnation point and the slope of the tangent
line match. The numerical simulation predicted slightly lower up-
stream velocities in the recirculation region.
4.4
Temperatures. Figure 13 shows results from time-
averaged VLES simulations of the HiPerMix® burner, version 2A,
operated at a pressure p=7 bars, a jet nozzle exit velocity
vnozzle=90 m/s, and an air preheat temperature T=673 K with
natural gas Fig. 13a and natural gas with 50 vol % hydrogen
Fig. 13b as fuel. The calculated adiabatic ﬂame temperature is
Tad2000 K for both cases.
The temperature ﬁelds for both cases are not completely homo-
Fig. 10
Pressure dynamics for different nozzle exit velocities
for enhanced FLOX® burner, version 2A, operated with natural
gas
Fig. 11
Flow ﬁeld measurements with PIV for enhanced
FLOX® burner, version 2A. „a… Conﬁguration of the combustor:
15 deg, indication of the size and the position of the PIV laser
sheet and image plane; „b… instantaneous ﬂow ﬁelds „stream-
line plots….
Fig. 12
Average ﬂow ﬁeld „streamline plot… for enhanced
FLOX® burner, version 2A. Comparison between „a… PIV experi-
mental data and „b… result from numerical simulation.
Fig. 13
Results from numerical simulation: temperature and
ﬂow ﬁelds for enhanced FLOX® burner, version 2A, operated
„a… with natural gas and „b… with natural gas+50 vol % hydro-
gen, respectively
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 121503-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

geneous, and the maximum temperature exceeds the adiabatic
ﬂame temperature. The highest local temperatures are Tmax
=2130 K for natural gas and Tmax=2305 K for hydrogen admix-
ture, respectively.
During the high pressure tests, temperature measurements with
CARS were carried out. The results for the operating conditions
p=7 bars, vnozzle=90 m/s, T=673 K, and =1.6 with natural
gas as fuel are displayed in Fig. 14. For each measuring position,
the mean temperature Tmean squared symbol, the most probable
temperature Tmopro circular symbol, and the interval that com-
prises 90% of all measured temperatures at this position are given.
For asymmetric temperature distributions, the most probable tem-
perature Tmopro and the 90% interval of all temperatures are more
suitable to represent the temperature ﬂuctuations. Histograms
were generated for each measuring position based on the single
shot temperature values. Some temperature histograms are shown
in Fig. 14 for selected CARS measuring positions.
The number N of evaluated spectra is smaller than the number
of recorded spectra 1200 because some spectra were rejected
due to a too low intensity bad signal-to-noise ratio, a too high
intensity saturation of the analog to digital AD converter, or a
too large sum of residuals bad quality of the spectrum. Spectra
containing a high background level nonresonant CARS signal or
optical breakdown producing radiating plasma initiated by intense
laser light in the focal region were also rejected due to the unde-
ﬁned inﬂuence on the accuracy of the resulting temperature value.
In most situations, the number of rejected spectra is small with
respect to the 1200 recorded ones.
The instantaneous temperature data indicate different degrees of
ﬂuctuations in the ﬂame. At x=30 mm z=y=0 mm, a position
in the inner recirculation zone, the temperature distribution is ex-
panded compared with positions downstream the stagnation point.
The location x=110 mm is characterized by the smallest interval
of 90% of all temperatures. Beyond this point, the temperature
unsteadiness increases again.
The solid line given in Fig. 14 is a result of the numerical
simulation, as shown in the upper half of Fig. 13. In the central
region of the combustor, the conformance of experimental and
computational data values is very good. At locations ahead the
stagnation point and toward the exhaust gas nozzle, the predicted
temperature from numerical simulation is too high. While the de-
viation for x=30 mm is signiﬁcant, the discrepancy for all other
measurement positions is smaller than the measuring inaccuracy
of the CARS method in a turbulent combustor 5%, i.e., 93 K
at this temperature level. As stated in a previous section, CARS
tends to overestimate cold temperatures due to the nonlinearity of
the CARS process. However, all temperature values match within
the ﬂuctuation ranges.
4.5
Exhaust Gas Analysis. The conventional exhaust gas
analysis system of the high pressure test rig was connected to a
suction probe behind the combustion chamber. Its inlet is located
near the center axis of the combustor because of the tight nar-
rowing of the exhaust gas nozzle the radial position had no inﬂu-
ence on the measured values. The concentrations of the pollutants
CO and NO/NOx in this work are converted to dry exhaust gas
related to 15% O2 concentration.
Experimental and computational results for the version 2A of
the HiPerMix® burner are shown in Fig. 15. The burner was op-
erated at p=7 bars, vnozzle=90 m/s, and T=673 K. The fuel
mass ﬂow of natural gas Fig. 15a and of natural gas
+50 vol % hydrogen Fig. 15b was varied.
For natural gas Fig. 15a, the NOx curve goes below the limit
of 10 ppm at =1.6 adiabatic ﬂame temperature Tad=1996 K as
predicted from numerical calculations. In the case of the natural
gas+hydrogen mixture, the computational values at =1.65 for
the concentration of NO at the combustor exit is 15.4 ppm, and
that of NO2 is 0.05 ppm. Here, the simulated NO values are con-
sistent with the measured NO concentrations, while the concen-
tration of NO2 is higher as forecasted.
For an almost perfectly premixed combustion, Leonard and
Stegmaier 35 experimentally investigated the NOx formation
subject to the adiabatic ﬂame temperature in the range of 1700–
1900 K. From this work, we ﬁnd by extrapolation concentrations
of NOx between 12 ppm and 19 ppm depending on the residence
time between 2 ms and 100 ms. In fact, if the fuel/air mixture is
assumed to be perfectly premixed, the simulation predicts about
13 ppm NOx emission. However, in the present case, the emission
value of 10 ppm is lower despite the fact that the mixture is
obviously not perfect see Fig. 13. The reason for this is seen in
Fig. 1. We observe that the ﬂame is largely detached from the
burner. NOx is predominantly generated at the tip of the ﬂame and
directly transported to the combustor exit. The residence time be-
tween these two points is about 2 ms. In the case of a perfectly
premixed combustion, the simulation reveals that the ﬂame ex-
tends more upstream between jet and recirculation, and conse-
quently more NOx is generated in the recirculation zone due to the
essentially larger residence times.
Figure 16 shows nitrogen oxide NOx values measured at the
combustor exhaust gas nozzle for different fuel mixtures. The air
equivalence ratio was varied; the curves are printed for the corre-
sponding adiabatic ﬂame temperature values, which are deduced
from equilibrium calculations and do not consider possible heat
Fig. 14
Temperature measurements with CARS and compari-
son with computational values. Temperature proﬁle on the
combustor axis. Small inlaid frames: statistical temperature in-
formation for selected measurement positions „histograms
with number of events versus temperatures, all inlaid frames
scaled equally….
Fig. 15
Exhaust gas analysis data for enhanced FLOX®
burner, version 2A: „a… natural gas and „b… natural gas
+50 vol % hydrogen. Computational results indicated by big
symbols,
squared
for
CO,
and
circular
for
NO/NOx,
respectively.
121503-8 / Vol. 132, DECEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

loss in the combustion chamber. The constant operating conditions
were pressure p=7 bars, vnozzle=133 m/s, and air preheat tem-
perature T=673 K.
The enhanced FLOX® combustor, version 2D, could be oper-
ated with natural gas methane content 95–98 vol %, natural
gas+propane up to 20 vol % C3H8, and natural gas+hydrogen
up to 100 vol % H2. NOx values below 10 ppm could be
achieved in all cases. The combustor was optimized for natural
gas and combined10 ppm NOx performance with high adia-
batic ﬂame temperature operation 2000 K.
5
Conclusion
Modern gas turbine combustors operate at high speciﬁc power
densities. Next generation gas turbines will again raise the turbine
inlet temperature. In previous work, it was demonstrated that the
FLOX® burner can be operated with different fuel compositions,
especially with hydrogen content 13. The challenge in the devel-
opment process of an enhanced FLOX® burner is the combination
of these three attributes. The novel burner concept based on the
FLOX® principle should merge speciﬁc power densities of PA
	10 MW/m2 bar, adiabatic ﬂame temperatures of Tad=2000 K,
and low NOx emission values.
The design process is supported by two essential parts, numeri-
cal simulations that can predict emission values by the usage of
detailed chemistry models and high pressure tests combined with
revealing combustion diagnostic techniques.
Identifying the inﬂuence of the fuel distribution in the combus-
tion air prior to the combustion chamber is a key issue. The
HiPerMix® principle was applied to the FLOX® nozzles to get a
reliable control mechanism for the mixing behavior.
The enhanced FLOX® burner, also called HiPerMix® burner,
could be operated at the high pressure test rig HBK-S with pres-
sures up to 7 bars and nozzle exit velocities up to 150 m/s. Ex-
periments with natural gas, natural gas+hydrogen, and natural
gas+propane were carried out. Stable operation is achieved for
fuel blends up to 100 vol % hydrogen and 20 vol % propane.
This demonstrates the high fuel ﬂexibility of the burner concept,
which makes it attractive to meet requests for next generation gas
turbines.
Flame positions, pressure dynamics, ﬂow ﬁelds, temperatures,
and exhaust gas compositions were measured. The experimental
values are used as code and model validation data besides their
usage for a deeper understanding of the combustion behavior. Pre-
dicted quantities are in close match with experimental results.
Low NO emissions are attained if the local temperature values
do not exceed the adiabatic ﬂame temperature of the global mix-
ture. Therefore, the enhanced FLOX® burner development aims at
an almost homogeneous temperature ﬁeld. Recent numerical
simulations and CARS temperature measurements show a remain-
ing inhomogeneity in the temperature ﬁeld of the HiPerMix®
burner. This is due to a compromise between mixing performance
and burner pressure loss. However, combustor operation with NOx
concentrations below 10 ppm could already be achieved in com-
bination with adiabatic ﬂame temperatures of about 2000 K and
speciﬁc power densities of more than 10 MW/m2 bar.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Uwe Prestel and Karl-Heinz
Ferst for the installation of the combustor and the operation of the
test rig and Manfred Kapernaum, Oliver Kislat, Sami Tanios, and
Christian Eberle for the assistance during the experiments and the
data evaluation.
The investigations were conducted as part of the joint research
program COORETEC-turbo in the frame of AG Turbo. The work
was supported by the Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Tech-
nologie BMWi as per resolution of the German Federal Parlia-
ment under Grant No. 0327715D. The authors gratefully acknowl-
edge AG Turbo and Siemens AG Energy Sector for their support
and permission to publish this paper.
Nomenclature
nozzle  nozzle diameter mm
vnozzle  nozzle exit velocity m/s
p  pressure bar
  air equivalence ratio
local  local air equivalence ratio
global  global air equivalence ratio
T  air preheat temperature K
P  thermal power MW
PA  thermal power density per area MW/m2 bar
PV  thermal power density per volume
MW/m3 bar
Tad  adiabatic ﬂame temperature K
Tmax  maximum local temperature K
Q  mass ﬂow g/s
Qair  air mass ﬂow g/s
QNG  natural gas mass ﬂow g/s
fH2  fuel mixture content, hydrogen H2+NG
vol %
fC3H8  fuel mixture content, propane C3H8+NG
vol %
  wavelength nm
f  focal length mm
x,y,z,h  coordinates mm
Tmean  mean temperature K
Tmopro  most probable temperature K
L95%  spatial resolution mm
N  number of evaluated spectra
References
1 Krebs, W., Hellat, J., and Eroglu, A., 2003, “Technische Verbrennungssys-
teme,” Stationäre Gasturbinen, C. Lechner and J. Seume, eds., Springer–
Verlag, New York.
2 Correa, S. M., 1993, “A Review of NOx Formation Under Gas-Turbine Com-
bustion Conditions,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 87, pp. 329–362.
3 Lefebvre, A. H., 1999, Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor & Francis, Philadel-
phia.
4 Dowling, A. P., and Hubbard, S., 2000, “Instability in Lean Premixed Com-
bustors,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part A, 214, pp. 317–332.
5 Candel, S., 2002, “Combustion Dynamics and Control: Progress and Chal-
lenges,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 29, pp. 1–28.
6 Kröner, M., Fritz, J., and Sattelmayer, T., 2002, “Flashback Limits for Com-
bustion Induced Vortex Breakdown in a Swirl Burner,” ASME Paper No.
GT2002-30075.
7 Lieuwen, T., 2003, “Combustion Driven Oscillations in Gas Turbines,” Turbo-
machinery International, 44, pp. 16–19.
Fig. 16
Measured NOx values for enhanced FLOX® burner, ver-
sion 2D, for different fuel mixtures „natural gas, natural gas
+propane, natural gas+hydrogen…
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 121503-9
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 10 ---

8 FLOX® is a registered trademark of WS Wärmeprozesstechnik GmbH, Ren-
ningen, Germany.
9 Wünning, J. A., and Wünning, J. G., 1992, “Burners for Flameless Oxidation
With Low NOx Formation Even at Maximum Air Preheat,” Gaswärme Inter-
national, 4110, pp. 438–444.
10 Wünning, J. A., and Wünning, J. G., 1997, “Flameless Oxidation to Reduce
Thermal NO-Formation,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 23, pp. 81–94.
11 Cavaliere, A., and Joannon, M., 2004, “Mild Combustion,” Prog. Energy
Combust. Sci., 30, pp. 329–366.
12 Bobba, M. K., Gopalakrishnan, P., Seitzman, J. M., and Zinn, B. T., 2006,
“Characteristics of Combustion Processes in a Stagnation Point Reverse Flow
Combustor,” ASME Paper No. GT2006-91217.
13 Lückerath, R., Meier, W., and Aigner, M., 2008, “FLOX® Combustion at High
Pressure With Different Fuel Compositions,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power, 1301, p. 011505.
14 Schütz, H., Lückerath, R., Noll, B., and Aigner, M., 2007, “Complex Chem-
istry Simulation of FLOX®: Flameless Oxidation Combustion,” Clean Air,
International Journal of Energy for a Clean Environment, 83, pp. 239–257.
15 Schütz, H., Lückerath, R., Kretschmer, T., Noll, B., and Aigner, M., 2008,
“Analysis of the Pollutant Formation in the FLOX® Combustion,” ASME J.
Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 1301, p. 011503.
16 HiPerMix® is a registered trademark of the DLR Deutsches Zentrum für
Luft-und Raumfahrt e.V., Köln.
17 Hirt, C. W., Amsden, A. A., and Cook, J. L., 1974, “An Arbitrary Lagrangian-
Eulerian Computing Method for All Flow Speeds,” J. Comput. Phys., 14, pp.
227–253.
18 Pracht, W. E., 1975, “Calculating Three-Dimensional Fluid Flows at All
Speeds With an Eulerian-Lagrangian Computing Mesh,” J. Comput. Phys., 17,
pp. 132–159.
19 Amsden, A. A., O’Rourke, P. J., and Butler, T. D., 1989, “KIVA-II: A Com-
puter Program for Chemically Reactive Flows With Sprays,” Report No. LA-
11560-MS.
20 Speziale, C. G., 1998, “Turbulence Modeling for Time-Dependent RANS and
VLES: A Review,” AIAA J., 36, pp. 173–184.
21 Nordin, P. A. N., 1995, “Complex Chemistry Modelling of Diesel Sprays,”
Ph.D. thesis, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg.
22 Byggstøyl, S., and Magnussen, B. F., 1985, “A Model for Flame Extinction in
Turbulent Flow,” Fourth Symposium on Turbulent Shear Flows, pp. 381–395.
23 Schütz, H., and Schmitz, G., 2009, European Patent No. PCT/EP08/59744 and
German Patent No. DE 10 2007 036 953 B3 2009.04.02.
24 Fleck, J., Griebel, P., Steinberg, A., Stöhr, M., and Aigner, M., 2010, “Experi-
mental Investigation of a Generic, Fuel Flexible Reheat Combustor at Gas
Turbine Relevant Operating Conditions,” ASME Paper No. GT2010-22722.
25 Hall, J. M., and Petersen, E. L., 2006, “An Optimized Kinetics Model for OH
Chemiluminescence at High Temperatures and Atmospheric Pressures,” Int. J.
Chem. Kinet., 38, pp. 714–724.
26 Lee, J. G., and Santavicca, D. A., 2003, “Experimental Diagnostics for the
Study of Combustion Instabilities in Lean Premixed Combustors,” J. Propul.
Power, 19, pp. 735–750.
27 LaVision GmbH, 2005, DaVis Flowmaster Manual.
28 Meinhart, C., Wereley, S., and Santiago, J., 2000, “A PIV Algorithm for Esti-
mating Time-Averaged Velocity Fields,” ASME J. Fluids Eng., 122, pp. 285–
289.
29 Eckbreth, A. C., 1995, Laser Diagnostics for Combustion Temperature and
Species, 2nd ed., Gordon and Breach, Amsterdam.
30 Stricker, W., 2002, Measurement of Temperature in Laboratory Flames and
Practical Devices, 2nd ed., Taylor & Francis, New York.
31 Lückerath, R., Woyde, M., Meier, W., Stricker, W., Schnell, U., Magel, H. C.,
Görres, J., Spliethoff, H., and Maier, H., 1995, “Comparison of Coherent Anti-
Stokes Raman-Scattering Thermometry With Thermocouple Measurements
and Model Predictions in Both Natural-Gas and Coal-Dust Flames,” Appl.
Opt., 34, pp. 3303–3312.
32 Meier, W., Plath, I., and Stricker, W., 1991, “The Application of Single-Pulse
CARS for Temperature Measurements in a Turbulent Stagnation Flame,” Appl.
Phys. B: Photophys. Laser Chem., 53, pp. 339–346.
33 Boquillon, J. P., Péalat, M., Bouchardy, P., Gollin, G., Magre, P., and Taran, J.
P., 1988, “Spatial Averaging and Multiplex Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scat-
tering Temperature-Measurement Error,” Opt. Lett., 13, pp. 722–724.
34 Thumann, A., Seeger, T., and Leipertz, A., 1995, “Evaluation of Two Different
Gas Temperatures and Their Volumetric Fraction From Broadband N2 Coher-
ent Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy Spectra,” Appl. Opt., 34, pp. 3313–
3317.
35 Leonard, G., and Stegmaier, J., 1993, “Development of an Aeroderivative Gas
Turbine Dry Low Emission Combustion System,” ASME Paper No. 93-GT-
288.
121503-10 / Vol. 132, DECEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
