
--- Page 1 ---

2733
Twenty-Sixth Symposium (International) on Combustion/The Combustion Institute, 1996/pp. 2733–2739
THE EFFECTS OF FUEL–AIR MIXING ON NOX FORMATION
IN NON-PREMIXED SWIRL BURNERS
TAKASHI TERASAKI
Research Laboratory, Noritz Corporation, Tokyo, Japan
SHIGERU HAYASHI
Thermoﬂuid Dynamics Division, National Aerospace Laboratory, Tokyo, Japan
This paper describes the low NOx emissions achieved by a non-premixed, direct fuel-injection burner,
equipped with a unique double swirler for gas turbine combustors. The burner has circular and annular
air channels to which swirlers are ﬁtted. The inner channel converges into a throat, and gaseous fuel is
injected into the air ﬂow by a multihole fuel nozzle. The NOx emissions and combustion efﬁciency of the
double-swirler burner with natural gas fueling were compared with those of conventional swirl burners of
different hub diameters. The measurements of gaseous species concentration in the combustion region at
the ﬂame tube exit were made at atmospheric pressure; at inlet air temperatures of 650, 950, and 1100 K;
and at equivalence ratios down to the lean ﬂame stability limit. Among the burners tested, the double-
swirler burner achieved the lowest NOx emissions level: at 1800 K gas temperature and 15 m/s reference
air velocity, the emissions indices for NOx with the double-swirler burner, and the conventional small-hub
swirler and large-hub swirler burners were 0.5, 1.1, and 2.2 g/kg fuel, respectively. The reasons that the
double-swirler burner achieved the lowest NOx emissions are discussed on the basis of the proﬁles of
gaseous species concentration and gas temperature as well as on the data of fuel–air mixing in the com-
bustion region.
Introduction
The operating temperatures of gas turbines and
air-breathing engines go up continuously for better
thermal efﬁciency. Combustor inlet air temperatures
of the 900–1000 K level are targeted in research pro-
grams of propulsion systems for the next generation
supersonic transport [1] and large high-bypass ratio
engines of pressure ratios as high as 40. The opera-
tion at higher combustion temperatures leads to sig-
niﬁcantly increased NOx emissions, provided that
the available NOx control strategy remains the same.
The regulations for pollutant emissions from gas tur-
bines and aircraft, especially for NOx, will be more
stringent in the near future. Therefore, the devel-
opment of low-NOx combustion technology that is
effective at high-temperature operating conditionsis
required.
It is generally recognized that premixed combus-
tion of lean, homogeneous mixtures has a potential
for achieving very low levels of NOx emissions, even
at high inlet air temperatures [2]. At very high inlet
air temperatures, however, mixture preparation up-
stream of the combustion region would lead to au-
toignition of the injected fuel, which is favored at
increased pressures. Unexpected combustion in the
mixture preparation zone would damage the com-
bustor hardware and endanger the engine safety.
Some researchers [3–5] have reported the capa-
bility of low-NOx emissions for non-premixed burn-
ers, which are completely free from problems such
as autoignition and ﬂashback. The experimental re-
sults obtained at atmospheric pressure and moderate
inlet air temperatures showed that low-NOx emis-
sions were achieved not only for gaseous fuel [3,4]
but also for kerosene sprays [5], while maintaining
high combustion efﬁciency even near ﬂame stability
limits. A feature common to these burners is en-
hanced mixing of fuel and excessive combustion air
just downstream of the burner exit by means of
strong swirling ﬂows or interacting impinging jets.
NOx emissions depend signiﬁcantly on the homo-
geneity of unburned mixtures [6,7] and on the char-
acteristic lifetime of burned gas pockets in the com-
bustion region. Rapid mixing increases mixture
homogeneity and shortens the characteristic time for
NOx formation. Later, Tacina [8] categorized these
non-premixed, low-NOx burners into “direct fuel in-
jection.”
In the present study, the potential for low-NOx
emissions of the double-swirler burner, developed
by Hayashi [9], is investigated at inlet air tempera-
tures up to 1100 K using natural gas. The fuel is
widely used for advanced high-temperature station-
ary gas turbines for power generation and is sup-
posed to be used for future hypersonic propulsion


--- Page 2 ---

2734
GAS TURBINES
Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of double-swirler and conventional swirl burners used.
Fig. 2. Schematic drawing of experimental combustor
ﬁtted with double-swirler burner.
engines [1]. The NOx emission levels for the double-
swirler burner are compared with those for two con-
ventional burners ﬁtted with large-hub and small-
hub swirlers. The reasons for the difference in the
levels of NOx emissions measured for the three
burners are discussed on the basis of the measured
proﬁles of gas temperature, local equivalence ratio,
and gaseous species including CO, CO2, HC, O2,
NO, and NOx in the combustion region. The data of
fuel–air mixing, measured under nonburning con-
ditions, are also used for the discussion.
Experimental
Burner Modules
The burner modules used in the present study are
schematically shown in Fig. 1. The double swirler is
composed of coaxial and corotational swirlers with
16 curved vanes of an angle of 458 and a multihole
fuel nozzle. Combustion air is split between inner
circular and outer annular passages with a ratio of
about 1:2. The large-hub and small-hub swirlers,
composed of 16 curved vanes of an angle of 458, have
the same annular passage area. The nominal swirl
numbers of the small-hub and large-hub swirlers are
0.8 and 0.88, respectively. According to the criterion
in Ref. 10, both produce a “strong” swirl, which pro-
vides a central recirculation behind the hub.
There is a signiﬁcant difference between the ﬂow
structures downstream of the double swirler and
conventional swirlers. The conventional swirler pro-
vides a recirculation zone formed behind the hub,
through which fuel is injected to the annular air jet.
The double swirler, on the other hand, provides a
recirculation zone, with its apex close to the throat.
A high-velocity jet issuing from the center oriﬁce
prevents ﬂash back, and the resulting short residence
time excludes the possibility of autoignition in the
passage.
The conventional swirl burners are mounted ﬂush
to the end wall of the ﬂame tube while the double-
swirler burner is mounted on back of the end wall
ﬂange of 16 mm in thickness, as shown in Fig. 2.
The ﬂange has a diverging conical passage connect-
ing the swirler and the ﬂame tube. The ﬂame tube
is a silicone nitride tube, 300 mm in length, 80 mm
in diameter, and 10 mm in wall thickness, blanketed
with ceramic ﬁber for minimizing heat losses.
Combustion air is electrically heated, and its ﬂow
rate is measured by an oriﬁce ﬂowmeter, and fuel
ﬂow rate is measured by a mass ﬂowmeter.
Procedures
Emissions characteristics were investigated for
fuel-lean mixtures at inlet air temperatures of 650,
950, and 1100 K and at reference air velocities of 10
and 15 m/s, averaged over the cross-sectional area
of the ﬂame tube.
Representative gas sampling was made at 300 mm
from the end of the wall by using an X-shaped, area-


--- Page 3 ---

NOX FORMATION IN NON-PREMIXED SWIRL BURNER
2735
Fig. 3. Effects of inlet air temperature on NOx emissions
from double-swirler and conventional swirl burners.
Fig. 4. Correlation of NOx emissions and combustion
efﬁciency for double-swirler burner.
averaged gas sampling probe with 36 holes in total.
To prevent condensation of water vapor in the sam-
pling probe and lines, the feed rate of cooling water
to the probe was controlled, and the sampling line
was electrically heated to a temperature of about 430
K. Burned gas samples were diluted with pure ni-
trogen using a capillary ﬂow mixer before entering
the gas analyzer. The concentrations of O2, CO,
CO2, HC (as CH4), NO, and NOx were measured
by the standard gas analysis procedures: chemilu-
minescence for NO, nondispersive infrared absorp-
tion for CO and CO2, ﬂame ionization for HC, and
paramagnetic analysis for O2. The NO2–NO con-
verter with stainless steel catalyst was calibrated us-
ing standard NO2 gas to conﬁrm conversion efﬁcien-
cies greater than 96%. Combustion efﬁciencies were
calculated from the measured gas compositions, as-
suming that the ﬁnal combustion products at com-
plete combustion were water vapor and carbon di-
oxide. Equivalence ratios were calculated not only
from the measured air and fuel ﬂow rates but also
from the gas compositions measured for the area-
averaged gas samples. The equivalence ratios cal-
culated based on the area-averaged gas analysis data
at the ﬂame tube exit agreed with those from the
measured fuel and air ﬂow rates to accuracies better
than 5% for all experimental conditions.
The local species concentrations in the combus-
tion region were measured for the three burners by
using a single-hole gas sampling probe at 650 K inlet
air temperature, 10 m/s reference air velocity, and
0.5 overall equivalence ratio. The sampling probe
was traversed along the diameter at each measure-
ment cross section, and sampled gas was analyzed
by the procedure described above.
The mixing of injected fuel and air in the com-
bustion region was investigated under nonburning
conditions. A mixture of 1% methane and air, instead
of fuel, was injected from the fuel nozzle, and local
fuel concentrations in the ﬂame tube were measured
using a minute single-hole probe and a ﬂame ioni-
zation detector.
Results and Discussion
NOx Emissions
Six multihole fuel nozzles of different conﬁgura-
tions were preliminary tested for the double-swirler
and conventional swirl burners. The results revealed
that the effects of number, size, and position of holes
and fuel-jet angle of the fuel nozzle on the NOx
emission levels were very small, suggesting that mix-
ing of fuel and air was mainly controlled by the swirl-
ing air ﬂow. Therefore, a multihole fuel nozzle with
16 jet holes was used for the later experiments. The
total cone angle of fuel jets is 608 for the double-
swirler burner and 1208 for the conventional swirl
burners.
The EINOx for the three burners is shown in Fig.
3. The effect of inlet air temperature is signiﬁcant,
and EINOx increases more steeply with equivalence
ratio at higher inlet air temperatures. The NOx emis-
sions for the double-swirler burner are lower than
those for the conventional swirl burners at lower
equivalence ratios (,0.7). It is generally difﬁcult for
conventional swirl burners to attain very low NOx
emissions without deteriorating combustion efﬁ-
ciency [11].
The EINOx-combustion efﬁciency correlationsfor
the double-swirler burner are shown in Fig. 4 for


--- Page 4 ---

2736
GAS TURBINES
Fig. 5. Comparison of NOx emissions from double-swir-
ler and conventional swirl burners.
Fig. 6. Normalized fuel concentrations in combustion
region for double-swirler and large-hub swirler burners un-
der nonburning condition.
different inlet air temperatures. The numerical val-
ues attached to some data points represent equiva-
lence ratios at which the emissions data were mea-
sured. With decreasing equivalence ratio along each
line, the EINOx decreases while combustion efﬁ-
ciency increases. Thus, both very low NOx emissions
and very high combustion efﬁciency (.99.9%) are
achieved simultaneously, even at fairly lean condi-
tions. This trend is quite different from that of the
conventional swirl burners, for which combustionef-
ﬁciency deteriorates at very lean conditions. The
measured concentrations of HC were less than a few
parts per million. The trend of measured CO con-
centration with overall equivalence ratio was consis-
tent with that of the prediction by adiabatic equilib-
rium
calculations,
though
the
measured
CO
concentration was lower than the predicted at
greater equivalence ratios.
The NOx emissions levels measured at 950 K inlet
air temperature and at 10- and 15-m/s reference air
velocities are plotted against adiabatic ﬂame tem-
perature in Fig. 5. For the sake of clariﬁcation, only
the data measured at ﬂame temperatures up to about
2100 K are included in the ﬁgure. The EINOx for
the double-swirler burner is always the smallest, and
an increase of reference air velocity results in lower
NOx emissions levels. At 1800 K adiabatic ﬂame
temperature and 15-m/s reference air velocity, the
EINOx for the double-swirler burner is about half
of that for the small-hub swirler burner and about
one-fourth of that for the large-hub swirler burner.
The EINOx for the double-swirler and the small-hub
swirler burners decreases monotonically with de-
creasing adiabatic ﬂame temperature. The EINOx
for the large-hub swirler burner, which sustained
ﬂame until the fuel ﬂow was cut off, reaches a min-
imum at an adiabatic ﬂame temperature of around
1600 K.
Fuel–Air Mixing under Nonburning Conditions
Enhanced mixing of fuel and air in the combustion
region is very effective in suppressing NOx forma-
tion. Fuel–air mixing in the double-swirler and the
large-hub swirler burners was investigated under
nonburning conditions at an inlet air temperature of
350 K and a reference air velocity of 5 m/s.
The proﬁles of nondimensional fuel concentration
C/CA, where C and CA are the local and overall fuel
concentrations, are shown in Fig. 6. In this ﬁgure,
H represents the distance from the swirler exit to
the measurement cross section. The proﬁles of C/
CA show the radial spread of fuel jets and progress
of fuel–air mixing. In the double-swirler burner, at
H 4 1 mm, the proﬁle is a cone with its apex on the
axis, suggesting that the mixing of air and fuel in the
inner channel is far from complete. The proﬁle
comes to have two peaks (C/CA 4 3.5) at H 4 6
mm, but is almost ﬂat at H 4 16 mm. More uniform
proﬁles of C/CA are observed further downstream
(i.e., H 4 21 and 26 mm). The measured ﬂame tem-
perature proﬁles show that the ﬂame started at H 4
10 mm. Thus, it is expected that mixtures of high
uniformity are formed in a very short distance from
the double-swirler exit. The M-shaped C/CA proﬁles
just downstream of the fuel nozzle of the large-hub
swirler burner reﬂect penetration of the fuel jets.
With increasing axial distance, the two peaks are di-
minished and uniform fuel distributions result at H
4 30 mm.


--- Page 5 ---

NOX FORMATION IN NON-PREMIXED SWIRL BURNER
2737
Fig. 7. Proﬁles of equivalence ratio in combustion re-
gion for double-swirler and conventional swirl burners.
Fig. 8. CO concentrations in combustion region for dou-
ble-swirler and conventional swirl burners.
Uniform proﬁles of fuel–air ratio are obtained in
a shorter distance in the double-swirler burner than
in the conventional swirl burner. A comparison of
the fuel concentration proﬁles shows that the fuel-
rich region is smaller in the double-swirler burner
than in the large-hub swirler burner. That rapid
fuel–air mixing in the double-swirler burner is the
reason for the lower NOx emissions of the double-
swirler burner.
Proﬁles of Equivalence Ratio and Gaseous Species
Concentrations
Measurements of species concentrations and gas
temperatures were made at different axial positions
in the ﬂame tube at 650 K inlet air temperature, 10-
m/s reference air velocity, and 0.5 overall equiva-
lence ratio.
Local Equivalence Ratio
The proﬁles of local equivalence ratio in the three
burners are compared in Fig. 7. At H 4 10 mm, the
proﬁles for the conventional swirl burners are M-
shaped and the mixtures are rich in the central re-
gion of the large-hub swirler burner. The proﬁles are
increasingly uniform with axial distance. They almost
agree with each other at H 4 35 mm, and very uni-
form proﬁles result at H 4 75 mm for all the burn-
ers.
A comparison of the development of proﬁles for
the burners shows that fuel–air mixing is the slowest
in the large-hub swirler burner. The fuel-rich zone
in the large-hub swirler burner is the reason for high
NOx emissions of the burner.
Carbon Monoxide and Unburned Hydrocarbons
The CO proﬁles for the three burners are com-
pared in Fig. 8. The variation of the CO proﬁle with
axial distance is generally consistent with that of HC
proﬁle, which is not included in the paper because
the allowable length of a paper is limited. It is shown
that the hub size has a signiﬁcant effect on the CO
and HC proﬁles at H 4 10 and 20 mm. The CO
concentration is highest on the axis for the large-hub
swirler burner while minimum for the small-hub
swirler burner. Except for the central region, the CO
and HC proﬁles are the same for the conventional
swirl burners. At H 4 50 mm, the proﬁle of CO
concentration became high near the ﬂame tube wall,
and HC concentration became very low over the
cross section. The oxidation of CO in the region near
the wall is slow because of lower gas temperatures,
though the proﬁles of CO become nearly uniform
for both burners at H 4 100 mm.
Oxides of Nitrogen
Figure 9 shows the proﬁles of NOx emissions in
the ﬂame tube for the three burners. It is shown that


--- Page 6 ---

2738
GAS TURBINES
Fig. 9. NOx concentrations in combustion region for
double-swirler and conventional swirl burners.
Fig. 10. Proﬁles of gas temperature in combustion re-
gion for double-swirler and conventional swirl burners.
at H 4 20 mm, the peak NOx concentration for the
double-swirler burner is about one-third of that for
the small-hub swirler burner and about one-sixth of
that for the large-hub swirler burner. With increas-
ing axial distance, the NOx concentration decreases
in the central region, and uniform proﬁles result.
The reduction of NOx concentration in the central
region for the large-hub swirler burner is remark-
able. The proﬁles are nearly uniform at H 4 75 mm
not only for the double-swirler burner but also for
the small-hub swirler burner. A comparison of the
NOx concentrations measured at H 4 75 mm for
both burners shows that the NOx concentration
(about 10 ppm) for the double-swirler burner is
about half of that for the small-hub swirler burner.
The NOx proﬁle for the large-hub swirler burner is
not uniform even at H 4 75 mm and has a region
of high NOx concentrations (about 50 ppm) on the
axis. It is noted that the NOx concentration increases
remarkably in the upstream region of the ﬂame tube
and increases little in the downstream region of H
4 75 mm. The order of the three burners in respect
to NOx emissions concentrations at H 4 75 mm
does not change until the ﬂame tube exit, as shown
in Fig. 5. The proﬁles of equivalence ratio for the
double-swirler burner, as shown in Fig. 7, are more
uniform than those of conventional swirl burners.
Moreover, the regions of high gas temperature in the
upstream region of the ﬂame tube is smaller in the
double-swirler burner than in the conventional swirl
burners, as shown in Fig. 10. The results conﬁrm
that the NOx concentration, especially in the up-
stream region of the ﬂame tube, for the double-
swirler burner is lower than that for the conventional
burners.
Conclusions
In this study, a non-premixed, direct fuel injection
burner with a unique double swirler was developed
for low-NOx and low-CO emissions gas turbine com-
bustors. The emissions characteristics of the burner
are compared with those for the swirl burners of
conventional conﬁgurations. The reasons for the low
emissions of the double-swirler burner are discussed
on the basis of the measured proﬁles of equivalence
ratio and gaseous species concentrations, as well as
of the data on fuel–air mixing in the combustion re-
gion.
Major conclusions are as follows:
1. The compatibility between low-NOx emissions
and high combustion efﬁciency was demon-
strated using the double-swirler burner, which di-
rectly injected natural gas into the combustion
region. The NOx emissions levels for the burner
were signiﬁcantly lower than those for conven-
tional swirl burners. The NOx emission levels for


--- Page 7 ---

NOX FORMATION IN NON-PREMIXED SWIRL BURNER
2739
the large-hub swirler burner were much higher
than those for the small-hub swirler burner.
2. NOx was formed rapidly in the upstream region
of the ﬂame tube.
3. The proﬁle of equivalence ratio in the upstream
region of the ﬂame tube for the double-swirler
burner was more uniform than that for conven-
tional swirl burners. The mixing of fuel and air
was more rapid in the double-swirler burner than
in the conventional swirl burners, which resulted
in uniform equivalence ratio proﬁles in the com-
bustion region. The improved mixing of directly
injected fuel and air in the double-swirler burner
is the reason for the lower NOx emissions of the
burner.
REFERENCES
1. Shaw, R. J., Gilkey, Samuel, and Hines, Richard,
Engine Technology Challenges for A 21st Century
High-speed
Civil
Transport,
ISAAC
93-7064,
1993.
2. Hayashi, S., Effects of Heterogeneity of Mixtures on
Gaseous Emissions in Premixed/Prevaporized Com-
bustion, 1983 Tokyo International Gas Turbine Con-
gress, pp. 245–251, 1983.
3. Hussain, U. S., Andrews, G. E., Cheung, W. G., and
Shahabadi, A. R., Low NOx Primary Zones Using Jet
Mixing Shear Layer Combustion, ASME 88-GT-308,
1988.
4. Alkabie, H. S., Andrews, G. E., and Ahmad, N. T.,
Lean Low NOx Primary Zones Using Radial Swirlers,
ASME 88-GT-245, 1988.
5. Hayashi, S., Compatibility between Low-NOx Emis-
sions and High-combustion Efﬁciency by Lean Direct
Injection Combustion, ASME 95-GT-276, 1995.
6. Lyons, V. J., Fuel/Air Nonuniformity—Effect on Nitric
Oxide Emissions, AIAA J. 20(5):660–665 (1982).
7. Fric, T. F., Effect of Fuel-Air Unmixedness on NOx
Emissions, AIAA 92-3345, 1992.
8. Tacina, R. R., Low NOx Potential of Gas Turbine En-
gines, AIAA-90-0550, 1990.
9. Hayashi, S., Technical Memorandum, TM470, Na-
tional Aerospace Laboratory, 1982.
10. Beer, J. M., and Chigier, N. A., Combustion Aero-Dy-
namics, Appl. Sci. London, 1972.
11. Koff, B. L., Aircraft Gas Turbine Emissions Challenge,
ASME 95-GT-422, 1993.
COMMENTS
Prof. C. Bruno, University of Rome, Italy. The results
presented are extremely interesting in that very high com-
bustion temperatures correspond to very low levels of NOx.
At very low equivalence ratio and low combustion temper-
atures, there is recent evidence that N2O may form, com-
pensating for the NO reduction. Will the authors look into
this issue in the future?
Author’s Reply. Thank you very much for your interest
in our study and for your suggestion. We are very sorry to
say that the N2O concentration has not been measured.
We are now preparing to measure N2O.
●
Christian Eigenbrod, ZARM Institute, Germany. How
high is the pressure drop of your swirler compared with
the conventional type?
Are the spin directions of the two swirlers parallel or
counterwise?
Author’s Reply. We did not measures the pressure drop
of the conventional swirler. The pressure drop of the dou-
ble-swirler was about 7% at 650 K inlet air temperature,
10 m/s reference air velocity, and 0.5 equivalence ratio.
The double-swirler is a co-rotational swirler.
