
--- Page 1 ---

Kexin Liu1
e-mail: kexin.liu@siemens.com
John P. Wood2
e-mail: jpwood@qinetiq.com
Eoghan R. Buchanan
Pete Martin
Victoria E. Sanderson
Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery Ltd.,
P.O. Box 1,
Waterside South,
Lincoln LN5 7FD, UK
Biodiesel as an Alternative Fuel
in Siemens Dry Low Emissions
Combustors: Atmospheric and
High Pressure Rig Testing
Atmospheric and high pressure rig tests were conducted to investigate the feasibility of
using biodiesel as an alternative fuel to power industrial gas turbines in one of the
worldŌĆÖs leading dry low emissions (DLE) combustion systems, the SGT-100. At the same
conditions, tests were also carried out for mineral diesel to provide reference information
to evaluate biodiesel as an alternative fuel. In atmospheric pressure rig tests, the likeli-
hood of the machine lighting was identi’¼üed based on the measured probability of the
ignition of a single combustor. Lean ignition and extinction limits at various air tempera-
tures were also investigated with different air assist pressures. The ignition test results
reveal that reliable ignition can be achieved with biodiesel across a range of air mass
’¼éow rates and air fuel ratios (AFRs). In high pressure rig tests, emissions and combustion
dynamics were measured for various combustor air inlet pressures, temperatures, com-
bustor wall pressure drops, and ’¼éame temperatures. These high pressure rig results show
that biodiesel produced less NOx than mineral diesel. The test results indicate that the
Siemens DLE combustion system can be adapted to use biodiesel as an alternative fuel
without major modi’¼ücation. DOI: 10.1115/1.3204617
1
Introduction
Renewable fuels are of increasing interest for many applica-
tions including gas turbines 1,2 due to environmental issues,
fossil fuel conservation, and energy price increases. Biofuels in-
cluding biogas, bioethanol and biodiesel are renewable and envi-
ronment friendly in many ways such as being carbon neutral and
in theory producing zero carbon dioxide CO2, but the produc-
tion of biofuels should avoid competition with food production.
The current work focuses on the technical issue of biofuels in
terms of operability and emissions.
Biodiesel is produced by the process of transesteri’¼ücation of
vegetable oil, animal oil/fats, tallow and waste cooking oil to form
fatty acid methyl esters FAME. The advantage of treating the
vegetable oil in this way is that the resulting oil has properties that
are signi’¼ücantly closer to those of mineral diesel than in the case
for the original feedstock. The precise properties of the fuel pro-
duced in this way are dependent on the original feedstock 3,4.
Oils derived straight from crops such as rapeseed, palm and soy-
bean have the greatest potential; however, there are issues with
land availability and cost. Waste vegetable oils from restaurants
and animal oil/fat from the food industry represent the economic
way to produce biodiesel.
Biodiesel fuels have been widely used in internal combustion
engines, either pure biodiesel BD100 or blended with diesel as
BD5 biodiesel 5%, diesel 95%, BD10 biodiesel 10%, diesel
90%. Lapuerta et al. 5 used pure biodiesel fuels in a diesel
engine and found that pure biodiesel, compared with the reference
mineral diesel, resulted in a slight increase in fuel consumption,
very slight differences in NOx emissions, and sharp reductions in
total hydrocarbon emissions, smoke opacity and particle emis-
sions. Biodiesel is indeed an environmentally friendly fuel when
applied to internal combustion engines.
To the authorsŌĆÖ best knowledge, biodiesel was not widely used
in industrial gas turbines, but some test experience was built up on
heavy duty gas turbines 1,2, small gas turbines 6, microtur-
bines 7,8 and simulated gas turbine burner tests 9,10. Compa-
rable NOx emissions were found in the work on heavy duty gas
turbines 1,2 and on small gas turbines 6. Chiang et al. 8
reported carbon deposits on the fuel nozzle burning biodiesel, and
Bolszo et al. 7 found that engine cold start becomes a signi’¼ücant
challenge under more extreme conditions. The major concerns
using biodiesel to power industrial gas turbine are operability,
NOx emission, materials, component life, fuel storage 11, cold
start 7, and carbon deposits 8.
Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery Ltd. was involved in the
recently ’¼ünished European project, Alternative Fuels for Industrial
Gas Turbines AFTUR, to investigate the feasibility of using
biodiesel as an alternative fuel to power industrial gas turbines.
Siemens conducted both atmospheric and high pressure rig tests in
the SGT-100 using one of the worldŌĆÖs leading DLE combustion
systems. Reference data were obtained by carrying out the same
tests with mineral diesel.
In an atmospheric pressure rig, extensive ignition tests were
conducted, to investigate engine start reliability, lean ignition, and
extinction limits to establish the biodieselŌĆÖs operability in gas tur-
bines. In high pressure rig testing, emissions and combustion dy-
namics were investigated. The biodiesel selected for this study
was supplied by C Zero Energy Ltd. Coventry, UK, produced
from recycled cooking oil, and was consequently derived from a
mixture of feedstocks. All tests were with the standard DLE SGT-
100 burner, combustor, and transition duct, and 100% biodiesel
BD100 was used. The reference mineral diesel was BS 2869
Class A2/D.
2
Siemens DLE Combustion System
Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery Ltd. is the manufacturer of
small industrial gas turbines from the SGT-100 at approximately 5
MW to the SGT-400 at 13.4 MW, which have now accumulated
more than 3 million hours of experience. The SGT-300 and SGT-
400 are offered commercially for less than 10 ppmv NOx
1Corresponding author.
2Now in QineitiQ, Cody Technology Park, Farnborough GU14 0LX, UK.
Manuscript received March 24, 2009; ’¼ünal manuscript received March 30, 2009;
published online September 14, 2009. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 011501-1
Copyright ┬® 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

at 15%O2 emissions for certain markets, for example, the SGT-
300, operating at the University of New Hampshire, USA.
The dual fuel DLE combustion system is designed as a reverse-
’¼éow tuboannular type, as shown in Fig. 1. The combustor consists
of three main sections: 1 the pilot burner, which houses the pilot
fuel galleries and injectors for both gaseous and liquid fuels; 2
the main burner, which houses the main air swirler and main gas
and liquid fuel injection systems; and 3 the combustor, which
includes the prechamber, and is of a double skin construction,
cooled through impingement cooling. At the downstream of the
combustor, a transition duct is used to condition the ’¼éow from the
circular combustor exit to a sector of the turbine entry annulus.
In order to cover all the power range, rather than having a
single combustor design and applying different numbers of com-
bustors to each engine type, the combustors have been scaled.
Figure 2 shows the DLE combustor family. The SGT-100, 300,
and 400 have 6 combustors per engine, and the SGT-200 has 8.
A schematic of the combustion concept is shown in Fig. 3. The
main combustion air enters through a single radial swirler at the
head of the combustor. The ’¼éow then turns through a right angle
into the prechamber, followed by a sudden expansion into the
combustion chamber.
The swirl number is suf’¼üciently high to induce a vortex break-
down reverse ’¼éow zone along the axis. This is termed as the
internal reverse ’¼éow zone. In the concept, this reverse ’¼éow zone
remains attached to the surface of the pilot burner, thereby estab-
lishing a ’¼ürm aerodynamic base for ’¼éame stabilization. In the
wake of the sudden expansion, an external reverse ’¼éow zone is
established. The ’¼éame is stabilized in the shear layers around the
internal and external reverse ’¼éow zones.
The fuel, either gas or liquid, is introduced in two stages, as
shown in Fig. 4: the main, which results in a high degree of
premixedness, and hence, low NOx emissions, and the pilot,
which steadily increases as the load demand decreases in order to
ensure ’¼éame stability. The pilot is arranged, such that, as the pilot
fuel split increases, the fuel is biased towards the axis of the
combustor.
3
Capability of the DLE System for Fuel Flexibility
Siemens has a continuous policy of expanding its fuel capabil-
ity. As well as the above mentioned DLE combustion system,
Siemens also has conventional combustion systems, which can
burn various fuels in the Wobbe index range from 4 MJ/m3 to
70 MJ/m3. In this section, the fuel ’¼éexibility for the DLE system
is described.
The Siemens standard DLE combustion system is capable of
burning conventional fuels with a Wobbe index from 37 MJ/m3
to 49 MJ/m3 with guaranteed NOx, CO, and UHC emissions.
With modi’¼ücation when necessary, the DLE system is also ca-
pable of burning fuels with a lower Wobbe index. For example,
the standard SGT-300 operates in Libya with a gas having a
Wobbe index of about 32 MJ/m3, modi’¼üed SGT-400 engines op-
erate at Yadana in the Andaman Sea with a Wobbe index of
28 MJ/m3, and at Kandhkot, Pakistan with 32 MJ/m3.
Siemens is interested in expanding their fuel ’¼éexibility with
alternative fuels such as syngas, biogas, bioethanol, and biodiesel.
High pressure rig tests have been completed with biogases, simu-
lated by diluting natural gas with inert gases and syngases, mix-
tures of natural gas with hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and inerts.
The current liquid fuel capability for the Siemens DLE system
includes mineral diesels and kerosenes. As part of its policy to
increase liquid fuel ’¼éexibility, Siemens was involved in the Euro-
Fig. 1
Siemens DLE combustor construction
Fig. 2
Siemens DLE combustor family
Fig. 3
Siemens DLE combustion concept
Fig. 4
Conceptual details of fuel injectors and air paths
011501-2 / Vol. 132, JANUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

pean project AFTUR to investigate the feasibility of using biodie-
sel as an alternative fuel to power industrial gas turbines. Siemens
conducted both atmospheric and high pressure rig tests in the
SGT-100 DLE combustion system to investigate ignition, emis-
sion, and combustion dynamics using biodiesel as an alternative
fuel. Reference data were obtained by carrying out the same tests
with mineral diesel. Valuable experience has been gained on
biodiesel, and the test results are the basis for this paper.
4
Rig Tests Using Biodiesel to Fuel a Standard SGT-
100 Combustor
4.1
Ignition Tests in an Atmospheric Rig. In the atmo-
spheric rig testing, extensive ignition testing of biodiesel has been
conducted to investigate the feasibility of using it as a fuel to
power industrial gas turbines. For all the tests performed in the
atmospheric rig, 100% of the fuel was supplied from the pilot fuel
nozzle. Two series of tests were performed to identify the key
properties of the proposed fuel. In the ’¼ürst set of tests, an attempt
was made to identify the likelihood of the engine lighting, based
on the measured probability of the ignition of a single combustor.
The second series of tests investigated the lean ignition and ex-
tinction limits at various air temperatures and at different air assist
pressures.
In order to assess the engine start reliability operating with
biodiesel, it is necessary to determine the ignition reliability of a
single combustor, and then convert this into an overall probability
for the engine lighting. The probability of a single combustor
lighting is easily determined by counting the number of sparks
required to initiate combustion during the atmospheric rig testing.
The probability of ignition is then just the reciprocal of the num-
ber of sparks that was taken to ignite the combustor. In practice,
the experiment was repeated three times, and an average number
of sparks was taken to ensure the consistency, and compensate for
noise factors, for example, in the spark.
An algorithm was developed to convert the single combustor
ignition probability into a probability for lighting the engine. The
method consists of calculating the probability of various permu-
tations of combustors lighting on the ’¼ürst round, based on a given
’¼üxed probability of an individual combustor lighting Pi. Any
probability
of
any
combination
from
this
’¼ürst
round
Pof k from n=Pi
k1ŌłÆPinŌłÆkn! /nŌłÆk!k! is then multiplied
by the probabilities for lighting various combinations of the re-
maining unlit combustors. The same process is repeated in the
third round. All probabilities for sequences, which lead to all com-
bustors lit, are added together, apart from those, which are ex-
cluded by the time-out rules built into the control algorithm. This
gives the ’¼ünal probability of a successful system light for a given
’¼üxed individual combustor light probability. A number of calcula-
tions are then run with different ’¼üxed probabilities for the indi-
vidual combustor, and a polynomial ’¼üt is applied to model the
system response over the interesting high light reliability end of
the curve.
The lean ignition limit was found by activating the igniter, and
then gradually increasing the fuel ’¼éow rate until ignition took
place. Ignition was deemed to have occurred when the ’¼éame per-
sisted without the presence of a spark. The effect of air assist
pressure and air temperature on lean ignition limit was investi-
gated. The lean extinction limit was determined by taking the
stable ’¼éame at each of the air ’¼éow rates studied, and reducing the
amount of fuel until extinction occurred. At this point, the air and
fuel ’¼éow rates were recorded. Each test was repeated three times
to ensure the consistency, and compensate for the noise factors
such as ’¼éuctuations in the air or fuel ’¼éow rates.
4.2
Emissions and Dynamics Tests in a High Pressure Rig.
High pressure rig tests were performed in one of the high pressure
facilities at Firth Road, Lincoln, of Siemens Industrial Turboma-
chinery Ltd. The maximum pressure, temperature, and air mass
’¼éow rate are 20 bar, 873 K, and 5 kg/s, respectively.
The high pressure rig tests investigated the behavior of the fuel
injection system, which directly affects the degree of premixed-
ness of the air and fuel mixture, as the operating condition was
altered under a biodiesel fuel operation. This was achieved by
making measurements of the bulk emissions at the exit of the
combustor, and then inferring the impact on the spray from the
observed change.
The key parameters in’¼éuencing the quality of the atomization
are believed to be inlet air pressure, temperature, mass ’¼éow rate,
and ’¼éame temperature. A different air mass ’¼éow rate results in a
different combustor wall pressure drop, which is a key parameter
to control air fuel mixing and ’¼éame stability. As a consequence,
the variation in these parameters formed the basis of the present
testing for biodiesel. At the same operating conditions, reference
tests were also performed for a mineral diesel operation. During
the tests, combustion dynamics were also recorded. For all the
tests, 100% of the fuel was supplied from main fuel nozzles with
no fuel supplied from the pilot fuel nozzle. The pilot fuel nozzle is
an air assist injector, and the main nozzle is a pressure swirl in-
jector.
4.3
Biodiesel Supply and Its Properties. The biodiesel se-
lected for this study was composed of recycled cooking oil. The
fuel samples of biodiesel and diesel were collected before and
after the test, and were sent to a laboratory for analysis. The
comparison of the important properties of the two fuels is listed in
Table 1. One can see that biodiesel has a lower heating value,
contains oxygen, and in particular, the kinematic viscosity is about
42.3% higher than that of diesel at a temperature of 40┬░C. When
the fuel temperature is increased to 50┬░C, the biodieselŌĆÖs kine-
matic viscosity is reduced to 54.4% of its value at 40┬░C.
Tate et al. 3,4 studied the fuel properties of three biodiesel
fuels from different sources, methyl esters ME from canola and
soy, and ethyl esters EE from ’¼üsh oil. All three of these biodiesel
fuels have much higher kinematic viscosity than diesel, and the
viscosity of biodiesel exponentially decays as temperature in-
creases, with signi’¼ücant change with the temperature at the range
of 20ŌĆō100┬░C. The boiling points of the three biodiesel fuels are
also higher than diesel.
Wilson et al. 11 showed that their four kinds of biodiesel fuels
have higher viscosity than diesel, and the carbon content varies
from 76.8% to 77.52%. The hydrogen content varies from 12.59%
to 12.77%, oxygen content varies from 9.37% to 9.94%, and the
nitrogen content varies from 0.34% to 0.38%. One can see that the
biodiesel selected for the current work has less nitrogen content
than that of Wilson et al. 11.
Panchasara et al. 9 also reported that the viscosity of biodesel
is 45ŌĆō55% higher, compared with that of mineral diesel. The
higher fuel viscosity of biodiesel could result in poor atomization,
which will be quanti’¼üed later on by droplet size predictions. Sur-
face tension is required in order to evaluate the droplet size of the
fuels. It was calculated for both fuels at different fuel pressures by
Table 1
The comparison of fuel properties of biodiesel with
those of diesel
Property
Diesel
Biodiesel
Low heating value MJ/kg
42.397
37.414
Density at 15┬░C kg/m3
867.8
832.2
Carbon % mass
87.1
76.8
Hydrogen % mass
12.7
12.1
Oxygen % mass
0.0
10.6
Nitrogen mg/kg
335.0
25.0
Kinematic viscosity at 40┬░C mm2/s
3.45
4.91
Kinematic viscosity at 50┬░C mm2/s
ŌĆō
2.67
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 011501-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

the method of Odgers and Krestschmer 12. The calculation
showed that both fuels have comparable surface tension, which is
also con’¼ürmed by Panchasara et al. 9.
5
Test Results and Discussion
5.1
Ignition. Figure 5 shows the predicted probabilities of the
engine lighting with biodiesel, based on the measured probability
for the ignition of a single combustor. Also, three levels of air
assist pressure are shown in the ’¼ügure. The black quadrilateral
overlaying these plots shows the predicted extreme limits of the
SGT-100 light up window, which incorporates the combustor to
combustor variation as the engine lights for biodiesel. The predic-
tion for the light up window of diesel is very close to that of
biodiesel.
At low air mass ’¼éow and low air fuel ratio, it seems that air
assist pressure has little impact on the probability of engine light-
ing. At higher air mass ’¼éow rates, the air assist pressure has a
greater impact on the probability of engine lighting. Increasing the
air assist pressure reduces the probability of lighting. It is surpris-
ing that increasing the air assist pressure has a negative impact on
ignition as it would be expected to increase the atomization, and
thus make combustion more likely. It has, however, been sug-
gested by Wilbraham 13 that the ’¼éame is stabilized by the wake
formed by the spray, and that if the atomization is promoted ex-
cessively, this wake can be disrupted, preventing the ’¼éame from
stabilizing. It is, consequently, a compromise between promoting
atomization to aid ignition and providing suf’¼üciently dense spray
ef’¼éux to produce suf’¼ücient wake to stabilize the ’¼éame.
From Fig. 5, it can be seen that over the majority of the SGT-
100 ignition window, a 95% start reliability could be achieved
with biodiesel at air assist pressures lower that 3 bar. Even for an
air assist pressure of 3.21 bar, a very high start reliability could be
achieved.
Figure 6 shows the lean ignition limit for biodiesel fuel at air
assist pressure of 2.72 bar and the comparison with those of min-
eral diesel by Martin 14. The results suggest that at high air ’¼éow
rates, the biodiesel is easier to ignite than diesel with the ignition
being possible at signi’¼ücantly higher AFRs. At lower ’¼éow rates,
the opposite is true with diesel igniting at higher values of the
AFRs. The results also suggest that the lean ignition limit of
biodiesel is not sensitive to air temperature, although the scatter at
the lowest air ’¼éow rate is bigger. Also shown in the ’¼ügure is the
extreme of predicted light up window for the SGT-100 engine for
biodiesel. It further suggests that reliable ignition can be achieved
for SGT-100 operating with biodiesel.
The air assist pressure has a minimal impact on the lean igni-
tion limit of diesel, although higher air pressure slightly broadens
the limit. This also seems to be the case for biodiesel, as shown in
Fig. 7, except at low air mass ’¼éow rates, where signi’¼ücantly dif-
ferent AFR is required for ignition at different air assist pressures.
The lean extinction limit was also recorded for the biodiesel at
air temperatures of 0┬░C and 30┬░C, and is illustrated in Fig. 8.
This showed that the lean extinction occurred for both cases at the
same conditions, and furthermore, that these conditions were simi-
lar to those seen for the lean ignition.
The close similarity in the position of the ignition and extinc-
tion could indicate that the igniter is placed in a region where
combustion is most likely to be sustained. If there had been a
Fig. 5
Probability of engine lighting, fueled with biodiesel and
calculated from single combustor tests for three different air
assist pressures: ŌĆ×aŌĆ” 2.31 bar, ŌĆ×bŌĆ” 2.72 bar, and ŌĆ×cŌĆ” 3.21 bar
Fig. 6
Lean ignition limit for SGT-100 burning biodiesel at dif-
ferent ambient air temperatures at an air assist pressure of 2.72
bar, and the comparison with diesel
011501-4 / Vol. 132, JANUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

signi’¼ücant difference between the extinction and ignition curves,
it would indicate that the spark was poor or that it was being
introduced in an inappropriate place. As the two curves are coin-
cident, within the measurement accuracy available, it indicates
that the ignition occurs at the optimal AFR. This in turn would
suggest that the design for the igniter position and spark quality
for diesel is also optimal for biodiesel.
It is interesting to mention that Wilson et al. 11 showed that
their four kinds of biodiesel fuels were harder to ignite than diesel,
and that the location of the igniter had a signi’¼ücant impact on the
performance. There are several possible reasons for different re-
sults from the two different groups. It was found that at the same
air mass ’¼éow rate, Wilson et al. 11 operated at a much richer
fuel condition than Siemens for both fuels. Also, the two groups
used different injectors; Siemens used air assist injectors, and Wil-
son et al. 11 used nonair assist injectors. Different mechanisms
for ’¼éame stabilization can also contribute to the difference.
5.2
Emissions and Combustion Dynamics. The impact of
’¼éame temperature and combustor pressure drop on NOx emissions
are shown in Fig. 9 for two different air inlet pressures of 9 bar
and 14 bar at a typical engine combustor full load inlet tempera-
ture. Flame temperatures presented in this paper were normalized
to the full load ’¼éame temperature, and as a result, a normalized
value of 1.0 represents the full load condition. At both inlet pres-
sures, diesel had a higher NOx emission than biodiesel, and, as
expected, higher ’¼éame temperature resulted in a higher NOx emis-
sion for both fuels. At lower inlet pressure, the combustor pressure
drop had an insigni’¼ücant effect on NOx formation for both fuels.
However, at higher inlet pressure, there was a strong dependence
on combustor pressure drop for biodiesel, with the NOx reduced
with the increasing combustor pressure drop. This dependence
was not seen for diesel.
It is expected that the NOx formation would be reduced as the
combustor pressure drop is increased for three reasons: 1 the
burnt gas residence time in the burner is reduced as the mixture
velocity is increased, and as a consequence, the NOx level is re-
duced due to the diminished in’¼éuence of the slow Zeldovich
mechanism; 2 particularly for the liquid fuel, as the velocity of
the mixture inside the combustor increases, the evaporation and
droplet size of the fuel are improved 15, and the mixing with air
is enhanced, as a result, NOx level is reduced; and 3 the mixing
of air and fuel is further enhanced by the possible downstream
displacement of the ’¼éame. However, once perfect mixing is
achieved, then the impact of combustor pressure drop on the NOx
emission would be limited to reducing the burnt gas residence
time. Syed and Buchanan 16 showed that the NOx formation is
independent of combustor pressure drop, once optimal levels of
mixing are achieved in their modi’¼üed swirler under a gas
operation.
Based on the above arguments, for diesel fuel, the optimal level
of mixing was achieved in the SGT-100 combustor, regardless of
the inlet pressure. However, for biodiesel, at the lower inlet pres-
sure of 9 bar, the optimal level of mixing was achieved, so the
combustor pressure drop had a little in’¼éuence on the NOx forma-
tion, but at the higher inlet pressure of 14 bar, the optimal level of
mixing was not achieved, the combustor pressure drop had a great
impact on NOx formation, and mixing was improved by increas-
ing the combustor pressure drop.
As shown in Fig. 9, for biodiesel fuel, comparable levels of
NOx are produced at low ’¼éame temperature at the two different
inlet pressures, regardless of the combustor pressure drop. As the
’¼éame temperature is increased, NOx formation at higher pressure
begins to diverge from those of low pressure, and result in higher
NOx emissions. For diesel fuel, the inlet pressure effect is not
signi’¼ücant, although higher pressure produces slightly higher
NOx.
The insigni’¼ücant dependence of inlet pressure and combustor
pressure drop on the NOx emission for diesel for all the investi-
gated ’¼éame temperatures, and for biodiesel at low ’¼éame tempera-
ture, suggests that well premixed mixtures were achieved, and
Fig. 7
Effect of air assist pressure on SGT-100 lean ignition
limit burning biodiesel at ambient air temperature of 15┬░C
Fig. 8
Effect of ambient air temperature on SGT-100 lean ex-
tinction limit burning biodiesel at air assist pressure of 2.72 bar
Fig. 9
The effect of the ’¼éame temperature and combustor
pressure drop on NOx emission for biodiesel at two different air
inlet pressures, and its comparison with diesel
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 011501-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

mixing was completed prior to the reaction zone under these con-
ditions. However, for biodiesel, at higher pressure and high ’¼éame
temperature, as the amount of fuel is increased, there is a clear
move away from the minimum level for low pressure. This would
suggest that once the amount of fuel supplied exceeds a certain
level, mixing is incomplete at the reaction zone.
Figure 9 was replotted as an Arrhenius-type plot in Fig. 10 to
get the approximate activation temperature for NOx formation,
based on a simple Arrhenius expression.
Syed and Buchanan 16 demonstrated that the apparent activa-
tion temperature is increased as the degree of premixing is in-
creased for gas fuel, and once the optimal mixing level is
achieved, the activation temperature is not sensitive to combustor
pressure drop. It would be expected that similar behavior would
be seen with liquid fuel. This would be complicated by the pres-
ence of a fuel bound nitrogen and the NOx it generates.
As shown in Fig. 10, only for biodiesel at the higher inlet pres-
sure of 14 bar is there a clear trend of activation temperature
increasing with the increasing combustor pressure drop. From the
link established between activation temperature and mixedness,
Fig. 10 further indicates that the degree of premixedness is quite
high for diesel at both pressures and for biodiesel at low pressure,
but for biodiesel premixedness at higher inlet pressure increases
with higher combustor pressure drop. Biodiesel has a higher acti-
vation temperature than diesel at the same inlet pressure, and has
lower NOx emissions, which suggests that activation temperature
would be an important indicator for NOx formation.
Campbell et al. 1 and Lapuerta et al. 5 demonstrated that
biodiesel fuels have a comparable NOx emission in industrial gas
turbines and internal combustion diesel engines, respectively. This
could be because their biodiesel and diesel fuels had comparable
nitrogen content. As mentioned before, the biodiesel used in the
current study has ten times less nitrogen content than Wilson et al.
11. Also, the fuel sample analysis showed that the biodiesel used
in this study had a signi’¼ücantly less nitrogen content than diesel as
listed in Table 1. The experimental study by Eberius et al. 17 and
the chemical kinetics study by Warnatz et al. 18 on a propane air
’¼éame with 2400 ppm CH3-NH2 methylamine can be used as a
model system for the fuel nitrogen conversion into pollutants.
Both studies show that about two-thirds of the fuel nitrogen are
oxidized to form NO under fuel lean conditions, and the rest is
converted into N2. Nicol et al. 19 demonstrated that at low
equivalence ratios of about 0.5 and 0.6, most of the NOx is formed
by the nitrous oxide mechanism. In the detailed internal measure-
ments on the SGT-100 20 fueled by mineral diesel, the concen-
trations of NO and NO2 were measured. It was found that NO was
dominant and was about 80% of the total NOx. Based on these
arguments, an attempt has been made to correct for the fuel bound
nitrogen FBN effect, assuming that all the nitrogen in the fuel is
converted to NO. This correction isolates the in’¼éuence of FBN,
and the effect of mixing and combustion can be identi’¼üed.
The NOx emissions corrected for FBN are shown in Fig. 11. A
huge reduction in the NOx level can be seen for diesel, and little
reduction is observed for biodiesel. At an inlet pressure of 14 bar,
comparable NOx levels for both fuels can be seen for all ’¼éame
temperatures and combustor pressure drops, except for biodiesel
at the combustor pressure drop of 3.7%, which has the highest
NOx level for all ’¼éame temperatures. For an inlet pressure of 9 bar
at a lower ’¼éame temperature, the NOx levels are comparable, but
diesel shows slightly higher NOx levels when the ’¼éame tempera-
ture is increased.
The comparisons of CO emission for both fuels at 15% O2 are
shown in Fig. 12. At an inlet pressure of 14 bar at all ’¼éame
temperatures investigated, biodiesel has a higher CO emission.
This difference is larger at the lowest ’¼éame temperature. At the
lowest ’¼éame temperature, both diesel and biodiesel show strong
combustor pressure drop in’¼éuence on CO emission; CO level is
reduced when combustor pressure drop is reduced. When the nor-
malized ’¼éame temperature is higher than 0.99, the effect of the
combustor pressure drop on the CO level is diminished. At an
inlet pressure of 9 bar, the in’¼éuence of the combustor pressure
drop on CO is reduced. Biodiesel has much higher CO emission
levels than diesel at the lowest ’¼éame temperature, and the differ-
ence becomes smaller when the ’¼éame temperature is increased
until the CO levels for the two fuels are comparable.
For diesel, the effect of the air inlet pressure on CO emission is
Fig. 10
Activation temperatures for biodiesel and diesel fuel at
different air inlet pressures and combustor pressure drops
Fig. 11
Comparison of NOx emissions from biodiesel and die-
sel after FBN correction
011501-6 / Vol. 132, JANUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

small when the normalized ’¼éame temperature is higher than 0.99.
There is some pressure effect at the lower ’¼éame temperature,
where CO emission is higher when the air inlet pressure is lower.
It is interesting to note that for biodiesel at normalized ’¼éame
temperature of 0.99, there is little pressure effect on CO emission.
However, a clear pressure effect is observed at other ’¼éame tem-
peratures, with the CO level increased as ’¼éame temperature is
reduced, and decreased as ’¼éame temperature is increased.
The comparisons of unburned hydrocarbon UHC emissions
are shown in Fig. 13. At a higher air inlet pressure of 14 bar,
biodiesel has lower UHC emissions. However, the differences are
within 0.5 ppm, and the authors would consider that the two fuels
have comparable UHC emissions considering the measurement
accuracy. At the lower air inlet pressure of 9 bar, biodiesel has
slightly higher UHC emissions, but the differences are within 3
ppm, except at a combustor pressure drop of 4.7%, which has the
highest difference of about 4 ppm.
For high pressure rig testing, combustion dynamics were also
measured by a pressure transducer mounted at the pilot burner
face. The comparisons of combustion dynamic pressure from the
two fuels at inlet pressure of 14 bar are shown in Fig. 14 in terms
of frequency and root mean square rms amplitude. The frequen-
cies and rms pressures were normalized using typical values for
the SGT-100 engine at full load conditions. The dynamics fre-
quencies increase as the ’¼éame temperature increases for both fu-
els, but both fuels have comparable dynamics frequencies. Biodie-
sel has lower rms dynamics pressures at lower ’¼éame temperatures,
and has higher dynamics when the ’¼éame temperatures exceed full
load value.
The Sauter mean diameter SMD droplet sizes have been esti-
mated to investigate the evaporation process in mixing and com-
bustion. According to Lefebvre 15, the droplet size is a function
of dynamic viscosity having SMDL
a and a between 0.06 and
0.215. It is also a function of surface tension having SMDb
and b about 0.25. The surface tension for biodiesel and diesel
were calculated, and the results showed that the surface tension is
comparable.
According to Lefebvre 15, SMD can be calculated by Eq. 1
as
SMD = 2.250.25L
0.25m╦Ö L
0.25PL
ŌłÆ0.5A
ŌłÆ0.25
1
where  is the surface tension kg/s2, L is the dynamic viscosity
kg/m s, m╦Ö L is the liquid mass ’¼éow rate kg/s, PL is the pres-
Fig. 12
The effect of ’¼éame temperature, combustor pressure
drop on CO emission of biodiesel at two inlet pressures, and its
comparison with diesel
Fig. 13
Comparison of UHC emissions from biodiesel and die-
sel at two inlet pressures
Fig. 14
Comparison of combustion dynamics fueled with
biodiesel and diesel at an air inlet pressure of 14 bar
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 011501-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

sure difference across nozzle Pa, and A is the air density
kg/m3.
The droplet diameters, thus calculated, are shown in Fig. 15. It
can be seen that biodiesel has a larger droplet size than diesel at
the same condition, and the droplet size is bigger when pressure is
reduced for both fuels. According to Eq. 1, the dominant contri-
bution to the different droplet size of both fuels comes from the
Dynamic viscosity; as at 313 K, the dynamic viscosities are
4.1810ŌłÆ3 kg/m s and 3.0610ŌłÆ3 kg/m s for biodiesel and
diesel, respectively. Biodiesel has a higher dynamic viscosity than
diesel, hence, it has a bigger droplet size. It is also signi’¼ücant that
evaporation for diesel is better than biodiesel.
Panchasara et al. 9 measured the droplet size of two different
biodiesel fuels, and found that the droplet size of biodiesel is
bigger than that of diesel. They also demonstrated that the atomi-
zation and fuel-air mixing processes have a major impact on NOx
and CO formation. Sequera et al. 10 found that even though the
fuel properties are important, the ’¼éow effects can dominate the
emissions of NOx and CO, for example, the fraction of the total
air used for atomization had a signi’¼ücant effect on both NOx and
CO emission, and emissions decreased with the increase in the
atomizing air. They suggest that for a given fuel, the emissions
can be minimized by properly tailoring the injector design and the
associated combustion processes.
6
Conclusions
Extensive ignition, emissions, and combustion dynamics testing
of biodiesel on standard DLE SGT-100 combustion hardware has
been conducted to investigate the feasibility of using biodiesel as
a fuel to power industrial gas turbines.
In ignition testing, two series of tests were performed to iden-
tify the key properties of the proposed fuel. The ’¼ürst set of tests
identi’¼üed the likelihood of the engine lighting, based on the mea-
sured probability of the ignition of a single combustor. This dem-
onstrated that a high likelihood of ignition would be possible,
depending on the choice of air assist pressure. The second series
of tests investigated the lean ignition and extinction limits at vari-
ous air temperatures. This showed that the ignition limit was dif-
ferent to that measured for mineral diesel, with the biodiesel being
easier to ignite at high air mass ’¼éow rates, and harder at lower
’¼éow rates. It was also demonstrated that air temperature did not
have a signi’¼ücant impact on the lean ignition limit. It was further
shown that the ignition window for the SGT-100 lays well within
the predicted curves for the lean ignition limit, and therefore, good
ignition should be possible. The lean extinction limits were found
to be very similar to the ignition limits.
Emissions and combustion dynamics were measured in a high
pressure test rig. The performance of the burner on the biodiesel
was mapped by variation in operating conditions such as the air
inlet pressure, temperature, combustor pressure drop, and ’¼éame
temperature. The results were compared with those of diesel at the
same conditions. For all the operating conditions tested, biodiesel
had a lower NOx emission than diesel. For biodiesel at an air inlet
pressure of 14 bar, there was a strong link between NOx and the
combustor pressure drop, where the NOx level was reduced as the
combustor pressure drop was increased. It was not the case for the
biodiesel at 9 bar, and for the mineral diesel at all the pressures
investigated. However, after the FBN correction, comparable NOx
emissions were obtained, although diesel showed a slightly higher
NOx emission than biodiesel at 9 bar inlet pressure.
The analysis of the high pressure rig testing results showed that
for biodiesel at low ’¼éame temperature and low air inlet pressure,
a high degree of premixing was achieved, so NOx level was inde-
pendent of the inlet pressure and combustor pressure drop. At high
pressure and high ’¼éame temperature, the optimal level of mixing
could not be achieved due to the amount of fuel supplied. Where
mixing is not optimal, the thermal NOx formation is higher and
dependent on the inlet pressure and combustor pressure drop.
However, for mineral diesel, good premixing was achieved at all
the pressures investigated, and little dependence on the inlet pres-
sure and combustor pressure drop was observed.
At lower ’¼éame temperature, biodiesel had signi’¼ücantly higher
level of CO than diesel, particularly at a lower inlet pressure of 9
bar. For both fuels, the combustor pressure drop had apparent
in’¼éuence on CO at lower ’¼éame temperature with CO level de-
creasing with the combustor pressure drop decrease, and this in-
’¼éuence diminished as the ’¼éame temperature was increased.
Both fuels had a comparable level of UHC emission at higher
inlet pressure, and biodiesel had slightly higher UHC emissions at
lower inlet pressure.
For combustion dynamics, both fuels had comparable frequen-
cies, but biodiesel had lower rms dynamic pressures at lower
’¼éame temperatures, and higher when ’¼éame temperatures exceed
the full load value.
Fuel droplet sizes were calculated, and biodiesel had a bigger
droplet size, particularly at lower pressure, lower ’¼éame tempera-
ture, and lower combustor pressure drop. The dominant contribu-
tion of big droplet size for biodiesel came from its much higher
viscosity.
Acknowledgment
The tests reported here were partly funded by the European
commission as part of the Alternative Fuels for Industrial Gas
Turbines AFTUR project under Grant No. ENK5-CT-2002-
00662.
References
1 Campbell, A., Goldmeer, J., Healy, T., Washam, R., Moli├©re, M., and Citeno,
J., 2008, ŌĆ£Heavy Duty Gas Turbines Fuel Flexibility,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No.
GT2008-51368.
2 Moli├©re, M., Panarotto, E., Aboujaib, M., Bisseaud, J. M., Campbell, A., Cit-
eno, J., Mire, P. A., and Ducrest, L., 2007, ŌĆ£Gas Turbines in Alternative Fuel
Fig. 15
SMD droplet diameter for biodiesel ŌĆ×solid lineŌĆ” and die-
sel ŌĆ×dashed lineŌĆ” at different air inlet pressures and combustor
pressure drops
011501-8 / Vol. 132, JANUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

Applications: Biodiesel Field Test,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. GT2007-27212.
3 Tate, R. E., Watts, K. C., Allen, C. A. W., and Wilkie, K. I., 2006, ŌĆ£The
Densities of Three Biodiesel Fuels at Temperature up to 300┬░C,ŌĆØ Fuel, 85, pp.
1004ŌĆō1009.
4 Tate, R. E., Watts, K. C., Allen, C. A. W., and Wilkie, K. I., 2006, ŌĆ£The
Viscosities of Three Biodiesel Fuels at Temperature up to 300┬░C,ŌĆØ Fuel, 85,
pp. 1010ŌĆō1015.
5 Lapuerta, M., Herreros, J. M., Lyons, L. L., Garc├Ła-Contreras, R., and Yolanda
Brice├▒o, Y., 2008, ŌĆ£Effect of the Alcohol Type Used in the Production of
Waste Cooking Oil Biodiesel on Diesel Performance and Emissions,ŌĆØ Fuel,
87, pp. 3161ŌĆō3169.
6 Lupandin, V., Thamburaj, R., and Nikolayev, A., 2005, ŌĆ£Test Results of the
OGT2500 Gas Turbine Engine Running on Alternative Fuels: Biooil, Ethanol,
Biodiesel and Crude Oil,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. GT2005-68488.
7 Bolszo, C., McDonell, V., and Samuelsen, S., 2007, ŌĆ£Impact of Biodiesel on
Fuel Preparation and Emissions for a Liquid Fired Gas Turbine Engine,ŌĆØ
ASME Paper No. GT2007-27652.
8 Chiang, H. W. D., Chiang, I. C., and Li, H. L., 2007, ŌĆ£Performance Testing of
Mircoturbine Generator System Fueled by Biodiesel,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No.
GT2007-28075.
9 Panchasara, H, Simmons, B. M., Agrawal, A. K., Spear, S. K., and Daly, D. T.,
2008, ŌĆ£Combustion Performance of Biodiesel and Diesel-Vegetable Oil Blends
in a Simulated Gas Turbine Burner,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. GT2008-51496.
10 Sequera, D., Agrawal, A. K., Spear, S. K., and Daly, D. T., 2007, ŌĆ£Combustion
Performance of Liquid Bio-Fuels in a Swirl-Stabilized Burner,ŌĆØ ASME Paper
No. GT2007-28326.
11 Wilson, C., Blakey, S., Darbyshire, O., Woolley, R., Cornwell, S., Sidaway, T.,
and Weiss, S., 2007, Preparing the Way for Gas Turbines to Run on Alternative
Fuel, Developments in Industrial Burner Technology to Meet the Challenges of
the Ef’¼ücient Combustion of New and Dif’¼ücult Fuels, British Flame, Birming-
ham, UK.
12 Odgers, J., and Krestschmer, D., 1986, Gas Turbine Fuels and Their In’¼éuence
on Combustion, Energy and Engineering Science Series, A. K. Gupta and D.
G. Lilley, eds., Abacus, Kent, England.
13 Wilbraham, N., 2005, ŌĆ£G30 DLE Pilot Liquid Fuel System-Fleet-Wide Devel-
opment Status,ŌĆØ Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery Ltd. Internal Report No.
TDR 05/223.
14 Martin, D. A., 1999, ŌĆ£Production and Development DLE RM Liquid Primary
Air Assist Lance Tests on the LP Rig,ŌĆØ Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery
Ltd. Internal Report No. TDR 99/012.
15 Lefebvre, A. H., 1999, Gas Turbine Combustion, 2nd ed., New York.
16 Syed, J. K., and Buchanan, E., 2005, ŌĆ£The Nature of NOx Formation Within an
Industrial Gas Turbine Dry Low Emission Combustor,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No.
GT2005-68070.
17 Eberius, H., Just, T., Kelm, S., Warnatz, J., and Nowak, U., 1987, ŌĆ£Konversion
von brennstoffgebundenem Stickstoff am Beispiel von dotierten Propan-Luft-
Flammen,ŌĆØ VDI-Ber., 645, pp. 626ŌĆō645.
18 Warnatz, J., Maas, U., and Dibble, R. W., 2006, Combustion: Physical and
Chemical Fundamentals, Modeling and Simulation, Experiments, Pollutant
Formation, 4th ed., Springer, New York.
19 Nicol, D., Malte, P. C., Lai, J., Marinov, N. N., and Pratt, D. T., 1992, ŌĆ£NOx
Sensitivities for Gas Turbine Engines Operated on Lean-Premixed Combustion
and Convertional Diffusion Flames,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. 92-GT-115.
20 Wedlock, M., Wood, J. P., Miller, M. N., Sims, G. J., Liu, K., Syed, K.,
Bowen, P., Crayford, A., and Sevcenco, Y., 2008, ŌĆ£Detailed Internal Measure-
ments of a Siemens Combustor Operating at Gas Turbine Relevant Condi-
tions,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. GT2008-50790.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 011501-9
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
