
--- Page 1 ---

Review of particle deposition on aeroengine turbine blades and 
its mitigation
Guangfu Bin a, Pingping Yang a,*, Jian Li b, Chao Li a, Weihao Zhang c, Haiyan Miao d,  
Fengshou Gu a,d
a Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Health Maintenance for Mechanical Equipment, Hunan University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan 411201, China
b AECC HAPRI Key Laboratory of Aero-engine Vibration Technology, Zhuzhou 412000, China
c School of Energy and Power Engineering, National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Aero-Engine Aero-thermodynamics, Beihang University, Beijing 
100191, China
d Centre for Efficiency and Performance Engineering, University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield HD13DH, UK
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Aeroengine
Turbine performance
Deposition patterns
Protection method
A B S T R A C T
When aeroengines operate in harsh environments — such as deserts, dust storms, and marine regions— solid 
particles from the external environment are carried by the airflow into the turbine, where they are heated and 
deposit on the turbine blades. Additionally, solid particles produced during fuel combustion are also ingested 
into the turbine and accumulate on the blade surfaces. As these deposits build up over time on the blade surfaces, 
the turbine’s performance progressively deteriorates, consequently compromising the engine’s operational 
safety. In this review paper, we first examine the advantages and disadvantages of several typical deposition 
analysis models, including the critical velocity deposition model, critical viscosity deposition model, viscoelastic- 
plastic deposition model, and composite deposition model. Next, the effects of particle properties, inlet airflow 
conditions, blade characteristics, and cooling operation conditions on deposition patterns are summarized. 
Subsequently, the advantages and limitations of low-temperature, high-temperature, and actual deposition ex­
periments are discussed, followed by analyzing the effects of particle deposition on turbine aerodynamic per­
formance and cooling efficiency. Finally, the latest advancements in protective technologies, such as coatings and 
blade optimization, are explored. Based on the comprehensive review of the latest research progress, knowledge 
gaps are identified and potential future research directions are proposed. These findings provide practical ref­
erences for the development of protection technologies and condition monitoring of turbine blades in 
aeroengines.
1. Introduction
Aeroengines, characterized by their compact design, high efficiency, 
and low emissions, are extensively utilized in various aircraft types, 
including commercial airliners, helicopters, and transport aircraft 
(Yeranee et al., 2024; Zhang and Liu, 2023). The turbine, as a critical 
component of the aeroengine, must operate for extended periods of time 
under extreme conditions, high temperatures, high rotational speeds, 
elevated pressure, and heavy loads. The energy efficiency of the turbine 
is essential for the overall performance and reliability of the aeroengine 
(Yang et al., 2025). However, when operating in harsh environments 
such as deserts (sand particles), volcanic areas (volcanic ash), 
sandstorms (dust), and marine areas (salt particles), aeroengines inevi­
tably ingest solid particles. These particles are commonly referred to as 
calcium-magnesium-alumino-silicate (CMAS), which enters the turbine 
through the compressor and combustion chamber. Internally, carbon 
particles are generated during the fuel combustion process, which also 
infiltrate the turbine with the airflow (Yang et al., 2022, 2023a,b). 
CMAS primarily consists of CaO, MgO, Al2O3, and SiO2, exhibiting high 
corrosivity and permeability —especially after being heated in the 
compressor and combustor. Once deposited onto the surface of the 
blade, CMAS transforms into a rigid, dense, glassy solid with excep­
tionally strong adhesion, making it extremely difficult to remove. CMAS 
deposition can be categorized into two types: the first occurs inside the 
* Corresponding author at: Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Health Maintenance for Mechanical Equipment, Hunan University of Science and Technology, 
Xiangtan 411201, China.
E-mail address: yangpingping1003@163.com (P. Yang). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhff
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2025.110023
Received 5 May 2025; Received in revised form 31 July 2025; Accepted 18 August 2025  
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
Available online 22 August 2025 
0142-727X/© 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 


--- Page 2 ---

Fig. 1. CMAS deposition on (a) Stator blade; (b) Blade surface; (c) Cooling channel (Giehl et al., 2017).
Fig. 2. The phenomenon produced by the impact of particles on the blades: erosion, deposition, corrosion, and detachment.
Fig. 3. Flow chart of this review.
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
2 


--- Page 3 ---

complex cooling channels of turbine blades, leading to blockages that 
reduce cooling efficiency; the second occurs on the external surfaces of 
turbine blades, altering their geometric shapes and consequently 
decreasing turbine efficiency and shortening component lifespan (Xie 
et al., 2024; Giehl et al., 2017), as illustrated in Fig. 1. As the deposition 
accumulates, the turbine blades may experience corrosion or fracture, 
ultimately leading to aeroengine shutdown (Suman et al., 2019). As a 
result, CMAS deposition has a significant impact on turbine efficiency 
and poses a serious threat to aircraft operational safety.
Statistical evidence indicates that since 1973, volcanic ash has been 
responsible for over 100 aeroengine failures, including nine critical 
flameout incidents (Liu et al., 2022). Notably, British Airways Flight 
BA009 and Royal Dutch Airlines Flight KLM867 each experienced total 
power loss in all four engines due to encountering with volcanic ash in 
June 1982 and December 1989, respectively. In April 2010, the eruption 
of the Eyjafjallaj¨okull volcano in Iceland released substantial amounts of 
ash, leading to widespread flight cancellations across Europe. This 
disruption had severe economic repercussions: within six days of the 
eruption, 108,000 flights were canceled, 10 million passengers were 
stranded, and airlines reported an estimated revenue loss of $1.7 billion 
(Liu et al., 2022; Brooker, 2010). The United States Federal Aviation 
Administration mandates that the concentration of particulate matter 
for safe flight must remain below 2 mg/m3. However, even at this “safe” 
concentration, a fully loaded aeroengine can still ingest up to 3.6 kg of 
particulates per hour due to the prevalence of submicroscopic particles 
in the atmosphere (Taltavull et al., 2016). With ongoing technological 
advancements, aeroengine turbine inlet temperatures are steadily rising, 
and projections suggest that these temperatures will exceed 1,900 K, 
further increasing the likelihood of particle deposition on turbine blades 
(Hu et al., 2025).
The interaction between particles and turbine blades is highly 
complex, involving four primary phenomena: erosion, deposition, 
corrosion, and detachment, as shown in Fig. 2. The occurrence of these 
phenomena is closely influenced by factors such as particle size, veloc­
ity, impact angle, and temperature. When the temperature, velocity, and 
other conditions satisfy the deposition criteria, particles adhere to the 
blade surface. As deposition accumulates, the deposited material can 
corrode the blade surface, reducing the blade’s lifespan. However, due 
to the flow field and subsequent particle impacts, some deposited par­
ticles may detach and be removed from the blade surface. If deposition 
conditions are not met, particles tend to rebound off the blade, resulting 
in erosion (Wang et al., 2018; Erraghroughi et al., 2024). In the field of 
particle deposition, a variety of deposition models have been proposed, 
highlighting the effects of temperature, particle size, and blowing ratio 
on turbine blade performance (Han et al., 2024; Kasper et al., 2019). 
Most current studies on particle erosion concentrate on the impact of 
particles on compressor blades, with relatively fewer investigations 
addressing erosion in turbine blades (Yang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 
2024). Existing research on particle corrosion mainly focuses on the 
damage caused by deposited particles to blade surface materials and the 
development of anti-corrosion materials (Singh et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 
2024). Notably, deposition, erosion, corrosion, and detachment signifi­
cantly affect the aerodynamic performance, cooling efficiency, and 
service life of the turbine, posing a direct threat to the safe operation of 
the aeroengine (Fazeli et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024).
Currently, there is a lack of comprehensive review articles that sys­
tematically summaries research progress in key areas such as particle 
deposition patterns, deposition experiments, the impact of particles on 
turbine performance, and related protection technologies. This paper 
provides a comprehensive review of particle deposition patterns on 
turbine blades, deposition experiments, the impact of deposition on 
turbine performance, and protective technologies. Fig. 3 illustrates the 
flowchart for this review. First, widely used deposition models are 
analyzed, and their applicability is discussed. The influence of particle 
properties, inlet airflow conditions, blade characteristics, and cooling 
operation conditions on deposition patterns is summarized. Addition­
ally, three commonly used experimental setups are compared, with a 
detailed overview of their respective advantages and disadvantages. 
Next, the effects of particle deposition on turbine aerodynamics and 
cooling performance are examined. Furthermore, advancements in 
research on anti-corrosion technologies for turbine blades are reviewed. 
Finally, based on an analysis of existing studies, potential directions for 
future research are proposed.
2. Deposition patterns of turbine blades
To address the issue of particle deposition, a series of deposition 
models have been developed. Developing deposition models is essential 
for accurately predicting and understanding how particles interact with 
turbine components under various operating conditions. These models 
can simulate particle behavior and predict the extent and patterns of 
particle buildup, helping to design effective mitigation strategies or 
optimize cooling systems for example. Furthermore, deposition models 
provide valuable insights that guide the development of advanced 
coatings and protective technologies. As turbine operating environ­
ments become increasingly harsh with higher temperatures and pres­
sures, the need for precise and comprehensive deposition models 
becomes even more critical to ensure the reliable performance of aero­
engines. This section will focus on discussing existing deposition models, 
followed by deposition patterns.
2.1. Deposition model
After entering the turbine, particles may or may not deposit on the 
blade surface. Extensive experiments have been conducted to under­
stand the particle deposition phenomenon (see Section 3). Based on 
these experiments, researchers have suggested several models to explain 
how particles stick to surfaces, such as the critical viscosity deposition 
model, the critical velocity deposition model, and the composite depo­
sition model (Suman et al., 2019; N’Dala et al., 1984; El-Batsh and 
Haselbacher, 2002; Li et al., 2024; Zhang, 2021; Fu et al., 2004; Adams 
et al., 2004).
(1) Critical viscosity deposition model.
Critical viscosity refers to the phenomenon in which particle vis­
cosity decreases rapidly when the temperature surpasses a specific 
critical threshold. When the particle temperature exceeds its softening 
Fig. 4. Geometrical evolution of particles on temperature.
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
3 


--- Page 4 ---

temperature, the likelihood of adhesion to the surface approaches 1. 
Conversely, particles with temperatures significantly lower than the 
critical sticking temperature will exhibit a sticking probability of 0, as 
illustrated in Fig. 4. For particles with temperatures that fall within the 
intermediate range, the probability function can be determined using 
(Zhang, 2021): 
Ps(Tp) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
μcr
μTp
μcr < μTp
1
μcr⩾μTp
(1) 
where Tp is the particle temperature, µcr the critical viscosity and µTp, 
the viscosity of the particle at the current temperature. N’Dala et al. 
(N’Dala et al., 1984) have demonstrated that the temperature depen­
dence of the viscosity of silicate and aluminosilicate melts can be 
described by: 
ln(μTp
Tp
) = A + B103
Tp
(2) 
where A and B are constants which depend on the chemical 
composition.
The model is applicable to particles at extremely low or high tem­
peratures. However, the model has limitations because it doesn’t take 
into account other important factors like how fast the particles hit, their 
mass, and the angle of impact, which can greatly affect the results in 
certain situations.
(2) Critical velocity deposition model.
Critical velocity refers to the threshold at which particles rebound 
upon colliding with a surface, provided their impact velocity exceeds a 
specific critical value. This means, when a particle’s impact velocity is 
greater than the critical velocity, it will not deposit. Conversely, if the 
impact velocity is less than the critical velocity, the particle will adhere 
to the surface, as illustrated in Fig. 5. The probability of particles vis­
cosity to the wall surface is (El-Batsh and Haselbacher, 2002; Zhang, 
2021): 
Ps(Vn) =
{ 0
Vn > Vcr
1
Vn⩽Vcr
(3) 
where Vcr is the critical velocity, which is related to the particle diameter 
Dp and the elastic modulus E: 
Vcr =
(2E
Dp
)10/7
(4) 
E = 0.51
(
5π2(K1 + K2)
4ρ3/2
p
)2/5
(5) 
K1 = 1 −v2
s
πEs
(6) 
K2 =
1 −v2
p
πEp
(7) 
where Es is the wall elastic modulus, Ep the particulate elastic modulus, 
vs the wall Poisson’s ratios, and vp the particulate Poisson’s ratios.
This model is primarily applicable to the study of particle deposition 
behaviors at low velocities. However, it does not account for the viscous 
effects on deposition. When the impact velocity of a particle falls below 
the critical threshold, its temperature may also be below the softening 
temperature. In such cases, the particles may be unable to form a deposit 
Fig. 5. Geometrical evolution of particles on velocity.
Fig. 6. Green: Integration elastoviscoplasticity, Blue: Energy elastoviscoplasticity, Red: Critical velocity, Dashed line: Increased temperature (Lawrence et al., 1112). 
(For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
4 


--- Page 5 ---

on the target wall.
(3) Elastoviscoplasticity model.
To account for elastic, viscous, and plastic effects during particle 
impact and rebound processes, various viscoelastic-plastic models have 
been proposed. Fu et al. (Fu et al., 2004) created a model that examines 
how elastic energy, plastic energy, and adhesive work are connected 
when particles hit a surface. When the recovery coefficient e ≥0: 
e =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
We −Wa
Wp
√
(8) 
where Wp is the energy associated with the load, Wa the associated work, 
and We the elastic strain energy. 
Wp = σfεp −0.5
(
σ2
f
E + σ2
0
E
)
(9) 
Wa = GcA
(10) 
We = mE
[εp(V)
]2
2ρ
(11) 
where σf is the dynamic flow stress, εp the maximum strain, σ0 the yield 
stress, E the Young’s modulus, A the contact area, Gc the interfacial 
fracture energy, m the mass, V the impact velocity, and ρ the particle 
density.
At relatively large strains (εp≫εf) and small values of the adhesion 
this expression reduces to: 
e =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
σ2
0
Eσf(V)εp(V)
√
(12) 
Adams et al. (Adams et al., 2004) suggested a combined elasto­
viscoplasticity model that relates kinetic energy to the total pressure 
across the distance moved. The final expression for the coefficient of 
restitution is presented as follows: 
e =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
18πσ2
Y
5Êσf
√
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
9̂σf
8ρV2
8
√
(13) 
where ̂σf is the flow stress, σY the uniaxial yield stress, E Young’s 
modulus, V the impact velocity, and ρ the particle density.
Michael et al. (Lawrence et al., 1112) compared the performance of 
the critical velocity model, the energy elastoviscoplasticity model, and 
the integrated elastoviscoplasticity model. They found that both the 
energy elastoviscoplasticity model and the integrated elastoviscoplas­
ticity model exhibit similar trends: particles rebound at low velocities 
and adhere at high velocities, with significant differences in transition 
velocity and the slope of the restitution coefficient between the two 
models. The trends predicted by the elastoviscoplasticity models 
contrast with those of the critical velocity model, which is based on the 
assumption that particles always yield in the elastoviscoplasticity 
models, while the critical velocity model assumes that particles never 
yield. Since the predictions of the critical velocity model do not depend 
on the particle impact velocity, it was excluded from the comparison, as 
illustrated in Fig. 6.
(4) Composite deposition model.
When the impact velocity of particles exceeds the critical velocity, 
the particles are generally considered to rebound. However, if the par­
ticle viscosity is lower than the critical viscosity, rebound may not 
necessarily occur, even if the incident velocity condition is satisfied. 
Therefore, the influence of viscosity must be taken into account when 
predicting particle rebound behaviour. The adhesion probability is (Li 
et al., 2024): 
Ps = μcrVcr
μTpVn
(13) 
where Vn is the particle impact velocity, Vcr is the critical velocity, µcr is 
the critical viscosity, µTp is the viscosity of the particle at the current 
temperature. The probability of adhesion of particles after collision with 
the wall is shown in Table 1 (Li et al., 2024).
The shear force may detach particles deposited on the wall surface. 
The balance between the adhesion and detachment forces determines 
the final deposition amount. According to the critical momentum the­
ory, a comparison of the shear velocity and critical shear velocity at the 
wall can be used to determine whether article detachment occurs, as 
illustrated in Fig. 7. The critical shear velocity and shear velocity are 
expressed as (Li et al., 2024): 
u2
τc = CuWA
ρD p
(3πWA
2DpKc
)1/3
(14) 
uτ =
̅̅̅̅̅
τw
ρ
√
(15) 
where WA is the adhesion constant. The composite Young’s modulus Kc 
is expressed as: 
Kc = 4
3
(
1 −V2
s
Es
+
1 −V2
p
Ep
)−1
(16) 
where Es is the wall elastic modulus, Ep the particulate elastic modulus, 
vs the wall Poisson’s ratios, and vp the particulate Poisson’s ratios.
The composite deposition model takes into account not only tem­
perature but also impact velocity. Fig. 8 presents the prediction results 
from both the composite deposition model and the critical velocity 
model. The findings indicate that the composite deposition model has a 
better match with the experimental data compared to the critical ve­
locity model (Li et al., 2024).
To minimize errors associated with the deposition model, efforts 
have been made to improve these models’ accuracy. For instance, Singh 
et al. (Singh and Tafti, 2015) revised the critical viscosity deposition 
model to account for energy loss and temperature variations during 
particle impact. Batsh et al. (El-Batsh, 2001) modified the critical 
Table 1 
Categories of adhesion probability (Li et al., 2024).
No.
Tp
Vn
Ps
1
Tp ≥Tcr
Vn < Vcr
1
2
Tp ≥Tcr
Vn ≥Vcr
Vcr/Vn
3
Tp < Tcr
Vn < Vcr
µcr/µTp
4
Tp < Tcr
Vn ≥Vcr
µcrVcr/µTpVn
Fig. 7. The movement behavior of particles at critical viscosity.
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
5 


--- Page 6 ---

velocity deposition model, suggesting that the Poisson’s ratio between 
the particles and the wall remains constant despite temperature fluctu­
ations. The EI-Batsh deposition model categorises the particle deposition 
process into two stages: the first involves particle adhesion to the wall, 
while the second involves particle detachment. The adhesion of particles 
is determined by the critical velocity model, whereas detachment is 
assessed using the critical shear velocity model (Sun et al., 2024). To 
date, most studies continue to rely on the critical viscosity model, the 
critical velocity model, and the composite deposition model. However, 
as turbine operating conditions become increasingly complex, these 
existing models fall short in accurately simulating particle deposition 
patterns, as shown in Table 2. Therefore, further experimental studies on 
particle deposition are necessary to refine the existing models and to 
develop new models that can better reflect the complexities of real- 
world conditions.
2.2. Deposition patterns
Recently, researchers have conducted extensive studies on particle 
deposition patterns on turbine blade surfaces and within their cooling 
channels (Wu et al., 2023; OuYang et al., 2024). The deposition process 
is primarily governed by a range of factors, including particle properties, 
airflow velocity, airflow temperature, blade temperature, blade shape, 
and cooling holes. Accordingly, this section will provide a detailed 
discussion of the following aspects: particle properties, inlet airflow 
conditions, blade characteristics, and cooling operation conditions.
(1) Particle properties.
Under varying operating conditions, particles entering the turbine 
typically exhibit different sizes and types, resulting in significant dif­
ferences in their deposition patterns on the blades (Stokes and Presby, 
2024; Xin et al., 2025). Casari et al. (Casari et al., 2018) studied particle 
motion behaviour and discovered that particles can adhere to the blade 
surface and rebound, leading to erosion. Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2024) 
observed that due to inertial effects, smaller particles primarily deposit 
on the suction surface, while larger particles tend to accumulate on the 
pressure surface. This finding is corroborated by Liu et al. (Liu et al., 
2023). Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2024) further noted that as particle size 
increases, the deposition rate also rises, consistent with the results of 
Fig. 8. Critical velocity model and composite deposition model (Li et al., 2024).
Table 2 
Comparison of deposition models.
Model
Advantages and disadvantages
Scope of 
application
Critical viscosity
The model is suitable for studying the 
mechanism of particle deposition at 
high temperatures. However, it does 
not adequately address the behaviour 
of particles under low-temperature or 
high-velocity impacts.
High temperature
Critical velocity
The model is suitable for analysing 
the behaviour of particles during 
low-velocity impacts. However, it has 
limited ability to explain the 
behaviour of particles under high- 
velocity conditions.
Low-velocity
Elastoviscoplasticity
The model simultaneously accounts 
for the elastic, viscous, and plastic 
deformation characteristics of 
particles. However, it entails high 
computational complexity and is 
therefore more suitable for complex 
scenarios that require detailed 
analysis.
High temperature 
and high velocity
Composite
This model is applicable for analysing 
particle behaviour under varying 
temperatures and velocities. 
However, it involves complex 
computations and requires extensive 
input parameters.
Various working 
conditions
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
6 


--- Page 7 ---

Pearson et al. (Pearson and Brooker, 2020) and Bonilla et al. (Bonilla 
et al., 2012). However, Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2024) and Bojdo et al. 
(Bojdo and Filippone, 2019) presented an alternative perspective, sug­
gesting the existence of a critical particle size: when the particle size is 
smaller than this critical value, the deposition rate increases with par­
ticle size, whereas when the particle size exceeds the critical value, the 
deposition rate decreases. Tian et al. (Tian et al., 2021) further pointed 
out that smaller particles primarily affect the blade through deposition, 
while larger particles influence it mainly through impact. Specifically, 
when the particle size exceeds 20 μm, fewer particles deposit on the 
blade surface. Based on this observation, Sun et al. (Sun et al., 2024) 
proposed a critical particle size of 15 μm. However, due to variations in 
boundary conditions across studies, the specific value of the critical 
particle size differs, and no definitive critical particle size has yet been 
established.
In fact, the rate and location of particle deposition are closely related 
to their capture and impact efficiencies. Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2024) 
demonstrated that as particle size increases, capture efficiency initially 
rises before declining, mirroring the trend observed in particle deposi­
tion rates. Additionally, they found that impact efficiency increases with 
particle size, as larger particles possess greater inertia, making them 
more likely to collide with the blade surface. Tian et al. (Tian et al., 
2021) also noted that smaller particles rarely impact the blade surface. 
However, as particle size increases, impact efficiency rises rapidly. For 
particles with a size of 50 µm, the total impact efficiency exceeds 400 %, 
indicating that particles may rebound multiple times on the blade sur­
face. Consequently, changes in particle size can lead to corresponding 
changes in particle movement mechanisms and blade deposition pro­
cesses. Liu et al. (OuYang et al., 2024) found that with increased particle 
size, the deposition area on the guide blade gradually extends across the 
entire pressure surface, and the deposition area on the rotor blade shifts 
from the pressure surface toward the blade tip. In addition, particle 
density is another important factor influencing deposition patterns. Sun 
et al. (Sun et al., 2024) suggested that particle density has a minimal 
effect on deposition, particularly when the density reaches 1,700 kg/m3, 
at which point its influence on the deposition rate becomes almost 
negligible. However, Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2024) argued that as 
particle density increases, impact efficiency rises, subsequently affecting 
the deposition rate. Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2023) found that SiO2 particles 
cause the most deposition, followed by CMAS and Al2O3 particles, as 
illustrated in Fig. 9. These findings clearly demonstrate that variations in 
particle properties have a substantial impact on deposition rates.
In summary, particles predominantly deposit on the leading edge 
and pressure surface of turbine blades, with significantly less deposition 
occurring on the suction surface. A significant temperature gradient 
exists within the disk region, which hinders particle deposition. 
Furthermore, centrifugal forces tend to drive particles toward the blade 
tip region, further complicating particle deposition within the disk re­
gion. Currently, the underlying mechanisms responsible for this phe­
nomenon remain insufficiently analyzed. Future studies should 
investigate in greater detail the factors contributing to the limited par­
ticle deposition in the disk region. As the deposition time increases, the 
blade surfaces gradually develop discontinuous peaks and valleys. The 
differences in capture and impact efficiency among particles of varying 
sizes directly influence their deposition rates. A critical particle size 
exists in the deposition process. When the particle size is smaller than 
this critical value, the deposition rate increases with size. Conversely, 
when the particle size exceeds this critical value, the deposition rate 
decreases as size increases. Additionally, variations in particle types also 
result in differences in deposition mass.
(2) Inlet airflow conditions-velocity & temperature.
During aeroengine operation, the parameters of the inlet airflow 
entering the turbine, such as temperature and pressure, are not constant 
but vary over time (Wang et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024). Wang et al. 
(Wang et al., 2021) investigated the effects on turbine blades when the 
angle of the airflow inlet changed from 123◦to 143◦. They discovered 
that the impact area on the blade pressure surface increased. Zhang et al. 
(Zhang et al., 2020) demonstrated that capture efficiency rises with the 
angle of attack, although the rate of increase gradually diminishes. On 
the pressure surface of the blade, particle deposition is primarily 
distributed downstream of the film cooling holes near the trailing edge 
at small angles of attack. In contrast, at larger angles of attack, 
Fig. 9. Distribution of deposition of different types of particles on the blade (a) SiO2 particles; (b) Al2O3 particles and (c) CMAS particles (modified version (Liu 
et al., 2023).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
7 


--- Page 8 ---

deposition is concentrated around the film cooling holes near the lead­
ing edge, leading to partial blockage of these holes. These findings 
indicate that particle deposition patterns change with variations in the 
inlet airflow angle. Additionally, Sacco et al. (Sacco et al., 2018) sug­
gested that the pressure of the airflow entering the turbine is typically 
unstable. In their deposition experiments on blade cooling channels 
under varying pressures, they observed that deposition decreased non- 
linearly with increasing pressure. They also noted that temperature is 
another critical factor that influences particle deposition. As the airflow 
temperature rises, the total amount of deposition increases. Laycock 
et al. (Laycock and Fletcher, 2016) conducted experimental studies on 
particle deposition patterns at 1,673.15 K, finding that the temperature 
of the airflow and particles determines particle softening and viscosity. 
When the material surface temperature remains constant, the particle 
deposition rate gradually increases as the inlet temperature rises. Singh 
et al. (Singh and Tafti, 2015) and Hao et al. (Hao et al., 2021) also 
concluded that particle deposition increases with higher inlet 
temperatures.
However, Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2020) suggested the existence of 
an airflow temperature threshold, beyond which capture efficiency in­
creases significantly. Fig. 10 illustrates the deposition patterns on the 
pressure surface of the blade under different airflow temperatures. 
Fig. 10. Pressure surface deposition patterns at different airflow temperatures (modified version (Zhang et al., 2020).
Fig. 11. The concentration of particles on the cut planes within the passage (Hao et al., 2022).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
8 


--- Page 9 ---

Smith et al. (Smith et al., 2010) reported that deposition increases 
sharply with temperature, identifying a critical range between 1,173.15 
K and 1,273.15 K, while Jensen et al. (Jensen et al., 2005) proposed that 
the temperature threshold for accelerated deposition lies between 
1,173.15 K and 1,373.15 K. In contrast, Crosby et al. (Crosby et al., 
2008) identified a different temperature threshold in their research. 
They observed that when the gas temperature is below 1150 K, particle 
deposition efficiency is nearly zero. However, when the gas temperature 
exceeds 1,150 K, deposition efficiency increases rapidly. When the gas 
temperature reaches approximately 1,460 K, the deposition efficiency 
attains a value of 1.78, which is about 14 times greater than that at 
1,240 K. Variations in particle types and particle sizes may be the cause 
of these discrepancies in deposition temperature thresholds.
In summary, particle deposition’s behaviour is influenced by varia­
tions in the airflow inlet angle. There is a threshold temperature for the 
airflow, beyond which the deposition rates increase significantly. 
Furthermore, as the blowing ratio increases, particle deposition on the 
blade surface generally decreases.
(3) Blade characteristics.
When the aeroengine runs under different working conditions, the 
temperature of the turbine blades varies. Yang et al. (Yang et al., 2021) 
and Casaday et al. (Casaday et al., 2014) indicate that high wall tem­
peratures lead to an increase of deposition mass. However, some re­
searchers believe that a minimum adhesion temperature exists. Laycock 
et al. (Laycock and Fletcher, 2016) discovered that as the initial surface 
temperature of the material increased from 1;167  K to 1,211 K and 
1,407 K, the particle deposition rate rose from 0.8 % to 10.8 % and 7.5 
%, respectively. Wylie et al. (Wylie et al., 2017) observed significant 
volcanic ash deposition at a metal temperature of 1;193  K and suggested 
that the minimum adhesion temperature is 1,190 K. Currently, there is a 
lack of consensus regarding the precise value of the critical wall tem­
perature, which may stem from variations in experimental conditions, 
such as the types of metallic materials used and differences in particle 
properties.
Additionally, blade tip clearance significantly influences the depo­
sition pattern. Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2023) found that tip separation 
vortices and leakage vortices significantly influence tip deposition. Hao 
et al. (Hao et al., 2022) showed that a larger tip clearance allows more 
leakage flow, which means more particles can get into the tip gap and 
increase deposition at the tip. However, as tip depositions rise, deposits 
on the blade surface decrease. Xu et al. (Xu et al., 2019) discovered that 
while the particle deposition region at the tip does not change signifi­
cantly with increasing roughness, particle deposition, particularly in the 
mid-tip area, increases with higher roughness. Particle deposition at the 
tip can lead to an uneven distribution of the clearance between the tip 
and the casing, which may deteriorate aerodynamic performance and 
potentially induce rotor vibrations. Furthermore, studies have found 
that rotational speed also influences the deposition mechanism. As the 
rotational speed increases, particle deposition on the blade surface also 
increases, becoming more concentrated on the rotating blades. From 
Fig. 11, it can be seen that the particles are concentrated on the mid- 
chord of the pressure surface of the blade tip and little particles enter 
the cavity at a low rotating speed. With the rise of the rotating speed, a 
larger intensity of the vortex near the pressure surface rim, induced by a 
greater pressure difference, sends more particles into the tip clearance, 
and a larger intensity of the suction surface vortex, resulting from a 
higher rotating speed, enhance the flow disturbance, making more 
particles impact on the squealer tip (Hao et al., 2022).
To ensure the safe and efficient operation of aeroengines, turbine 
blades are typically designed with film cooling holes to mitigate tem­
perature increases (Liu et al., 2024; Du et al., 2025). Consequently, re­
searchers have conducted extensive studies on various types of cooling 
holes. Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2023) investigated the impact of the pin fins 
aspect ratio on deposition rates and found that increasing the aspect 
ratio contributed to a reduction in deposition rates. Zhang et al. (Zhang 
et al., 2023) used numerical simulations to find that film cooling 
decreased deposition in some areas but increased deposition near film 
coverage zones because of vortex entrainment. However, 777-shaped 
holes reduced deposition by 10–15 % compared to cylindrical holes. 
This finding indicates that non-cylindrical holes can modify particle 
trajectories, thereby effectively decreasing particle deposition. Wang 
et al. (Wang et al., 2016) studied how particles settled in both cylindrical 
and non-cylindrical film cooling holes and found that non-cylindrical 
holes were less effective at capturing particles. Davidson et al. (Todd 
Davidson et al., 2014) compared four different film cooling structures: 
cylindrical, craters, a trench, and a modified trench. They found that 
craters and trenches located downstream of the film cooling structures 
were the best at accumulating deposits from building up. Wang et al. 
(Wang et al., 2021) further analyzed the results of combined and cy­
lindrical holes, revealing that the particle capture efficiency of com­
bined holes was 3.9 % lower than that of cylindrical holes. These 
findings reinforce the notion that modifying the shape of the holes can 
lead to a reduction in particle deposition.
In film cooling environments, variations in hole orientation lead to 
changes in the blowing angle, which subsequently influence the depo­
sition patterns. Zeng et al. (Zeng et al., 2023) reported that the minimum 
deposition occurs when the single cooling film holes are orientated with 
the radial inclination directed towards the leading edge. The amount of 
deposition gradually increases as the inclination angle shifts towards the 
pressure and suction surfaces. And the deposition thickness is inversely 
proportional to the blowing angle (Zhang et al., 2024). In addition to 
hole orientation, hole spacing and arrangement significantly influence 
deposition characteristics. Ai et al. (Ai et al., 2011) experiments 
demonstrated that smaller hole spacing results in a more uniform 
Fig. 12. Deposition thickness on the leading edge surface: (a) and (b) for 
different spray angles; (c) and (d) for different spacing; (e) and (f) for different 
arrangements. (modified version (Yang et al., 2021).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
9 


--- Page 10 ---

deposition distribution with reduced overall deposition. Zeng et al. 
(Zeng et al., 2023) found that the main areas where particles deposited 
were almost the same for different hole designs. However, as the 
opening angle varies from the suction surface to the leading edge, par­
ticle deposition on the blade surface gradually decreases. Yang et al. 
(Yang et al., 2021) performed experiments on particle deposition with 
different hole arrangements and observed that dense, staggered hole 
configurations and steep bi-directional injection effectively minimize 
deposition, as illustrated in Fig. 12. Peng et al. (Peng et al., 2022) 
simulated the deposition patterns of film cooling holes arranged in three 
rows and revealed that cooling air from the first row creates airflow 
disturbances that facilitate particle deposition in the trailing area while 
the cooling air from the second row elevates the airflow, effectively 
preventing deposition in the tail area.
In summary, a critical wall temperature may exist beyond which the 
particle deposition patterns change significantly. Non-cylindrical holes 
are indeed more effective at reducing particle deposition compared to 
cylindrical holes. Furthermore, variables such as hole orientation, hole 
arrangements, rotational speed, and tip clearance significantly impact 
the deposition patterns.
(4) Cooling operation conditions.
During engine operation, airflow with different blowing ratios is 
introduced into the cooling holes of the turbine blades (Li et al., 2024; 
Cheng et al., 2024). In this process, the blowing ratio significantly in­
fluences the particle deposition pattern. Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2020) 
discovered that when the blow ratio is low, larger particles are more 
likely to enter the cooling hole. Conversely, Wang et al. (Wang et al., 
2024) suggested that as the blowing ratio increases, the deposition rate 
of smaller particles rises, while the deposition rate of larger particles 
declines. Zeng et al. (Zeng et al., 2023), Sun et al. (Sun et al., 2024), and 
Ai et al. (Ai et al., 2011) found that as the blowing ratio increases, the 
deposition rate initially decreases before increasing again, as illustrated 
in Fig. 13. Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2016) argued that a higher blowing 
ratio enhances particle–wall impact efficiency for smaller particles while 
decreasing it for larger particles. Nonetheless, an increase in the blowing 
ratio generally suppresses overall particle deposition. Mensch et al. 
(Mensch and Thole, 2015) further demonstrated that increasing the 
blowing ratio can reduce deposition near the exits of the film cooling 
holes. These findings suggest that while a higher blowing ratio can 
mitigate particle deposition, the specific trends in deposition rates vary 
based on factors such as hole geometry and location, and there remains 
no consensus within the academic community on this issue.
It is evident that the particle deposition patterns on the blade surface 
exhibit significant differences under varying conditions. As technology 
advances, turbine blade structure becomes increasingly complex, with 
elevated operating temperatures rising. Developing more accurate 
deposition models and uncovering particle deposition patterns under the 
combined effects of multiple factors remain challenging tasks.
3. Deposition experiments
Experiments are a vital method for investigating the particle depo­
sition process on turbine blades, as they can effectively replicate this 
complex phenomenon (Xu et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2023). Currently, there 
are three commonly employed deposition experimental methods: high- 
temperature deposition experiments, low-temperature deposition ex­
periments, and real-world deposition experiments. Low-temperature 
deposition experiments typically use gas temperatures below the 
Fig. 13. Particle deposition patterns at different blowing ratios (modified version (Ai et al., 2011).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
10 


--- Page 11 ---

turbine inlet temperature. In contrast, high-temperature deposition ex­
periments use gas temperatures that are closer to those at which the 
turbine operates (Liu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2018).
3.1. High-temperature deposition experiment
The Ohio State University in the United States has developed a high- 
temperature deposition experimental setup (TuRER II) (Smith et al., 
2010; Webb et al., 2013; Lundgreen et al., 2016), as illustrated in 
Fig. 14. This device generates high-temperature airflow within a com­
bustion chamber, transporting particles into the cascade channel for 
deposition experiments. The burner is designed to achieve temperatures 
as high as 2,033.15 K and an absolute pressure of 345 kPa. The system 
can conduct cascade deposition experiments under various particle 
sizes, types, and temperature conditions. Additionally, Brigham Young 
University has constructed a high-temperature deposition experimental 
Fig. 14. (a) TuRFR II; (b) Measurement and viewing area; (c) Pre-test image on the left, post-test image on the right (modified version (Lundgreen et al., 2016).
Fig. 15. (a) Illustration of wind tunnel facility and experiment result (modified version (Lawson et al., 2013; Albert and Bogard, 2012); (b) Experimental setup and 
experimental results of low-temperature deposition based on wax particles (modified version (Liu et al., 2024).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
11 


--- Page 12 ---

setup (Jensen et al., 2005). Even though high-temperature deposition 
experiments can accurately mimic how particles settle, they are not used 
very often because the equipment needed is very specific and 
demanding (Liu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2018).
3.2. Low-temperature deposition experiment
Pennsylvania State University has developed a closed-loop, low- 
temperature wind tunnel deposition experimental setup (Lawson et al., 
2012; Lawson et al., 2013), as illustrated in Fig. 15(a). A blower gen­
erates the airflow, which then enters the experimental section via a 
heater and flow regulation system. The particle mass flow rate is 
controlled via a particle injection system. Additionally, the University of 
Texas at Austin has created a similar closed-loop, low-temperature wind 
tunnel deposition setup (Albert and Bogard, 2012). Fig. 15(b) illustrates 
the experimental setup that uses wax as deposition particles. In this 
system, airflow is generated by an industrial compressor, heated by a 
heater, and then passes through a regulation device to ensure stable 
output airflow before entering the test section via a nozzle (Yang et al., 
2025; Liu et al., 2024). It is important to note that there is a significant 
difference between low-temperature experiments and actual high- 
temperature conditions.
In low-temperature deposition experiments, wax is frequently used 
as a substitute for CMAS, primarily due to its lower melting point, which 
effectively simulates the melting and deposition processes of CMAS. This 
approach provides a practical method for conducting deposition ex­
periments under low-temperature conditions. Within the experimental 
framework, dimensionless parameters are introduced to facilitate the 
equivalent transformation of high-temperature experimental conditions 
into low-temperature scenarios. Specifically, to match the characteris­
tics of CMAS, the Stokes number and thermal ratio are often selected as 
similarity parameters, while the Reynolds number and temperature are 
employed as similarity parameters for airflow characteristics.
3.3. Real-world deposition experiment
Real-world experiments can effectively simulate the impact of par­
ticle deposition on turbine blades. However, such experiments typically 
require substantial resources in terms of manpower, time, and finances. 
Consequently, they are often conducted with the support of government 
agencies or aeroengine companies and are rarely reported publicly. Kim 
et al. (Kim et al., 1993) and Dunn (Dunn, 2012) investigated the effects 
of volcanic ash on aeroengines. They discovered that the ash predomi­
nantly accumulated on the pressure surface and leading edge of the 
turbine blades, as illustrated in Fig. 16. It is evident that volcanic ash, the 
primary component of CMAS, is highly corrosive and permeable. These 
characteristics allow volcanic ash to inflict significant damage after it 
adheres to the surface of turbine blades. The results from real-world 
experiments align with those from both low-temperature and high- 
temperature deposition experiments, as well as simulation models. 
This consistency demonstrates that both experimental and simulation 
methods can accurately replicate the particle deposition process.
In conclusion, while real-world experiments can accurately simulate 
the effects of particle deposition on turbine blades, they often necessitate 
significant investments in manpower, time, and financial resources. 
Researchers prefer low-temperature deposition experiments due to their 
simplicity and cost-effectiveness. However, the airflow temperature and 
particle properties employed in these experiments differ markedly from 
actual operating conditions. High-temperature deposition experiments, 
on the other hand, overcome the limitations of low-temperature 
methods and provide a more accurate simulation of the particle depo­
sition mechanisms on turbine blades. Consequently, high-temperature 
deposition experiments represent a crucial avenue for future research.
4. Effect of particle deposition on turbine performance
Particle deposition on turbine blade surfaces can alter their shape 
and surface roughness, thereby affecting aerodynamic performance. 
Additionally, when particles enter the cooling channels, they may cause 
Fig. 16. Front view of deposition on high-pressure turbine blade of YF101 S/N 
GEE470058 (Dunn, 2012).
Fig. 17. Flow field distribution of blade surface under different roughness (Nardini et al., 2024).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
12 


--- Page 13 ---

blockages, which reduce cooling performance (Zhang and Liu, 2023; 
Guo et al., 2025). Therefore, this section will provide a detailed dis­
cussion of the effects on both aerodynamic performance and cooling 
performance.
4.1. Aerodynamic performance
For the purpose of this analysis, existing research often equates 
surface deposition on blades with surface roughness. Different levels of 
roughness indicate the severity of deposition: higher roughness corre­
lates with more severe deposition, while lower roughness suggests 
lighter deposition. Moshizi et al. (Moshizi et al., 2014) observed that as 
surface roughness increases, the onset of turbulent transition shifts 
closer to the leading edge. Jelly et al. (Jelly et al., 2023) discovered that 
the roughness of a blade’s surface greatly affects the change from 
smooth (laminar) flow to chaotic (turbulent) flow on the suction side. 
The resulting changes in wall shear stress, wall heat flux, boundary layer 
thickness, turbulent kinetic energy, and total pressure loss. In contrast, 
the boundary layer on the pressure surface is less influenced by surface 
roughness, even at maximum roughness levels. Delvaux et al. (Delvaux 
et al., 2023) reached a similar conclusion, attributing this phenomenon 
to the favorable pressure gradient on the pressure surface. They also 
noted that on the suction surface, both the width and depth of the wake 
increase. Lorenz et al. (Lorenz et al., 2012; Lorenz et al., 2012) deter­
mined that losses in the boundary layer predominantly occur on the 
suction surface. As the roughness height increases, the laminar- 
turbulent transition on the suction surface shifts upstream toward the 
leading edge, resulting in a boundary layer thickness increase of up to 
190 %. However, under low Reynolds number and free-stream turbu­
lence conditions, surface roughness can sometimes suppress boundary 
layer separation, reducing the boundary layer thickness at the trailing 
edge by up to 30 %. Therefore, as blade surface roughness increases, the 
boundary layer separation point shifts, significantly impacting turbine 
aerodynamic performance.
To learn more about the impact of surface roughness on turbine 
performance, the researchers examined the airflow dynamics within the 
turbine. Nardini et al. (Nardini et al., 2024; Nardini et al., 2024) 
demonstrated that the boundary layer on smooth and low-roughness 
blades predominantly remains in a laminar state. As surface roughness 
increases, the boundary layer transitions to turbulence, with the tran­
sition point gradually shifting towards the leading edge. Specifically, 
blades with higher roughness result in larger wake losses and signifi­
cantly higher turbulent kinetic energy. In contrast, smooth blades 
exhibit minimal wake losses and relatively lower turbulent kinetic en­
ergy, as illustrated in Fig. 17. Kellersmann et al. (Kellersmann et al., 
2018) analyzed the effects of varying roughness on turbine efficiency, 
revealing that higher roughness values lead to a more pronounced 
decline in efficiency. When the equivalent sand roughness reaches 16.3 
µm, efficiency can decrease by as much as 0.68 %. Aligoodarz et al. 
(Aligoodarz and Derakhshan, 2013) found that as roughness height in­
creases, efficiency goes down. When transition roughness treatment was 
applied to both stator and rotor blades, the total isentropic efficiency 
decreased by 2.93 %. With full roughness treatment, it dropped by 5.83 
%. Gilge et al. (Gilge et al., 2017) examined how localized surface 
roughness affects the aerodynamic loss characteristics of turbine blades, 
concluding that localized surface roughness significantly impacts profile 
losses.
During turbine operation, changes in the blade’s angle of attack can 
significantly affect turbine aerodynamic performance. For example, 
several studies have investigated the impact of the angle of attack on 
turbine performance under fixed roughness conditions. Cai et al. (Chen 
et al., 2023) conducted experimental studies to examine the effect of 
various inflow angles on turbine performance. During the incidence 
changing from negative to positive, the high load region moves towards 
the leading edge and the pressure gradient increases leading to a sig­
nificant enhancement of the passage vortex. Habib et al. (Habib et al., 
2025) observed that the pressure coefficient at the trailing edge of the 
blade varies with the angle of attack. Specifically, the pressure coeffi­
cient has minimum values at the trailing edge and its decrease remains a 
function of the blade orientation, the lower the blade orientation angle, 
the more the decrease in the pressure coefficient gradually approaches 
the leading edge on the upper part of the blade (extrados) and 
conversely, the greater the blade orientation, the more the decrease in 
the pressure coefficient is concentrated only at the trailing edge in the 
lower part of the blade (intrados). As noted in (Li et al., 2025), extreme 
angles of attack significantly increase both total and profile losses. 
Extreme positive angles induce pressure surface separation vortices with 
spanwise propagation; this increases the aerodynamic losses through 
channel blockage. Conversely, reduced angles primarily cause suction 
surface separation near the leading edges, where the resulting separa­
tion losses exceed those caused by mid-chord flow detachment. Mamaev 
et al. (Mamaev and Ermolaev, 2023) observed through extensive ex­
periments that a negative incidence angle in terms of its effect on loss is a 
more complex phenomenon than a positive one. It is evident that 
changes in the angle of attack can significantly alter the pressure dis­
tribution and the formation of passage vortices. Therefore, it is impor­
tant to consider the interaction between angle of attack and surface 
roughness when studying particle deposition on aerodynamic 
performance.
Existing studies often model surface roughness as uniformly 
distributed, overlooking the localized and uneven characteristics 
resulting fromactual particle deposition. To address this limitation, re­
searchers have introduced dynamic mesh techniques to more accurately 
simulate the effects of particle deposition processes on turbine 
Fig. 18. Total pressure loss coefficients at the blade outlet (Hao et al., 2023).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
13 


--- Page 14 ---

performance. Shi et al. (Shi et al., 2025) analyzed turbine aerodynamic 
performance under hot spot conditions and found that blade surface 
geometry and roughness significantly affect aerodynamic performance. 
Under hot spot conditions, total pressure loss is higher than in no hot 
spot conditions, with pressure loss increasing from 3.7 % to 4.3 %. 
Further research showed that vortices greatly affect how particles settle 
unevenly and the turbine’s aerodynamic performance, changing the 
shape of the blades and making their surfaces rougher. Under both 
clockwise and anticlockwise vortex conditions, pressure loss increased 
by 77.6 % and 129.2 %, respectively (Shi et al., 2025). As deposition 
time increased, turbine performance further degraded. Hao et al. (Hao 
et al., 2023) initially studied the early-stage effects of deposition and 
found that they had a minimal impact on turbine aerodynamic perfor­
mance. However, their subsequent analysis over an extended opera­
tional period (0 to 1,000 h) revealed that deposition progressively 
narrowed the blade channel, leading to increased pressure drops and 
energy losses. After 1000 h of deposition, the total pressure coefficient 
maintained the same distribution, while the magnitude of the area- 
weighted average total pressure loss increased by 13 %, as shown in 
Fig. 18. Thus, dynamic mesh technology can adjust the computational 
grid in real-time to accommodate geometric changes caused by particle 
deposition, significantly improving the accuracy of turbine performance 
predictions.
In conclusion, particle deposition leads to a decline in turbine 
aerodynamic performance. Advances in dynamic mesh technology have 
made it possible to precisely simulate the impact of deposition on tur­
bine performance. Therefore, future research should concentrate on 
developing models for analyzing turbine performance that utilize dy­
namic grid technology to gain a deeper understanding of the mecha­
nisms underlying performance evolution under complex operating 
conditions.
4.2. Cooling performance
Particles deposited within the cooling channels weaken heat transfer, 
directly impacting turbine cooling performance. Yang et al. (Wang et al., 
2016) pointed out that even though the flow in subsonic blade passages 
is not greatly affected by early particle buildup, the cooling performance 
still changes a lot. Lawson et al. (Lawson and Thole, 2012; Lawson and 
Thole, 2012) found that particle deposition reduced cooling efficiency 
by 15 %, and excessive deposition could further degrade cooling per­
formance, potentially leading to turbine failure. Yang et al. (Yang et al., 
2021) demonstrated a marked difference in cooling performance be­
tween deposited and non-deposited conditions. Deposits may tempo­
rarily improve cooling performance, particularly in the early stages of 
deposition. However, as deposition continues, cooling performance 
gradually deteriorates, with a maximum reduction of up to 76 %. These 
findings indicate that particle deposition significantly undermines the 
cooling performance of turbine blades, but the specific mechanism un­
derlying this effect remains unclear. Mensch et al. (Mensch and Thole, 
2015) observed that deposits formed an insulating layer on the end wall, 
raising its temperature and thereby reducing the performance of the 
cooling system. Similarly, Sun et al. (Sun et al., 2024) found that 
deposition led to increased surface temperatures on the blades. More­
over, deposition increased surface roughness, hindering the formation of 
a cooling air film and weakening the cooling effect. It is obvious that the 
increased surface roughness brought on by particle deposition reduces 
the blade’s capacity to cool. Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2025) investigated 
the cooling efficiency of turbine blades under three different surface 
roughness conditions. Their results indicated that surface roughness 
primarily impairs cooling performance by reducing the area of high- 
efficiency cooling regions and diminishing the cooling effectiveness 
near the film-cooling hole exits. Prapamonthon et al. (Prapamonthon 
et al., 2020) found that as the roughness increased, the local heat 
transfer coefficient on the suction and pressure surfaces of the back half 
of the blades improved a lot, which caused the cooling effectiveness to 
drop even more. For every 120 µm increase in roughness height, the 
average and maximum blade temperatures rose by 24 K and 20 K, 
respectively. These studies confirm that particle deposition forms an 
insulating layer on the blade surface, raising surface temperatures and 
significantly reducing heat transfer capacity.
During the deposition process, particles are not uniformly deposited 
in the cooling channel; instead, they accumulate unevenly, forming 
peak-to-valley deposition patterns. Gong et al. (Gong et al., 2024) 
indicated that deposition can lead to cooling hole blockage, significantly 
reducing the cooling efficiency downstream of the exit boundary. 
Furthermore, this effect exhibits a nonlinear increase. This peak-to- 
valley deposition results in blockages within the cooling channels, dis­
rupting airflow and subsequently diminishing cooling efficiency. Xu 
et al. (Xu et al., 2025) investigated the effectiveness of blade film cooling 
under different blockage levels (B) and injection angles (β) and found 
that the worst cooling performance happened at B = 0.4 and β = 30◦. Dai 
et al. (Dai et al., 2024) examined the effects of three different types of 
blockages—full annular blockage, leading-edge blockage, and trailing- 
edge blockage—on the flow and heat transfer in blades, using 
blockage ratios of 0.2, 0.35, and 0.5. Their results showed that full 
annular blockage reduced the effective cooling channels, resulting in a 
maximum cooling efficiency reduction of 7 %. Leading-edge blockage 
significantly diminished cooling efficiency at blockage ratios of 0.35 and 
0.5. In contrast, trailing-edge blockage caused a slight increase in outlet 
temperature, resulting in a decrease in cooling efficiency near the 
cooling hole exit. Chen et al. (Chen et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021) 
observed that after 675 to 3; 106 h of operation, studies have shown that 
blockages can become as severe as 0.75D. Severe blockages reduce the 
average lateral film cooling efficiency of fan-shaped holes by 97 % and 
27 %, respectively (see Fig. 19). However, slight blockages can enhance 
the cooling performance of fan-shaped holes by approximately 13 %. 
Further research indicates that enhanced entrainment of hot gases, 
coolant mixing, and flow separation are the primary causes of cooling 
performance deterioration. Clearly, a blockage alters the airflow 
mechanism and ultimately reduce the cooling efficiency of the turbine.
In addition to the previously mentioned factors, the blowing ratio, 
particle size, and other parameters significantly influence cooling per­
formance. Lawson et al. (Albert and Bogard, 2012) proposed that at 
higher blowing ratios, the reduction in cooling efficiency becomes more 
pronounced. Their results also indicated a positive correlation between 
the decrease in cooling efficiency and the increase in particle tempera­
ture. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2024) explored the effect of particle size 
on cooling performance. The study revealed that 10 μm particles had the 
most significant effect on cooling at the leading edge of the pressure 
surface, while 20 μm particles had the most pronounced effect at the 
Fig. 19. Distribution of time-averaged adiabatic film cooling effect in the plane 
under different blockages (Chen et al., 2021).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
14 


--- Page 15 ---

leading edge of the suction surface, resulting in up to 30 % less cooling 
overall. It is also noteworthy that geometry of the cooling hole plays a 
crucial role in cooling performance. Yang et al. (Yang et al., 2024) 
discovered that regardless of the coolant injection conditions, particle 
deposition leads to a reduction in cooling efficiency. The cooling effi­
ciency of compound angled holes decreased by as much as 20 %, while 
the efficiency of simple angled holes declined by 8.5 %. Ai et al. (Ai and 
Fletcher, 2011) revealed that the spacing of cooling holes has a sub­
stantial impact on cooling efficiency, with wider hole spacing yielding 
superior cooling performance compared to narrower configurations. Liu 
et al. (Liu et al., 2025) investigated the effect of different transverse 
trench configurations on particle deposition and its impact on film 
cooling plates. The results demonstrated that transverse trenches 
significantly improved the uniformity of particle deposition and cooling 
performance, with rectangular transverse trenches showing the best 
results. Kim et al. (Kim et al., 2021) analysed the effect of hole ar­
rangements and density on the heat transfer coefficients of fan-shaped 
film cooling holes. It was found that the spacing and arrangement of 
holes did not significantly affect the heat transfer coefficient, likely due 
to the relatively large hole spacing employed in the experiments.
To more accurately reflect the interaction between particles and 
turbine blades on cooling performance, researchers have begun to 
employ methods for conjugating heat transfer in their analyses. Yang 
et al. (Yang et al., 2024) developed a conjugate mesh morphing simu­
lation framework that has proven capable of predicting the insulation 
effects of the deposit layer during a dynamic deposition process. Shi 
et al. (Li et al., 2025) used conjugate heat transfer methods to study how 
CMAS deposits and infiltration affect the cooling efficiency of turbine 
blades. Their findings indicate that while CMAS deposition enhances 
cooling efficiency, this effect diminishes with CMAS infiltration. After 
1,500 h of deposition, the cooling efficiency increased by 1.06 %; 
however, due to CMAS infiltration, the net increase was only 1.06 %. 
Tan et al. (Tan et al., 2025) demonstrated through simulations that 
deposition reduces heat transfer to the blade and lowers the internal 
temperature. As deposition time increased, overall cooling efficiency 
improved, particularly at the leading and trailing edges. After 9,000 h of 
deposition, the average increase in overall cooling efficiency rose from 
9.4 % to 13 %, as illustrated in Fig. 20. Yang et al. (Yang et al., 2025) 
using a high-precision particle deposition prediction method combined 
with a temperature deposition model and conjugate mesh deformation 
technology, qualitatively and quantitatively analyzed the evolution of 
particle deposition characteristics and cooling efficiency on film cooling 
plates. The results indicated that the average overall cooling efficiency 
initially increased by 11.3 % to 20.2 % as deposition levels rose but 
subsequently decreased by 15.9 % to 25.5 % from its peak and stabi­
lized. Cooling performance initially improved due to the insulating ef­
fects of deposition but deteriorated in the later stages due to blockage of 
the cooling holes.
Although conjugate heat transfer methods can elucidate the dynamic 
effects of deposition on turbine cooling performance, research in this 
area remains limited. Future studies should combine advanced com­
puter methods with experiments to perform detailed analyses at 
different scales and involving various physical processes, which will 
improve the accuracy and reliability of cooling performance predictions 
during particle deposition.
5. Deposition protection technology of turbine blades
After particle deposition on the turbine blade surface, the accumu­
lated particles gradually corrode the blade material, leading to a 
reduction in blade lifespan. Therefore, it is essential to research and 
develop protective technologies for turbine blades (Khushbash et al., 
2025). Coating technologies, known for their excellent thermal insu­
lation and corrosion resistance, have been widely applied to turbine 
blades (Liu et al., 2021). Furthermore; optimizing blade structure can 
effectively reduce the adverse effects of particle deposition (Yuan et al., 
2023). This section will focus on these two protective technologies: 
coatings and blade structure optimization.
5.1. Anti-corrosion coatings
This section describes the corrosion-resistant coatings for turbine 
Fig. 20. Distribution of time-averaged adiabatic film cooling effect in the plane under different blockages (Tan et al., 2025).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
15 


--- Page 16 ---

blades in terms of both coating types and preparation techniques.
(1) Coating type.
Thermal barrier coatings (TBCS) and environmental barrier coatings 
(EBCS) are widely used to mitigate damage caused by high-temperature 
gases and CMAS to critical aeroengine components such as turbines and 
combustion chambers, thereby enhancing aeroengine power and ther­
mal efficiency (Cai et al., 2024; Xiong et al., 2025). The most commonly 
employed material is 6 %-8% yttria (Y2O3) partially stabilized zirconia 
(ZrO2), known as YSZ. However, when turbine operating temperatures 
exceed 1,473.15 K, YSZ undergoes phase transformation and sintering, 
which diminishes its resistance to CMAS corrosion (Pakseresht et al., 
2022). To enhance the high-temperature stability and CMAS resistance 
of YSZ, researchers have explored various structural optimizations. 
Munuhe et al. (Munuhe et al., 2022) found that alternating fine- 
columnar and coarse-columnar multilayer coatings can effectively 
slow CMAS infiltration. Park et al. (Park et al., 2021) looked into how 
well dense microstructures, porous microstructures, structures without a 
monoclinic phase, and low thermal conductivity (8YSZ) worked at 
blocking CMAS. The results indicated that monoclinic-phase-free YSZ 
maintained excellent integrity after thermal corrosion and CMAS tests, 
exhibiting no failure. Although improving the structure of YSZ has 
increased its resistance to CMAS, this approach remains limited because 
the chemical composition of YSZ has not been altered.
It is possible to significantly enhance the CMAS resistance of YSZ by 
incorporating MgO, CeO2, Al2O3, Y2O3, and CaO into zirconia (ZrO2). 
Islam et al. (Islam et al., 2022) investigated the effects of adding CeO2 to 
YSZ and compared it to traditional YSZ. The results demonstrated that 
CeO2-doped YSZ exhibited excellent resistance to CMAS infiltration. 
Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2024) found that the addition of Al2O3 
facilitated the reaction between the glass melt and YSZ, thereby pre­
venting the formation of CMAS. Zu et al. (Zu et al., 2025) studied how 
deep the corrosion went in ScYSZ coatings with different amounts of Gd 
after being exposed to molten CMAS for 1 h. Their results indicated a 
significant improvement in CMAS resistance with increasing Gd doping 
concentration. Specifically, the corrosion depth was approximately 190 
μm for the 5GdScYSZ coating, reduced to approximately 135 μm for the 
10GdScYSZ coating, and further decreased to approximately 108 μm for 
the 20GdScYSZ coating, as shown in Fig. 21. Wei et al. (Wei et al., 2023) 
said that TiO2-doped YSZ had better CMAS resistance because it had a 
more stable cubic phase. However, ¨OZÇEL˙IK et al. (¨OZÇEL˙IK et al., 
2024) indicated that the addition of Al2O3 or TiO2 alone was insufficient 
to significantly improve CMAS resistance. Adding both Al2O3 and TiO2 
together, on the other hand, made the tetragonal to monoclinic phase 
change in YSZ less noticeable. This made the CMAS resistance much 
better. These variations may be attributed to differing experimental 
conditions, such as temperature and coating thickness.
In addition to YSZ, rare earth zirconates (RE2Zr2O7, RE = La, Nd, Sm, 
Eu, Gd, and Dy) have garnered significant attention as potential candi­
dates for next-generation TBC materials in aeroengines. This interest is 
due to their high melting points, excellent phase stability, and low 
thermal conductivity (Xiong et al., 2025). Drexler et al. (Drexler et al., 
2012) demonstrated that Gd2Zr2O7 coatings effectively inhibited CMAS 
infiltration. After being heated at 1,473.15 K for 24 h, regular 7YSZ 
coatings were fully soaked through by CMAS glass, while Gd2Zr2O7 only 
showed some surface damage, with CMAS going in about 20 μm deep 
and affecting around 10 % of the area. Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2021) 
observed that while CMAS initially infiltrated Sm2Zr2O7, a dense barrier 
layer developed as the reaction progressed, protecting it from further 
corrosion. These studies primarily focus on the CMAS resistance of in­
dividual rare earth elements. However, as research advances, re­
searchers have begun to explore the performance of combinations of 
multiple rare earth elements against CMAS. Yan et al. (Yan et al., 2023; 
Yan et al., 2024) found that (Gd0.2Y0.2Er0.2Tm0.2Yb0.2)2Zr2O7 exhibited 
significantly greater corrosion resistance than Gd2Zr2O7, with the 
corrosion depth being only one-sixth that of Gd2Zr2O7 after the same 
exposure duration. Tu et al. (Tu et al., 2022) compared (La0.2Nd0.2­
Sm0.2Eu0.2Gd0.2)2Zr2O7 with La2Zr2O7, revealing that (La0.2Nd0.2­
Sm0.2Eu0.2Gd0.2)2Zr2O7 
underwent only CMAS dissolution and 
reprecipitation, while La2Zr2O7 exhibited grain boundary corrosion. 
Yang et al. (Yang et al., 2025) synthesized (Ho0.2Er0.2Tm0.2Y­
b0.2Lu0.2)2Zr2O7 coatings and evaluated their corrosion resistance. The 
results indicated that the coating exhibited good corrosion resistance. 
The corrosion rate of the coating under CMAS exposure was approxi­
mately 2.5 μm/h. These findings indicate that materials composed of 
combinations of rare earth elements demonstrate significant resistance 
to CMAS. Furthermore, rare earth hafnates and rare earth silicates have 
also attracted considerable research interest. Wu et al. (Wu et al., 2024) 
found that the reaction between Gd2Zr2O7 and CMAS resulted in the 
formation of a thick protective reaction layer, which prevented further 
CMAS infiltration. In comparison, Gd2Zr2O7 coatings demonstrated su­
perior resistance to CMAS corrosion. After exposure at 1,573.15 K for 25 
h, the corrosion layer thickness of the Gd2Zr2O7 coating reached 136 μm, 
whereas the corresponding thickness for the Gd2Zr2O7 coating was only 
45 μm, indicating the enhanced corrosion resistance of the latter. Stol­
zenburg et al. (Stolzenburg et al., 2015) reported that no significant 
reaction occurred between CMAS and Yb2Si2O7 after 96 h of exposure.
The aforementioned studies have thoroughly analyzed the CMAS 
resistance of single-layer coatings through element doping. However, 
the CMAS resistance of multi-layer coatings has yet to be fully explored. 
Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2019) did high-temperature CMAS corrosion 
Fig. 21. Cross-sectional morphologies of four types of xGdScYSZ after CMAS 
corrosion at 1400 ℃ for 1 h: (a) ScYSZ, (b) 5GdScYSZ, (c) 10GdScYSZ and (d) 
20GdScYSZ (modified version (Zu et al., 2025).
Fig. 22. Surface morphologies of TBCs system after different numbers of 
thermal shock- CMAS corrosion cycles: (a)-(d) YSZ, (e)-(h) LZC/YSZ, (i)-(l) 
GZO/YSZ (Yan et al., 2025).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
16 


--- Page 17 ---

tests and found that the YSZ ceramic coating in the single layer shrunk 
because of phase transformation. This caused surface cracks to form, 
which could cause the coating to fail. Dual-layer La2Zr2O7/YSZ ceramic 
coatings, on the other hand, formed dense apatite and fluorite phases 
during the CMAS reaction, which effectively stopped the infiltration of 
CMAS. Li et al. (Li et al., 2022) looked into how well single-layer 8YSZ 
and dual-layer Y3Al5O12/8YSZ coatings worked when CMAS was 
corroding. The phase structure of the single-layer 8YSZ coating transi­
tioned from tetragonal to monoclinic after one hour of corrosion. 
Conversely, the dual-layer Y3Al5O12/8YSZ surface formed a high 
melting-point apatite phase, which inhibited further CMAS infiltration. 
Zhou et al. (Zhou et al., 2020) prepared dual and triple layer YSZ/ 
Gd2Zr2O7 coatings, finding that the triple-layer coating exhibited a 
longer lifespan under CMAS corrosion compared to the dual-layer 
coating. Under thermal cycling tests involving CMAS attack, the dual 
and triple layer coating demonstrated lifetimes of 115 cycles and 308 
cycles, respectively. These studies provide significant theoretical guid­
ance for the selection and design of coatings with superior CMAS 
resistance. Yan et al. (Yan et al., 2025) fabricated three TBC systems: a 
YSZ single-layer coating, a La2(Zr0.7Ce0.3)2O7/YSZ (LZC/YSZ) bilayer 
coating, and a Gd2Zr2O7/YSZ (GZO/YSZ) bilayer coating. The results 
showed that the GZO/YSZ coating exhibited the best corrosion resis­
tance, followed by the LZC/YSZ coating, while the YSZ single-layer 
coating exhibited the poorest corrosion resistance, as shown in Fig. 22.
In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) technologies have 
demonstrated significant advances in the design and optimisation of 
coating materials for turbine blades in aeroengines. Researchers have 
used machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) techniques to un­
derstand and forecast the important properties of coating materials, like 
how their strength, and how well they resist corrosion (Ashofteh and 
Rajabzadeh, 2024; Krishna et al., 2022). Ye et al. (Ye et al., 2024) 
developed a predictive model for resistance to molten CMAS corrosion. 
The results indicated that the ML model achieved a coefficient of 
determination (R2) greater than 0.96, demonstrating high predictive 
accuracy. Xu et al. (Xu et al., 2022) used Gaussian mixture models and 
support vector regression to create a predictive model for how strong the 
bond is between YSZ coatings and the conditions used in atmospheric 
plasma spraying. They tested it experimentally to prove it was very 
accurate and reliable. Samuel et al. (Afolabi et al., 2025) employed an AI 
algorithm to refine parameter selection and accelerate convergence 
analysis. The approach demonstrated a 30 % improvement in thermal 
insulation efficiency, a 40 % increase in scratch resistance, and a 50 % 
enhancement in corrosion resistance compared to conventional models.
Overall, CMAS infiltrates and induces phase transformations, accel­
erating material corrosion and failure. To address this challenge, re­
searchers have implemented a series of enhancements to commonly 
used coating materials, such as YSZ and RE2Zr2O7. Although these 
improved coatings demonstrate excellent resistance to CMAS and high- 
temperature stability, their mechanical properties warrant further 
investigation. AI technologies have significantly accelerated the 
development of new anti-corrosion coatings. However, the application 
of AI methods in this field remains in its early stages, with considerable 
potential for growth. Consequently, future efforts should be directed 
toward intensifying the implementation of AI technologies in the 
development of anti-corrosion coatings to further enhance material 
performance and facilitate practical engineering applications.
It is worth mentioning that despite intensive studies have been car­
ried out to evaluate anti-corrosion coatings, it is difficult to conduct 
quantitative comparison (e.g. durability, CMAS penetration rate, me­
chanical strength) based on published data without bias. Hamed et al. 
(Hamed et al., 2006) list several erosion tests, including the blade/ 
coating materials and particles used in the tests, the test conditions, and 
references to which the results were reported. Ther are notable differ­
ences in the preparation techniques, experimental conditions (e.g. 
temperature, duration), and analytical methods employed across the 
published results. In some cases, the preparation processes and sub­
strates used were not reported, making it difficult to fairly compare the 
results with those of other studies. Therefore, it is important to stan­
dardize testing procedures so to enable a fair and quantitative com­
parison among results from different research groups or industry 
laboratories.
(2) Coating application techniques.
Common techniques for the preparation of coatings to combat CMAS 
corrosion include air plasma spraying (APS), electron beam physical 
vapour deposition (EB-PVD), plasma spraying-physical vapour deposi­
tion (PS-PVD), suspension plasma spraying (SPS), and solution precursor 
plasma spraying (SPPS) (Chen and Dambra, 2024; Mehta et al., 2022).
APS is a technique that employs plasma to heat powder to a molten 
or semi-molten state, which is then sprayed at high velocity onto a 
substrate to create a lamellar coating. The advantages of APS include 
low cost, high spraying efficiency, the capability to coat complex-shaped 
thick layers (typically exceeding several hundred micrometres), and 
excellent material compatibility. These features make it widely used in 
components, such as combustion chambers and casings. However, APS 
coatings also have several drawbacks, including poor adhesion and 
durability, a rough surface, a relatively short thermal cycling life, and 
the propensity for larger particles to clog cooling holes during the 
spraying process. Also, the coatings made by APS have more tiny holes, 
making them susceptible to being penetrated by molten CMAS, which 
can cause them to become denser and create areas of thermal stress, as 
shown in Fig. 23(a) (Chen and Dambra, 2024; Mehta et al., 2022; Kumar 
et al., 2021).
EB-PVD is a technique that utilises a high-energy electron beam to 
evaporate a target material in a high-vacuum environment, allowing the 
material to deposit onto a substrate. The coatings produced by this 
method typically exhibit a feather-like or columnar structure that is 
characterised by significant longitudinal microporosity, as shown in 
Fig. 23(c). EB-PVD coatings are known for their high durability, excel­
lent thermal shock resistance, and low thermal conductivity, making 
them particularly suitable for high-temperature components such as 
Fig. 23. A schematic showing the features of a typical columnar microstructure produced by (a) SPS, (b) PS-PVD and (c) EB-PVD (Kumar et al., 2021).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
17 


--- Page 18 ---

turbine blades and disks. However, the equipment required for EB-PVD 
is costly, and the preparation process can be time-consuming. Addi­
tionally, this technique is limited to linear spraying, which imposes strict 
geometric constraints on the substrates. The columnar structure of EB- 
PVD coatings creates pathways for molten CMAS, rendering the 
coating more vulnerable to CMAS corrosion in high-temperature envi­
ronments. Nevertheless, this columnar structure also aids in alleviating 
thermal stresses during thermal cycling, significantly extending the 
thermal cycling life, often surpassing that of conventional APS coatings 
(Chen and Dambra, 2024; Mehta et al., 2022; Northam et al., 2023).
PS-PVD is a hybrid process that introduces powder or suspension into 
plasma for partial evaporation, followed by the formation of a vapor 
flow that deposits the coating in a low-pressure environment. This 
process combines the advantages of PS and PVD, enabling the produc­
tion of coatings with columnar or feather-like structures, as shown in 
Fig. 23(b). PS-PVD offers excellent non-line-of-sight coating capabilities, 
allowing for uniform deposition on complex-shaped substrates. Its pri­
mary advantages include outstanding thermal cycling performance, 
extremely low thermal conductivity, reduced coating density, and 
controllable porosity. However, the PS-PVD process is relatively com­
plex, requiring a vacuum system, and the adhesion of the coatings may 
be lower than that of APS coatings. Compared to APS, PS-PVD coatings 
are thinner, necessitating multilayer stacking when greater thickness is 
required. In comparison to EB-PVD, the major advantage of PS-PVD lies 
in its non-line-of-sight spraying capability and higher spraying rate, 
which enable more uniform coating of complex-shaped components. 
The feather-like columnar structure of PS-PVD coatings provides mul­
tiple infiltration channels for molten CMAS, making them susceptible to 
CMAS infiltration, which can lead to premature coating failure due to 
solidification between the columns (Chen and Dambra, 2024; Mehta 
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024).
SPS employs a liquid suspension containing nano/submicron sized 
powders as the feedstock, which is injected into the plasma jet. The fine 
particles are ejected with the spray flow and rapidly solidify on the 
substrate surface, forming various microstructures. Depending on the 
spraying parameters, either dense vertical crack structures or columnar 
structures can be achieved. The benefits of SPS include making 
columnar or column-cracked thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) that are 
hard to create with traditional air plasma spraying (APS), offering better 
strain tolerance and longer life cycles. Additionally, the fine powders 
can minimise the blocking of cooling holes. However, the SPS process is 
more complex, with lower deposition rates and efficiency, and it is 
sensitive to the spray gun standoff distance, which typically requires 
short-distance spraying. For coatings on curved and complex-shaped 
engine components, short standoff distances are impractical, as the 
plasma spray gun may collide with the component during the spraying 
process (Chen and Dambra, 2024; Mehta et al., 2022; Hervy et al., 
2025).
SPPS replaces traditional powders with solution precursors, such as 
metal nitrate solutions, which are atomized and injected into a plasma 
jet. Following droplet evaporation, nano- or submicron-sized particles 
are formed and subsequently condense on the substrate surface. This 
technique addresses the limitations associated with conventional pow­
der sizes and can directly produce coatings composed of numerous 
nanoparticles, garnering significant attention in recent years. The cost 
and efficiency of SPPS fall between APS and PS-PVD, and it can produce 
unique nanostructures. However, it is essential for the precursor to be 
completely decomposed after spraying, as the bonding strength of the 
coating may be lower than that of coatings produced using powder- 
spraying methods. Furthermore, the porosity and uniformity of the 
coating are influenced by the precursor formulation and process pa­
rameters. SPPS-prepared nanostructured coatings can modify the 
adhesion and wettability of CMAS, thereby enhancing the coating’s 
resistance to CMAS corrosion. As an emerging coating deposition 
method, SPPS offers the advantages of eliminating the need for powders 
and flammable solvents; however, the formation and control of its 
columnar structures still require further investigation (Mehta et al., 
2022; Mehta and Vasudev, 2025).
As shown in Table 3, various coating application techniques each 
possess distinct advantages and disadvantages. With the ongoing 
advancement of coating application technologies, the density and 
adhesion of coatings have significantly improved. Future research 
should concentrate on optimizing process parameters and further 
developing composite coating technologies, such as the combination of 
APS and EB-PVD, with the goal of enhancing coating performance even 
further.
5.2. Blade structure optimization
Blade structure optimization mitigates the impact of particles on 
blades by modifying their geometric shape and construction parameters. 
Table 3 
Comparison of coating application technologies (Chen and Dambra, 2024; 
Mehta et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2021; Northam et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; 
Hervy et al., 2025; Mehta and Vasudev, 2025).
Application 
technologies
Advantages
Disadvantages
APS
Low cost, high spraying 
efficiency, and good material 
compatibility.
Lower thermal cycle life and 
poor thermal shock resistance. 
Higher residual stress, which 
can easily lead to cracking and 
peeling.
EB-PVD
Excellent durability, thermal 
shock resistance, and low 
thermal conductivity.
High equipment cost, slow 
deposition rates, constrained 
coating thickness.
PS-PVD
Excellent thermal cycling 
properties, very low thermal 
conductivity, low coating 
density and controlled 
porosity.
The equipment is costly, the 
process is complex, and the 
requirements for process 
parameters are high.
SPS
Nano-scale fine crystal 
structure can be prepared, the 
coating density and toughness 
increased, and excellent 
thermal insulation properties.
High equipment cost, complex 
technology control, and 
exhibiting low deposition 
efficiency.
SPPS
Controls the microstructure of 
the coating. Lower cost than 
EB-PVD and slightly higher 
than APS.
High equipment cost, and 
complex technology control.
Fig. 24. Changes of blade profile with erosion time for (a) the original blade 
and (b) the optimized blade (Zhang et al., 2024).
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
18 


--- Page 19 ---

This approach addresses the issue from the design phase, minimizing the 
adverse effects of particles and thereby enhancing the performance and 
reliability of the blades. Currently, this method has been shown to 
reduce the erosion caused by particles on the blade surfaces. Zhang et al. 
(Zhang and Liu, 2023) identified that the primary design parameters 
influencing erosion are the airflow angles near the midspan and the 
trailing edge at the blade tip. Following optimization, erosion on the 
pressure surface mid-span and near the mid-chord of the suction surface 
was significantly reduced. Furthermore, the optimized blade markedly 
decreased losses near the blade tip and suction surface. Zhang et al. 
(Zhang et al., 2024) compared simulation results before and after blade 
optimization, revealing that the optimized blade exhibited higher effi­
ciency and lower erosion rates compared to the original blade, as shown 
in Fig. 24. Cai et al. (Cai et al., 2024) proposed a method for optimizing 
turbine blade that considers multiple objectives. This method is based on 
design experiments, genetic algorithms, and computational fluid dy­
namics simulations of multiphase flow. The optimization results indi­
cated that the optimized blade reduced both the velocity and the 
probability of particle impacts on the rotor leading edge, resulting in a 
70 % reduction in erosion. The load distribution and inlet angle of attack 
of the rotor were also changed to lower the flow separation losses and 
secondary flow intensity in the rotor blade row. Consequently, turbine 
efficiency increased by 2.28 %. These findings demonstrate that blade 
optimization not only significantly reduces particle impact but also en­
hances overall turbine efficiency. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2025) also 
proposed a multi-objective optimization method to address particle 
deposition on blade surfaces. After optimization, the deposition rate on 
the blades decreased by 40.5 % compared to before.
Although blade optimization methods can effectively mitigate the 
adverse effects of particle deposition during the design phase, their 
application in the field of CMAS resistance remains relatively limited. 
However, these methods have been widely applied in turbines across 
industries such as chemical engineering, hydropower, and power gen­
eration (Sobhani et al., 2025; Li et al., 2023; Akhyar and Sofyan, 2025). 
To enhance the utilization of these methods in CMAS mitigation, further 
research efforts are necessary. Additionally, the challenge of reducing 
particle deposition while improving turbine efficiency remains a critical 
issue that requires in-depth investigation.
6. Conclusions and future work
With the increasing complexity of the aeroengine operating envi­
ronment, the adverse effects of particle deposition on turbine blades are 
becoming more pronounced, posing a significant challenge to overall 
aeroengine performance. This paper presents a systematic review of 
recent research advancements in four key areas: patterns of particle 
deposition on turbines, experimental studies on deposition, the impact 
of deposition on turbine performance, and protective technologies. The 
research findings and future outlook are summarized as follows:
(1) Based on deposition models, researchers have identified the 
various influences of particle properties, airflow conditions, and blade 
characteristics on turbine deposition. However, traditional models often 
fail to accurately represent the deposition process under complex con­
ditions. Future research should focus on developing multi-factor 
coupling models to achieve a precise understanding of the microscopic 
mechanisms of particle deposition. Additionally, advanced condition 
monitoring techniques should be employed to enable real-time tracking 
of turbine operational status and remaining service life.
Fig. 25. Flowchart for future research.
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
19 


--- Page 20 ---

(2) Currently, high-temperature and low-temperature deposition 
experiments are the two most commonly employed methods in research. 
High-temperature deposition experiments are less frequently utilized 
due to their complex equipment and high costs. In contrast, low- 
temperature experiments, while simpler and more cost-effective, 
demonstrate significant discrepancies in airflow temperature and par­
ticle properties when compared to real-world conditions. Future 
research should focus on optimizing high-temperature deposition tech­
nology by simplifying equipment and lowering costs.
(3) Particle deposition increases the surface roughness of turbine 
blades, promoting boundary layer separation and disrupting airflow, 
which ultimately reduces turbine efficiency. Additionally, particles can 
create blockages in the cooling channels, altering airflow dynamics and 
significantly diminishing cooling efficiency. With the technological ad­
vancements in aeroengines, where turbine blades are exposed to higher 
temperatures and intricate structural designs, there is an urgent need to 
develop accurate performance prediction models.
(4) Anti-corrosion coating technology has shown promising results in 
experimental studies. However, significant challenges persist regarding 
its practical engineering applications. With the rapid advancements in 
big data and artificial intelligence, future efforts should concentrate on 
creating a comprehensive database for anti-corrosion coatings and 
employing intelligent algorithms for efficient screening. This approach 
will expedite the development and application of more reliable coating 
materials, as shown in Fig. 25. Furthermore, combining blade structure 
optimization with advanced material technologies will propel turbine 
protection technology toward intelligent and precise development.
(5) It is important to standardize testing procedures so to enable a 
fair and quantitative comparison among results from different research 
groups or industry laboratories. Due to the differences in the preparation 
techniques, experimental conditions (e.g. temperature, duration), and 
analytical methods employed across the published results, as well as the 
preparation processes and substrates used, it is difficult to fairly 
compare one’s results with other’s studies, which makes knowledge 
sharing less efficient.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Guangfu Bin: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. 
Pingping Yang: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis. 
Jian Li: Methodology, Conceptualization. Chao Li: Writing – review & 
editing, Methodology. Weihao Zhang: Formal analysis, Conceptuali­
zation. Haiyan Miao: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Feng­
shou Gu: Writing – review & editing, Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China [Grant No. 52175091 and 52405103]; The National Natural 
Science Foundation of Hunan Province [Grant No. 2023JJ30247, 
2023JJ30247, 2024JJ5156 and 2024JJ6216].
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
Yeranee, K., Rao, Y., Zuo, Q., Xie, J.J., 2024. Thermal performance enhancement for gas 
turbine blade trailing edge cooling with topology-optimized printable diamond 
TPMS lattice. Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 110, 109649.
Zhang, J.K., Liu, H.H., 2023. Multi-objective optimization of aerodynamic and erosion 
resistance performances of a high-pressure turbine. Energy 277, 127731.
Yang, X., Wu, H., Hao, Z., Feng, Z.P., 2025. Assessment of a virtual boundary concept for 
efficient modeling of turbine film cooling. Numer. Heat Tr. A-Appl 86, 3088–3110.
Yang, P.P., Li, C., Yue, W.H., Bin, G.F., Chen, A.H., 2023. Study on erosion wear 
characteristics of aero-compressor blades considering distortion degree. Tribol. Int. 
189, 108895.
Yang, P.P., Yue, W.H., Bin, G.F., Chen, A.H., 2023. Influence of SiO2 and Al2O3 particles 
on erosion wear of aero-compressor blades. Wear 530, 204992.
Yang, P.P., Yue, W.H., Li, J., Bin, G.F., Li, C., 2022. Review of damage mechanism and 
protection of aero-engine blades based on impact properties. Eng. Fail. Anal. 140, 
106570.
Xie, J., Gui, Y., Shao, H., Yang, T., Li, R., 2024. Research progress on particle deposition 
characteristics of cooling channel in gas turbine. Therm. Sci. Eng. Prog. 49, 102435.
Giehl, C., Brooker, R.A., Marxer, H., Nowak, M., 2017. An experimental simulation of 
volcanic ash deposition in gas turbines and implications for jet engine safety. Chem. 
Geol. 461, 160–170.
Suman, A., Casari, N., Fabbri, E., di Mare, L., Montomoli, F., Pinelli, M., 2019. 
Generalization of particle impact behavior in gas turbine via non-dimensional 
grouping. Prog. Energ. Combust 74, 103–151.
Liu, Z.G., Zhang, P., Zhu, P.F., Liu, Z.X., Li, W., 2022. Study of microparticle deposition 
on turbine blade surfaces. China Science Press.
Brooker, P., 2010. Fear in a handful of dust: aviation and the icelandic volcano. 
Significance 7, 112–115.
Taltavull, C., Dean, J., Clyne, T.W., 2016. Adhesion of volcanic ash particles under 
controlled conditions and implications for their deposition in gas turbines. Adv. Eng. 
Mater. 18, 803–813.
Hu, C., Yang, X., Huang, Y.C., Feng, Z.P., 2025. Contaminant dust effects on mist cooling 
in ribbed U-shaped channels of gas turbine blades. Appl. Therm. Eng. 258, 124618.
Wang, J., Vujanovic, M., Sunden, B., 2018. A review of multiphase flow and deposition 
effects in film-cooled gas turbines. Therm. Sci. 22, 1905–1921.
Erraghroughi, F.Z., Bah, A., Maakoul, A.E., Abdellah, A.B., 2024. Numerical assessment 
of particle deposition reduction in turbulent bend pipe flow with a rib insertion. Int. 
J. Heat Fluid Fl. 106, 109290.
Han, J.Q., Liu, M.J., Mostaghimi, J., Yang, G.J., 2024. Solid dust induced roughening and 
overheating of TBC-coated superalloy. J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 180, 69–79.
Kasper, R., Turnow, J., Kornev, N., 2019. Multiphase Eulerian–Lagrangian LES of 
particulate fouling on structured heat transfer surfaces. Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 79, 
108462.
Yang, P.P., Li, C., Bin, G.F., Miao, H.Y., Gu, F.S., 2024. Erosion wear patterns of 
turboshaft engine compressor under different radial inlet distortion conditions. 
Tribol. Int. 198, 109907.
Yang, P.P., Li, C., Bin, G.F., Gu, F.S., Miao, H.Y., 2024. Effect of particle impact on spatial 
and temporal erosion characteristics of turboshaft engine compressor. Wear 558, 
205578.
Singh, S., Tafti, D., Reagle, C., Delimont, J., Wing, N., 2014. Sand transport in a two pass 
internal cooling duct with rib turbulators. Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 46, 158–167.
Zhang, Y.A., Gao, W., Dou, M.F., Han, J.S., Wu, D.T., Zou, Y., 2024. Highly-durable 
plasma-sprayed Al2O3-YSZ/YSZ double ceramic layer TBCs against CMAS corrosion. 
J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 44, 7328–7338.
Fazeli, M., Emdad, H., Alishahi, M.M., Rezaeiravesh, S., 2024. Wall-modeled large eddy 
simulation of 90◦bent pipe flows with/without particles: a comparative study. Int. J. 
Heat Fluid Fl. 105, 109268.
Liu, W., Yan, G., Sun, Y., Liu, Z.Y., Yang, L., Zhou, Y.C., 2024. Numerical assessment of 
thermal insulation and stress responses in film-cooled turbine vane thermal barrier 
coatings under CMAS deposition conditions. Surf. Coat. Tech. 489, 131158.
N’Dala, I., Cambier, F., Anseau, M.R., Urbain, G., 1984. Viscosity of liquid feldspars. Part 
I: Viscosity measurements. Br. Ceram. Trans. J. 83, 108–112.
El-Batsh, H., Haselbacher, H., 2002. Numerical investigation of the effect of ash particle 
deposition on the flow field through turbine cascades. Vienna University of 
Technology, Vienna, Austria. 
Li, G., Zhang, G., He, H., Zhao, C., Zhao, Z., Zhang, W., 2024. Coupling effect of particle 
deposition inside and outside holes on film cooling performance on the leading edge 
of the blade. J. Appl. Fluid Mech. 17, 2192–2202.
Zhang, Z.S., 2021. Simulation of particle deposition in turbine internal cooling passage 
and optimization. Civil Aviation University of China Dissertations & Theses.
Fu, J., Adams, M.J., Reynolds, G.K., Salmana, A.D., Hounslow, M.J., 2004. Impact 
deformation and rebound of wet granules. Powder Technol. 140, 248–257.
Adams, M.J., Lawrence, C.J., Urso, M.E.D., Rance, J., 2004. Modelling collisions of soft 
agglomerates at the continuum length scale. Powder Technol. 140, 268–279.
J.M. Lawrence, M.S. Whitaker, B.P. Casaday, D. Lageman, J.P. Bons, Computational 
modeling of high temperature deposition in gas turbine engines with experimental 
validation, 51st AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting including the New Horizons 
Forum and Aerospace Exposition 1112 (2013) 1-16.
Singh, S., Tafti, D., 2015. Particle deposition model for particulate flows at high 
temperatures in gas turbine components. Int. J. Heat. Fluid Fl. 52, 72–83.
El-Batsh, H., 2001. Modeling particle deposition on compressorand turbine blade 
surfaces, Vienna. Vienna University of Technology, Austria. 
Sun, W.J., Zheng, Y.Q., Zhang, J.Z., Jieru, C., Yu, J.H., 2024. Numerical study on particle 
deposition characteristics of turbine blade with cooling film. Powder Technol. 439, 
119679.
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
20 


--- Page 21 ---

Wu, H., Yang, X., Wu, Y.Q., Feng, Z.P., 2023. Experimental decoupled-analysis of overall 
cooling effectiveness for a turbine endwall with internal and external cooling 
configurations. Appl. Therm. Eng. 228, 120435.
OuYang, M.C., Lang, Z.M., Xu, X.M., Kang, Y.J., Wu, G.Q., Wang, R.F., Wang, Y.X., 
Ma, Q., Wu, Y.L., 2024. Experimental and numerical simulation of the effect of free 
particles dispersed within microchannels on pool boiling heat transfer. Int. J. Heat 
Fluid Fl. 110, 109595.
Stokes, J.L., Presby, M.J., 2024. A dynamic testing approach for particulate 
erosion–corrosion for gas turbine coatings. J. Eng. Gas. Turb. Power 146, 111006.
Xin, S.H., Peng, C.Q., Qi, J.C., Sun, B.W., Xiao, Y., 2025. Effect of deposits on micron 
particle collision and deposition in cooling duct of turbine blades. Crystals 15, 510.
Casari, N., Pinelli, M., Suman, A., di Mare, L., Montomoli, F., 2018. EBFOG: Deposition, 
erosion, and detachment on high-pressure turbine vanes. J. Turbomach. 140, 
061001.
Wang, H., He, P.L., Li, J.L., Lu, H.W., 2024. A method proposed to predict particle 
deposition based on critical viscosity model and roughness height prediction in a 
turbine cascade. J. Turbomach. 146, 011010.
Liu, X.H., Zhu, W., Guo, J.W., Song, X.Z., Xiao, Y.Q., 2023. Numerical investigation of 
the effect of CMAS deposition on the temperature and stress distribution of thermal 
barrier coatings coated on a turbine blade. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 140, 108456.
Pearson, D., Brooker, R., 2020. The accumulation of molten volcanic ash in jet engines 
simulating the role of magma composition, ash particle size and thermal barrier 
coatings. J. Volcanol. Geoth. Res. 389, 106707.
Bonilla, C., Webb, J., Clum, C., Casaday, B., Brewer, E., Bons, J.P., 2012. The effect of 
particle size and film cooling on nozzle guide vane deposition. J. Eng. Gas. Turb. 
Power 134, 1–8.
Wang, X.Z., Sun, Q., Yang, X.Y., Zhu, Y.H., Jiang, P.X., Peng, W., 2024. Study of the 
behavior of dust particles in helium turbines considering the effects of particle 
deposition and resuspension. Powder Technol. 444, 120030.
Bojdo, N., Filippone, A., 2019. A simple model to assess the role of dust composition and 
size on deposition in rotorcraft engines. Aerospace 6, 44.
Tian, K., Tang, Z., Wang, J., Vujanovi´c, M., Zeng, M., Wang, Q., 2021. Numerical 
investigations of film cooling and particle impact on the blade leading edge. Energies 
14, 1102.
Wang, L., Xiao, W.L., Shi, B.B., Li, X.R., Liao, Q.X., Liao, Y.T., 2024. Numerical and 
experimental study on the performance of a stabilising turbine inside a seed 
distribution device. Biosyst. Eng. 246, 219–232.
Sun, E.H., Wang, X.R., Zhang, Q.K., Chen, F., Xu, J.L., Liu, Y.F., 2024. Thermodynamic 
analysis of a gas turbine cycle with direct recuperation based on a multistage 
compressed mass storage process. Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 109, 109555.
Wang, J., Zhao, Z., Xie, G., Mikulˇci´c, H., Vujanovi´c, M., Sund´en, B., 2021. Effects of 
particle size and mainstream inlet angle on deposition in a turbine cascade. J. Energ. 
Resour. Technol. 143, 122103.
Zhang, F., Liu, Z.X., Liu, Z.G., Diao, W.N., 2020. Experimental study of sand particle 
deposition on a film-cooled turbine blade at different gas temperatures and angles of 
attack. Energies 13, 811.
Sacco, C., Bowen, C., Lundgreen, R., Bons, J.P., Ruggiero, E., Allen, J., Bailey, J., 2018. 
Dynamic similarity in turbine deposition testing and the role of pressure. J. Eng. Gas. 
Turb. Power 140, 102605.
Laycock, R., Fletcher, T.H., 2016. Independent effects of surface and gas temperature on 
coal fly ash deposition in gas turbines at temperatures up to 1400 ◦C. J. Eng. Gas. 
Turb. Power 138, 021402.
Hao, Z., Yang, X., Feng, Z., 2021. Unsteady simulations of migration and deposition of 
fly-ash particles in the first-stage turbine of an aero-engine tip gap. Aeronaut. J. 125, 
1566–1586.
Smith, C., Barker, B., Clum, C., Bons, J., 2010. Deposition in a turbine cascade with 
combusting flow. Turbo Expo: Power for Land, Sea, and Air 43994, 743–751.
Jensen, J.W., Squire, S.W., Bons, J.P., Fletcher, T.H., 2005. Simulated land-based turbine 
deposits generated in an accelerated deposition facility. J. Turbomach. 127, 
462–470.
Crosby, J.M., Lewis, S., Bons, J.P., Ai, W., Fletcher, T.H., 2008. Effects of temperature 
and particle size on deposition in land based turbines. J. Eng. Gas. Turb. Power 130, 
0515031–0515039.
Yang, X., Hao, Z.H., Feng, Z.P., 2021. Variations of cooling performance on turbine vanes 
due to incipient particle deposition. P. I. Mech. Eng. A-J Pow. 235, 1832–1846.
Casaday, B., Prenter, R., Bonilla, C., Lawrence, M., Clum, C., Ameri, A.A., Jeffrey, P.B., 
2014. Deposition with hot streaks in an uncooled turbine vane passage. 
J. Turbomach. 136, 1–9.
Wylie, S., Bucknell, A., Forsyth, P., McGilvray, M., Gillespie, D.R.H., 2017. Reduction in 
flow parameter resulting from volcanic ash deposition in engine representative 
cooling passages. J. Turbomach. 139, 031008.
Wang, H., Li, J., Guo, H., 2023. A method for roughness height prediction by particle 
deposition and its effect on flow and heat transfer in a turbine cascade. Numer. Heat 
Transf. A-Appl. 83, 1080–1094.
Hao, Z., Yang, X., Wang, X., Feng, Z., 2022. Unsteady simulations of deposition in a rotor 
passage of the first-stage turbine for an aero-engine. J. Glob. Power Propuls. Soc. 6, 
74–87.
Xu, W.W., Zhu, K.H., Wang, J.J., Lin, Y.J., Li, Q., 2019. Modeling and numerical analysis 
of the effect of blade roughness on particle deposition in a flue gas turbine. Powder 
Technol. 347, 59–65.
Liu, Z.W., Ji, S.T., Zhou, Y.T., Chen, S.Y., Li, P., 2024. Heat transfer enhancement of gas 
turbine trailing-edge cooling channel with twisted blade-like fins arranged on 
endwalls. Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 110, 109615.
Du, K., Li, J.X., Liang, T.R., Liu, C.L., Sunden, B., 2025. Effects of water vapor 
concentration on the film cooling effectiveness of hydrogen gas turbine vane. Int. J. 
Heat Fluid Fl. 112, 109760.
Liu, J.W., Yu, K.H., Peng, C.Q., Yao, S.L., Xin, S.H., 2023. Micron-sized particle transport 
and deposition in internal cooling duct with elliptical pin fins. J. Eng. Gas. Turb. 
Power 145, 081001.
Zhang, T.L., Huang, W.C., Zhou, W.W., Tian, W., Liu, Y.Z., 2023. Unveiling particle 
deposition characteristics on flat plate with a shaped film cooling hole. Int. J. Heat. 
Mass. Tran. 216, 124584.
Wang, C.H., Zhang, J.Z., Zhou, J.H., 2016. Investigation of particle deposition 
characteristics in vicinity of laidback fan-shaped film cooling holes. Flow Turbul. 
Combust. 97, 591–607.
Todd Davidson, F., Kistenmacher, D.A., Bogard, D.G., 2014. A study of deposition on a 
turbine vane with a thermal barrier coating and various film cooling geometries. 
J. Turbomach. 136, 1–11.
Zeng, J.W., Wang, F.L., Wang, Y.Q., Wang, Y.B., Shi, J., 2023. Particle deposition 
characteristics on turbine blade surface based on critical velocity model. J. Phys. 
Conf. Ser. 2610, 12041.
Zhang, F.X., Pang, Y., Wang, B.H., Wang, J., ˇCuˇcek, L., Varbanov, P.S., 2024. Dynamic 
simulation of particle deposition on the blade leading edge with film cooling in gas 
turbines. Therm. Sci. Eng. Prog. 51, 102608.
Ai, W., Murray, N., Fletcher, T.H., 2011. Effect of hole spacing on deposition of fine coal 
flyash near film cooling holes. J. Turbomach. 134, 11.
Zeng, J.W., Wang, F.L., Wang, Y.Q., Wang, Y.B., Shi, J., 2023. Particle deposition 
characteristics on turbine blade surface based on critical velocity model, Journal of 
Physics: Conference Series. IOP Publishing 2610, 012041.
Yang, X., Hao, Z.H., Feng, Z.P., 2021. An experimental study on turbine vane leading- 
edge film cooling with deposition. Appl. Therm. Eng. 198, 117447.
Peng, Y.B., Xu, G.Q., Luo, X., He, J., Liu, D.D., 2022. Particle deposition in the vicinity of 
multiple film cooling holes. Micromachines 13, 523.
Li, Y., Rao, Y., Liu, Y.Y., Terzis, A., 2024. Film cooling enhancement over oblong-dimpled 
cutback surfaces for the trailing edge of turbine blades. Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 108, 
109450.
Y. Cheng, Y. Li, Y. Rao, Enhanced turbine endwall cooling using crescent-dimpled film 
cooling holes and a hybrid configuration: numerical study, Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 109 
(2024) 109: 109546.
Wang, J., Tian, K., Zhu, H., Zeng, M., Sund´en, B., 2020. Numerical investigation of 
particle deposition in film-cooled blade leading edge. Numer. Heat Tr. A-Appl 77, 
579–598.
Sun, W.J., Zheng, Y.Q., Gao, Q.H., Zhang, J.Z., 2024. Numerical simulations on film 
cooling performance of turbine blade before and after particles deposition. Therm. 
Sci. Eng. Prog. 49, 102504.
Ai, W., Laycock, R.G., Rappleye, D.S., Fletcher, T.H., Bons, J.P., 2011. Effect of particle 
size and trench configuration on deposition from fine coal flyash near film cooling 
holes. Energy Fuels 25, 1066–1076.
Mensch, A., Thole, K., 2015. Simulations of multiphase particle deposition on a gas 
turbine endwall with impingement and film cooling. J. Turbomach. 137, 111002.
Cai, L.X., Yao, J.W., Hou, Y.F., Wang, S.S., Li, Y., Feng, Z.P., 2023. Numerical analysis of 
catalyst particle deposition characteristics in a flue gas turbine with an improved 
particle motion and deposition model. P. I. Mech. Eng. A-J Pow. 237, 1790–1807.
Webb, J., Casaday, B., Barker, B., Bons, J.P., Gledhill, A.D., Padture, N.P., 2013. Coal ash 
deposition on nozzle guide vanes-part I: experimental characteristics of four coal ash 
types. J. Turbomach. 135, 1–9.
Lundgreen, R., Sacco, C., Prenter, R., Bons, J.P., 2016. Temperature effects on nozzle 
guide vane deposition in a new turbine cascade rig, Turbo Expo: Power for Land. 
Sea, and Air. American Society of Mechanical Engineers 49781, V05AT13A021.
Lawson, S.A., Thole, K.A., Okita, Y., Nakamata, C., 2012. Simulations of multiphase 
particle deposition on a showerhead with staggered film-cooling holes. 
J. Turbomach. 134, 1–12.
Lawson, S.A., Lynch, S.P., Thole, K.A., 2013. Simulations of multiphase particle 
deposition on a nonaxisymmetric contoured endwall with film-cooling. 
J. Turbomach. 135, 1–11.
Albert, J.E., Bogard, D.G., 2012. Experimental simulation of contaminant deposition on a 
film cooled turbine airfoil leading edge. J. Turbomach. 134, 1–10.
Yang, X., Hao, Z., Feng, Z., 2025. Influences of particulate deposition on vane trailing- 
edge film cooling: adiabatic and overall cooling effectiveness. J. Turbomach. 147, 
091012.
Liu, Z., Ruan, R., Zhang, Y., Lyu, Y., Liu, Z., 2024. Particles deposition on plates with 
different film cooling hole shapes for different blowing ratios and angles of attack. 
Phys. Fluids 36, 083343.
Kim, J., Dunn, M.G., Baran, A.J., Wade, D.P., Tremba, E.L., 1993. Deposition of volcanic 
materials in the hot sections of two gas turbine engines. J. Eng. Gas. Turb. Power 
115, 641–651.
Dunn, M.G., 2012. Operation of gas turbine engines in an environment contaminated 
with volcanic ash. J. Turbomach. 134, 1–18.
Zhang, J.K., Liu, H.H., 2023. Effect of solid particles on performance and erosion 
characteristics of a high-pressure turbine. Energy 272, 127185.
Guo, W.J., Ye, Z.T., Liu, Y., Fu, J., Yan, Y., Sun, W., Cui, J.H., 2025. Equivalent boundary 
model for turbine film cooling prediction. Appl. Therm. Eng. 273, 126381.
Moshizi, S.A., Nakhaei, M.H., Kermani, M.J., Madadi, A., 2014. Development of a 
numerical based correlation for performance losses due to surface roughness in axial 
turbines. J. Mech. 30, 631–642.
Jelly, T.O., Nardini, M., Rosenzweig, M., Leggett, J., Marusic, I., Sandberg, R.D., 2023. 
High-fidelity computational study of roughness effects on high pressure turbine 
performance and heat transfer. Int. J. Heat. Fluid Fl. 101, 109134.
Delvaux, G., Toracchio, R., Boufidi, E., Croner, E., Fontaneto, F., 2023. The modeling of 
roughness effect on the performance of a controlled diffusion airfoil. J. Turbomach. 
145, 021008.
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
21 


--- Page 22 ---

Lorenz, M., Schulz, A., Bauer, H.J., 2012. Experimental study of surface roughness effects 
on a turbine airfoil in a linear cascade-part I: external heat transfer. J. Turbomach. 
134, 041006.
Lorenz, M., Schulz, A., Bauer, H.J., 2012. Experimental study of surface roughness effects 
on a turbine airfoil in a linear cascade-Part II: aerodynamic losses. J. Turbomach. 
134, 041007.
Nardini, M., Kozul, M., Jelly, T.O., Sandberg, R.D., 2024. Direct numerical simulation of 
transitional and turbulent flows over multi-scale surface roughness-part I: 
methodology and challenges. J. Turbomach. 146, 041007.
Nardini, M., Jelly, T.O., Kozul, M., Sandberg, R.D., Vitt, P., Sluyter, G., 2024. Direct 
numerical simulation of transitional and turbulent flows over multi-scale surface 
roughness-part II: The effect of roughness on the performance of a high-pressure 
turbine blade. J. Turbomach. 146, 031009.
Kellersmann, A., Weiler, S., Bode, C., Friedrichs, J., St¨ading, J., Ramm, G., 2018. Surface 
roughness impact on low-pressure turbine performance due to operational 
deterioration. J. Eng. Gas. Turb. Power 140, 062601.
Aligoodarz, M.R., Derakhshan, F.E., 2013. Numerical study of blade deterioration effects 
on an industrial gas turbine stage performance and flow field. P. I. Mech. Eng. A-J 
Pow. 227, 515–527.
Gilge, P., Hohenstein, S., Seume, J.R., 2017. Experimental investigation of the 
aerodynamic effect of local surface roughness on a turbine blade. International 
Journal of Gas Turbine, Propulsion and Power Systems 9, 12–21.
Chen, Y., Cai, L., Jiang, D., Li, Y., Du, Z., Wang, S., 2023. Experimental and numerical 
investigations for turbine aerodynamic performance with different pressure side 
squealers and incidence angles. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 136, 108234.
Habib, M., Ismail, D., Rachid, S., 2025. Incidence angle effect on the behaviour of a flow 
around the turbine blades. WSEAS Trans. Fluid Mech. 20, 32–39.
Li, M., Liu, J., Zhang, X., Yuan, H., Ju, W., Lu, X., 2025. Numerical study on the internal 
flow mechanisms of variable geometry high-load low-pressure turbine cascade under 
wide operating conditions. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 162, 110246.
Mamaev, B.I., Ermolaev, G.V., 2023. Study of turbine cascades at negative incidence 
angles. Therm. Eng. 70, 215–222.
Shi, L., Tan, X., Deng, R., Su, L., Peng, J., Song, J., Chen, J., 2025. An unsteady deposition 
model for evaluating CMAS nonuniform deposition behavior and aerodynamic 
performance degradation under hot streak clocking effect. J. Turbomach. 147, 
101012.
Shi, L., Wang, C.C., Tan, X., Deng, R.L., Song, J.S., Su, L., Chen, J.J., Peng, J.F., 2025. 
Conjugate heat transfer investigating the impact of the hot streak and swirling flow 
on the non-uniformly deposition behavior of CMAS on a coated vane. Inte. Commun. 
Heat Mass 162, 108578.
Hao, Z., Yang, X., Feng, Z., 2023. Unsteady modeling of particle deposition effects on 
aerodynamics and heat transfer in turbine stator passages with mesh morphing. Int. 
J. Therm. Sci. 190, 108326.
Lawson, S.A., Thole, K.A., 2012. Simulations of multiphase particle deposition on 
endwall film-cooling. J. Turbomach. 134, 151–162.
Lawson, S.A., Thole, K.A., 2012. Simulations of multiphase particle deposition on 
endwall film-cooling holes in transverse trenches. J. Turbomach. 134, 1–10.
Wang, X.Y., Ye, L., Li, W., Zheng, T.Y., Liang, X.Y., Liu, C.L., 2025. Film cooling 
effectiveness in the presence of internal hole random roughness: a comprehensive 
analysis. Int. Commun. Heat Mass 165, 108990.
Prapamonthon, P., Yin, B., Yang, G.W., Zhang, M.H., 2020. Separate and combined 
effects of surface roughness and thermal barrier coating on vane cooling 
performance. J. Therm. Sci. Eng. Appl. 12, 051017.
Gong, M., Huang, W., Shen, Y., Ma, C., 2024. Influence mechanism of local air film holes 
blockage on cooling efficiency of turbine blades. Therm. Sci. 28, 641–657.
Xu, K.W., He, K., Yan, X., 2025. Effects of cooling hole blockage on heat transfer and film 
cooling effectiveness of gas turbine squealer tip. Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 112, 109678.
Dai, H.W., Liu, W.X., Zhang, X.L., Zhang, P., Zhng, X.L., Zhang, J.H., Lin, J.W., 2024. 
Flow and heat transfer on the pressure side of C3X vane with various cooling hole 
blockages. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 201, 109007.
Chen, X.H., Wang, Y.Z., Long, Y., Weng, S.L., 2021. Effect of partial blockage on flow and 
heat transfer of film cooling with cylindrical and fan-shaped holes. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 
164, 106866.
Chen, X.H., Long, Y., Wang, Y.Z., Weng, S.L., Luan, Y.G., 2021. Large eddy simulation of 
film cooling from cylindrical holes partially blocked by CaO-MgO-Al2O3-SiO2. Int. 
Commun Heat Mass 129, 105754.
Zhang, H.S., Jiang, Y.T., Chen, C.L., He, Y.X., 2024. Simulation of particle deposition on 
high temperature turbine film cooling blade surface with dynamic mesh morphing. 
Int. Commun Heat Mass 151, 107244.
Yang, X., Hao, Z.H., Feng, Z.P., 2024. Experimental assessment of film cooling from 
cylindrical holes subject to particulate deposition. Exp. Therm Fluid Sci. 154, 
111155.
Ai, W., Fletcher, T.H., 2011. Computational analysis of conjugate heat transfer and 
particulate deposition on a high pressure turbine vane. J. Turbomach. 134, 573–585.
Liu, Z., Cheng, L., Yuan, Z., Liu, Z., Zhang, L., 2025. Particles deposition on film cooling 
plates with different types of trenches. Appl. Therm. Eng. 263, 125335.
Kim, Y.S., Jeong, J.Y., Kwak, J.S., Chung, H., 2021. The effects of hole arrangement and 
density ratio on the heat transfer coefficient augmentation of fan-shaped film cooling 
holes. Energies 14, 186.
Yang, X.H., Hao, Z.H., Feng, Z.P., Ligrani, P., PhillipWeigand, B., 2024. Conjugate heat 
transfer evaluation of turbine blade leading-edge swirl and jet impingement cooling 
with particulate deposition. J. Turbomach. 146, 011003.
Li, S., Wang, C., Tan, X., Liao, S., Deng, Z., Deng, R., Song, J., 2025. Impact of non- 
uniform CMAS deposition and penetration on the performance degradation of a film- 
cooled vane with TBCs under a hot streak condition. Surf. Coat. Technol. 506, 
132118.
Tan, X., Shi, L., Deng, R.L., Sun, L., Peng, J.F., Song, J.S., Chen, J.J., 2025. Conjugate 
heat transfer simulation the impact of CMAS non-uniform deposition on the cooling 
effectiveness of a coated C3X vane. Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 112, 109755.
Yang, C., Wang, Y.Z., Cheng, K., Zhang, K.Y., Wei, H.Q., 2025. Dynamic evolution of 
melting particle deposition and overall cooling effectiveness on a film-cooled flat 
plate. Energy 330, 136917.
S. Khushbash, A. Hameed, A. Mumtaz, H.A. Khan, A Shahzad, Investigation of 
temperature assisted corrosion failure of an aircraft turbine blade, Eng. Fail. Anal. 
167 (2025) 167: 108909.
Liu, J.H., Liu, Y.B., Liu, L., Yu, Y.H., He, X., 2021. Submodeling method to study the 
residual stress of TBCs near the interfacial asperity on a vane. Eng. Fail. Anal. 122, 
105220.
Yuan, Z.H., Chen, Z.C., Li, Z.Q., Bian, L.G., Wu, X.L., Zhang, B., Li, J.W., Qiao, Y.Y., 2023. 
Influence of blade angle in the outer secondary air for swirl burner on the flow, 
combustion, and slagging characteristics in the pre-combustion chamber under the 
air-staged condition. Energy 275, 127418.
Cai, F.X., Zhou, H., Yao, M., Ren, Z.Y., 2024. An accelerated time-scale decomposition 
algorithm for transient thermal fluid-solid coupled simulations in multi-medium 
systems. Int. J. Heat Fluid Fl. 107, 109364.
Xiong, K., Wang, J., Hou, C., Zhou, Z., Jin, X., Fan, X., 2025. Damage quantification and 
failure mechanism of EB-PVD thermal barrier coatings under CMAS corrosion. Surf. 
Coat. Technol. 495, 131554.
Pakseresht, A., Sharifianjazi, F., Esmaeilkhanian, A., Bazli, L., Reisi Nafchi, M., Bazli, M., 
Kirubaharan, K., 2022. Failure mechanisms and structure tailoring of YSZ and new 
candidates for thermal barrier coatings: a systematic review. Mater. Design 222, 
111044.
Munuhe, T.W., Chen, R.H., Zhu, L., Ma, R., 2022. Modeling molten droplet spreading and 
infiltration into non-isothermal thermal barrier coatings. Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 182, 
121942.
Park, K.Y., Jang, K.I., Myoung, S.W., Jung, Y.G., Yang, B., Kim, J.S., 2021. Degradation 
characteristics of thermal barrier coatings for hot corrosion and CaO-MgO-Al2O3- 
SiO2. Surf. Coat. Tech. 412, 127045.
Islam, A., Sharma, A., Singh, P., Pandit, N., Keshri, A.K., 2022. Plasma-sprayed CeO2 
overlay on YSZ thermal barrier coating: Solution for resisting molten CMAS 
infiltration. Ceram. Int. 48, 14587–14595.
Zhang, Y.A., Dou, M.F., Gao, W., Han, J.S., Wu, D.T., Zou, Y., 2024. Wetting kinetics and 
corrosion of CMAS and CMAS-NaCl to plasma-sprayed YSZ and Al2O3-YSZ thermal 
barrier coatings. Corros. Sci. 232, 112048.
Zu, J.H., Feng, Z., Liu, D., Gao, Y., Luo, W.F., Fan, W., Lin, M.T., Wang, Y., Bai, Y., 2025. 
Investigation on CMAS corrosion resistance of Sc2O3-Y2O3 co-stabilized ZrO2 
thermal barrier coating material by tunable design with Gd-doping. Corros. Sci. 244, 
112653.
Wei, X.D., Zhao, Z.C., An, Y.L., Zhou, H.D., Chen, J.M., 2023. Effect of modulating the 
phase structure of YSZ ceramics by TiO2 doping on the CMAS corrosion resistance at 
1250◦C. Ceram. Int. 49, 14624–14634.
¨OZÇEL˙IK, A., EKER, A.A., KARABAS¸, M., Karabas¸Al, M., Avci, A., Kucukyildirim, B.O., 
2024. Enhanced CMAS and hot corrosion degradation of YSZ thermal barrier coating 
with nano powders. Surf. Coat. Tech. 481, 130624.
Drexler, J.M., Chen, C.H., Gledhill, A.D., Shinoda, K., Sampath, S., Padture, N.P., 2012. 
Plasma sprayed gadolinium zirconate thermal barrier coatings that are resistant to 
damage by molten Ca-Mg-Al-silicate glass. Surf. Coat. Tech. 20, 3911–3916.
Wang, Y.H., Ma, Z., Liu, L., Liu, Y.B., 2021. Influence of the grain size on CMAS attack of 
Sm2Zr2O7 ceramic. Ceram. Int. 47, 24453–24457.
Yan, R.X., Liang, W.P., Miao, Q., Zhao, H., Liu, R.X., Li, J.L., Zang, K., Dong, M.J., He, X. 
P., Gao, X.G., Song, Y.D., 2023. Mechanical, thermal and CMAS resistance properties 
of high-entropy (Gd0.2 Y0.2 Er0.2 Tm0.2 Yb0.2)2Zr2O7 ceramics. Ceram. Int. 49, 
20729–20741.
Yan, R.X., Liang, W.P., Miao, Q., Zhao, H., Liu, R.X., Dong, M.J., Zang, K., Jia, F.L., 
Chang, X.L., He, X.P., Gao, X.G., Song, Y.D., Tao, X.M., 2024. Corrosion mechanisms 
of high-entropy rare earth zirconate (Gd0.2 Y0.2 Er0.2 Tm0.2 Yb0.2)2Zr2O7 exposed to 
CMAS and multi-medium (NaVO3+CMAS). J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 44, 3277–3295.
Tu, T.Z., Liu, J.X., Zhou, L., Liang, Y., Zhang, G.J., 2022. Graceful behavior during CMAS 
corrosion of a high-entropy rare-earth zirconate for thermal barrier coating material. 
J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 42, 649–657.
Yang, L.X., Xie, F.K., Geng, H.J., Wu, L.K., Liu, H.J., Zeng, C.L., 2025. A novel 
(Ho0.2Er0.2Tm0.2Yb0.2Lu0.2)2Zr2O7 high-entropy ceramic with excellent CMAS 
corrosion resistance for thermal barrier coatings. Corros. Sci. 250, 112904.
Wu, Y.M., Zhong, X., Hong, D., Hu, C., Liang, R.H., Fan, D., Wang, L.J., Niu, Y.R., 
Zheng, X.B., 2024. Hot corrosion of Gd2M2O7 (M=Zr, Hf) thermal/environmental 
barrier coatings subjected to calcium-magnesium-alumina-silicate melts at 1300 and 
1500◦C. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 44, 6082–6096.
Stolzenburg, F., Johnson, M.T., Lee, K.N., Jacobson, N.S., Faber, K.T., 2015. The 
interaction of calcium-magnesium-aluminosilicate with ytterbium silicate 
environmental barrier materials. Surf. Coat. Tech. 284, 44–50.
Wang, R., Dong, T.S., Wang, H.D., Di, Y.L., Li, G.L., Feng, Y., 2019. CMAS corrosion 
resistance in high temperature and rainwater environment of double-layer thermal 
barrier coatings odified by rare earth. Ceram. Int. 45, 17409–17419.
Li, C., Cheng, B., Zhang, Y., An, G., Sun, Y., Wang, Y., Li, W.S., 2022. Corrosion behavior 
of atmospheric plasma-sprayed YAG/8YSZ double ceramic-layered thermal barrier 
coatings in a calcium-magnesium-alumino-silicate melt. J. Mater. Eng. Perform. 31, 
10205–10212.
Zhou, D., Mack, D.E., Bakan, E., Mauer, G., Sebold, D., Guillon, O., Vaßen, R., 2020. 
Thermal cycling performances of multilayered yttria-stabilized zirconia/gadolinium 
zirconate thermal barrier coatings. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 103, 2048–2061.
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
22 


--- Page 23 ---

Yan, G., Liu, W., Sun, Y., Li, C., Yang, L., Zhou, Y., 2025. Failure behavior of RE2M2O7/ 
YSZ TBCs prepared by EB-PVD in gas thermal shock-CMAS corrosion environment. 
J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 45, 117027.
Ashofteh, A., Rajabzadeh, M., 2024. Advances in thermal barrier coatings modeling, 
simulation, and analysis: a review. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 116693.
Krishna, K.P.S., Puthiyaveettil, N., Srinivasa, C.V., et al., 2022. Simulation-assisted AI for 
the evaluation of thermal barrier coatings using pulsed infrared thermography. 
J. Appl. Phys. 132, 064902.
Ye, D., Wu, F., Xu, Z., Wu, Y., Yin, C., Fang, H., Liu, H., 2024. Research on modified 
thermal barrier coatings against CMAS corrosion driven by mechanism–data hybrid 
model. Coatings 14, 1513.
Xu, P., Chen, C., Chen, S., Lu, W., Qian, Q., Zeng, Y., 2022. Machine learning-assisted 
design of yttria-stabilized zirconia thermal barrier coatings with high bonding 
strength. ACS Omega 7, 21052–21061.
Afolabi, S.O., Malachi, I.O., Olawumi, A.O., 2025. Multiscale modeling and AI-enhanced 
optimization of thermal barrier coatings for extreme interface conditions in high- 
temperature. Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp 137658.
Hamed, A., Tabakoff, W.C., Wenglarz, R.V., 2006. Erosion and deposition in 
turbomachinery. J. Propul. Power 22, 350–360.
Chen, D., Dambra, C., 2024. Thick columnar-structured thermal barrier coatings using 
the suspension plasma spray process. Coatings 14, 996.
Mehta, A., Vasudev, H., Singh, S., Prakash, C., Saxena, K.K., Linul, E., Buddhi, D., Xu, J., 
2022. Processing and advancements in the development of thermal barrier coatings: 
a review. Coatings 12, 1318.
Kumar, N., Gupta, M., Mack, D.E., Georg Mauer, M., Vaßen, R., 2021. Columnar thermal 
barrier coatings produced by different thermal spray processes. J. Therm. Spray 
Technol. 30, 1437–1452.
Northam, M., Fouliard, Q., Rossmann, L., Park, J.-S., Kenesei, P., Almer, J., 
Viswanathan, V., Harder, B., Raghavan, S., 2023. Thermally grown oxide stress in 
PS-PVD and EB-PVD thermal barrier coatings observed at various lifetimes via 
synchrotron X-ray diffraction. J. Eng. Mater. Technol. 145, 011004.
Wang, Z., Fan, J., Kang, K., Wu, J., Liu, M., Zhou, K., Zhang, Q., Zhang, Z., Li, X., 
Zhang, X., 2024. Foreign object damage behavior and failure mechanism of Al2O3- 
modified TBCs prepared by PS-PVD. Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China 34, 
2289–2303.
Hervy, T., Alroy, R.J., Bj¨orklund, S., Yao, Y., Genois, R., Joshi, S., 2025. Evaluation of 
high-throughput columnar YSZ thermal barrier coatings deposited via axial plasma 
spraying of aqueous solution precursors. Surf. Coat. Technol. 509, 132214.
Mehta, A., Vasudev, H., 2025. A review on the thermal barrier coatings in hot corrosion 
protection: innovations and future directions for high-temperature alloys. J. Fail. 
Anal. Prev. 04, 1–37.
Zhang, J.K., Li, H.J., Liu, H.H., 2024. Modeling of particle erosion of high-pressure 
turbine based on dynamic mesh method. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 150, 109236.
Cai, L., He, Y., Yao, J., Hou, Y.F., Wang, S.S., Feng, Z.P., 2024. Multiobjective 
optimization study on the aerodynamic performance and anti-erosion characteristics 
of a single-stage dusty flue gas turbine. J. Eng. Gas. Turb. Power 146, 041022.
Zhang, J., Li, H., Li, R., Liu, H., 2025. Optimization of impeller to reduce deposition of 
soot and oil particles within a multi-blade centrifugal fan. J. Fluids Eng. 147, 1–35.
Sobhani, P., Hasanzadeh, N., Rostamani, M.J., Najafi, A.F., 2025. In-pipe drag-based 
turbine blade optimization for energy harvesting in urban water networks: a novel 
theoretical approach. Renew. Energy 123208.
Li, L., Zhang, W., Li, Y., Jiang, C., Wang, Y., 2023. Multi-objective optimization of 
turbine blade profiles based on multi-agent reinforcement learning. Energy Convers. 
Manag. 297, 117637.
Akhyar, A., Sofyan, S.E., 2025. A review of vortex water turbine design for sustainable 
energy generation (principles, optimization, and validation). Energy Convers. 
Manag. 26, 100895.
G. Bin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 117 (2026) 110023 
23 
