
--- Page 1 ---

Christian Eichler1
e-mail: eichler@td.mw.tum.de
Thomas Sattelmayer
Lehrstuhl für Thermodynamik,
Technische Universität München,
Boltzmannstraße 15,
85748 Garching, Germany
Experiments on Flame Flashback
in a Quasi-2D Turbulent Wall
Boundary Layer for Premixed
Methane-Hydrogen-Air Mixtures
Premixed combustion of hydrogen-rich mixtures involves the risk of ﬂame ﬂashback
through wall boundary layers. For laminar ﬂow conditions, the ﬂashback mechanism is
well understood and is usually correlated by a critical velocity gradient at the wall.
Turbulent transport inside the boundary layer considerably increases the ﬂashback pro-
pensity. Only tube burner setups were investigated in the past, and thus turbulent ﬂash-
back limits were only derived for a fully developed Blasius wall friction proﬁle. For
turbulent ﬂows, details of the ﬂame propagation in proximity to the wall remain unclear.
This paper presents results from a new experimental combustion rig, apt for detailed
optical investigations of ﬂame ﬂashbacks in a turbulent wall boundary layer developing
on a ﬂat plate and being subject to an adjustable pressure gradient. Turbulent ﬂashback
limits are derived from the observed ﬂame position inside the measurement section. The
fuels investigated cover mixtures of methane, hydrogen, and air at various mixing ratios.
The associated wall friction distributions are determined by Reynolds-averaged Navier-
Stokes (RANS) computations of the ﬂow inside the measurement section with fully re-
solved boundary layers. Consequently, the interaction between ﬂame back pressure and
incoming ﬂow is not taken into account explicitly, in accordance with the evaluation
procedure used for tube burner experiments. The results are compared with literature
values, and the critical gradient concept is reviewed in light of the new data.
DOI: 10.1115/1.4001985
1
Introduction
Current developments in the power generation sector aim to-
ward the capture and storage of CO2 CCS in order to fulﬁll
climate protection commitments and to reduce emission costs.
Precombustion capture of CO2, one of three focused CCS process
chains, yields fuels with high H2 content exceeding 90 vol %. To
date, the combustion of such H2-rich mixtures in existing gas
turbine combustors is limited to diluted diffusion-ﬂame operation
due to combustion stability constraints. Since such systems re-
quire an undesirable tight integration between gas turbine and
gasiﬁcation plant, lean premixed LP H2 combustors are consid-
ered as an enabling technology for precombustion CCS. Recent
studies 1–3 list blowout, ﬂashback, thermoacoustic instabilities,
autoignition, and emissions as operational and safety issues in
modern LP combustion systems. It is interesting to mention that
most of these issues do also occur in combustors running on natu-
ral gas NG, and their understanding thus has been improved
considerably during the past decades. The only exception is
boundary layer ﬂashback BLF, which is irrelevant for NG de-
signs but gains in importance when moving toward high H2 con-
tents. As a consequence, only a very limited number of investiga-
tions on BLF are available in the open literature so far. The aims
of the present work are to reconsider turbulent BLF as an impor-
tant instability source in H2-ﬁred combustors and to provide a
more complete picture of the physical processes involved. It will
be shown that the current understanding and data basis for turbu-
lent BLF are neither sufﬁciently complete nor representative of
safety-critical ﬂame holding events.
Before turning to the turbulent situation, it is instructive to con-
sider laminar BLF at ﬁrst. Lewis and von Elbe 4 introduced a
model for the physical situation at laminar BLF, which is still
considered as the state of knowledge today. Figure 1 illustrates
their physical picture at the onset of BLF. On the left, the wall-
near region of the undisturbed boundary ﬂow uy is shown. Far
upstream of the ﬂame, the mixture state is determined by static
temperature T and pressure p, while the wall temperature is con-
stant at Tw. On the right-hand side of the ﬁgure, the reaction zone
of the ﬂame at the onset of ﬂashback is depicted. The reaction
zone adopts a curved shape due to the velocity gradient of the
unburnt gases. At the stability limit, the burning velocity Sf at a
distance b from the wall equals the undisturbed ﬂow velocity at
the same height, inducing a reaction zone perpendicular to the
incoming ﬂow, which continuously ignites neighboring regions
downstream. Since the ﬂame curvature in this leading region is on
the order of the ﬂame thickness f, Sf can deviate from the lami-
nar ﬂame speed SL for Le1 due to nonequidiffusion effects
5,6. Above b, the ﬂame velocity is determined by the laminar
ﬂame speed SL of the mixture. Close to the wall, Sf decreases due
to heat loss and radical recombination, and the luminous combus-
tion zone vanishes below the quenching distance q.
Based on the situation in Fig. 1, a correlation model has been
proposed, which involves the velocity gradient at the wall as a
measure of the ﬂashback limit:
gc =
u
y
y=0
=
Sfy=b
b
1
In Eq. 1, gc is called the critical gradient, which generally de-
pends on fuel-oxidizer kinetics, equivalence ratio , T, p, Tw, the
boundary layer state, and the geometry. Equation 1 induces that
the distance b tends to be smaller than the penetration distance;
i.e., the distance from the wall at which the reaction rate starts to
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute IGTI of ASME for pub-
lication in the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript
received April 8, 2010; ﬁnal manuscript received April 21, 2010; published online
September 14, 2010. Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 011503-1
Copyright © 2011 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

decrease due to the wall inﬂuence 4,7. Putnam and Jensen 8
proposed
a
dimensionless
correlation
for
laminar
Hagen–
Poiseuille ﬂow based on Eq. 1, which involves two Peclet num-
bers:
Pef = 1
8KPeF2
2a
where
Pef = u¯d
a ,
PeF = SLd
a ,
K = const
2b
In Eq. 2b, a is the thermal diffusivity of the unburnt mixture and
d is the diameter of the burner tube. Another means of nondimen-
sionalizing Eq. 1 was proposed by Lee and T’ien 9. For their
numerical simulations of laminar tube ﬂashback, they introduced
an inverse Damköhler number,
1
Dac
= gcf
SL
3
which has been adopted for other laminar ﬂashback simulations
6. For the fuels considered in the present work, numerous ex-
perimental results from laminar ﬂashback studies were published
e.g., Refs. 10–15. Velocity gradients were calculated from
laminar ﬂow theory and showed good agreement between differ-
ent studies. In all studies mentioned, only tube or slit burner ge-
ometries with a constant cross section were investigated.
The laminar theory behind Eq. 1 was transferred unaltered to
turbulent BLF. Results for atmospheric H2-air mixtures in tube
burners were published by several authors 11,12,16. The experi-
ments showed that the values of gc at constant  increase sub-
stantially with the transition from laminar to turbulent ﬂow.
Around stoichiometry, a characteristic ratio of gc,turb/gc,lam=3 has
been observed for H2-air mixtures, which also seems to hold for
other fuels 7. Figure 2 summarizes literature results for turbulent
critical gradients gc as a function of the H2 mixture fraction. To
illustrate the effect of turbulence, laminar results 4 have also
been included in the ﬁgure. Measurements for BLF of turbulent
NG-air mixtures in tube burners are available 17, but the results
are difﬁcult to interpret since core ﬂow velocities at the ﬂashback
point were close to the turbulent burning velocity of the mixture.
In all turbulent studies mentioned so far, velocity gradients were
calculated from the Blasius–Prandtl correlation for fully devel-
oped turbulent tube ﬂow. If Eq. 1 is considered to be valid also
for turbulent BLF, the assumption of Sf=SL leads to a distance b,
which lies within or at the border of the viscous region of the
turbulent boundary layer. Although this result supports the laminar
ﬂame assumption, it does not exclude an alternative solution in
the turbulent region. At the end, it remains unclear whether the
increase in gc emerges from a decrease in b, an increase in Sf, or
a mixture of both.
This overview on published BLF investigations reveals that in
spite of early publications on experimental and theoretical basis,
no substantial progress has been achieved since then to tackle the
open questions regarding turbulent BLF, which deﬁnitely repre-
sents the dominating ﬂow situation in practical burner designs.
Furthermore, all experimental data available were recorded from
tube burner ﬂames, which represent a rather special case in terms
of the ﬂame-ﬂow conﬁguration close to the burner rim. For these
reasons, a new experiment was designed, which allows the optical
investigation of turbulent BLF at conditions relevant for the
safety-critical assessment of boundary layers in premixed burner
geometries. Instead of a tube burner arrangement, a setup was
chosen where the ﬂame is already burning inside the boundary
layer of interest, and optical access was considered as a key fea-
ture to clarify the turbulent BLF mechanism using advanced op-
tical measurement equipment. In the following, the experimental
rig will be introduced, and the ﬁrst measurement series of turbu-
lent BLF limits will be presented and compared with existing tube
burner data.
2
Experimental Setup
The design of the experiment follows two principles. On the
one hand, a rather generic ﬂow situation is created, which is well
accessible for an analytic treatment and for measurements. On the
other hand, the stable ﬂame conﬁguration represents the critical
operation condition from a practical combustor, namely, that a
ﬂame is already present inside the boundary layer region in order
to test its resistance against ﬂashback.
2.1
Rig Structure. The experimental rig consists of ﬂow sec-
tions for premixing, ﬂow conditioning, the measurement section,
the combustion chamber, and the exhaust duct. The premixing
section allows for mixtures of air, H2, and CH4
2. All gases are
supplied at room temperature. A static ﬂow mixer and the subse-
quent ﬂow straightening devices provide proper large- and ﬁne-
scale mixing before the mixture enters the measurement section.
An overview of measurement section and combustion chamber is
shown in Fig. 3. An open air gap at the combustion chamber exit
generates a constant pressure outlet condition with acoustic de-
coupling from the exhaust duct system.
2.2
Measurement Section. A planar asymmetric diffuser has
been chosen as the basic geometry for the measurement section
since diverging sections are often encountered at the exit of non-
swirling as well as swirling ﬂow burners. At the same time, high
duct Reynolds numbers can be achieved, which ensures fully tur-
bulent conditions, while ﬂashback can still be expected due to the
wall friction reducing effect of the positive pressure gradient. A
2NG with a mean CH4 content of 97.63 vol % was used as a substitute.
Fig. 1
2D model of ﬂow and ﬂame conﬁguration at the onset
of laminar BLF
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
0
20
40
60
80
100
H2 [% vol]
gc [1/s]
von Elbe et al. (1943)
Khitrin et al. (1965)
Fine (1958)
laminar
turbulent
Fig. 2
Literature results for BLF in tube burners during atmo-
spheric premixed H2-air combustion
011503-2 / Vol. 133, JANUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

further advantage of the geometry emerges from the continuously
increasing wall velocity gradients along the diffuser walls in the
upstream direction: At ﬂashback, the ﬂame propagates upstream
only a ﬁnite distance until it reaches a new mean position. This
behavior allows the determination of critical velocity gradients for
a ﬂame that is stabilized inside a turbulent boundary layer without
any inﬂuence from auxiliary ﬂame holders.
The ﬂow inside the measurement section has been designed
such that the ﬂashback process only takes place in the center of
the lower diffuser wall, which constitutes a quasi-2D boundary
layer region with good optical access. A cross section of the dif-
fuser arrangement is depicted in Fig. 4, with all dimensions given
in millimeters. The width of the duct is constant at w=157 mm.
The premixed gases enter the chamber from the right-hand side of
the ﬁgure through an entry duct of height h=17.5 mm. To a short
horizontal section at the inlet, a stainless steel ramp is attached
with an intermediate graphite seal of approximately 0.5 mm thick-
ness. The upper edge of the seal is positioned ﬂush with the lower
wall of the duct upstream. The ramp surface forms the lower
diffuser wall with a constant inclination angle of , which can be
discretely varied between 0 deg and 8 deg. The ramp surface
temperature can be controlled by an impingement cooling system
on the bottom side of the ramp surface, which is not shown in Fig.
4. The roughness height of the ramp surface lies within 50 m,
which results in a hydraulically smooth wall for all ﬂow situations
considered in this work. The ramp is followed ﬂushly by a ce-
ramic tile that ensures thermal insulation during stable operation.
Optical access to the diffuser section is provided by three fused
silica windows along the y- and z-directions. The window surfaces
in contact with the ﬂow are aligned with the upper and side walls,
respectively, by joining two windows together using a special
bonding technique. This avoids any stagnation or recirculation
regions, which could lead to ﬂame anchoring.
The premixed gases are continuously ignited by two pilot burn-
ers at the end of the asymmetric diffuser section, which thus act as
ﬂame holders for two main ﬂames that extend into a combustion
chamber of 570 mm length after a step change in cross section, as
indicated on the left-hand side in Fig. 4. The pilot burners run on
premixed methane and air at near-stoichiometric mixture ratios. In
order to prevent blow-off, the burner ﬂames impinge on the wall
of neighboring ceramic tiles, from where the ﬂames subsequently
emerge perpendicular into the main ﬂow. The lower pilot burner is
further embedded by the trapezoidal part of a ceramic block,
which forms a gap of 2 mm together with the opposite ceramic
tile. The surface of the ceramic block is also inclined toward the
horizontal by  but is offset below the ramp plane by 4 mm. By
doing so, the power of the lower pilot burner can be reduced to a
minimum while still providing a stable ﬂame to ignite the main
ﬂame. The lower pilot burner has its position still inside the dif-
fuser section for two reasons: On the one hand, the inﬂuence of
the shear layer and the recirculation zone behind the trailing edge
of the ceramic block on the anchor of the lower main ﬂame is
minimized. On the other hand, the ﬂow displacement by the lower
main ﬂame causes a contraction of streamlines above it, which
induces a negative pressure gradient on the upper wall boundary
layer. When ﬂashback conditions are approached, this conﬁgura-
tion results in a self-stabilizing system where the ﬂame ﬂashes
back only on the lower wall of the diffuser.
It is well known that boundary layer development in rectangu-
lar channels induces a region of reduced wall friction at the edges
of the duct 18. Therefore, according to Eq. 1, BLF is likely to
occur only along the corners in this type of geometry, and, indeed,
the present experiment showed this behavior as expected. How-
ever, BLF should only take place in the center region of the ramp
surface, as otherwise the assumption of a quasi-2D diffuser ﬂow
would not be feasible anymore. In order to avoid corner ﬂashback,
air is locally injected into the corner boundary layers in two dif-
ferent ways. In the upper corners, the air enters through a slot of 2
mm width perpendicular to the main ﬂow direction. In the lower
corners, air is blown out along the main ﬂow direction through
several slots of 1 mm height and 4 mm width. During experi-
ments, the amount of blowing air was adjusted by volume ﬂow
meters such that the sum fed to all slots did not exceed 2% of the
main mass ﬂow. The inﬂuence of the blowing air on the main ﬂow
development has been investigated quantitatively by numerical
RANS mixing simulations using ANSYS CFX 12.0 as well as quali-
tatively by changing the amount of blowing during the running
experiment. No appreciable inﬂuence, neither on the ﬂow distri-
bution nor on the ﬂame shape at ﬂashback, was observed inside
the 2D region of the diffuser within the blowing range mentioned
above.
2.3
Flow Conditioning. The premixed gases downstream of
the static ﬂow mixer contain substantial swirl and large-scale tur-
bulent ﬂuctuations. A cascade of ﬂow straightening and settling
devices downstream of the mixer is thus needed to obtain a ho-
mogeneous ﬂow distribution, in terms of mean and turbulent
quantities, at the inlet of the measurement section. For cold ﬂow
experiments, a lot of experiences exist for the design of such ﬂow
conditioning setups, which are usually composed of a wide-angle
diffuser, a settling chamber of a large cross section with several
honeycombs and grids, and ﬁnally a contraction toward the inlet
proﬁle. However, when premixed and preheated ignitable mix-
tures are investigated, a compromise has to be found between
satisfactory ﬂow conditioning and the safety aspect of avoiding
large volumes with low mixture velocities. In the present setup,
the conditioning section is kept at a constant cross section, and a
combination of stainless-steel honeycombs, perforated plates, and
wire meshes of different solidities is used as distributed eddy sup-
pressors and pressure losses, respectively. Downstream of the last
mesh, two identical rough strips of 5 mm streamwise width at the
top and bottom of the channel ensure a prompt and even transition
of the boundary layers.
Figure 5 shows the mean ﬂow distribution at the combustion
Fig. 3
Overview of measurement section and combustion
chamber
17.5
15
Thermocouples
Thermocouple
430
20
Pilot burner
Ceramic block
Main flames
Pilot burner
Wall-aligned windows
φ
Flow
x
y
Fig. 4
Details of the measurement section
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 011503-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

chamber inlet for pure air at a mass ﬂow rate of m˙ air=50 g/s,
which was measured by a constant temperature anemometer
CTA. The measurement plane was located 148 mm downstream
of the last wire mesh.
The velocity distributions along the full channel height 0y
h and width 0zw are shown in Fig. 5a. The nondimen-
sional channel height y/h and width z/w are plotted on the x-axis.
On the y-axis, the nondimensionalized mean ﬂow velocities u¯ /uref
are shown. The mean velocity at the center of the duct was chosen
as uref. The velocity distribution along the channel width at half
channel height y/h=0.5 shows good uniformity. Only close to the
channel sidewalls, the velocities rise above the center value. This
fact can be explained by the ﬂow distribution properties of ﬁne
wire meshes, which produce a distinct velocity overshoot at the
edge of the boundary layer due to a minimum of the pressure loss
coefﬁcient in this region 19. The same mechanism is observed
for the mean velocity proﬁles along the channel height at three
lateral positions z/w=0.25, 0.5, and 0.75. While the proﬁles again
show a good uniformity within 1.5%, there exists a symmetric
peak of velocities above the center value at y/h=0.25 and y/h
=0.75. The boundary layer thickness amounts to approximately 3
mm at the top and bottom of the channel. The measurements did
not extend to the near wall region of the channel sidewalls, as can
be seen from the different scaling of the x-axis. However, the
boundary layer thickness there is probably below 3 mm since the
sidewall regions lack the momentum loss from the rough strips
upstream.
According to Ref. 19, the wall friction produced by such mesh
wake proﬁles tends to lie above the value for an undisturbed tur-
bulent boundary layer at the same position. In order to check
whether this is also true for the present ﬂow, the CTA results at the
center of the lower wall were transformed to the wall coordinates,
y+ = y
u
4a
u+ = u¯
u
4b
In Eq. 4a,  is the kinematic viscosity of the mixture and u is
the shear stress velocity, calculated from the wall shear w and the
mixture density 	 by u=w/	. Figure 5b shows the result from
the coordinate transformation. The equation for the logarithmic
region of a fully turbulent boundary layer,
u+ = 1

lny+ + B
5
as well the law of the wall derived by Spalding 20 have been
included in the ﬁgure. For both correlations, 
=0.4 and B=5.5
were assumed. The wall shear stress w was adjusted until a good
match between the CTA results and the Spalding correlation was
achieved. The wall shear stress determined in this way amounts to
w=1.02 Pa, which is close to numerical results for fully devel-
oped channel ﬂow at the same mass ﬂow and density see the next
section for simulation details. It can be concluded that the wall-
near region of the boundary layer at the combustion chamber inlet
has the self-similar structure of a fully turbulent boundary layer,
and the wall shear stress is comparable to the results for fully
developed turbulent channel ﬂow.
2.4
Instrumentation. Mixture ratios for each component as
well as the pilot burner fuel mass ﬂow are controlled by separate
thermal mass ﬂow controllers with a nominal accuracy of 0.8% of
the measured value. The mixture inlet temperature and the center
temperature of the ramp surface plate at three positions are mea-
sured by thermocouples. For the optical measurements presented
in this work, an intensiﬁed charge-coupled device ICCD camera
Hamamatsu C4336-02 with a nominal resolution of 720
480 pixel and a frame rate of 30 Hz was used. An interference
ﬁlter with a transmission range of 300–350 nm in combination
with a UV lens was used to conﬁne the main part of the captured
signal to the radiation of the OH radical.
3
Measurement Procedure
For the determination of critical velocity gradients gc at turbu-
lent BLF, a combination of experimental and numerical results
was used. First, the mean position of the ﬂame tip at ﬂashback
was calculated from a time series of instantaneous ﬂame images
for a certain inlet mass ﬂow and equivalence ratio. As described
before, these images were taken at the pseudostationary new equi-
librium position of the ﬂame after it had ﬂashed back from its
original position above the pilot burner. Second, the respective
mean wall friction distribution along the centerline of the ramp
surface was extracted from a 2D RANS simulation of the ﬂow
inside the measurement section, and the value of gc at the mean
ﬂame tip position was evaluated. This procedure will be explained
in more detail in the following paragraphs.
3.1
Mean Flame Tip Position at BLF. To give an illustration
of the observed ﬂame conﬁguration, Fig. 6 shows the ﬂame shape
and position inside the measurement section at BLF for a lean
H2-air mixture at m˙ air=100 g/s and =0.29. The image repre-
sents an overlay of the ﬂame chemiluminescence captured with
the ICCD camera with an image of the measurement section at
ambient light. Since the depth of focus was large compared with
the channel width, the ﬂame image represents a line-of-sight inte-
gration with the optical axis tangential to the ramp surface plane.
The ﬂame exhibits the expected shape at BLF on the lower dif-
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
y/h, z/w [-]
u/uref [-]
z/w = 0.5
z/w = 0.75
z/w = 0.25
y/h = 0.5
0
5
10
15
20
25
1
10
100
1000
y+ [-]
u+ [-]
CTA
log-law
Spalding (1961)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5
Mean velocity proﬁles at combustion chamber inlet
„m˙ =50 g/s, pure air…. „a… Velocity proﬁles across full channel
height and width. „b… Wall-near velocities at the center of the
lower wall.
011503-4 / Vol. 133, JANUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

fuser wall, including a strongly curved leading edge zone and an
angled, stretched tail toward the inner channel region see Fig. 1.
A top view on the leading ﬂame front, which is not shown in Fig.
6, reveals a satisfactorily even mean lateral distribution in the
center region of the ramp. At the sidewalls of the channel, the
reaction is quenched since the blowing air produces equivalence
ratios below the lower explosion limit of the mixture. Since the
ﬂame tip is not stationary during BLF, but is moving back and
forth at an oscillation frequency of approximately 1–2 Hz due to
turbulent ﬂuctuations, a mean ﬂame tip position has been calcu-
lated from the experimental data. For each operation point, single
images from two measurement series 30 s duration each were
binarized with regard to the ﬂame region, and a time averaged
image normalized between 0 and 1 was produced. Along a line
parallel to the ramp surface, which intersected the mean ﬂame tip
region, and approaching this region from upstream, the point of
0.5 intensity was taken as the mean ﬂame tip position at BLF.
3.2
Numerical Simulation of the Diffuser Flow. The wall
friction distribution for each investigated combination of inlet
mass ﬂow and mixture composition was simulated using the AN-
SYS CFX 12.0 code. All simulations were made for cold mixture
ﬂow without combustion. By doing so, the data evaluation is
analogous to the procedure used for tube burner experiments in
the literature, where wall gradients were calculated from tube fric-
tion correlations, which are only valid for the nonreactive case. A
hexahedral 2D mesh with 0.35106 nodes was used to represent
the lateral center region of the measurement section and the com-
bustion chamber. The ﬂuid was modeled as a constant property
mixture of ideal gases with the dynamic viscosity taken from pure
air at 300 K and 1 bar. The domain additionally included a straight
duct of height h and a length of 50h in order to establish a fully
developed channel proﬁle before the beginning of the diffuser
section. As mentioned before, the mean inlet velocity proﬁle in the
experiments generated a wall velocity gradient, which is close to
the fully developed channel ﬂow case. Therefore, the numerical
simulation is expected to be a good representation of the wall
friction on the lower diffuser wall during the experiments. The
boundary layers along the diffuser walls were fully resolved dur-
ing all simulations, with a maximum value of ymax
+
0.4 at the
center of the wall cells. It was ensured that the laminar sublayer
contained more than three grid points and that the whole boundary
layer contained more than 30 grid points. The pilot burner mass
ﬂows were neglected due to their vanishing inﬂuence on the ﬂow
distribution. A constant average pressure outlet was set at the out-
let of the combustion chamber, while the domain was bounded by
symmetry planes at both sides. Turbulence modeling was pro-
vided by the shear stress transport SST two-equation model with
the default values for all model constants. This choice was based
on the outcomes of several test cases for wall friction simulations
21,22, which consistently revealed very good prediction capa-
bilities of k− based RANS models for turbulent wall friction at
mild to moderate adverse pressure gradients. Figure 7 shows the
numerical results for the wall shear distribution on the lower wall
of the diffuser. On the x-axis, the horizontal coordinate is shown,
where the point x=0 is located at the start of the diffuser section.
The curves exhibit the expected shape with a continuous decrease
in wall shear in the downstream direction. The maximum of the
wall shear gradient is located at the beginning of the diffuser,
which is caused by a maximum of the streamwise pressure gradi-
ent in this region.
4
Results and Discussion
According to the experimental procedure described above, BLF
experiments were conducted and mean critical gradients g¯c were
determined for several mixtures of CH4, H2, and air. The inclina-
tion angle  of the ramp surface was kept constant at 4 deg, which
resulted in a diffuser ﬂow with no appreciable stall, as predicted
from corresponding diffuser ﬂow charts 23.
The time averaged images for the determination of the mean
ﬂame tip position at turbulent BLF are shown in Fig. 8. As for Fig.
6, the geometry of the measurement section has been used as a
background to make the images more instructive. The images
show very similar shapes, and it can be seen that there is a unique
mean ﬂame position when approaching the ﬂame tip region from
upstream. It should be emphasized that the broad bright zone be-
hind the leading tip of the ﬂame does not indicate a high residence
probability of the ﬂame tip in this region. It rather represents the
time average of the chemiluminescence from the tail of the ﬂame.
The quantitative results from the combined experimental and
numerical data processing are summarized in Table 1. In each
line, the fuel as well as the air mass ﬂow rate m˙ air are listed,
followed by the equivalence ratio BLF at which the position of
the ﬂame at ﬂashback was recorded. The mean critical gradient g¯c
is given as extracted from the respective numerical wall friction
simulation. The last entry, g¯c,t=0.5–1, is the mean critical gradient
as calculated from the second half of each data set. This variable
is a measure of the inﬂuence of wall heating during the ﬁrst half
of the experiments t=0–0.5 on the further ﬂashback position.
By comparing the results for g¯c and g¯c,t=0.5–1 in each line, it is
concluded that the heating of the ramp during the experimental
time had no signiﬁcant effect on the determined mean ﬂashback
positions.
The obtained results for the mean critical gradients were sur-
prising. For all mixtures, the critical gradients lie substantially
above the tube values reported in the literature. The results for
CH4-air mixtures can be compared with the turbulent ﬂashback
data published by Grumer 17, which indicates critical gradients
below gc=2000 1/s for =0.8. This value is exceeded by the
present results by a factor of about 3. The results for H2-air mix-
tures can be directly compared with Fig. 2. It can be seen that at
such lean mixtures 9.5 vol % H2 for =0.25 and 10.71 vol % H2
for =0.29, ﬂashback in tube burners was observed at laminar
Fig. 6
Instantaneous H2-air ﬂame shape and position at BLF
„m˙ air=100 g/s, =0.29…
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
0,0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
x [m]
Wall Shear [Pa]
H2_120_0.29
H2_100_0.29
H2_60_0.25
H2_50_0.25
CH4_50_0.8
CH4_40_0.8
Fig. 7
Numerical results for wall shear stress along the lower
diffuser wall
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 011503-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

conditions
only
at
very
low
critical
gradients
around
gc
=100 1/s. The present results exceed this laminar value by two
orders of magnitude.
The reasons for the observed deviations of the present results
from the literature are probably twofold: 1 The pressure rise
upstream of the reaction zone acts more strongly on the incoming
boundary layer ﬂow, and 2 the boundary layer resistance to
ﬂashback is deteriorated by the positive pressure gradient acting
on it.
Looking at the ﬁrst point, the conﬁguration between ﬂame and
incoming ﬂow at conditions approaching ﬂashback is not the same
Fig. 8
Time averaged ﬂame images for the determination of mean ﬂame tip position at turbulent BLF. „a… CH4, m˙ air
=40 g/s, and =0.8. „b… CH4, m˙ air=50 g/s, and =0.8. „c… H2, m˙ air=50 g/s, and =0.25. „d… H2, m˙ air=60 g/s, and 
=0.25. „e… H2, m˙ air=100 g/s, and =0.29. „f… H2, m˙ air=120 g/s, and =0.29.
Table 1
Critical gradients at BLF for different fuel-air mixtures
at a diffuser angle of 4 deg
Fuel
m˙ air
g/s
BLF
g¯c
1/s
g¯c,t=0.5–1
1/s
CH4
40
0.8
5329
5336
CH4
50
0.8
6952
6952
H2
50
0.25
8098
8067
H2
60
0.25
10,047
10,121
H2
100
0.29
31,899
31,798
H2
120
0.29
42,576
42,786
011503-6 / Vol. 133, JANUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

for tube burners and the experiment presented here. At the exit of
a tube burner, the ﬂame is stabilized inside the shear layer formed
in the wake of the burner rim. Consequently, the backpressure of
the ﬂame is not limited to the boundary layer region upstream of
the burner rim but is also distributed to regions directly above and
toward the outward side of the burner rim. In the present experi-
ment, the lower main ﬂame always stays attached to the edge
above the pilot burner exit, where its pressure rise acts directly
against the incoming boundary layer. The induced local decelera-
tion of the near-wall ﬂow is likely to support the upstream propa-
gation of the ﬂame dynamically, depending on the dynamic pres-
sure proﬁle of the boundary layer and the pressure rise in front of
the ﬂame.
Regarding the second argument, it is instructive to compare
values from Table 1 for g¯c at identical  but different m˙ air. It
becomes obvious that for all three data pairs, which span over
both fuels and a wide range of g¯c, the critical gradients for high
m˙ air lie consistently above the data for lower m˙ air. In other words,
if the mean position at BLF lies more downstream from the dif-
fuser inlet, as it is the case for higher m˙ air at a given , then the
boundary layer is more susceptible to ﬂashback compared with
positions closer to the inlet. An obvious explanation for this ob-
servation is the integral distance along which the positive pressure
gradient has acted on the boundary layer. This is an interesting
observation since turbulent boundary layers subject to an adverse
pressure gradient only show deviations from the universal nondi-
mensional proﬁle in the outer layer, which has also been called the
wake region e.g., Ref. 24. However, according to the classical
theory explained in the introduction, turbulent BLF is determined
only by the ﬂow distribution inside the laminar sublayer, which
should stay the same at different positions along the ramp.
5
Conclusions
An experimental setup has been presented, which allows the
optical investigation of turbulent BLF during premixed combus-
tion of CH4–H2-air mixtures. The ﬂame holding has been chosen
such that it represents the critical situation in gas turbine combus-
tors, namely, that a wall boundary layer should be resistant against
ﬂashback even if a ﬂame is directly located inside of it. As a ﬁrst
series of measurements from the new rig, mean ﬂame tip positions
during BLF were recorded for different mixture compositions and
inlet mass ﬂows. The ﬂow was subject to an adverse pressure
gradient imposed by an asymmetric diffuser at an opening angle
of 4 deg. The results were expressed as mean critical velocity
gradients according to the classical ﬂashback theory using numeri-
cal RANS simulations for the determination of the wall shear
distributions inside the measurement section. The results deviate
substantially from the published data for tube burner ﬂashbacks,
indicating that the investigated combination of the safety-critical
ﬂame position and the inﬂuence of an adverse pressure gradient
upon the boundary layer structure leads to a completely different
interaction between ﬂame and ﬂow than expected. In light of these
ﬁndings, the concept of a critical velocity gradient as a universal
measure of ﬂashback propensity in turbulent boundary layers
seems not to deliver realistic results and has to be replaced by a
model which also takes into account the outer regions of the
boundary layer. Future work will be concentrated on the inﬂuence
of the pressure gradient by varying the diffuser opening angle, on
mixture preheating, on the interaction between the ﬂame back-
pressure and the incoming boundary layer as well as the detailed
ﬂame propagation mechanism inside the boundary layer.
Acknowledgment
This publication forms a part of the BIGCO2 project, per-
formed under the strategic Norwegian research program Climit.
The authors acknowledge the partners StatoilHydro, GE Global
Research, Statkraft, Aker Clean Carbon, Shell, TOTAL, Conoco-
Phillips, ALSTOM, the Research Council of Norway Grant Nos.
178004/I30 and 176059/I30, and Gassnova Grant No. 182070
for their support.
References
1 Payrhuber, K., Moliére, M., Scholz, M., and Jones, R. M., 2007, “Future
Energy Challenges in a Carbon Constrained Environment—Fuel Flexibility as
a Growing Need,” VGB PowerTech, 8710, pp. 23–29.
2 Lieuwen, T., McDonell, V., Petersen, E., and Santavicca, D., 2008, “Fuel Flex-
ibility Inﬂuences on Premixed Combustor Blowout, Flashback, Autoignition,
and Stability,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 130, p. 011506.
3 Lieuwen, T., McDonell, V., Santavicca, D., and Sattelmayer, T., 2008, “Burner
Development and Operability Issues Associated With Steady Flowing Syngas
Fired Combustors,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 1806, pp. 1169–1192.
4 Lewis, B., and von Elbe, G., 1943, “Stability and Structure of Burner Flames,”
J. Chem. Phys., 11, pp. 75–97.
5 Kurdyumov, V. N., Fern’andez, E., and Liñán, A., 2000, “Flame Flashback and
Propagation of Premixed Flames Near a Wall,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 28, pp.
1883–1889.
6 Kurdyumov, V., Fernández-Tarrazo, E., Truffaut, J.-M., Quinard, J., Wangher,
A., and Searby, G., 2007, “Experimental and Numerical Study of Premixed
Flame Flashback,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 1275–1282.
7 Wohl, K., 1953, “Quenching, Flash-Back, Blow-Off—Theory and Experi-
ment,” Fourth Symposium International on Combustion, pp. 68–89.
8 Putnam, A. A., and Jensen, R. A., 1949, “Application of Dimensionless Num-
bers to Flash-Back and Other Combustion Phenomena,” Third Symposium on
Combustion, Flame and Explosion Phenomena, The Combustion Institute, pp.
89–98.
9 Lee, S. T., and T’ien, J. S., 1982, “A Numerical Analysis of Flame Flashback
in a Premixed Laminar System,” Combust. Flame, 48, pp. 273–285.
10 Dugger, G. L., 1955, “Flame Stability of Preheated Propane-Air Mixtures,”
Ind. Eng. Chem., 47, pp. 109–114.
11 Fine, B., 1958, “The Flashback of Laminar and Turbulent Burner Flames at
Reduced Pressure,” Combust. Flame, 2, pp. 253–266.
12 Fine, B., 1959, “Effect of Initial Temperature on Flash Back of Laminar and
Turbulent Burner Flames,” Ind. Eng. Chem., 51, pp. 564–566.
13 France, D. H., 1977, “Flashback of Laminar Monoport Burner Flames,” J. Inst.
Fuel, 50, pp. 147–152.
14 Mallens, R. M. M., and De Goey, L. P. H., 1998, “Flash-Back of Laminar
Premixed Methane/Air Flames on Slit and Tube Burners,” Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol., 136, pp. 41–54.
15 Davu, D., Franko, R., and Choudhuri, A., 2005, “Investigation on Flashback
Propensity of Syngas Premixed Flames,” 41st AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint
Propulsion Conference and Exhibit, Paper No. AIAA 2005-3585.
16 Khitrin, L., Moin, P., Smirnov, D., and Shevchuk, V., 1965, “Peculiarities of
laminar- and turbulent-ﬂame ﬂashbacks,” Tenth Symposium International on
Combustion, pp. 1285–1291.
17 Grumer, J., 1958, “Flashback and Blowoff Limits of Unpiloted Turbulent
Flames,” Jet Propul., 28, pp. 756–759.
18 Schlichting, H., 1982, Grenzschicht-Theorie, Braun, Karlsruhe.
19 Mehta, R., 1985, “Turbulent Boundary Layer Perturbed by a Screen,” AIAA J.,
239, pp. 1335–1342.
20 Spalding, D., 1961, “A Single Formula for the Law of the Wall,” ASME J.
Appl. Mech., 28, pp. 455–458.
21 Wilcox, D., 1993, “Comparison of Two-Equation Turbulence Models for
Boundary Layers With Pressure Gradient,” AIAA J., 318, pp. 1414–1421.
22 Menter, F. R., 1994, “Two-Equation Eddy-Viscosity Turbulence Models for
Engineering Applications,” AIAA J., 328, pp. 1598–1605.
23 Greitzer, E. M., Tan, C. S., and Graf, M. B., 2004, Internal Flow, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
24 White, F. M., 2005, Viscous Fluid Flow, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 011503-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
