
--- Page 1 ---

A. Lacarelle1
e-mail: arnaud.lacarelle@tu-berlin.de
T. Faustmann
Institut für Strömungsmechanik
und Technische Akustik,
Technische Universität Berlin,
Müller-Breslau-Strasse 8,
10623 Berlin, Germany
D. Greenblatt
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology,
Technion City, Haifa 32000, Israel
C. O. Paschereit
O. Lehmann
D. M. Luchtenburg
B. R. Noack
Institut für Strömungsmechanik
und Technische Akustik,
Technische Universität Berlin,
Müller-Breslau-Strasse 8,
10623 Berlin, Germany
Spatiotemporal Characterization
of a Conical Swirler Flow Field
Under Strong Forcing
In this study, a spatiotemporal characterization of forced and unforced ﬂows of a conical
swirler is performed based on particle image velocimetry (PIV) and laser Doppler an-
emometry (LDA). The measurements are performed at a Reynolds number of 33,000 and
a swirl number of 0.71. Axisymmetric forcing is applied to approximate the effects of
thermoacoustic instabilities on the ﬂow ﬁeld at the burner inlet and outlet. The actuation
frequencies are set at the natural ﬂow frequency (Strouhal number Stf0.92) and two
higher frequencies (Stf1.3 and 1.55) that are not harmonically related to the natural
frequency. Phase-averaged measurement are used as a ﬁrst step to visualize the coherent
ﬂow structures. Second, proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) is applied to the PIV
data to characterize the effect of the actuation on the ﬂuctuating ﬂow. Measurements
indicate a typical natural ﬂow instability of helical nature in the unforced case. The
associated induced pressure and ﬂow oscillations travel upstream to the swirler inlet
where generally fuel is injected. This observation is of critical importance with respect to
the stability of the combustion. Harmonic actuation at different frequencies and ampli-
tudes does not affect the mean velocity proﬁle at the outlet, while the coherent velocity
ﬂuctuations are strongly inﬂuenced at both the inlet and outlet. On one hand, the domi-
nant helical mode is replaced by an axisymmetric vortex ring if the ﬂow is forced at the
natural ﬂow frequency. On the other hand, the natural ﬂow frequency prevails at the
outlet under forcing at higher frequencies and POD analysis indicates that the helical
structure is still present. The presented results give new insight into the ﬂow dynamics of
a swirling ﬂow burner under strong forcing. DOI: 10.1115/1.2982139
Keywords: swirling ﬂows, PIV, LDA, POD, coherent structures, ﬂow instability, ﬂow
forcing
1
Introduction
For the past decades, lean premixed combustion has become a
standard feature in gas turbine engines and is expected to be
implemented in aircraft engines. The main advantage of this com-
bustion technique is that the low fuel/air ratio results in a lower
burning temperature and produces relatively low NOx emissions.
One of the main disadvantages of lean premixed combustion is
that it is susceptible to combustion instabilities that produce large-
amplitude pressure oscillations that can damage the combustor
and turbine. The mechanisms leading to thermoacoustic instabili-
ties are numerous and closely related to each other: fuel/air ratio
oscillations 1, acoustics boundary conditions 2, and ﬂame sur-
face oscillations induced by coherent structures 3,4.
These coherent ﬂow structures are present in most combustors
jet ﬂames, bluff body, and swirling ﬂows and lead to periodical
oscillations of the velocity and mixing proﬁle. This results in os-
cillations of the ﬂame, which can excite acoustic modes of the
combustor and in turn generate combustion instabilities. Particu-
larly in swirling combustors, different coherent structures have
been identiﬁed in experimental and numerical studies of isother-
mal ﬂows 5–10. Most of these investigations revealed a precess-
ing vortex core PVC and a helical mode. The typical frequencies
of these two phenomena were generally not related but some in-
vestigations showed that the frequency of the PVC was very
closed or equal to the frequency of the helical mode 7 and par-
ticularly in a downscaled model of the burner used in this inves-
tigation 10. In the shear layer of the ﬂow, Kelvin–Helmholtz
instabilities have also been observed 3,5,9. The inﬂuence of the
burner geometry, swirl number, expansion ratio, and boundary
conditions on the ﬂow ﬁeld have also been investigated by many
authors 11–13.
To avoid combustion instabilities induced by coherent struc-
tures, it is essential to understand their generation mechanism, as
well as their evolution in the case of forced ﬂows. The forcing,
which is applied in the current investigation, approximates the
impact of axial acoustic modes of combustion instabilities on the
ﬂow ﬁeld in the burner.
Numerous experimental investigations on the excitation of
simple jets have been reported in literature 14,15. The forcing of
those jets with different excitation modes generated axisymmetric
or helical structures. Literature dealing with the experimental
forcing of swirling jets is rare, and even rarer are studies carried
out on swirl burners. One of the main reasons is that actuators
may not have sufﬁcient authority to excite the ﬂow with an am-
plitude that is comparable to the oscillation amplitude that is at-
tained under full-scale operating conditions 10% of the mean
ﬂow velocity.
Nevertheless, Paschereit et al. 3 investigated the ﬂow in re-
acting and non-reacting ﬂows on a model premixed burner. They
observed that axisymmetrical and helical modes could be excited
by changing the boundary conditions downstream of the combus-
tion chamber. Cold ﬂow investigations of the same burner in a
water test rig showed that the helical mode found in the reacting
experiments corresponded to a helical mode of the burner ﬂow.
Using the same burner type, Lacarelle et al. 16 showed that
forcing at the frequency of the helical mode led to an increase in
scalar mixing at the burner outlet. Phase-averaged measurements
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received
March 31, 2008; ﬁnal manuscript received April 21, 2008; published online February
6, 2009. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the ASME Turbo
Expo 2008: Land, Sea and Air GT2008, Berlin, Germany, June 9–13, 2008.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031504-1
Copyright © 2009 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

from PIV data showed that axial forcing at the natural ﬂow fre-
quency replaced a helical mode with an axisymmetric mode at the
burner outlet. Khalil et al. 17 also investigated the impact of
forcing on the ﬂow ﬁeld of a generic swirler. They found that
forcing frequency and amplitude have an inﬂuence on both the
vortex shedding and mean-ﬁeld of the ﬂow. Pulsing at the natural
ﬂow frequency caused the development of axisymmetric vortex
rings in the shear layer, while the unforced ﬂow showed a
m= +2 helical structure. Forcing at frequencies lower than two
times the natural frequency resulted in a lock-in phenomenon of
the vortex shedding frequency on the excitation, which disap-
peared for higher frequencies. The amplitude of the excitation had
a signiﬁcant impact on the breakdown position, which moved
downstream as the amplitude increased.
As it is difﬁcult to experimentally actuate the ﬂow at a high
amplitude over a wide frequency range, numerical simulations are
often employed as these actuation boundary conditions can be
relatively easily implemented. Wang and Yang 9 performed a
large-eddy-simulation LES of the axially forced ﬂow of a swirl
injector with radial entry. They focused on forcing frequencies
remaining below or equal to the natural ﬂow frequencies of the
PVC 4 kHz. One simulation was performed at the natural fre-
quency of the shear layer 13 kHz. The amplitude of forcing was
set to 10%. They showed that the forced axial disturbance may be
split into two parts at the burner outlet: The propagation of the
waves in the streamwise direction followed an acoustic wave,
propagating at the speed of sound. On the other hand, the azi-
muthal oscillations were convected downstream with the local
ﬂow velocity. The excitation of the ﬂow had a small impact on the
mean ﬂow properties, except when the forcing was applied at a
frequency matching the natural ﬂow frequency of the outer shear
layer region. In this case mixing was dramatically enhanced.
The goal of this work is to understand the impact of strong
forcing on the ﬂow ﬁeld at the inlet and outlet of a swirl burner.
This is achieved by initially studying the unforced natural burner
ﬂow ﬁeld and then comparing this to the forced case. Two mea-
surement techniques PIV and laser Doppler anemometry LDA
and postprocessing tools phase averaging and proper orthogonal
decomposition POD are combined to characterize the unforced
and forced ﬂows. In Sec. 2, the experimental setup water test rig
with excitation mechanism is presented. Then the measurement
technique and the postprocessing tools used are described. Section
4 shows the results obtained with PIV and LDA at the burner
outlet and inlet for the unforced ﬂow of the burner. A typical
helical structure is observed in this case and a physical explana-
tion of the observed phenomenon is advanced. Section 5 focuses
on the impact of axial forcing on the ﬂow ﬁeld at the inlet and
outlet of the burner. Two excitation frequencies are chosen and
show remarkable properties concerning the ﬂow structures. The
POD analysis of the PIV snapshots presented in Sec. 6 reveals the
shape of the dominant structures for all forcing cases investigated,
and a sensitivity analysis of the number of PIV snapshots needed
to resolve the modes is shown. The results demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of POD for the analysis of complex turbulent ﬂows.
2
Experimental Setup
2.1
The Burner. The burner that is employed in this investi-
gation is a full-size conical swirler, normally used in gas turbine
engines. It consists of two halves of a cone that are shifted with
respect to each other in the radial direction, such that two inlet
slots of constant width are formed. The diameter of each cone-half
at the outlet is D=82 mm. This diameter is used as a reference
length for all characteristic numbers.
The airﬂow through the lateral slots generates a strong azi-
muthal velocity component. This component produces a ﬂow with
a high degree of swirl, which results in vortex breakdown near the
burner outlet followed by a recirculation zone where the ﬂame
stabilizes. The recirculation of hot combustion gas, inside the
ﬂame, leads to a second oxidation and to a reduction in carbon
monoxide gas. The disadvantages of this type of ﬂame stabiliza-
tion are ﬂow instabilities and complex three-dimensional coherent
structures. A detailed description of the burner under running con-
ditions is presented by Sattelmayer et al. 18 or Döbbeling et al.
19.
2.2
The Test Rig. The conical swirler was mounted in the
square test section of a specially designed water test rig, which
allows for full optical access to the burner from all four sides see
Fig. 1. The burner was secured to a plate, and this assembly was
mounted in the center of the test section. The dump plane thus
created had an expansion ratio burner/test section of 0.033.
The water test rig volume ﬂow was set to 7.75 m3/h, which
corresponds to a Reynolds number of 33,000. One of the main
features of the test rig was the forcing mechanism, which was
located upstream of the test section, in the bypass of the pump. It
consisted simply of a standard rotating valve driven by an electric
motor. Depending on the parameters set valve position, volume
ﬂow, and frequency of forcing and rotation of the pump, strong
forcing amplitudes were achievable up to 90% for some con-
ﬁgurations. All the measurement points chosen exhibited an al-
most sinusoidal excitation, which could be acquired using a hy-
drophone Bruel & Kjaer, type 8103 that was ﬁxed on the burner
outlet above slot S1 as shown in Fig. 2 center of hydrophone
located at x/D=0.05. The hydrophone was used to synchronize
the triggering of the measurement equipment described below. A
second hydrophone was also used to determine the rotational
sense of the natural coherent structure.
The ﬁrst PIV measurements made in planes containing the
streamwise axis x for different burner angles  showed that the
ﬂow at the burner outlet was not fully rotational symmetric, which
can be explained by the lack of rotational symmetry of the burner
geometry. The reference plane for the measurement was thus cho-
Flow
Manipulator
Water inlet
Flow
Straightener
Outlet
FI
Burner
model
Main
Pump
FI : Flow indicator
Main
Flow
Fig. 1
Principle sketch of the water test rig illustrating the ex-
citation mechanism
yr
zr
yb
zb

ur
ut
ux
S1
S2
yb
zb
h
x
G
(0.25D, 0, 0.61D)
A (-3/5D)
F (-7/5D)
LDA
xr
zr
(0,0,0)
PIV
P
a)
b)
c)
a)
b)
Fig. 2
Mounted burner in the test rig, side „a… and top views
„„b… and „c……. The ﬁgures show the PIV and LDA measurement
positions. S1 and S2 are the two slots of the burner. The hydro-
phone h was ﬁxed on S1. For the LDA measurement in the slot,
the angle  was set equal to −20 deg.
031504-2 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

sen to be the axial plane containing the two injection slots xb,zb.
With this deﬁnition and the two velocity components ux,ut i.e.,
the streamwise and azimuthal components recorded by the LDA
at the burner exit x/D=0.25, it was possible to obtain an evalu-
ation of the degree of swirl at the outlet. In our case, the swirl
number S is deﬁned as the ratio of azimuthal to streamwise mo-
mentum from z=0 to zs=50 mm
S = 20
zsu¯x · u¯tz2 · dz
zs · 20
zsu¯x
2z · dz
1
For the present Reynolds number Re=33,000, the swirl number S
was calculated to be S0.71, consistent with the presence of a
strong recirculation zone at the burner outlet.
3
Measurement Techniques
A main aim of these investigations is to characterize the ﬂow
instabilities occurring in swirling ﬂows when forcing is applied to
the ﬂow. As instabilities could be also evidenced in the unforced
case, it is appropriate to characterize the ﬂow following the triple
decomposition technique 20, where turbulent ﬂuctuations ufluc
are split into a coherent part u˜ and a random part u. Both parts
are then added to the time-averaged velocity u¯ to build the instan-
taneous velocity u
u = u¯ + ufluc
2
ufluc = u˜ + u
3
Thus, phase triggered PIV and phase-averaged velocities of the
2D LDA were used to capture the evolution of coherent structures
characterized by u˜ in the unforced and forced cases. Both mea-
surement techniques used the signal of the hydrophone h as a
trigger signal to allow for the reconstruction of the triple decom-
position. To reduce noise and avoid ﬁlter phase shifting, this sig-
nal was bandpass ﬁltered with a single cutoff frequency corre-
sponding to the dominant frequency observed.
3.1
PIV Measurement. PIV measurements were performed
at the burner outlet in the xb,zb-plane. For this a standard PIV
installation was used Nd:YAG laser, 20 mJ per pulse, associated
with a PCO Sensicam, 10241024 pixels, two image pairs per
second. Seeding of water was achieved with 5 m spherical sil-
ver coated particles. Data were processed in 3232 pixel inter-
rogation areas with 50% overlap. Interrogation areas were cross-
correlated and a local median ﬁlter was used to eliminate spurious
vectors. The eliminated data were replaced via interpolation from
adjacent interrogation areas. The resulting vector ﬁeld was used
for an adaptive cross-correlation of the data, spurious data were
ﬁltered again and adaptive cross-correlation in 1616 pixel in-
terrogation areas was reapplied. The percentage of spurious vec-
tors never exceeded 2% for any measurement plane.
The mean velocity proﬁles were computed with 500 image-
pairs taken randomly. For the phase triggered acquisitions 60
image-pairs per phase were taken and averaged. This number was
found to be high enough to capture the ﬂow structure of interest
but was not sufﬁcient to obtain reliable statistical values of the
ﬂow as suggested by Wernert and Favier 21.
3.2
LDA Measurements. 2D LDA measurements were made
using a Dantec two component system Model No. 5500A-00 with
BSA F60. The “sample and hold” acquisition of the bursts was
set 2 ms dead time between two valid bursts, i.e., maximal data
rate of 500 Hz, and the two velocity measurements were nonco-
incident. Data rates ranging from 100 Hz up to 500 Hz were
achieved, depending on the location of the measurement probe.
These values were sufﬁcient to obtain a good resolution of the
dominant frequencies of interest ranging below 10 Hz. The posi-
tioning of the LDA optic was ensured by a traversing system and
positioning correction due to the different refraction indices air,
glass, and water was applied.
LDA measurements were mainly used to investigate the ﬂow in
the inlet slots. Measurements were performed at ﬁve axial posi-
tions from x/D=−7/5D to −3/5D in steps of 1/5D Fig. 2a.
Due to the complex geometry of the slot, which cannot be con-
sidered as a translated 2D proﬁle with an increasing axial position
x, a positioning procedure was deﬁned. The burner angle was ﬁrst
set to =−20 deg to ensure optical access into the inlet slot. The
outer edge of the slot was used to position the measurement vol-
ume point P in Fig. 2b. Then a translation along yr and zr 1
mm and 4 mm positioned the measurement probe in the ﬂow. The
same procedure was repeated to deﬁne the points A to F shown in
Fig. 2a.
3.3
LDA Phase Averaging Processing. The velocity samples
acquired by the LDA were ﬁrst phase sorted in reference to the
ﬁltered reference signal, with a phase resolution of 1 deg result-
ing in 360 bins. About 15,000 valid samples for each measure-
ment point were taken. As the number of samples per bin did not
allow for reliable statistical results, an estimate of the mean phase-
averaged proﬁle was obtained by ﬁtting a Fourier series to the bin
averaged proﬁle, as described by Sonnenberger et al. 22. Five
harmonics were used and ensured a higher stability of the ob-
tained proﬁle against outliers resulting from the measurement. The
formulation of the Fourier estimation of the mean velocity uF,t
here for the azimuthal velocity was therefore
uF,t = u¯t + 
m=1
5
am cos2mf0 + bm sin2mf0
4
where u¯t is the mean velocity at the considered point, f0 is the
dominant frequency, and am and bm are the Fourier coefﬁcients of
the harmonic m. To allow for a direct comparison of the amplitude
and phase shift relationship between measurement points and hy-
drophone signal, the expression 4 was reformulated as follows:
uF,t = u¯t + 
m=1
5
u˜t,mcos2mf0 +  u˜t,m
5
with
u˜t,m = am −ibm
6
With this deﬁnition, the amplitude u˜t,m and the phase u˜t,m of
the harmonic m are directly obtained. The same processing was
also applied to the hydrophone signal as data of the hydrophone
were sampled with a valid burst of the streamwise velocity and
not continuously sampled. Figure 3 illustrates the effectiveness of
the Fourier estimation in comparison to the bin averaging method.
Measurements were performed at the position G at the burner
outlet for the unforced ﬂow see position in Fig. 2. The left ﬁgure
shows the phase sorted samples of the ut component and the re-
sulting bin averaging. It illustrates the strength of the random
component ut in comparison to the coherent motion u˜t. The Fou-
rier estimation on the right ﬁgure smoothes the proﬁle and allows
for obtaining a better estimate of u˜t.
In Fig. 3, it is also noticeable that the phase-averaged signal at
the burner outlet is not sinusoidal but reproduces qualitatively the
signal obtained in other experimental conﬁgurations 6.
The Fourier estimation was then used to calculate the phase
shift between the ﬁrst harmonic of the phase-averaged velocity at
a chosen point i and the ﬁrst harmonic of the signal of the hydro-
phone located above slot 1, which was calculated as follows:
 =  u˜t,1,i − h˜1
7
3.4
Deﬁnition of the Forcing Amplitude. The amplitude of
the excitation showed a nonlinear response to the frequency and
the different settings of the water test rig, such as the valve posi-
tion. No global actuation amplitude could be satisfyingly deﬁned
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031504-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

from these settings, as resonance phenomena of the hydraulic
pump with the piping system also occurred. Thus a local deﬁnition
Fa of the forcing amplitude was chosen. It was constructed using
the ratio of the ﬁrst harmonic amplitude of the azimuthal velocity
to its mean value at the arbitrarily chosen position C x/D=1 in
the slot S1
Fa =	
u˜t,1
u¯t 
C
8
With this deﬁnition, forcing amplitudes of up to 90% for se-
lected frequencies were achievable. The corresponding forcing
Strouhal number Stf was based on the forcing frequency f, the
burner outlet diameter D, and the mean bulk streamwise velocity
U0 based on this diameter.
3.5
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition. A low-dimensional
characterization of the ﬂuctuating velocity ﬁeld is obtained by
proper orthogonal decomposition. POD decomposes the ﬂow in
spatial dependent modes and time-dependent mode coefﬁcients.
The POD modes are sometimes referred to as coherent structures
of the ﬂow ﬁeld. The decomposition represents the ﬂow ﬁeld
in
an
optimally
compact
fashion
in
the
sense
that
uflucx,t−j=1
N ajtujx2 is minimal for any N over the class of
all orthonormal bases. The ﬂuctuating velocity ﬁeld is decom-
posed as follows:
uflucx,t  ufluc
Nx,t =
j=1
N
ajtujx
9
where N is the number of modes, uj are the POD modes, and the
mode coefﬁcients are labeled aj.
The optimality condition leads to the following eigenproblem:

	
uflucx  uflucxujxdx = 
jujx
10
where 	 is the considered ﬂow domain. The 
j are the eigenval-
ues corresponding to the eigenfunctions uj, which are called POD
modes. uflucx  uflucx is the two-point space-time correlation
tensor  is the dyadic product. The eigenvalues 
j represent the
contribution of the mode j to the mean turbulent kinetic energy
TKE. The modes are ordered by decreasing energy contribution
optimality condition. The time coefﬁcients can be obtained by
taking the inner product with the corresponding mode
ajt =
	
uflucx,tujxdx
11
A full discussion of the POD framework may be found in Holmes
et al. 23.
4
Unforced Flow of the Burner
4.1
Natural Coherent Structure Visualization. The ﬁrst
step of the investigation is to characterize the unforced ﬂow ﬁeld,
as well as the dominant structures and their characteristic frequen-
cies. Figure 4 shows the PIV results of the mean unforced ﬂow
Stf=0 at the burner outlet in the xb,zb-plane. The contour plot
of the streamwise velocity ux on which the vector plot ux,ur is
superposed, shows a central recirculation zone surrounded by a
conical jet, which is typical for this kind of swirling ﬂow. The
signal of the hydrophone showed a dominant frequency corre-
sponding to Stn0.92. This frequency could also be observed in
the ux and ut components of the LDA in the shear layer, as shown
by the power spectrum densities PSD of their ﬂuctuating parts,
u˜x,fluc and u˜t,fluc, in Fig. 5. Further measurement showed that the
dimensionless frequency Stn of the helical structure was also in-
dependent of the Reynolds number, conﬁrming that this instability
0
200
400
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
Phase Angle in deg
Velocity in m/s
0
200
400
-0.4
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
Phase Angle in deg
Velocity in m/s
Ut LDA
Bin Averaging
Bin Averaging
Fourier Estimation
Fig. 3
Scatter plot of the phase-sorted azimuthal velocity ut, bin averaging
of the velocity „left… and comparison of the bin averaging with the Fourier
estimation of the bin averaged velocity „right…, uF,t for the unforced ﬂow
Fig. 4
Contour plot of the mean streamwise velocity ux in m/s
with the vector plot of the velocity in the „xb,zb…-plane, un-
forced ﬂow
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
ux,fluc
St
PSD
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
ut,fluc
St
PSD
Fig. 5
Frequency spectra of the ux,fluc „left… and ut,fluc „right…
components for the unforced ﬂow, in the shear layer at the
burner outlet „G position, x=D/4, y=0, and z=−50 mm…
031504-4 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

is related to a ﬂow instability.
To visualize this ﬂow structure, phase triggered PIV measure-
ments were performed as described in Sec. 3. The azimuthal vor-
ticity 	 deﬁned as
	 = ux
r −ur
x
12
was used to plot the data, with r corresponding to the distance of
a considered point to the centerline of the ﬂow. This deﬁnition
characterizes more easily rotational systems, as a rotational struc-
ture centered on r/D=0 will have the same vorticity sign and
hence the same color in the color maps in the positive zb/D
0 or negative zb/D0 axial half planes. Four of the eight
phase angles acquired, which are presented in Fig. 6, clearly show
the streamwise evolution of one helical structure. The phase angle
0 deg appears indeed to be the axial symmetric picture of the
phase angle 180 deg. This helical structure is made up of two
counter rotating vortices, which evolve downstream as the phase
angle increases.
As the helical structure could be detected at the burner outlet,
the question of what happen to the slot needs to be answered. To
this end, LDA measurements were performed in slot 1 at the pre-
viously deﬁned axial positions. Then, the complete system
hydrophone/burner was rotated by 180 deg allowing for an access
to the second slot.
The power spectrum densities presented in Fig. 7 clearly show
that an oscillation at the same frequency St0.92 is also present
upstream within the slots. This oscillation can be found back near
the burner apex position E. Furthermore, the relative amplitude
of the oscillation in both slots for the azimuthal velocity u˜t is
plotted along the axial position. The amplitude of the fundamental
frequency is calculated following Eq. 8, this time applied at the
considered point. This amplitude increases as a power 4 of the
axial position, but remains still lower than the amplitude observed
in the shear layer at position G.
The evolution of the phase shift between the azimuthal veloci-
ties in the two slots and the hydrophone is shown in Fig. 8. A
phase shift of about 180 deg is visible, conﬁrming the helical
nature of the oscillations in the burner slots. This plot facilitates
an estimation of the axial wavelength 
 of the instability into the
burner, which is 
=2.25D.
This wavelength decreases strongly to 
0.5D at the burner
outlet, as can be seen in Fig. 6, where a half wavelength of 0.25D
can be estimated at each phase angle presented. This decrease
is mainly due to the change in the ﬂow ﬁeld induced by the
geometry of the dump section.
4.2
Determination of the Mode Sign and Phase Equation.
As the PIV phase locked measurement showed that the structure is
traveling downstream, only the sense of rotation i.e., clockwise
or counterclockwise rotation determined at one axial position is
necessary to fully characterize the structure see Ref. 8 or Ref.
24 for more details. The determination of the sign of the helical
mode was performed by introducing a second hydrophone probe.
One hydrophone h2 was ﬁxed over slot 1, while the angle  of
the other hydrophone h1 was varied on the circumference of the
burner see sketch in Fig. 9. The cross-correlation Rh1h2 of both
signals gives then the resulting time lag and hence phase lag
h1h2 depending on the angle . Figure 9 shows that both angles
have the same sign and, regarding the common deﬁnition of Rh1h2,
this means that the signal h1 precedes the signal h2 when   0,
180 and follows h2 when   −180, 0. The helix is thus wind-
Fig. 6
Phase-averaged color maps of the azimuthal vorticity  „in s−1… in the „xb,zb…-plane of the unforced ﬂow,
which evidences the natural helical mode. Four phases of the hydrophone signal „top right… were used to trigger
the acquisition. The arrows represent the velocity vectors.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031504-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

ing in the same sense as the swirling motion, and the mode sign is
positive m=1, conﬁrming the results of the LES simulation on
the same burner model presented by Duwig et al. 10.
With the data acquired, as discussed above, it is possible to
reconstruct the phase relation hel of the helical wave into the
burner.
helx,,t = kx + m −t
13
with
the
measured
parameter,
k=2/2.25D,
m=1,
and
=2 Stn U0/D. This relation may be taken from Ref. 8 or Ref.
24 and is valid for a ﬂow rotating counterclockwise when
viewed from the downstream x-direction, as is the case here.
4.3
Transposition of the Water Experiment to Gaseous
Experiment. To verify that the results of the water test rig could
be transposed to real gas ﬂow conditions, similar tests were con-
ducted on a similar burner in an air test rig 25. A dominant
frequency corresponding to the same Strouhal number St=0.92
was measured in the inlet slot, conﬁrming that the water labora-
tory experiments catch the same dominant ﬂow phenomena as in
the gaseous case.
4.4
Explanation of the Origins of Flow Oscillations in the
Slot. The previous results demonstrate that the helical instability,
which was observed at the burner outlet, is also present upstream
of the inlet slot. In order to explain the phenomena observed,
information on the ﬂow ﬁeld inside the burner was needed. Some
of the required information was obtained from a steady computa-
tional ﬂuid dynamics CFD simulation of the ﬂow ﬁeld per-
formed by the authors but, as yet, is still unpublished. The domain
extending between x/D=−2.8 and x/D=4 was calculated using a
ﬁrst order Reynolds average Navier–Stokes RANS solver in CFX
10.0. A k- turbulence model was employed together with an un-
structured mesh that was reﬁned in regions containing large ve-
locity gradients. They showed that the vortex breakdown VBD
already occurs in the burner and the stagnation point of the recir-
culation zone narrows the apex of the burner. In other words, the
recirculation zone is already present in the burner. As the helical
instability is closely related to the VBD phenomenon, the steady
numerical simulation conﬁrms also the experimental observation
Fig. 7
Relative oscillation amplitude of the natural frequency for ut over the axial position for the
unforced ﬂow. Spectrum of the signal at the different locations „E, D, B, and shear layer G… is shown.
A best ﬁt power four polynomial is applied to the data.
Fig. 8
Phase relationship between the tangential velocity u˜ t
and the hydrophone signal h within Slots 1 and 2 of the burner
depending on the axial position x/D for the unforced ﬂow
Fig. 9
Phase angle h1h2 of the hydrophone signals as a
function of the angle 
031504-6 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

of Sec. 4.1.
The ﬁrst explanation of the velocity oscillations at the burner
inlet presupposes that the helical structure is directly responsible
for pressure and velocity oscillations at the inlet. This helical
structure may be seen by the slots as a rotating pressure ﬁeld,
which changes periodically the local pressure loss coefﬁcient over
the slot length. As the overall pressure drop over the burner re-
mains constant, this is also the case of the pressure drop along a
streamline of the mean ﬂow. An increase in the local pressure drop
coefﬁcient will thus lead to a reduction in the velocity to keep the
mean total pressure constant. Thus, the velocity oscillations will
also follow the periodic motion of the helical instability.
Another explanation deals directly with the nature of the ﬂow.
The VBD is related to a change in the ﬂow nature and can be
explained by a transition from a supercritical state to a subcritical
one 13. The subcritical nature of the ﬂow is a necessary condi-
tion to obtain an absolute instability, which allows for the pressure
ﬁeld oscillation associated with the coherent structures to propa-
gate upstream of the perturbation or VBD location. These pressure
oscillations would also lead to velocity oscillations. As the VBD
already occurs in the burner, there is no chance for the ﬂow to be
supercritical in the burner, as suggested by Keller et al. 26,
which is a necessary condition to avoid oscillations in the slots.
These results are important for the understanding of the mixing
process fuel/air of the burner as the injection of fuel is performed
in the slots. In fact, Flohr et al. 27 underlined that the turbulent
scalar transport induced by coherent motion may have a dominant
contribution to the global turbulent transport for the same burner.
The natural velocity oscillations evidenced here will lead to fuel/
air ratio oscillations, which may excite unstable modes of the
combustor.
5
Impact of Axial Forcing on the Flow Field
5.1
Forcing at the Natural Frequency „StfÉ0.92…. First, the
ﬂow was excited at the natural frequency previously measured
Stf0.92, and the same measurements as in the unexcited case
were performed. The amplitude Fa of forcing was set to 50%.
Figure 10 shows the resulting ﬂow ﬁeld at the burner outlet. Com-
pared with the unforced case presented in Fig. 4, it clearly shows
that the forcing has a negligible impact on the mean velocity ﬁeld
at the burner outlet. This is conﬁrmed by the radial proﬁles of the
axial and radial velocities presented in Fig. 11, which show little
changes between the two cases. The inner recirculation zone
slightly decreases when forcing is applied and the axial velocity
on the centerline near the burner outlet also decreases. Beside
those minor changes, the mean ﬂow ﬁeld remains mostly un-
changed. It is not the case of the coherent motion which shows
completely different patterns with forcing at the natural ﬂow fre-
quency as shown by the phase-averaged vorticity plots in Fig. 12.
For this forcing frequency, the helical structure is replaced by an
axially symmetric vortex ring.
As for the unforced ﬂow, the phase relationship between veloc-
ity in the slot and the hydrophone was recorded for three forcing
amplitudes Fa and is presented in Fig. 13. The forcing completely
eliminates the phase shift existing between the different axial po-
sitions in the unforced conﬁguration as the phase angle  re-
mains constant. The phase shift of 60 deg obtained for the three
forcing amplitudes is due to a phase shift between the hydrophone
and velocity, as pressure oscillations coming from the excitation
are not in phase with the velocity oscillation in the shear layer.
The observation of the oscillation amplitude along the slot for
the three forcing amplitudes is shown in Fig. 14. An increase in
the axial position leads also to a slight increase in the oscillation
amplitude in the slot. This observation may be of interest regard-
ing the control of combustion by fuel injection. On one hand, one
would prefer a steady fuel injection at the bottom of the burner,
where ﬂow oscillations and hence fuel mixing oscillations are
lower than near the burner outlet. On the other hand, an unsteady
Fig. 10
Contour plot of the mean streamwise velocity ux in m/s
with the vector plot of the velocity in the „xb,zb…-plane, forced
ﬂow at StfÉ0.92
−1.5 −1 −0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
−0.5
0
0.5
zb/D
x/D=0.08
−0.5
0
0.5
x/D=0.25
−0.5
0
0.5
x/D=0.50
−0.5
0
0.5
x/D=0.75
−0.2
0
0.2
x/D=1.00
−1.5 −1 −0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
−0.5
0
0.5
zb/D
x/D=0.08
−0.2
0
0.2
x/D=0.25
−0.2
0
0.2
x/D=0.50
−0.1
0
0.1
x/D=0.75
−0.1
0
0.1
x/D=1.00
Fig. 11
Line plot of the mean streamwise velocity ux „left… and radial veloc-
ity ur „right…, in m/s, for the unforced „Stf=0,−… and forced „StfÉ0.92,…
cases
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031504-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

injection of fuel at the frequency of the instability active control
may be more effective near the burner outlet if the phase between
the fuel injection and the main ﬂow is properly adjusted.
Furthermore, except for the extremely strong forcing amplitude
Fa=90% where back ﬂow occurs, the proﬁles of the mean ve-
locity Fig. 15 and oscillation amplitude appear similar from the
apex of the burner to x/D−0.8. Mean radial proﬁles across the
slots of the axial and tangential velocities showed also the same
results. Thus, except for a deviation in the proﬁles at x/D−0.8
and Fa50%, the mean distribution of the ﬂow in the burner inlet
slots is only slightly inﬂuenced by the forcing.
5.2
Forcing at a Frequency Not Related to the Natural
Flow Frequency„StfÉ1.3…. The impact of an excitation, which
did not correspond to any harmonic of the unforced ﬂow was
investigated. For this, the PSD spectra of the LDA measurements
in the slot x/D=−4/5D, point B and in the shear layer x
Fig. 12
Phase-averaged azimuthal vorticity  „in s−1… in the „xb,zb…-plane of the forced ﬂow at StfÉ0.92, which
shows the axisymmetric structure. Four phases of the hydrophone signal „top right… were used to trigger the
acquisition. The arrows represent the velocity vectors.
natural flow
forcing 20%
forcing 50%
forcing 90%
 in deg
Fig. 13
Phase relationship between the tangential velocity u˜ t
and the hydrophone signal h within slot 1, for three forcing
amplitudes at StfÉ0.92
natural flow
forcing 20%
forcing 50%
forcing 90%
Fig. 14
Relative oscillation amplitude of u˜ t depending on the
axial position x/D for three forcing amplitudes at StfÉ0.92
natural flow
forcing 20%
forcing 50%
forcing 90%
Fig. 15
Impact of the excitation on the mean ﬂow velocity ut in
slot 1 at StfÉ0.92
031504-8 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

=D/4, y=0, z=−50 mm, point G were compared. The results for
the streamwise and azimuthal turbulent velocities at Stf1.3 are
presented in Fig. 16. They show that the dominant frequency in
the shear layer is equal to St0.9 even if the forcing is applied at
a higher frequency.
The jet is thus not receptive to this forcing frequency, and no
lock-in of the vortex shedding can be achieved at the burner out-
let. These results show the same trends as those of Khalil et al.
17, with the difference that the lock-in of the vortex shedding
occurred in their study at frequencies of up to Stf=2 Stn. As their
experimental setup is totally different, one cannot expect the same
results to be obtained in the present case. Thus the lock-in phe-
nomenon, if present, may occur over a narrower frequency
bandwidth.
With the measurement setup used, the phase-averaged PIV
measurement did not reveal any ﬂow structure when forcing was
applied at higher frequencies than the natural instability fre-
quency. The signal of the hydrophone recorded mainly the pres-
sure oscillations induced by the forcing at St1.3 and was not
appropriate to be used as a trigger signal at St0.9 for the phase-
averaged PIV see Fig. 16. POD analysis of the PIV snapshots
was thus performed to obtain the missing information, particularly
when forcing is applied at higher frequencies than the natural one.
6
Analysis of Flow Structures With POD
6.1
Turbulent Kinetic Energy Distribution. The POD
analysis of the velocity vector ﬁeld ux,ur was performed for the
three cases: Stf=0, Stf0.92, and Stf1.55. In all cases, at least
200 modes were necessary to resolve 90% of the turbulent kinetic
energy, which conﬁrms the complexity of the unforced as well as
the forced ﬂows. However, the ﬁrst POD modes still represent a
signiﬁcant fraction of the TKE, as shown in Fig. 17. Regarding
the unforced ﬂow, the ﬁrst ﬁve modes resolve 25% of the TKE,
i.e., important ﬂow features are captured with a relatively small
number of modes. The normalized modal TKE of the ﬁrst mode
matches also well with the POD results from the numerical simu-
lation of Duwig et al. 10 6.2% compared with 5.7%.
As we compare the TKE distribution of the three ﬂow cases
presented in Fig. 17, it is apparent that the natural ﬂow and the
ﬂow forced at Stf1.55 are similar, except for the differences in
the second mode. Actuation with the natural ﬂow frequency Stf
0.92 presents a more signiﬁcant change in the energy reparti-
tion, as the ﬁrst mode contains twice as much energy as the ﬁrst
mode of the unforced ﬂow. Hence this explains partly why the
Stf0.92 case will show a stronger change in the structures than
the Stf1.55 case when compared with the unforced ﬂow.
6.2
Mode Shape. The resulting modes of the above men-
tioned POD method are deﬁned in the velocity ux,ur. As the
mode structures are of interest, the modes are rewritten in the
azimuthal vorticity 	x, which is shown in Fig. 18. For each case
from left to right, the mean ﬂow and the ﬁrst four POD modes
are presented from top to bottom. Antisymmetric structures can
be observed for the unforced and the forced case Stf1.55
modes 1–3, whereas the forced case corresponding to Stf
0.92 shows axisymmetric structures. A helical mode can be as-
sociated with the antisymmetric structures, which conﬁrms that a
helical structure is present at the burner outlet for the case Stf
1.55. The main difference between both helical structures is that
the helix of the unforced ﬂow is more stretched in the x and r
directions than for the Stf1.55 case. For the latter, almost one
revolution period of the helix is visible, and the axial wavelength
is smaller. The radial stretching is due to the jet opening angle,
which is lower for the forced case. Forcing at Stf1.55 leads to a
small jet opening angle and promotes a lower axial decay of the
coherent structures.
POD modes 2 and 3 of the Stf0.92 case form a pair, exhib-
iting strong similarities and a phase shift with respect to each
other in the axial direction. They indicate two counter-rotating
vortices at r/D0.5 and an axial displacement of the structure.
Since the snapshots are not correlated in time, it is not possible to
track with the POD analysis the evolvement of this structure. The
ﬁrst mode of this case describes a mean ﬂow correction of the
velocity ﬂow ﬁeld, which may correspond to a slow variation in
the central recirculation zone. A similar analysis can be done with
the ﬁrst two POD modes of the case Stf1.55 or modes 1 and 3
of the unforced ﬂow.
The fourth mode of case Stf1.55 is axially symmetric, show-
ing that a low energy axial symmetric structure is present at the
burner outlet. On the contrary, mode 4 of case Stf0.92, exhibits
an antisymmetric structure, while the three ﬁrst modes are sym-
metric. Thus, the forcing does not necessarily suppress some
structures, but redistributes the modal contribution on the TKE.
6.3
Sensitivity Analysis. A sensitivity analysis was per-
formed in order to see how many snapshots are needed for a good
representation of the dominant coherent structures. Therefore, the
POD framework was applied on M=63, 125, 250, and 500 snap-
shots. The unforced ﬂow was chosen for this analysis and modes
1, 3, 7, and 9 are presented in Fig. 19. As expected, an increase in
the number of snapshots smoothes the shape of the POD modes.
Especially, for modes 1–7, the shape of the modes obtained with
500 snapshots is already recognizable in the modes obtained with
four times less snapshots. Mode 9 shows also strong similarities in
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
ux,fluc
St
PSD, G
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
ut,fluc
St
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
hydrophone
St
PSD
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
St
PSD, B
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
St
Fig. 16
Spectra of ux,fluc and ut,fluc in the shear layer „G… and in
Slot „B… for StfÉ1.3 and Fa=10%. The spectrum of the hydro-
phone is shown in the right plot.
0
5
10
15
20
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Mode number
Fraction of TKE in %
Unforced
Stf≈0.92
Stf≈1.55
Fig. 17
Repartition of the turbulent kinetic energy within the
POD modes for the three with PIV investigated cases
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031504-9
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 10 ---

structures resulting from 500 and 250 snapshots. Thus, 500 snap-
shots are sufﬁcient if one is only interested in the dominant ﬂow
structures.
7
Conclusion and Outlook
The impact of axial forcing on the ﬂow ﬁeld of a swirl burner
was investigated and compared with its unforced counterpart. The
impact of different oscillation frequencies and amplitudes on the
ﬂow at the inlet and outlet of the burner was documented.
The natural helical mode m= +1 typical for those types of
ﬂows could be captured by phase-averaged LDA and PIV at the
burner outlet. The helical wave could be also found in the inlet
slots of the burner, upstream of the stagnation point located in the
burner. Thus the ﬂow from the inlet of the burner is subject to an
absolute instability, which needs to be taken into account for
further modeling of the fuel/air mixing.
The forcing frequencies and amplitudes had little impact on the
mean velocity ﬁeld at the burner inlet and outlet, but had a stron-
ger inﬂuence on the coherent ﬂow motion. Axisymmetrical forc-
ing of the ﬂow leads to a lock-in of the oscillation in the slot onto
the forcing frequency. However, the response of the ﬂow at the
burner outlet is dependent on the forcing frequency as follows.
•
Forcing at the natural frequency leads to a switch of the
helical structure to an axisymmetric one.
•
Forcing at a higher frequency than the natural frequency
Stf1.3 shows no lock-in of the vortex shedding fre-
quency onto the applied frequency. The POD analysis of
PIV snapshots shows clearly that a helical structure is still
present at the burner outlet even if the forcing applied is
axially symmetric St1.55.
Fig. 18
Contour plot of the azimuthal vorticity  resulting from the POD analysis of the snapshots in the „xb,zb…-plane. The
mean vorticity and the ﬁrst four „1–4… dominant modes for all three investigated cases are presented and show the domi-
nant coherent ﬂow structures. The limits of the gray scale are set to emphasize the vorticity sign of the structures, as
absolute vorticity values are not of interest. Superposed are streamline representations of the corresponding modes.
031504-10 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 11 ---

The proper orthogonal decomposition performed on experimen-
tal data appears to be an appropriate tool to capture physical prop-
erties of the ﬂow, which cannot be easily and directly measured by
the present measurement conﬁguration. Even if the ﬂow is quite
complex, as more than 200 modes were needed to resolve 90% of
the total kinetic energy, the ﬁve dominant modes of the unforced
and forced ﬂows still represented 25% of the TKE. Low order
modeling, based on the approach described in Ref. 28, may rep-
resent the physical mechanisms sufﬁciently for further work re-
lated to closed-loop control.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Y. Singh for helping to perform
the LDA measurements and would also like to thank the German
Science Foundation DFG for the ﬁnancial support as part of the
Collaborative Research Center SFB 557 “Control of Complex
Turbulent Shear Flows.”
Nomenclature
aj  mode coefﬁcients from POD
am  Fourier series coefﬁcient
bm  Fourier series coefﬁcient
D  burner diameter
f  excitation frequency
Fa  forcing amplitude
h  hydrophone signal
r=y2+z2  radius
uj  POD modes
ux  streamwise velocity
ur  radial velocity
ut  azimuthal velocity
U0  bulk velocity at the burner outlet
x  streamwise axis
xb,yb,zb  coordinate system of the burner
xr,yr,zr  coordinate system of the test rig
Rh1,h2  cross-correlation function
Re=U0D/  Reynolds number
St= fD/U0  Strouhal number
Stf= fforcingD/U0  Strouhal number of the forcing
  phase angle between the hydrophone
and LDA signal
hel  phase function of the helical wave

  axial wavelength

j  eigenvalues of the POD Analysis
  kinematic viscosity
  precessing frequency
	= ux/r −ur/x  azimuthal vorticity
·  time-averaged quantity
·
  coherent part of the turbulent motion
·  turbulent quantity
References
1 Lieuwen, T., and Zinn, B. T., 1998, “The Role of Equivalence Ratio Oscilla-
tions in Driving Combustion Instabilities in Low NOx Gas Turbines,” Pro-
ceedings of the 27th Symposium (International) on Combustion, Combustion
Institute, Boulder, CO, Aug. 2–7, pp. 1809–1816.
2 Bothien, M. R., Moeck, J. P., Lacarelle, A., and Paschereit, C. O., 2007, “Time
Domain Modelling and Stability Analysis of Complex Thermoacoustic Sys-
tems,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part A, 2215, pp. 657–668.
3 Paschereit, C. O., Gutmark, E. J., and Weisenstein, W., 1999, “Coherent Struc-
tures in Swirling Flows and Their Role in Acoustic Combustion Control,”
Phys. Fluids, 11, pp. 2667–2678.
4 Poinsot, T., Trouvé, A., Veyante, D., Candel, S., and Esposito, E., 1987, “Vor-
tex Driven Acoustically Coupled Combustion Instabilities,” J. Fluid Mech.,
177, pp. 265–292.
5 Panda, J., and McLaughlin, D. K., 1994, “Experiments on the Instabilities of a
Swirling Jet,” Exp. Fluids, 6, pp. 263–276.
6 Syred, N., 2006, “A Review of Oscillation Mechanisms and the Role of the
Precessing Vortex Core PVC in Swirl Combustion Systems,” Prog. Energy
Combust. Sci., 32, pp. 93–161.
7 Lucca-Negro, O., and O’Doherty, T., 2001, “Vortex Breakdown: A Review,”
Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 27, pp. 431–481.
8 Fernandes, E. C., Heitor, M. V., and Shtork, S. I., 2006, “An Analysis of
Unsteady Highly Turbulent Swirling Flow in a Model Vortex Combustor,”
Exp. Fluids, 40, pp. 177–187.
9 Wang, S., and Yang, V., 2005, “Unsteady Flow Evolution in Swirl Injectors
With Radial Entry. II. External Excitations,” Phys. Fluids, 17, p. 045107.
Fig. 19
Sensitivity of the POD to the number M of PIV snapshots „63, 125, 250, and 500… taken for the analysis. Modes 1, 3,
7, and 9 of the unforced ﬂow are presented.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031504-11
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 12 ---

10 Duwig, C., Fuchs, L., Lacarelle, A., Beutke, M., and Paschereit, C. O., 2007,
“Study of the Vortex Breakdown in a Conical Swirler Using LDV, LES and
POD,” ASME Paper No. GT2007-27006.
11 Paschereit, C. O., and Gutmark, E. J., 2004, “The Effectiveness of Passive
Combustion Control Methods,” ASME Paper No. 2004-GT-53587.
12 Rodriguez-Martinez, V. M., Dawson, J. R., Syred, N., and O’Doherty, T.,
2003, “The Effect of Expansion Plane Geometry on Fluid Dynamics Under
Combustion Instability in a Swirl Combustor,” AIAA Paper No. 2003-116.
13 Escudier, M. P., and Keller, J. J., 1985, “Recirculation in Swirling Flow: A
Manifestation of Vortex Breakdown,” AIAA J., 23, pp. 111–116.
14 Paschereit, C. O., Oster, D., Long, T. A., Fiedler, H. E., and Wygnanski, I.,
1992, “Flow Visualization of Interactions Among Large Coherent Structures in
an Axisymmetric Jet,” Exp. Fluids, 12, pp. 189–199.
15 Suzuki, H., Kasagi, N., and Suzuki, Y., 2004, “Active Control of an Axisym-
metric Jet With Distributed Electromagnetic Flap Actuators,” Exp. Fluids, 36,
pp. 498–509.
16 Lacarelle, A., Moeck, J. P., Konle, H. J., Vey, S., Nayeri, C. N., and Paschereit,
C. O., 2007, “Effect of Fuel/Air Mixing on NOx Emissions and Stability in a
Gas Premixed Combustion System,” AIAA Paper No. 2007-1417.
17 Khalil, S., Hourigan, K., and Thompson, M. C., 2006, “Response of Uncon-
ﬁned Vortex Breakdown to Axial Pulsing,” Phys. Fluids, 18, p. 038102.
18 Sattelmayer, T., Felchlin, M. P., Haumann, J., Hellat, J., and Styner, D., 1990,
“Second Generation Low-Emissions ABB Combustors for Gas Turbines:
Burner Development and Tests at Atmospheric Pressure,” ASME Paper No.
1990-GT-192.
19 Döbbeling, K., Knopﬂe, H. P., and Polifke, W., 1994, “Low NOx Combustion
of MBTU Fuels Using the ABB Double Cone Burner EV Burner,” ASME
Paper No. 94-GT-394.
20 Matsumura, M., and Antonia, R. A., 1993, “Momentum and Heat Transport in
the Turbulent Intermediate Wake of a Circular Cylinder,” J. Fluid Mech., 250,
pp. 651–666.
21 Wernert, P., and Favier, D., 1999, “Considerations About the Phase Averaging
Method With Application to ELDV and PIV Measurements Over Pitching
Airfoils,” Exp. Fluids, 27, pp. 473–483.
22 Sonnenberger, R., Graichen, K., and Erk, P., 2000, “Fourier Averaging: A
Phase-Averaging Method for Periodic Flow,” Exp. Fluids, 28, pp. 217–222.
23 Holmes, P., Lumley, J., and Berkooz, G., 1998, Turbulence, Coherent Struc-
tures, Dynamical Systems and Symmetry, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, England.
24 Gallaire, F., and Chomaz, J. M., 2003, “Mode Selection in Swirling Jet Ex-
periments: A Linear Stability Analysis,” J. Fluid Mech., 494, pp. 223–253.
25 Roessler, M., 2006, “Experimentelle Bestimmung des Akustisch Angeregten
Strömungsfeldes an Einem Drall-Brennermodell für Industrielle Gasturbinen,”
Studienarbeit, Technische Universität Berlin.
26 Keller, J. J., Sattelmayer, T., and Thüringer, F., 1991, “Double Cone Burner for
Gas Turbine Type 9 Retroﬁt Application,” Proceedings of the CIMAC 19th
International Congress on Combustion Engines, Florence, Italy.
27 Flohr, P., Schmitt, P., and Paschereit, C. O., 2002, “Mixing Field Analysis of a
Gas Turbine Burner,” Paper No. IMECE 2002-39317.
28 Li, F., Banaszuk, A., Tadmor, G., Noack, B. R., and Mehta, P. G., 2006, “A
Reduced Order Galerkin Model for the Reacting Bluff Body Flame Holder,”
AIAA Paper No. 2006-3487.
031504-12 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
