
--- Page 1 ---

2749
Twenty-Sixth Symposium (International) on Combustion/The Combustion Institute, 1996/pp. 2749–2755
USE OF AN OPTICAL PROBE FOR TIME-RESOLVED IN SITU
MEASUREMENT OF LOCAL AIR-TO-FUEL RATIO AND EXTENT OF FUEL
MIXING WITH APPLICATIONS TO LOW NOx EMISSIONS IN
PREMIXED GAS TURBINES
RAJIV K. MONGIA, EIJI TOMITA, FRANK K. HSU, LAWRENCE TALBOT and ROBERT W. DIBBLE
Combustion Analysis Laboratory
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California—Berkeley
50-B Hesse Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720-1740, USA
The lower temperatures associated with lean premixed combustion generally lead to lower NOx emis-
sions; however, the beneﬁt of lean premixed combustion may be lost if the fuel and air are poorly mixed.
In this paper, we describe the development of an inexpensive ﬁber optic probe capable of measuring the
extent of mixing. The fuel concentration is determined by laser light absorption at 3.39 lm over a short
path length created by using infrared transmitting ﬁber optics.
A hydrogen-piloted, CH4-in-air turbulent ﬂame with a variable fuel injection location is used to vary the
degree of mixedness at the burner exit. We use the optical probe to measure the level of mixedness
(nonreacting) at the burner exit. The level of mixing and the mean concentration proﬁles are also measured
by using planar laser–initiated Rayleigh scattering. NOx measurements are reported for several mixing
distances. We show that at lean conditions
4 0.6), incomplete mixing causes a dramatic increase in
¯
(f
NOx production because of the exponential temperature dependence of NOx formation about
4 0.6.
¯f
We also numerically investigate how the extent of mixing affects NOx production at various equivalence
ratios and pressures. Modeling the effect of incomplete mixing on NOx formation is done with a distribution
of f convolved with numerical results from a perfectly stirred reactor in series with a plug ﬂow reactor.
The model does an excellent job of predicting the NOx increase caused by incomplete mixing at lean
conditions. Model predictions at higher pressures that are typical of gas turbine conditions show good
agreement with available data. In particular, for lean premixed combustion, NOx is not a function of
pressure if the air and fuel are well mixed.
Introduction
Lean premixed combustion is emerging as a
method of meeting increasingly stringent air-quality
regulations for nitrogen oxides (NO ` NO2 4 NOx)
emissions [1]. Since NOx formation is a strong non-
linear function of the ﬂame temperature, lean com-
bustion yielding a lower ﬂame temperature will lead
to reduced NOx emissions.
Extent of Fuel Mixing in Premixed Combustion
In poorly premixed combustion, the stream ap-
proaching the ﬂame zone contains localized pockets
that are richer or leaner than the mean of the mix-
ture. Lyons [2] showed that in premixed ﬂames with
an overall equivalence ratio less than f 4 0.7, var-
iations in the mean concentration proﬁle cause an
increase in NOx emissions. Using point LIF on NO2-
seeded ﬂows, Gulati and Warren [3] measured tem-
poral concentration ﬂuctuations in a turbulent jet.
Fric [4] used the NO2 LIF technique to show that
for lean premixed combustion, NOx emissions are
increased when temporal nonuniformities of the
fuel-air mixture are present. Graham [5] and Hase
et al. [6] have observed an opposite effect for burn-
ers operating at near stoichiometric conditions; the
NOx emissions increase as the mixing improves.
The extent of mixing is quantiﬁed by the unmixed-
ness U [7],
2
2
c8
c8
c¯
rms
rms
U [
4
(1)
1 2 1
2
c¯ •(1 1 c¯)
c¯
1 1 c¯
where c¯ is the mean fuel concentration and
is
c8rms
the rms ﬂuctuation of the fuel concentration. For a
perfectly mixed stream, U 4 0; for a perfectly un-
mixed stream, U 4 1. The term [c¯(1 1 c¯)]1/2 is the
maximum rms possible of a signal that is bounded
by 0 and 1. More generally, the maximum rms of a
signal is [(c¯ 1 cmin)(cmax 1 c¯)]1/2 [8].
The NOx formation rate is strongly dependent on
the local equivalence ratio f. To show this, we model
the NOx production for CH4-in-air premixed ﬂames
by using a 2-ms residence time perfectly stirred re-
actor (PSR) in series with a 4-ms residence time plug
ﬂow reactor (PFR), as was done by Steele et al. [9].


--- Page 2 ---

2750
GAS TURBINES
Fig. 1. NOx at 15% O2 versus equivalence ratio as cal-
culated by the PSR/PFR model. The PSR has a residence
time of 2 ms, and the PFR has a residence time of 4 ms.
The inlet reactants are at 300 K and 1 atm.
GRI-Mech V2.11 [10], which includes nitrogen
chemistry, is used for the calculations. As depicted
in Fig. 1, the model predicts that the NOx formation
rate peaks at near-stoichiometric conditions.
For lean premixed combustion, the aforemen-
tioned LIF by Fric [4] shows that an increase in un-
mixedness will increase NOx formation. Fluctuations
around the mean produce regions that burn slightly
richer and leaner than the overall mean equivalence
ratio. The leaner regions have lower NOx production
rates than the mean equivalence ratio; however, the
increase in NOx production in the richer pockets
outweighs the reduction in the leaner pockets. The
net increase in NOx emissions results from the non-
linear equivalence ratio dependence of NOx produc-
tion.
Interestingly, perfect mixing is undesirable when
the mean stoichiometry is near f 4 1, such as occurs
in utility burners [5,6]. At near-stoichiometric con-
ditions, ﬂuctuations about the mean concentration
will produce regions that are lean and rich. These
lean and rich pockets will produce lower NOx, as
shown in Fig. 1. The focus of this work is to provide
more detailed information on the unmixedness ef-
fect on NOx emissions and to develop a tool to ac-
curately measure the unmixedness.
Laser Absorption of Hydrocarbons
The use of laser absorption in combustion systems
has been demonstrated by several authors including
Schoenung and Hanson [11] and Nguyen et al. [12]
for the measurement of CO and temperature. Sev-
eral authors have studied the absorption by methane
of the infrared He-Ne laser transition at 3.39 lm
[13,14,15]. Emmerman et al. [16] applied absorption
tomography to a methane jet into air and obtained
two-dimensional maps of methane concentration.
Tsuboi et al. [17] showed that ethane, propane, n-
octane, and several other hydrocarbons also strongly
absorb the 3.39-lm He-Ne laser. More recently,
Drallmeier [18] used the infrared He-Ne laser in
conjunction with a visible He-Ne laser to measure
the fuel vapor concentration of a fuel spray. The visi-
ble laser was used to account for absorption caused
by droplets in the optical path.
The Beer–Lambert law relates the transmitted in-
tensity I to the original intensity Io by
I 4 exp(1a•L•P•x )
(2)
i
Io
where L is the path length, a is the absorption co-
efﬁcient, P is the pressure, and xi is the mole fraction
of the hydrocarbon. Because the absorption coefﬁ-
cient is on the order of 10 atm11 cm11 for most
hydrocarbons [17], measurable absorption for com-
bustible mixtures occurs with a path length of only
5 mm. The short path length deﬁnes the spatial dis-
tribution. More important, because the gas is not
drawn through a sampling line, determination of the
temporal characteristics is limited only by the detec-
tor and data acquisition speed. This allows measure-
ment of the extent of mixing. Greater detail on the
spectroscopy of methane in this wavelength regime
can be found in the work of Cline and Varghese [19]
and Perrin and Hartmann [20].
Experimental Setup
Lean Premixed Combustion System
The burner tube with annular pilot used by Kar-
lovitz (described in the book by Lewis and von Elbe
[21]) and later by Dibble and Hollenbach [22],
shown in Fig. 2, has several important characteris-
tics. The annular pilot stabilizes the ﬂame at the
same location at various equivalence ratios and levels
of mixedness. Second, the combustor allows optical
access for the planar Rayleigh scattering that is de-
scribed in a later section. We have modiﬁed the Kar-
lovitz burner by injecting the fuel closer to the
burner exit. By changing the mixing distance l, the
rms of fuel concentration (i.e., the extent of mixing)
can be changed without changing the radial mean
concentration proﬁle.
As shown in Fig. 2, the burner has a methane in-
jection tube with d 4 3 mm, an air tube with D 4
27 mm, and a hydrogen pilot with annular thickness
of d 4 3 mm. The upstream mixing distance l is
varied between 33 and 63.5 cm. A fully premixed
ﬂame was produced by mixing the methane with the
air well upstream and not using the methane injec-
tion tube. The methane tube bulk velocity is 25 m/s,
and the air tube bulk velocity is 5.3 m/s. These ﬂows
yield a mean equivalence ratio of
4 0.6, which is
¯f


--- Page 3 ---

OPTICAL PROBE FOR RAPID LOCAL AIR-FUEL RATIO
2751
Fig. 2. Schematic of hydrogen-piloted, lean premixed
burner. The mixing distance l is varied to change the un-
mixedness at the burner exit without changing the mean
spatial distribution of fuel concentration.
Fig. 3. Schematic of optical probe. A small probe vol-
ume is created by the gap between the infrared transmit-
ting ﬁber optics. Light from a 3.39-lm He-Ne laser is fo-
cused into one of the ﬁber optics.
used consistently for all the test runs.
The radial proﬁle of NOx with only the hydrogen
pilot burning, with co-ﬂow air but no methane ﬂow,
conﬁrms that NOx produced by the hydrogen pilot
does not penetrate to the centerline. At a distance
of 17.8 cm above the burner exit, the NOx concen-
tration at the centerline is less than 0.5 ppm. Her-
manson and Dimotakis [23] show that increasing the
heat release reduces the entrainment of a jet; there-
fore, the expansion caused by the heat release in the
premixed ﬂame would further decrease the entrain-
ment of pilot ﬂame products. Accordingly, we con-
clude that any NOx measured at the centerline is
produced by the central premixed ﬂame and not by
the pilot ﬂame.
Infrared Fiber Optic Probe
A schematic of the optical probe is shown in Fig.
3. Light from a 3.39-lm He-Ne laser is focused into
an infrared transmitting ﬁber optic that guides the
laser light to the probe volume. The laser light passes
through the probe volume and a portion intersects
another infrared transmitting ﬁber, which guides the
light to a liquid nitrogen–cooled indium-antimonide
(InSb) detector. The gap width of the probe is L 4
5 mm. A low-pass ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency of 2
kHz is used before the sampling of the computer
data acquisition system that converts the transmis-
sion, I/Io, into a methane concentration. The A/D
board samples at 4 kHz, sufﬁcient to resolve ﬂuc-
tuations on the order of 2 kHz (Nyquist criterion).
The optical probe sample volume is placed 25 mm
above the burner exit along the burner centerline
during the nonreacting unmixedness measurements.
The probe location is where most of the combustion
occurs when ignited.
Planar Laser–Initiated Rayleigh Scattering
Laser-initiated Rayleigh scattering is used to mea-
sure the two-dimensional concentration ﬁeld for the
nonreacting ﬂow as described in Ref. 24. A Candela
LFDL-20 pulsed dye laser tuned to 590 nm with a
pulse duration of 3 ls and pulse energy of approxi-
mately 1–2 J is used as the light source. The laser
beam, typically 8 mm in diameter, is focused by a
cylindrical lens with a focal length of 1000 mm to
form a sheet at the measurement location. The cen-
ter of this laser sheet is located 25 mm above the
burner exit. The imaging area is approximately 0.5
mm 2 10 mm 2 60 mm. The images are taken at
a repetition rate of 0.5 Hz.


--- Page 4 ---

2752
GAS TURBINES
Fig. 4. Mean (solid symbols) and rms (open symbols) of
equivalence ratio as a function of radius at an axial distance
of 2.54 cm above the burner exit. The circles (both open
and solid) are for the perfectly mixed conditions, and the
squares (both open and solid) are for the l 4 33-cm mixing
distance (the most unmixed case studied).
Fig. 5. Laser transmission as a function of time for two
extreme mixing conditions. The circles are for the perfectly
mixed condition, and the triangles are for the most un-
mixed condition (mixing distance l 4 33 cm). The low val-
ues of laser transmission correspond to richer concentra-
tions than the mean, and the high values of laser
transmission correspond to leaner concentrations than the
mean.
NOx and O2 Measurements in Flames
Species measurements are made at an axial loca-
tion of 17.8 cm above the burner by using a quartz
suction probe with a heated sample line as described
in a previous work [24]. Horiba analyzers are used
for all species measurements. Nitrogen oxides are
measured by a chemiluminescent analyzer, CO and
CO2 by NDIR analyzers, and O2 by a paramagnetic
analyzer. Water is removed from the sample up-
stream of the analyzers by using an ice bath and wa-
ter trap for the CO, CO2, and O2 measurements.
The water is removed from the sample entering the
NOx analyzer by using a porous dryer, thus avoiding
the problem of NO2 absorption into water.
Model Description
The effect of unmixedness on NOx production in
the experimental combustion system is modeled nu-
merically using a distribution of equivalence ratios
in conjunction with numerical results of a 2-ms PSR
in series with a 4-ms PFR. The residence times were
chosen for their physical signiﬁcance (for an exit ve-
locity of 5.5 m/s, a sampling distance of 17.8 cm, and
an average temperature of 1600 K; the residence
time is approximately 6 ms) and then adjusted to
agree with the one experiment. The PSR/PFR code
is used to obtain a relationship between NOx emis-
sions and equivalence ratio assuming the air and fuel
are perfectly mixed (i.e., the PSR/PFR code is run
several times at different equivalence ratios). The
average NOx emissions of the unmixed combustion
system are then computed by
NO
4
NO (f)•P(f)•df
(3)
x,avg
x
#
where NOx(f) is the NOx emissions as a function of
equivalence ratio as predicted by the PSR/PFR and
P(f) is the distribution of equivalence ratios for the
combustion system of interest. Consistent with the
experiment, P(f) has an assumed Gaussian shape
with an appropriate mean and unmixedness (or,
equivalently, standard deviation).
Results and Discussion
Concentration Measurement in Nonreacting Flows
The mixing distance l was varied between 33.0 cm
and 63.5 cm while maintaining a mean equivalence
ratio of f 4 0.6. A fully premixed experiment was
performed as well. The Rayleigh measurements
shown in Fig. 4 conﬁrm that the mean equivalence
ratio has a uniform proﬁle at the exit of the burner
for the mixing distances studied. Figure 4 also shows
that as the mixing distance decreases, the rms of the
equivalence ratio increases dramatically.
Figure 5 compares the optical probe laser trans-
mission of the fully premixed case (l 4 `) to that of
the shortest mixing distance (l 4 33 cm). Clearly,
the large ﬂuctuations in laser transmission for the
33-cm mixing distance indicates large ﬂuctuations in
methane concentration. Low levels of laser trans-
mission correspond to high levels of methane con-
centration (i.e., regions that are richer than the
mean). The unmixedness is better quantiﬁed by Fig.
6, which shows the distribution of methane concen-
tration for three ﬂow conditions: fully premixed, 57-


--- Page 5 ---

OPTICAL PROBE FOR RAPID LOCAL AIR-FUEL RATIO
2753
Fig. 6. Distribution of concentration as measured by the
optical probe for three mixing conditions. The circles are
for the most unmixed case (l 4 33 cm); the squares for an
intermediate mixing distance (l 4 57 cm); and the triangles
for the perfectly mixed condition (l 4 `). The width of the
concentration distribution for the perfectly mixed condi-
tion corresponds to the instrument resolution.
Fig. 7. Scalar power spectrum of concentration for two
mixing distances. The squares are for a mixing distance of
l 4 33 cm, and the triangles are for a mixing distance of l
4 57 cm. Both spectra exhibit the expected 15/3 slope
cascade; however, the end of the cascade is not observed
because the signal was ﬁltered at 2 kHz.
Fig. 8. NOx emissions (dry) at 15% O2 versus unmixed-
ness. The symbols correspond to measured NOx and mea-
sured unmixedness (optical probe results). The solid line
corresponds to model prediction using a 2-ms PSR in series
with a 4-ms PFR in conjunction with a Gaussian equiva-
lence ratio distribution.
cm mixing distance, and 33-cm mixing distance. The
wide distribution of methane concentration for the
33-cm mixing distance includes regions that have
near-stoichiometric conditions. Because of the noise
in the laser and data acquisition system, the fully
premixed ﬂow condition has a measured standard
deviation of approximately 0.24% concentration of
methane. Therefore, in its current form, the optical
probe can measure ﬂuctuations as small as 4% in
methane mole fraction (i.e., if c¯ 4 0.05, then crms,min
4 0.002). Improvements to the data acquisition sys-
tem can be readily implemented.
The scalar power spectrum of two ﬂow conditions
is shown in Fig. 7 as the logarithm of power versus
the logarithm of frequency. The cascade of the scalar
power spectrum occurs with the expected slope of
15/3 [25]. The end of the cascade associated with
a decrease in the slope (more negative) is not ob-
served here because of the present frequency limit
of 2 kHz.
Nitrogen Oxide Emissions at Reacting Conditions
The NOx emissions (dry) corrected to 15% O2 are
shown in Fig. 8 as a function of unmixedness as mea-
sured by the optical probe for a mean equivalence
ratio of
4 0.6. Also included in Fig. 8 are the
¯f
modeling predictions of the effect of unmixedness
on NOx formation. As noted previously, for the mod-
eling results, a 2-ms PSR in series with a 4-ms PFR
is used to generate the relationship between NOx
and equivalence ratio if the air and fuel are perfectly
mixed. At an unmixedness U 4 0.001, the NOx
emissions are increased by 15% with respect to the
NOx emissions from a fully premixed ﬂame (U 4 0).
At an unmixedness U 4 0.0085, the NOx emissions
are increased by a factor of 4. The model does an
excellent job of predicting the NOx emissions of the
experimental burner, including the slight change of
slope that appears at high values of unmixedness.
Also shown in Fig. 8 is the resolution of the current
optical probe. As depicted by the modeling predic-
tions and the experimental results, the unmixedness
resolution Umin 4 0.0001 is sufﬁcient for measuring
whether the air and fuel are mixed well enough for
low NOx emissions.


--- Page 6 ---

2754
GAS TURBINES
Fig. 9. Effect of unmixedness on average NOx emissions
at different mean equivalence ratios. At lean conditions,
the NOx goes up signiﬁcantly with increasing unmixedness;
however, at a mean equivalence ratio of
4 1.0, increasing
¯f
unmixedness decreases NOx emissions.
Fig. 10. Effect of unmixedness on average NOx emis-
sions at different pressures. The NOx versus equivalence
ratio relationship is obtained by using preheated reactants
of 700 K and a 2-ms PSR in series with an 18-ms PFR. A
mean equivalence ratio of
4 0.5 is used so that the ad-
¯f
iabatic ﬂame temperature is 1800 K (typical gas turbine
conditions).
Modeling the Effect of Unmixedness on
NOx Emissions
Eq. (3) was used to study the role that the mean
equivalence ratio
plays on the relationship be-
¯f
tween unmixedness and overall NOx formation. Gra-
ham and McKindley [5] showed experimentally that
at stoichiometric conditions, the NOx for poorly pre-
mixed combustion was lower than the perfectly
mixed case; however, at lean conditions, the poorly
premixed combustion had higher NOx emissions.
Figure 9 shows how the unmixedness affects NOx
formation at several equivalence ratios. As shown ex-
perimentally by Graham and McKindley [5] and nu-
merically by Fig. 9, the unmixedness effect on NOx
production is signiﬁcantly different depending on
the mean equivalence ratio
.¯f
Modeling the Effect of Unmixedness at Gas
Turbine Conditions
Eq. (3) was also extended to gas turbine conditions
by using the PSR/PFR code with a 700 K preheat
(typical of compressor outlet) to generate the NOx
versus equivalence ratio relationship. The residence
time in the PSR was 2 ms, and the residence time
in the PFR was 18 ms. Figure 10 shows the effect
of unmixedness on NOx generation at P 4 1, 4, and
20 atm for a mean equivalence ratio
4 0.5.
¯f
The mean equivalence ratio
4 0.5 results in an
¯f
adiabatic ﬂame temperature of 1800 K. As shown,
the unmixedness has a larger inﬂuence on NOx for-
mation at the higher pressures because the peak
NOx levels are larger at the higher pressures. Sur-
prisingly, at low values of unmixedness (U , 0.0008),
the pressure does not make a large difference in
overall NOx formation. This has some interesting
consequences. It has been reported by Leonard and
Stegmaier [26] that at sufﬁciently lean conditions
(ﬂame temperature ,1900 K), the NOx from a lean
premixed combustor is only a function of ﬂame tem-
perature regardless of the pressure, amount of pre-
heat, or residence time. Figure 10 corroborates the
results of Leonard and Stegmaier [26] as long as the
unmixedness U is small. For a perfectly mixed com-
bustor (U 4 0), the model predicts that the NOx
emissions are independent of pressure (proportional
to P0); however, the relationship evolves to being de-
pendent on P1/2 as the unmixedness increases.
Conclusions
Lean premixed combustion is an established
method of conforming to increasingly restrictive air-
quality regulations, especially for NOx formation.
The lower temperatures associated with lean pre-
mixed combustion generally lead to lower NOx emis-
sions; however, the beneﬁt of lean premixed com-
bustion may be lost if the fuel and air are poorly
mixed.
A
hydrogen-piloted,
methane-in-air turbulent
ﬂame with a variable premixing distance is used to
vary the unmixedness without changing the mean
concentration proﬁle. A novel optical probe using
absorption of light from an inexpensive 3.39-lm He-
Ne laser is used to measure the effectiveness of a
premixer. In its current form, the optical probe is
capable of measuring unmixedness as low as U 4
0.0001.
At an overall equivalence ratio of f 4 0.6, un-
mixedness has a dramatic effect on NOx emissions.


--- Page 7 ---

OPTICAL PROBE FOR RAPID LOCAL AIR-FUEL RATIO
2755
For an unmixedness of U 4 0.001, the NOx emis-
sions are increased by 15% compared to the NOx
emissions of the fully premixed condition (U 4 0).
At an unmixedness of U 4 0.0085, the NOx emis-
sions are increased by a factor of 4. The optical probe
is capable of resolving the small unmixedness levels
that affect NOx production.
A numerical model of the effect of unmixedness
U on NOx production showed good agreement with
experiments. At higher pressures, the model pre-
dicts the trend observed by Leonard and Stegmaier
[26]. The model shows that at very low levels of un-
mixedness U, the NOx emissions are independent of
pressure (for an adiabatic ﬂame temperature of 1800
K); however, as the unmixedness increases, pressure
plays an increasingly important role in the overall
NOx generated by a lean premixed combustor.
Acknowledgments
This material is based on work supported through a Na-
tional Science Foundation graduate fellowship and Na-
tional Science Foundation research grant CTS-9415686.
REFERENCES
1. Bowman, C. T., Twenty-Fourth Symposium (Interna-
tional) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute,
Pittsburgh, 1993, pp. 859–878.
2. Lyons, V. J., AIAA J. 20:660–665 (1982).
3. Gulati, A. and Warren, R. E. Jr., J. Propulsion Power
10:54–61 (1994).
4. Fric, T. F., J. Propulsion Power 9:708–713 (1993).
5. Graham, D. P. and McKindley, K., 2nd European Con-
ference on Industrial Furnaces and Burners, Algarve,
Portugal, April 2–5, 1991.
6. Hase, K., Kori, Y., and Ohgl, K., 1st International Con-
ference on Combustion Technologies for a Clean En-
vironment, Portugal, 1991.
7. Danckwerts, P. V., Appl. Sci. Res. 3:279–296 (1952).
8. Dimotakis, P. E. and Miller, P. L., Phys. Fluids A
2:1919–1920 (1990).
9. Steele, R. C., Malte, P. C., Nicol, D. G., and Kramlich,
J. C., Combust. Flame 100:440–449 (1995).
10. Frenklach, M., Goldenberg, M., Bowman, C. T., Han-
son, R. K., Smith, G. P., Golden, D. M., Gardiner,
W. C., and Lissianski, V., GRI-Mech 2.11, http://
www.me.berkeley.edu/gri mech/, 1995.
11. Schoenung, S. M. and Hanson, R. K., Combust. Sci.
Technol. 24:227–237 (1981).
12. Nguyen, Q. V., Edgar, B. L., Dibble, R. W., and Gulati,
A., Combust. Flame 100:395–406 (1995).
13. Emrich, R. J. and Soloukhin, R. I., Astronautica Acta
17:639 (1972).
14. McMahon, J., Troup, G. J., and Hubbert, G., J. Quant.
Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 12:797–805 (1972).
15. Mallard, W. G. and Gardiner, W. C. Jr., J. Quant. Spec-
trosc. Radiat. Transfer 20:135–149 (1978).
16. Emmerman, P. J., Goulard, R., Santoro, R. J., and Se-
merjian, H. G., J. Energy 4:70–77 (1980).
17. Tsuboi, T., Arimitsu, N., Ping, D., and Hartmann,
J.-M., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 24:8–13 (1985).
18. Drallmeier, J. A., J. Appl. Opt. 33:7781–7788 (1994).
19. Cline, D. S. and Varghese, P. L., Twenty-Third Sym-
posium (International) on Combustion, The Combus-
tion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1990, pp. 1861–1868.
20. Perrin, M. Y. and Hartmann, J. M., J. Quant. Spec-
trosc. Radiat. Transfer 42:459–464 (1989).
21. Lewis, B. and von Elbe, G., Combustion, Flames, and
Explosions of Gases, Academic Press, New York, 1961.
22. Dibble, R. W. and Hollenbach, R. E., Eighteenth Sym-
posium (International) on Combustion, The Combus-
tion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1981, pp. 1489–1499.
23. Hermanson, J. C. and Dimotakis, P. E., J. Fluid Mech.
199:333–375 (1989).
24. Mongia, R. K., Tomita, E., Hsu, F., and Dibble, R. W.,
AIAA Paper 96-0174, 34th Aerospace Sciences Meet-
ing, Reno, Nevada, 1996.
25. Dowling, D. R., “Mixing in Gas Phase Turbulent Jets,”
Ph.D. Thesis, California Institute of Technology, 1988.
26. Leonard, G. and Stegmaier, J., “International Gas Tur-
bine and Aeroengine Congress and Exposition,”
ASME Paper 93-GT-288, Cincinnati, OH, 1993.
COMMENTS
Giancarlo Benelli, ENEL spa-Thermal Research Centre,
Italy. A diagnostic technique that seems interesting for
studying a lean premixed combustion system was pre-
sented. Did the author estimate the effects of probe design
on the monitored mixing process?
Author’s Reply. In this paper, we explore the application
of the probe to lean premixed combustion. However, we
anticipate widespread applications including nonpremixed
combustion and piston engines.
The effect of the probe on the mixing process (distur-
bance of the ﬂow) remains to be quantiﬁed. We expect the
disturbance is comparable to that associated with the
widely used hot wire anemometer.
