
--- Page 1 ---

Ashoke De
Shengrong Zhu
Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Sumanta Acharya1
Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA 70803;
Turbine Innovation and Energy Research Center,
Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
e-mail: acharya@me.lsu.edu
An Experimental and
Computational Study of a
Swirl-Stabilized Premixed Flame
An unconﬁned strongly swirled ﬂow is investigated for different Reynolds numbers using
particle image velocimetry (PIV) and large eddy simulation (LES) with a thickened-ﬂame
(TF) model. Both reacting and nonreacting ﬂow results are presented. In the LES-TF
approach, the ﬂame front is resolved on the computational grid through artiﬁcial thick-
ening and the individual species transport equations are directly solved with the reaction
rates speciﬁed using Arrhenius chemistry. Good agreement is found when comparing
predictions with the experimental data. Also the predicted root mean square (rms) ﬂuc-
tuations exhibit a double-peak proﬁle with one peak in the burnt and the other in the
unburnt region. The measured and predicted heat release distributions are in qualitative
agreement with each other and exhibit the highest values along the inner edge of the
shear layer. The precessing vortex core (PVC) is clearly observed in both the nonreacting
and reacting cases. However, it appears more axially elongated for the reacting cases
and the oscillations in the PVC are damped with reactions. DOI: 10.1115/1.4000141
Keywords: large eddy simulation, thickened-ﬂame, swirl, premixed combustion, gas
turbine, unconﬁned conﬁguration
1
Introduction
Land-based gas turbines operate primarily in a lean-premixed
mode LPM with natural gas as the fuel of choice due, in part, to
environmental regulations of reducing NOx. Swirl is used to pro-
vide ﬂame-holding, and plays an important role in premixed gas
turbine combustors 1,2. Several experimental studies have been
reported that characterize the ﬂame structure and provide insight
into the ﬂame-turbulence interaction in laboratory scale burners
3–5. Since experiments are generally expensive to undertake, in
order to properly design premixed combustion systems, accurate
predictions of premixed ﬂames are desirable. The capability of the
classical
approach
using
Reynolds
averaged
Navier–Stokes
RANS equations in conjunction with phenomenological com-
bustion models 6 is limited from an accuracy viewpoint. There-
fore, numerical simulations of reacting ﬂows based on large eddy
simulations LES have been proposed for providing accurate and
cost-effective predictions. The main philosophy behind LES of a
reacting ﬂow is to explicitly simulate the large scales of the ﬂow
and reactions, and to model the small scales. Hence, it is capable
of capturing the unsteady phenomenon more accurately. The un-
resolved small scales or subgrid scales must be modeled accu-
rately to include the interaction between the turbulent scales.
Since the typical premixed ﬂame thickness is smaller than the
computational grid , the small scale or subgrid scale modeling
must also take care of the interaction between turbulence and the
combustion processes.
In turbulent premixed combustion, a popular approach is to rely
on the ﬂamelet concept, which essentially assumes the reaction
layer thickness to be smaller than the smallest turbulence scales.
The two most popular models based on this concept are the ﬂame
surface density model FSD 7 and the G-equation model 8,9.
It has been reported that the FSD model is not adequate beyond
the corrugated ﬂamelet regime 10,11, while the G-equation ap-
proach depends on a calculated signed-distance function that rep-
resents an inherent drawback of this method.
Another family of models relies on the probability density func-
tion PDF approach 12. This is a stochastic method, which di-
rectly considers the probability distribution of the relevant sto-
chastic
quantities
in
a
turbulent
reacting
ﬂow.
The
PDF
description of turbulent reacting ﬂow has certain theoretical ben-
eﬁts; the complex chemistry is taken care of without applying any
ad hoc assumptions like “ﬂamelet” or “fast reaction”. Moreover,
it can be applied to nonpremixed, premixed, and partially pre-
mixed ﬂames without having much difﬁculty. However, the major
drawback of the PDF transport approach is its high dimensional-
ity, which essentially makes the implementation of this approach
to different numerical techniques, like ﬁnite volume method
FVM or ﬁnite element method FEM, limited.
In this work, a thickened-ﬂame TF model 13 is invoked
where the ﬂame is artiﬁcially thickened to resolve it on computa-
tional grid points, where reaction rates from kinetic models are
speciﬁed using reduced mechanisms. The inﬂuence of turbulence
is represented by a parameterized efﬁciency function. A key ad-
vantage of the TF model is that it directly solves the species
transport equations and uses the Arrhenius formulation for the
evaluation of the reaction rates.
The conﬁguration of interest in the present work is that of a
swirl-stabilized ﬂame. An extensive review on swirling ﬂows can
be found in Refs. 4,2. Chanaud 14 reported periodic vortex
instabilities in a certain regime of Reynolds number and swirl
numbers. These were identiﬁed to be the precision vortex core
PVC. Tangirala et al. 15 studied a nonpremixed swirl burner
where they reported that the mixing and ﬂame stability can be
improved with swirl up to a swirl number of about unity, beyond
which a further increase in swirl reduces the turbulence level as
well as the ﬂame stability. Broda et al. 16 and Seo 17 experi-
mentally investigated the combustion dynamics in a lean-
premixed swirl-stabilized combustor. As the swirl number exceeds
a critical value, vortex breakdown takes place and leads to the
formation of an internal recirculation zone 18. The shape and
size of the recirculation zone largely depends on swirl and Rey-
nolds numbers 5.This recirculation not only enhances fuel-air
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in the
JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received April 24,
2009; ﬁnal manuscript received April 28, 2009; published online April 9, 2010.
Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071503-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

mixing, but also carries hot products back to the reactants and
plays an important role in the ﬂame holding. However, despite
several years of research, the mechanisms of vortex breakdown
are only partially understood 2,19,20.
In this investigation, we employed both computational and ex-
perimental methods to investigate premixed swirl-stabilized
ﬂames. The experimental approach uses particle image velocim-
etry PIV and intensiﬁed charge-coupled device CCD imaging
of ﬂame CH-chemiluminescence. The computational method uses
LES combined with a TF approach for combustion. A key task is
the assessment of LES-TF model predictions through validations
with measurements in this study. A second task is to use the vali-
dated model predictions to analyze the ﬂow and combustion phys-
ics and, in particular, to explore how increasing ﬂow velocities
alter the vortical structures and the associated heat release behav-
ior which play an important role in the ﬂame-holding and blow-
off behavior.
2
Experimental Conﬁguration and Techniques
The conﬁguration considered here is an unconﬁned swirl
burner. The experimental setup includes the combustor, the PIV
system for velocity measurement, and the PI-MAX ICCD camera
Princeton Instruments for CH-emissions measurement. The
combustor consists of the inlet fuel and air-delivery system, and
the premixing section. The ﬂame is swirl-stabilized and attached
to the center body at the dump plane for conditions corresponding
to the measurements in this study.
The 45 deg swirl vane is ﬁtted with a solid center body which
also acts as a fuel injector Fig. 1. This center body extends
beyond the swirl vane and is ﬂushed with the dump plane of the
combustor. The diameter of the center body is 12.7mm 0.5 in.
and the outer diameter O.D. of the swirler is 34.9 mm 1.375
in.. Methane gas is injected radially from the center body through
eight holes immediately downstream of the swirler vane. The fuel/
air mixer is assumed to be perfectly premixed at the dump plane
and the equivalence ratio is calculated to be =0.7. The geometric
swirl number, deﬁned as the ratio of the axial ﬂux of the tangential
momentum to the product of axial momentum ﬂux and a charac-
teristic radius, is Sg=0.82. Experiments are conducted at atmo-
spheric pressure and temperature for two different Reynolds num-
bers of 10,144 and 13,339 based on inlet bulk velocity and
hydraulic diameter.
2.1
Stereoscopic PIV Measurements. For three-dimensional
velocity measurements, a commercial PIV system IDT Inc., Tal-
lahassee, FL using two Sharp Vision 1300DE cameras is used.
These
CCD
cameras
have
a
resolution
of
1280H
1024V pixels with pixel size of 6.76.7 m. Both cameras
are equipped with a 50mm Nikon lens. To illuminate the ﬂow ﬁeld
of interest, a pulsed Nd:YAG laser light sheet at 532 nm is used.
During the measurement, the PIV system is operated at a 10 Hz
frame rate. The time between two laser pulses is between 20 s
and 40 s, depending on the ﬂow velocity. The ﬁeld of view
FOV is approximately 8560 mm2, and the lens aperture is
adjusted to ensure the appropriate image size for the seeding par-
ticles to ensure the accuracy of postprocessing the data. The seed-
ing particles are small enough to ensure good tracking of the ﬂuid
motion low Stokes number and big enough to scatter light for
image capturing. Here TiO2 particles with nominal diameter of
3 m are introduced upstream of the swirler in order to distribute
them homogeneously and to follow the ﬂow oscillation with a
frequency of up to 1 kHz 21.
IDT PRO-VISION software with adaptive interrogation mode is
utilized; it is based on a second-order accurate mesh free algo-
rithm 22, and is designed to reduce errors associated with loss of
pairing, image truncation, and spatial averaging of velocity gradi-
ents. A 6050 mesh has been used to get 3000 vectors per frame
with 3232 correlation windows yielding a spatial resolution of
approximately 1.11.0 mm. Because of the complex nature of
the swirling ﬂow ﬁeld, care is taken to optimize interframe timing,
camera aperture setting, laser-sheet thickness, and seeding density.
Sets of 500 image pairs are usually recorded for each data set and
statistically processed for the mean and rms values.
3
Numerical Details
3.1
Flow Modeling Using LES. To model the turbulent ﬂow,
LES is used where the energetic larger-scale motions are resolved,
and the small scale ﬂuctuations are modeled. Therefore, the equa-
tions solved are the ﬁltered governing equations for the conserva-
tion of mass, momentum, energy, and species transport in a cur-
vilinear coordinate system 23. The subgrid stress modeling uses
a dynamic Smagorinsky model where the unresolved stresses are
related to the resolved velocity via a gradient approximation:
uiuj
 −ui
uj
 = −2tS¯ij
1
where
t = Cs
22S¯
2
S¯ik = 1
2amk
u¯i
m
+ amk
u¯k
m
3
S¯ =2S¯ikS¯ik
4
and S is the mean rate of strain. The coefﬁcient Cs is evaluated
dynamically 23 and locally averaged.
3.2
Combustion Modeling. Modeling the ﬂame-turbulence
interaction in premixed ﬂames requires tracking of the thin ﬂame
front on the computational grid. In the present paper we use the
thickened-ﬂame approach, which is a cost-effective strategy while
allowing the chemistry to be represented. In this technique, the
ﬂame front is artiﬁcially thickened to resolve it on the computa-
tional grid while allowing the ﬂame to propagate at the same
speed as the unthickened ﬂame 13. The artiﬁcial thickening of
the ﬂame front is obtained by multiplying the diffusion term by a
factor F and dividing the reaction rates by the same factor to
maintain the ﬂame speed. More detailed description of this tech-
Fig. 1
Sectional view of the swirl injector
071503-2 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

nique is found in the literature 23.
The major advantage associated with this TF model is the abil-
ity to capture the complex swirl-stabilized ﬂame behavior, which
is often found in a gas turbine combustor. Since this type of ge-
ometry with the premixing section does not guarantee a perfectly
premixed gas at the dump plane, the fully premixed assumption in
the numerical model is not valid any more. The present TF model
is capable of taking care of this type of partially premixed gas
since we solve for the individual species transport equations and
the reaction rates are speciﬁed using Arrhenius expressions.
In the LES framework, the spatially ﬁltered species transport
equation using artiﬁcial thickening is written as
¯Y˜ i
t
+ 
xj
¯Y˜ iu˜ j = 
xj¯EFDi
Y˜ i
xj + E˙¯ i
F
5
where the modiﬁed diffusivity ED, before multiplication by F to
thicken the ﬂame front, may be decomposed as ED=DE-1+D
and corresponds to the sum of molecular diffusivity, D, and a
turbulent subgrid scale diffusivity, E-1D. In fact, E-1D can be
regarded as a turbulent diffusivity used to close the unresolved
scalar transport term in the ﬁltered equation. Since the thickened
ﬂame does not respond to turbulence like the initial ﬂame, the
subgrid scale effects have been incorporated into the thickened-
ﬂame model, and parameterized using an efﬁciency function E
derived from direct numerical simulation DNS results 13. The
detailed description of E is found in the literature 23.
3.3
Chemistry Model. As all the species are explicitly re-
solved on the computational grid, the TF model is best suited to
resolve major species. Intermediate radicals with very short time
scales cannot be resolved. To this end, only simple global chem-
istry has been used with the thickened-ﬂame model.
In the present study, a two-step chemistry, which includes six
species CH4, O2, H2O, CO2, CO, and N2 is used and given by
the following equation set.
CH4 + 1.5O2 →CO + 2H2O
6
CO + 0.5O2 ↔CO2
7
The corresponding reaction rate expressions are given by
q1 = A1 exp-Ea
1/RTCH4a1O2b1
8
q2f = A2 exp-Ea
2/RTCOO2b2
9
q2b = A2 exp−Ea
2/RTCO2
10
where
the
activation
energy
Ea
1=34500 cal/mol,
Ea
2
=12000 cal/mol, a1=0.9, b1=1.1, b2=0.5, and A1 and A2 are
21015 and 1109, respectively, as given by Selle et al. 24.
The ﬁrst reaction Eq. 6 is irreversible, while the second reac-
tion Eq. 7 is reversible and leads to an equilibrium between
CO and CO2 in the burnt gases. Hence the expression in Eq. 8
represents the reaction rates for the irreversible reaction Eq. 6
and the expressions Eq. 9 and 10 represent the forward and
backward reaction rates for the reversible reaction Eq. 7. Prop-
erties
including
density
of
mixtures
are
calculated
using
CHEMKIN-II 25 and TRANFIT 26 depending on the local
temperature and the composition of the mixtures at 1 atm.
3.4
Solution Procedure. In the present study, a parallel multi-
block compressible ﬂow code for an arbitrary number of reacting
species, in generalized curvilinear coordinates, is used. Chemical
mechanisms and thermodynamic property information of indi-
vidual species are input in standard Chemkin format. Species
equations along with momentum and energy equation are solved
implicitly in a fully coupled fashion using a low Mach number
preconditioning technique, which is used to effectively rescale the
acoustics scale to match that of convective scales 27. An Euler
differencing for the pseudotime derivative and second-order back-
ward three-point differencing for physical time derivatives are
used. A second-order low diffusion ﬂux-splitting algorithm is used
for convective terms 28. However, the viscous terms are dis-
cretized using second-order central differences. An incomplete
lower-upper ILU matrix decomposition solver is used. Domain
decomposition and load balancing are accomplished using a fam-
ily of programs for partitioning unstructured graphs and hyper-
graphs and computing ﬁll-reducing orderings of sparse matrices,
METIS. The message communication in distributed computing
environments is achieved using message passing interface MPI.
The multiblock structured curvilinear grids presented in this paper
are
generated
using
commercial
grid
generation
software
GRIDPRO™.
3.5
Computational Domain and Boundary Conditions. As
noted earlier, and shown in Fig. 2, the conﬁguration of interest in
the present work is an unconﬁned swirled burner. The computa-
tional domain extends 20D downstream of the dump plane fuel-
air nozzle exit, 13D upstream of the dump plane location of the
swirl vane in Fig. 2 and 6D in the radial direction. Here, D is the
center-body diameter. Two different LES grids are studied for
cold ﬂow only: one that consists of 21013832 grid points
downstream of the dump plane plus 642332+7517
32 grid points upstream where the grid is in two blocks, and
corresponds to approximately 1.22M grid points mesh1: coarse.
The ﬁner mesh consists of 32020848 grid points downstream
of the dump plane plus 983248+1142248 grid
points upstream, and contains approximately 3.94M grid points
mesh2: ﬁne.
The inﬂow boundary condition is assigned at the experimental
location immediately downstream of the swirler blades. The mean
axial velocity distribution is speciﬁed as a one-seventh power law
proﬁle to represent the fully developed turbulent pipe ﬂow, with
superimposed ﬂuctuations at 10% intensity levels generated us-
ing Gaussian distribution. A constant tangential velocity compo-
nent is speciﬁed as determined from the swirl vane angle. Con-
vective boundary conditions 29 are prescribed at the outﬂow
boundary, and stress-free conditions are applied on the lateral
boundary in order to allow the entrainment of ﬂuid into domain.
The time step used for the computation is dt=1.010−3.
4
Results and Discussion
We will ﬁrst present the measurements and predictions for the
nonreacting LES calculations to ensure that the grid and boundary
conditions are properly chosen, and to assess the cold-ﬂow ﬂow
Fig. 2
Streamline patterns for nonreacting ﬂow condition †D:
center-body diameter…‡: „a… Re=10,144 and „b… Re=13,339
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071503-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

characteristics. This will be followed by a discussion of the react-
ing ﬂow calculations where we will examine both the ﬂow and
heat release distributions.
4.1
Nonreacting Flow Results. Figure 2 shows the stream
line patterns for the two Reynolds number. Three distinct recircu-
lation regions are observed in the high Reynolds number case,
Re=13,339, that include a separation wake recirculation zone
WRZ behind the center body, a corner-recirculation zone CRZ
due to sudden expansion of combustor conﬁguration, and a central
toroidal recirculation zone CTRZ formed due to vortex break-
down. The CTRZ, however, is not prominent in the low Reynolds
number case Re=10,144 and appears as an asymmetric struc-
ture that becomes more clearly visible and symmetric at higher
Reynolds number Re=13,339. The asymmetry at the lower
Reynolds number indicates a low-frequency unsteadiness Fig. 7
that is not averaged out despite the long integration times 15–25
ﬂow through times used for statistical averaging. Thus the origins
of the CTRZ at the lower Re appear to be in the form of a ﬂapping
vortical structure that becomes steadier and well deﬁned at higher
Reynolds numbers. Based on these observations, at the lower Re,
the WRZ and CRZ are likely to play an important role in the ﬂame
holding, while with increasing Re, the CTRZ becomes the domi-
nant structure and will be of primary signiﬁcance in the ﬂame-
holding behavior.
The radial distribution of the axial and tangential mean velocity
proﬁles and the axial and tangential ﬂuctuations at different axial
locations are shown in Fig. 3 for Re=13,339. The time-averaged
mean quantities are normalized by the corresponding bulk veloc-
ity Uo=9.57 corresponds to Reynolds number Re=13,339. Re-
sults from both the coarse and ﬁne grids are shown in the plots. In
general, the agreement between LES and the experimental data is
quite good with the peak velocities and turbulence levels correctly
predicted both in magnitude and location. The shape, size, and the
intensity of the recirculation zone region of negative axial veloci-
ties at the center are well predicted along with the overall spread-
ing of the turbulent swirling jet. Some level of asymmetry can be
observed in both the simulations and the experiments and indicate
that the statistical averaging period needs to be carried out over a
longer period of time. However, due to the presence of low-
frequency unsteadiness in the ﬂow, the averaging time-periods can
be very large and impractical from both computational and experi-
mental perspectives. Similar observations of asymmetry in the
averaged proﬁles have also been reported in the literature for a
conﬁned combustor geometry 24.
The rms ﬂuctuations of the axial and tangential velocities are
also shown in Fig. 3. The LES predictions only report the resolved
stresses, but these predictions are in excellent agreement with the
experimental data. The predicted axial ﬂuctuations indicate that
the primary contributor to these stresses is from the larger re-
solved scales. The peak in the axial velocity ﬂuctuations is ob-
served to be in the shear layer and between the location of the
peak velocity and the recirculation bubble. In this region, the
steepest velocity gradient Ui/xj is obtained and promotes the
production of the peak kinetic energy. The tangential velocity
ﬂuctuations show a ﬂatter proﬁle than the axial velocity ﬂuctua-
tions and their peaks are shifted radially inwards as for the mean
tangential velocities.
For both the mean velocity and ﬂuctuations, the ﬁne mesh
3.94M grid points results are in better agreement with the ex-
perimental data compared with those from the coarse mesh
1.22M grid points for all the cases considered 23. Hence, the
ﬁne mesh is chosen for the reacting ﬂow calculations.
4.2
Reacting Flow Results. Compared to nonreacting cases
Fig. 2, the stream line patterns corresponding to the shear layers
are quite different due to the added heat release, and the shear
layers appear to be more distinct and axially directed compared
with the nonreacting case as observed in Fig. 4. It can be seen that
the heat release distributions dramatically alter the ﬂow patterns.
Notably, the length of inner recirculation zone both the WRZ and
CTRZ is reduced while the length of corner-recirculation zone
increased quite signiﬁcantly in the reacting ﬂow ﬁeld.
Contours of the mean temperature levels are superimposed on
the streamlines in Fig. 4 and show that the highest temperatures
occur along the inner edge of the shear layers and in the CTRZ.
Note the inner edges of the shear layer are associated with the
highest turbulence, which are likely to promote molecular-level
mixing and combustion.
Figure 5 shows the snapshots of the isovorticity surface at 
=13 s−1 for both reacting and nonreacting cases. It is clearly ob-
served that for low Reynolds number case, a typical vortex spiral
starts evolving from the shear layers due to Kelvin–Helmholtz
instabilities in both the axial and azimuthal directions. This struc-
Fig.
3
Nonreacting
ﬂow
results
for
Re=13,339
at
different
axial
locations
†r1=„r/2D…
Ã25.4;
X2,
X3,
X4=„X/2D…Ã25.4‡: Experimental data „…; lines are LES predictions: ﬁne mesh
„—…, coarse mesh „- – – –…. Mean axial velocity U/Uo, mean tangential velocity W/Uo, axial velocity
ﬂuctuation u/Uo, and tangential velocity ﬂuctuation w/Uo
071503-4 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

ture, called the PVC, precesses around the centerline and sustains
for several turns before breaking down into smaller structures. For
the higher Reynolds number, the spiral vortex structures are also
observed; however, the structures appear to be more complex due
to the higher centrifugal force and they spread more rapidly in the
radial direction before breaking down to form smaller scale
structures.
While the PVC is clearly observed for both the nonreacting
cases and reacting cases, the PVC appears more axially elongated
for the reacting cases, but suppressed radially Fig. 5. To under-
stand this behavior, it is educational to look at the terms of the
vorticity transport equation which is written as
11
where the right-hand side RHS terms are I vortex stretching,
II gas expansion, III baroclinic production, and IV viscous
diffusion. Figure 6 shows these terms at one Reynolds number
13,339 for both the nonreacting and reacting ﬂow ﬁelds. The
vortex stretching term is comparable for both the reacting cases
and the nonreacting cases, and is not shown since it is not respon-
sible for the differences seen in Fig. 5. The gas expansion term
acts as a sink in reacting cases due to negative sign in the trans-
port equation. This term is directly proportional to the gas dilata-
tion ratio across the ﬂame u/b, which increases as the tem-
perature increases in presence of combustion. This term and its
greater value for the reacting case Fig. 6 is clearly partly respon-
sible for the reaction-induced-damping of the PVC seen in Fig. 5.
As the kinematic gas viscosity increases due to temperature in the
ﬂame, this substantially enhances the rate of vorticity diffusion
and further dampens the core vorticity. However, the pressure gra-
dient generated due to inclination and expansion of the ﬂame with
respect to the ﬂow ﬁeld contributes to the baroclinic production of
vorticity. The gas expansion ratio u/b affects both the source
and sink terms. In the present case, it actually gives rise to the
production and gas expansion terms and diffusion term as well
Fig. 6. Hence, the combined effects of gas expansion, produc-
tion, and diffusion terms make the PVC axially elongated. More-
over, the size of the CRZ in Fig. 4 also supports the existence of
the axially elongated PVC, although the effects of this exother-
micity produce thicker vortical structures in the reacting cases
Fig. 5.
Figure 7 shows the frequency spectra of the velocity ﬁeld at a
speciﬁc location in the PVC. In both cases, the PVC oscillating
frequencies are below 12 Hz. For the nonreacting case, the low
frequency oscillation peaks are more clearly observed with two
dominant peaks around 1.5 Hz and 3 Hz. This clearly indicates
that the PVC oscillation frequencies are suppressed with reaction.
Figure 8 shows the distributions of the normalized axial veloc-
ity proﬁles, and axial ﬂuctuations at different axial locations for
Re=13,339. The overall agreement of the predictions with the
data is found to be quite reasonable, considering the complexity of
the physical processes and the conﬁguration. Compared with the
nonreacting cases, the magnitude of the velocity peak is increased
and the radial-spreading angle is wider. With increasing axial dis-
tance the magnitude of the peak velocity decreases and the loca-
Fig. 4
Mean temperature ﬁeld streamline patterns for reacting
ﬂow condition: „a… Re=10,144 and „b… Re=13,339
Fig. 5
Snapshots of isovorticity surface at =13 s−1 for non-
reacting ﬂow „left… and reacting ﬂow „right… conditions: „a… Re
=10,144 and „b… Re=13,339
Fig. 6
Snapshots of gas expansion „top…, baroclinic produc-
tion „middle…, and diffusion term „bottom… for nonreacting „up-
per half… and reacting ﬂow „lower half… conditions for Re
=13,339
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071503-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

tion of the peak is moved further outwards radially. As noted
earlier by comparing the streamline plots in Figs. 2 and 4, the
negative velocities for the nonreacting cases are larger in magni-
tude than the reacting ﬂow cases.
While the general agreement between the data and predictions
are satisfactory, and the LES results show the right qualitative
features and the peak magnitudes, there are intrinsic differences
between the predictions and data. The axial velocities show a
narrower shear-layer region and a small over-prediction of the
peak axial velocity particularly at the upstream locations. Pre-
dicted rms ﬂuctuations clearly exhibit two peaks. The location of
the peaks correspond to the burnt and unburnt regions in the inner
part of the shear layer and associated with the high velocity gra-
dients where the turbulence production due to the mean velocity
gradient is the highest. The ﬁrst peak is lower in magnitude and
located in the burnt region of the shear layer downstream of the
center body where the temperatures are higher. The high tempera-
tures cause the viscosity value to go up, and this reduces the
magnitude of the peak stress component. The second peak is ob-
served in the unburnt regions of the shear layer where the tem-
peratures are relatively on the lower side, which reduces the vis-
cosity value and in turn exhibits higher ﬂuctuating components.
Similar trends for rms ﬂuctuations have also been reported by
other researchers reporting calculations 30. However, the mea-
surements do not clearly show this dual-peak behavior.
The radial distributions of the major species mass fractions are
presented in the Fig. 9 for Re=13,339. The entrainment of ambi-
ent air is clearly observed in the distributions of O2. Along the
centerline, CH4 and O2 consumptions are higher which, in turn,
reﬂect in the higher temperature zones observed earlier Fig. 4.
Unburnt CH4 is observed behind the center-body. No reacting
species excluding O2 is observed away from the ﬂame region
r1	20 mm. Away from the dump plane X4=40 mm the tem-
perature goes down; consequently the O2 consumption level goes
down. This lower temperature zone is clearly visible from Figs. 4
and 10, where the predicted mean heat release patterns show
shorter ﬂame length and lower temperature regions.
4.3
CH-Chemiluminescence Measurement. CH radicals are
produced at the ﬂame front and represent the reaction zones.
Therefore CH-chemiluminescence imaging has been carried out in
the present work 24, and Fig. 10 shows such an integrated image
across the ﬂame left. CH-chemiluminescence is considered here
to be representative of the heat release rate as shown in Fig. 10,
which also shows the predicted heat release distributions along the
center plane middle and averaged across the ﬂame right. It
should be noted that the CH data and the predicted heat release
distributions while related to each other are not directly the same
quantity and can only be qualitatively compared with each other,
and show reasonable agreement compare the averaged measured
image on left with the averaged predicted image on the right in
Fig. 10.
Figure 10 shows that the CH distributions and the heat release
patterns are similar to each other, in that, the levels are highest in
the inner-regions of the shear layer. It can be seen that the turbu-
lent ﬂame exhibits its peak CH signal closer to the dump plane.
This is seen in both the experimental and computational distribu-
tions. It is observed experimentally that the ﬂame is slightly lifted
Fig. 7
Spectrum of axial velocity ﬂuctuations for non reacting
and reacting cases for Re=10,144
Fig. 8
Reacting ﬂow results for Re=13,339 at different axial
locations
†r1=„r/2D…Ã25.4;
X2,
X3,
X4=„X/2D…Ã25.4‡:
Experimental data „…; lines are LES predictions „—…. Axial ve-
locity U/Uo and axial velocity ﬂuctuation u/Uo
Fig. 9
Mean species concentration for Re=13,339 at two axial
locations
†r1=„r/2D…Ã25.4;
X1,
X4=„X/2D…Ã25.4‡:
CH4
„—…, O2 „– – –…, H2O„··–…, CO2„·-·-…, and 10ÃCO „– –…
071503-6 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

off; however, computations show a more compact ﬂame and
shorter ﬂame length also seen in mean velocity predictions, Fig.
8. While not shown, a higher Re tends to increase the turbulence
intensity and the ﬂame speed and consequently shortens the ﬂame
length. Further, as Re increases, higher turbulence enhances the
ﬂame-turbulence interaction resulting in higher heat release. Tur-
bulent kinetic energy TKE is usually lower in the higher tem-
perature regions and increases in the lower temperature regions.
Thus, with reference to Fig. 10 middle the peak TKE is obtained
on either side of the maximum CH release and explains the double
peak captured in the predictions of the rms ﬂuctuations of the
axial velocity Fig. 8.
5
Conclusions
PIV measurements and LES with a TF model are used to in-
vestigate unconﬁned swirling ﬂows in a laboratory based model
combustor. Both reacting and nonreacting ﬂow conditions for dif-
ferent Reynolds numbers are studied. A two-step chemical scheme
is invoked to represent the ﬂame chemistry for methane-air com-
bustion. The equivalence ratio for the ﬂame is 0.7 and the geo-
metric
swirl
number
for
the
conﬁguration
is
0.82.
CH-
chemiluminescence imaging is also carried out to characterize the
heat release distributions.
Isothermal ﬂow predictions are in good agreement with the
measurements and indicate that the boundary conditions and grid
are properly chosen. Reynolds number is seen to have an impact
on the ﬂow ﬁeld particularly for the nonreacting cases. At a high
Re, all the recirculation zones, such as WRZ, CRZ, and CTRZ
caused due to vortex breakdown, are clearly observed. At lower
Re, the CTRZ is a weaker structure that exhibits a low-frequency
unsteady ﬂapping.
For the reacting ﬂows, the mean axial velocity proﬁles are in
good agreement with measurements, and slightly over-predicted
close to the dump plane locations. This over-prediction is reﬂected
by a more compact and attached ﬂame in the predictions com-
pared with the experimental observations, which show a slightly
lifted ﬂame. Moreover, the predicted rms ﬂuctuations exhibit
double peak in the burnt and unburnt regions, and on either side of
the peak heat release.
The measured and predicted heat release distributions are in
qualitative agreement with each other and exhibit the highest val-
ues along the inner edge of the shear layer. With increasing Rey-
nolds number the ﬂame region is seen to be more compact both
experimentally and computationally.
This study demonstrates that the thickened-ﬂame based LES
approach with simpliﬁed chemistry for reacting ﬂows is a prom-
ising tool to investigate reacting ﬂows in complex geometries.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the Clean Power and Energy Re-
search Consortium CPERC of Louisiana through a grant from
the Louisiana Board of Regents. Simulations are carried out on
the computers provided by LONI network at Louisiana, LA ww-
w.loni.org and HPC resources at LSU www.hpc.lsu.edu. This
support is gratefully acknowledged.
Nomenclature
A 
 pre-exponential constant
Cs 
 LES model coefﬁcient
Di 
 molecular diffusivity
E 
 efﬁciency function
Ea 
 activation energy
Sij 
 mean strain rate tensor
Ta 
 activation temperature
U 
 mean axial velocity
Uo 
 bulk inlet velocity
ui
 
 velocity vector
u 
 rms turbulence velocity
W 
 mean tangential velocity
w 
 tangential rms velocity
xi 
 Cartesian coordinate vector
Y˜ i 
 species mass fraction
Greek Symbols
 
 mesh spacing
t 
 kinematic turbulent eddy viscosity
¯ 
 mean density
i 
 reaction rate
References
1 Lefebrve, A. H., 1999, Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor & Francis, Philadel-
phia, PA.
2 Syred, D. G., and Beer, J. M., 1974, “Combustion in Swirling Flows: A Re-
view,” Combust. Flame, 23, pp. 143–201.
3 Cheng, R. K., 2000, “Velocity and Scalar Characteristics of Premixed Turbu-
lent Flames Stabilized by Weak Swirl,” Combust. Flame, 28, pp. 399–405.
4 Schneider, C., Dreizler, A., and Janicka, J., 2005, “Fluid Dynamical Analysis
of Atmospheric Reacting and Isothermal Swirling Flows,” Flow, Turbul. Com-
bus., 74, pp. 103–127.
5 Al-Abdeli, Y. M., and Masri, A. R., 2007, “Turbulent Swirling Natural Gas
Flames: Stability Characteristics, Unsteady Behavior and Vortex Breakdown,”
Combust. Sci. Technol., 179, pp. 207–225.
6 Poinsot, T., and Veynante, D., 2001, Theoretical and Numerical Combustion,
Edwards, Ann Arbor.
7 Hawkes, E., and Cant, R., 2001, “Implications of a Flame Surface Density
Approach to Large Eddy Simulation of Premixed Turbulent Combustion,”
Combust. Flame, 126, pp. 1617–1629.
8 Williams, F., 1985, Combustion Theory, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
9 Peters, N., 2000, Tubulent Combustion, Cambridge University Press, London.
10 Düsing, M., Sadiki, A., and Janicka, J., 2006, “Towards a Classiﬁcation of
Models for the Numerical Simulation of Premixed Combustion Based on a
Generalized Regime Diagram,” Combust. Theory Modell., 10, pp. 105–132.
11 Pitsch, H., and Duchamp de La Geneste, L., 2002, “Large-Eddy Simulation of
a Premixed Turbulent Combustion Using Level-Set Approach,” Proc. Com-
bust. Inst., 29, pp. 2001–2008.
12 Pope, S. B., 1985, “PDF Methods for Turbulent Reactive Flows,” Prog. Energy
Combust. Sci., 11, pp. 119–192.
13 Colin, O., Ducros, F., Veynante, D., and Poinsot, T., 2000, “A Thickened
Flame Model for Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Premixed Combustion,”
Phys. Fluids, 127, pp. 1843–1863.
Fig. 10
Experimental CH-chemiluminescence measurement „left…, computational mean
heat release „W/m3… predictions at center plane „middle…, and computational mean heat
release „W/m3… predictions averaged across ﬂame „right… for Re=13,339
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071503-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

14 Chanaud, R. C., 1965, “Observation of Oscillatory Motion in Certain Swirling
Flows,” J. Fluid Mech., 21, pp. 111–127.
15 Tangirala, V., Chen, R. H., and Driscoll, J. F., 1987, “Effect of Heat Release on
the Recirculation Within Swirl-Stabilized Flames,” Combust. Sci. Technol.,
51, pp. 75–95.
16 Broda, J. C., Seo, S., Santoto, R. J., Shirhattikar, G., and Yang, V., 1998, “An
Experimental Study of Combustion Dynamics of a Premixed Swirl Injector,”
Proc. Combust. Inst., 27, pp. 1849–1856.
17 Seo, S., 1999, “Parametric Study of Lean Premixed Combustion Instability in
a Pressured Model Gas Turbine Combustor,” Ph.D. thesis, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA.
18 Huang, Y., and Yang, V., 2005, “Effect of Swirl on Combustion Dynamics in a
Lean-Premixed Swirl-Stabilized Combustor,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 30, pp.
1775–1782.
19 Syred, N., 2006, “A Review of Oscillation Mechanisms and the Role of Pre-
cessing Vortex Core PVC in Swirl Combustion Systems,” Prog. Energy
Combust. Sci., 32, pp. 93–161.
20 Duwig, C., Fuchs, L., Lacarelle, A., Beutke, M, Paschereit, C. O., 2007,
“Study of the Vortex Breakdown in a Conical Swirler Using LDV, LES and
POD,” ASME Paper No. GT2007-27006.
21 Melling, A., 1997, “Tracer Particles and Seeding for Particle Image Velocim-
etry,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 8, pp. 1406–1416.
22 Lourenco, L. M., and Krothapalli, A., 2000, “TRUE Resolution PIV: A Mesh-
Free Second Order Accurate Algorithm,” Proceedings of the International
Conference on Applications of Laser Fluid Mechanics, Lisbon, Portugal.
23 De, A., Zhu, S., Acharya, S., 2009, “An Experimental and Computational
Study of a Swirled Stabilized Unconﬁned Premixed Flame,” ASME Paper No.
GT2009-60230.
24 Selle, L., Lartigue, G., Poinsot, T., Koch, R., Schildmacher, K. U., Krebs, W.,
Prade, B., Kaufmann, P., and Veynante, D., 2004, “Compressible Large Eddy
Simulation of Turbulent Combustion in Complex Geometry on Unstructured
Meshes,” Combust. Flame, 137, pp. 489–505.
25 Kee, R. J., Rupley, F. M., and Miller, J. A., 1989, “Chemkin-II: A Fortran
Chemical Kinetics Package for Analysis of Gas-Phase Chemical Kinetics,”
Sandia Report No. SAND 89-8009B.
26 Kee, R. J., Dixon-Lewis, G., Warnats, J., Coltrin, M. E., and Miller, J. A.,
1986, Sandia National Laboratories Technical Report No. SAND86-8246
TRANFIT, Livermore, CA.
27 Weiss, J. M., and Smith, W. A., 1995, “Preconditioning Applied to Variable
and Constant Density Flows,” AIAA J., 33, pp. 2050–2057.
28 Edwards, J. R., 1997, “A Low-Diffusion Flux-Splitting Scheme for Navier-
Stokes Calculations,” Comput. Fluids, 26, pp. 635–659.
29 Akselvoll, K., and Moin, P., 1996, “Large-Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Con-
ﬁned Coannular Jets,” J. Fluid Mech., 315, pp. 387–411.
30 Galpin, J., Naudin, A., Vervisch, L., Angelberger, C., Colin, O., and Domingo,
P., 2008, “Large-Eddy Simulation of a Fuel-Lean Premixed Turbulent Swirl
Burner,” Combust. Flame, 155, pp. 247–266.
071503-8 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
