
--- Page 1 ---

Sofya Buro
Technical University of Darmstadt,  
Department of Mechanical Engineering,  
Institute for Simulation of Reactive  
Thermo-Fluid Systems,  
Otto-Berndt-Straße 2,  
Darmstadt 64287, Germany  
e-mail: buro@stfs.tu-darmstadt.de
Ruud Eggels
Rolls-Royce Deutschland Ltd & Co KG,  
Eschenweg 11,  
Blankenfelde-Mahlow 15827, Germany
Hendrik Nicolai
Technical University of Darmstadt,  
Department of Mechanical Engineering,  
Institute for Simulation of Reactive Thermo-Fluid 
Systems,  
Otto-Berndt-Straße 2,  
Darmstadt 64287, Germany
Christian Hasse
Technical University of Darmstadt,  
Department of Mechanical Engineering,  
Institute for Simulation of Reactive  
Thermo-Fluid Systems,  
Otto-Berndt-Straße 2,  
Darmstadt 64287, Germany
Development and Assessment  
of Dual-Fuel Capabilities  
in Next-Generation Aero-Engine 
Injectors for Hydrogen  
and Liquid Fuels
Dual-fuel (DF) aero-engines, capable of using hydrogen alongside sustainable aviation fuel 
(SAF) or kerosene as a fuel, would be a key enabler in the transition to hydrogen operation 
but have received limited attention in research and development. Therefore, this study 
explores the potential of retrofitting the kerosene injector in a Rolls-Royce Pearl Rich 
Quench Lean (RQL) combustor for dual-fuel operation. Adapting the existing injector for the 
combined use with hydrogen poses a significant challenge due to elevated NOx emissions. To 
address this, an automated computational fluid dynamics (CFD) workflow is used to optimize 
the injector geometry for emission performance, enabling rapid evaluation under realistic 
engine conditions. To explore a broad range of geometry variations, the Reynolds-Averaged 
Navier–Stokes (RANS) approach is employed for simulations, while large eddy simulations 
(LES) are performed on selected geometries to validate emission trends. Prior to optimizing 
the injector, the CFD setup is validated against available measurements for conceptual 
injector geometries, confirming its capability to accurately predict emission levels. This 
study demonstrates that dual-fuel capability can be incorporated into an existing 
combustion system while preserving flame stability and emission levels comparable to 
standard kerosene injectors. The CFD-based workflow successfully identified optimal 
geometric features, achieving a reduction of emissions for both fuels during Landing-Take- 
Off cycle for the proposed injector configuration. Emissions are evaluated in accordance 
with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)-prescribed legislation. In the 
future, the optimized injector will undergo further evaluation through experimental testing 
to confirm the predicted performance and set the next step toward dual-fuel capable 
combustion systems. [DOI: 10.1115/1.4069797] 
Keywords: hydrogen, injection, combustion, dual fuel, emission, optimization 
1 Introduction
Hydrogen has gained significant attention as a sustainable fuel for 
reducing carbon dioxide emissions from aero engines [1,2]. 
However, the widespread adoption of hydrogen faces significant 
challenges, including limited availability and infrastructure gaps in 
many regions. Dual-fuel (DF) capable engines provide a decisive 
solution for the transition to hydrogen, allowing the seamless 
integration of hydrogen without sacrificing operational flexibility. 
Due to hydrogen’s lower volumetric energy density and the added 
weight of its fuel tanks, long-haul flights are expected to continue 
relying on liquid fuels such as kerosene and SAFs. In this context, 
DF engines provide the flexibility to take off with hydrogen and 
switch to liquid fuels midflight, effectively eliminating soot and CO2 
emissions during airport residence.
Research on dual-fuel combustion systems is limited, primarily 
focusing on reciprocating engines [3], with an emphasis on pollutant 
emissions and the ignition mechanisms of natural gas–air mixtures. 
Their potential for gas turbine or aero-engine applications has 
received little attention [4]. A fundamental study by Vance et al. [5] 
demonstrates that blending hydrogen with jet fuel improves flame 
stability and offers the potential to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. 
However, as an initial step, this study focuses on the single fuel cases 
of operating with either pure hydrogen or pure kerosene, excluding 
fuel blend scenarios.
While hydrogen combustion has the potential to reduce carbon 
dioxide and particulate emissions, nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions 
are a primary concern due to the higher adiabatic flame temperatures 
and distinct properties of hydrogen as a fuel.
At equivalent power outputs, systems using conventional fuels 
can generate significantly lower NOx emissions compared to those 
Turbo Expo: Turbomachinery Technical Conference & Exposition (GT2025), June 
16–20, 2025. GT2025.
Manuscript received July 7, 2025; final manuscript received July 30, 2025; published 
online November 17, 2025. Editor: Jerzy T. Sawicki.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041016-1 
Copyright V
C 2026 by ASME; reuse license CC-BY 4.0
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 2 ---

burning hydrogen-containing fuels, particularly when rich-quench- 
lean combustors are utilized. For instance, a numerical study [6] 
demonstrated that blending hydrogen into natural gas during burner 
operation results in large increases in NOx emissions. Increasing the 
hydrogen content in the fuel mixture can lead to a rise in NOx 
emissions by up to a factor of four. These findings underscore the 
importance of carefully controlling NOx emissions in hydrogen- 
based combustion systems.
Reducing emissions in dual-fuel combustors is particularly 
challenging due to the need to balance tradeoffs between various 
pollutants, in particular NOx and soot. For instance, rich combustion 
with shorter residence times lowers NOx emissions by reducing peak 
temperatures but increases soot emissions due to incomplete 
combustion. In contrast, longer residence times promote NOx 
formation but allow for more complete combustion and reoxidation, 
thereby reducing particulate emissions like soot. Hence, optimizing 
the injector’s geometry to create targeted flow patterns and flame 
structures within the combustor provides an effective method for 
reducing overall emissions.
Building on these considerations, current efforts focus on 
modifying the Pearl 15 engine, designed around the Rich Quench 
Lean (RQL) concept, to incorporate an injection system compatible 
with both hydrogen and liquid fuels. This retrofit approach seeks to 
minimize costs and expedite development. This study aims to 
advance these developments by adapting a fully automated 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) framework to evaluate and 
optimize fuel injectors for dual operation with hydrogen and 
kerosene/sustainable aviation fuel, while minimizing emissions.
The remainder of this work is structured as follows: First, the 
baseline design for the dual-fuel injector is presented. This is 
followed by a description of the automated CFD framework and the 
methodology for optimizing the NOx and soot emissions. It includes 
the automated meshing process, CFD setup, and a data-driven 
optimization approach. Following validation of the framework 
using available experimental data, the optimization results are 
presented and analyzed. Finally, the conclusions and outlook are 
given.
2 Baseline Design for the Dual-Fuel Injector
Before optimization, a base design of the DF injector, capable of 
operating with both fuels, is introduced. Based on this initial 
configuration, parameters are identified that can be optimized under 
specific constraints to minimize emissions. A schematic of the base 
injector is provided in Fig. 1. As shown by the arrows, the design 
features central injection for sustainable aviation fuel/kerosene and 
hydrogen injection positioned slightly further outward.
The simulation of the baseline dual-fuel injector operating with 
kerosene, shown in Fig. 2, provides insight into how the resulting 
flame stabilizes within the combustor. It presents contour plots of 
temperature and velocity profiles under full-load conditions. Two 
distinct combustion zones are observed: a rich zone located 
upstream of the dilution ports and a lean zone formed downstream 
of the secondary air injection.
The velocity and temperature structures observed are highly 
similar between the standard kerosene injector and the dual-fuel 
injector operating with kerosene, as the geometry modifications to 
the kerosene injector are minimal. Achieving a similar flow field and 
flame topology is essential for hydrogen operation.
As this work aims to optimize the design for minimal emissions 
with both fuels, the following outlines a set of geometric and 
operational constraints, which are also applied to the baseline 
design, defining the range within which the optimizer can operate.
2.1 Dimensions of the Injector. The design space for the DF 
injector is defined by the constraints imposed by the existing Pearl 
combustor geometry. The available volume determines the maximal 
geometrical dimensions of the injector, while the required power 
output at takeoff dictates the required hydrogen mass flow. To 
ensure consistent turbine inlet temperatures for both hydrogen and 
kerosene, the air-to-fuel ratio is adjusted, resulting in an air-to-fuel 
ratio approximately three times higher for hydrogen compared to 
kerosene. To minimize the impact on kerosene operation, the 
kerosene passage, and prefilmer retain their standard geometry, 
while the inner air passage and swirler are resized to allow 
accommodation of the hydrogen passage.
2.2 Flame Liftoff. To prevent flame stabilization on the 
injector tip, maintaining a high axial flow velocity is critical. High 
shear rates at the injector exit promote local quenching, facilitating a 
lifted flame. An effective strategy to achieve sufficient inlet velocity 
is to reduce the swirl in the outer air channel. This minimizes the 
tangential velocity components and pressure drop, directly contrib­
uting to higher axial flow velocities. However, reducing the swirl 
necessitates further design adaptations, as swirl plays a crucial role 
in stabilizing the primary combustion zone. It enhances fuel-air 
mixing and generates centrifugal forces, which create a low- 
pressure region along the centerline. This low-pressure region 
allows for the recirculation of hot combustion gases, which are 
essential for maintaining flame stability. In configurations with 
reduced swirl, stability is ensured through the design of outward- 
directed air and fuel channels, which create a diverging flow pattern 
essential for backflow and hot gas recirculation. Therefore, the 
opening angle must be carefully selected to maintain an open flame 
for both hydrogen and kerosene operation under reduced swirl 
conditions.
2.3 Effective Area. Finally, to maintain the airflow distribution 
of the combustion system, it is critical to closely match the effective 
areas of the dual-fuel injector with those of the standard injector. The 
effective area is defined by the air mass flow through the injector and 
the pressure drop across it. 
Aeff ¼
_m
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
2qDp
p
(1)  
2.4 Geometric Parameters for the Optimization. Building 
on the previously discussed geometric and operational constraints, a 
preliminary sensitivity analysis identified three geometric param­
eters as key factors significantly influencing flow and combustion 
behavior within the combustion chamber (CC). As illustrated in 
Fig. 1, the key parameters include Channel Height h of the outer air 
channel, which determines the air distribution between the primary 
and secondary combustion zones; Opening Angle a of the outer air 
channel, which impacts the size of the recirculation zone; and Vane 
Angle b of the outer swirler, which affects the mixing behavior 
within the chamber.
The optimization of the baseline geometry to minimize emissions 
is restricted to acceptable parameter levels that follow the previously 
outlined constraints. The considered levels, normalized by their 
Fig. 1 Schematic of the dual-fuel injector configuration. Air 
passages are indicated by blue arrows, hydrogen passages by green 
arrows, and kerosene passages by red arrows. (Color version online.)
041016-2 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                              
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 3 ---

respective maximum simulated values, are shown in Table 1. The 
values corresponding to the baseline dual fuel injector geometry 
before optimization are highlighted.
Bold values indicate the baseline geometry.
To investigate potential cross-correlational effects between the 
optimization parameters, a full factorial design of parameter 
variations is chosen for the study. This design includes all possible 
combinations of levels across all factors [7], resulting in 100 distinct 
parameter combinations.
Investigating a large number of geometries requires a structured 
and automated optimization approach for the injector design. A 
manual process for mesh generation across numerous geometries is 
inefficient and time-intensive, while manual data management 
challenges productivity and systematization. To address this, an 
automated workflow is developed to manage mesh generation, CFD 
simulations, data postprocessing, and optimization with minimal 
human involvement. The details of this setup are provided in the 
methodology section.
3 Computational Fluid Dynamics-Based Optimization 
Methodology
The adapted workflow integrates several components: a para­
meterized CAD geometry defined in Siemens NX, automated mesh 
generation with ICEM CFD software, CFD simulations with 
PRECISE-UNS solver, and data-driven postprocessing of the CFD 
results. Figure 3 provides an overview of the workflow, with each 
stage detailed in the sections below.
3.1 Geometry Parameterization and Automated 
Meshing. The parameterization of the CAD model for the injector 
and the CC involves defining their design through a set of rules and 
logical relationships. Instead of setting fixed dimensions, key 
components of the injector and CC are adjustable with constraints 
applied for the whole assembly using mathematical equations. 
These equations govern the relationships between geometric 
parameters, ensuring design flexibility while maintaining functional 
consistency. The automated geometry modification is achieved by 
using Visual Basic Scripting in combination with the expressions 
functionality of Siemens NX. An interface is established with the 
meshing software to enable streamlined and automated mesh 
generation. The meshing process employs the Octree algorithm 
[8], which initially generates a tetrahedral mesh for the entire 
computational domain. Subsequently, tetrahedral cells are selec­
tively merged into hexahedral cells, producing a hex-dominant 
mesh. This method proves to be both computationally efficient and 
robust, significantly reducing the need for user intervention while 
maintaining a good mesh quality throughout the process. The 
resulting meshes comprise approximately 25  106 cells, with 
refinement applied in high-shear regions to accurately capture 
critical flow features, as determined through mesh independence 
studies. The mesh refinement regions are defined using the mesh 
density feature in ICEM CFD, with positioning of the refined mesh 
regions dynamically linked to the applied geometrical modifica­
tions. The required level of refinement was determined through 
testing progressively finer meshes, with results being considered 
mesh-independent when changes in key output emission metrics 
were negligibly small (less than 1%).
3.2 Computational Fluid Dynamics Simulations and Emis­
sions Data Collection. The simulations in this study are conducted 
using the PRECISE-UNS CFD solver developed by Rolls-Royce 
[9]. To minimize computational cost, the Reynolds-Averaged 
Navier–Stokes (RANS) approach is employed, where all turbulent 
structures are modeled, reducing the required grid resolution. The 
k– realizable model is used for turbulence modeling [10].
The combustion process is modeled using a tabulated chemistry 
approach, which employs precomputed one-dimensional flamelets 
stored in a lookup table to determine thermo-chemical states during 
the simulation [11]. For kerosene, the progress variable is defined as 
a linear combination of the mass fractions of CO2, H2, and H2O, 
whereas for hydrogen, it is represented by the mass fraction of H2O. 
Flamelet calculations for the table generation are performed using 
CHEM1D [12] with a mixture-averaged transport model and an 
n-Dodecane reaction mechanism. The same reaction mechanism is 
used for both hydrogen and kerosene to facilitate a direct NOx 
comparison. A comparison done in Ref. [5] shows that there is a good 
agreement between the hydrogen-specific mechanisms and the n- 
Dodecane mechanism for the predicted laminar burning velocities.
A presumed probability density function approach is used for 
turbulence-chemistry interaction modeling [13]. The subgrid-scale 
distribution is modeled using a beta distribution for the mixture 
fraction and a tri-delta distribution for the progress variable [14]. This 
results in a four-dimensional chemistry lookup table, comprising the 
mixture fraction, progress variable, and their respective variances.
The CFD simulations are conducted for a single sector of the 
combustion chamber using boundary conditions that reflect realistic 
operating conditions for the dual-fuel system. The main focus of this 
study is Idle and Take-off like conditions. To model the single 
sector, rotational cyclic boundary conditions are applied at the sector 
interfaces. The turbulent kinetic energy at the inlet is initialized 
based on values obtained from a compressor simulation, ensuring a 
realistic turbulence level in the flow. The evolution of the fuel spray 
for kerosene is modeled using a Lagrangian particle tracking 
approach [15]. Droplets are introduced at specified injection points, 
with their sizes determined based on a Rosin–Rammler distribution 
characterized by defined statistical parameters. A steady-state 
evaporation model is employed to simulate the droplet behavior. 
The resulting spray pattern is assumed to represent the distribution 
following the atomization process [14]. The statistical spray 
characteristics in the simulations are derived from those of the 
standard kerosene injector, as the prefilmer geometry remains 
unchanged in the dual-fuel configuration.
NOx emission are calculated solving an additional transport 
equation, with source terms extracted from the chemistry table [16]. 
The soot model used in this study is the modified two-equation 
model based on the framework developed by Wen et al. [17]. This 
Fig. 2 Velocity and temperature contours for the baseline DF 
injector during kerosene operation and for the standard kerosene 
injector at full-load conditions. The contours represent a planar 
slice through the center of the domain.
Table 1 Levels of normalized design parameters 
Opening angle
Air channel height
Swirler angle
anorm
hnorm
bnorm
0.64, 0.73, 0.82, 0.90, 1
0.17, 0.33, 0.53, 0.67, 1
0, 0.6, 1
Bold values indicate the baseline geometry.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041016-3 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 4 ---

approach involves solving two transport equations: one for the soot 
mass fraction and another for the soot number density.
Emission metrics in form of integrated NOx and soot massflows at 
the combustor exit, are gathered from each simulation run. This 
emissions data is stored along with corresponding injector geometry 
parameters, establishing a structured dataset for the optimization 
process.
The pressure drop and air mass flow through the injector, 
necessary for calculating the effective area, are determined via CFD 
simulations. Consequently, certain preselected parameter levels are 
excluded from the optimization space if the simulations reveal that 
the effective area requirement is not met.
3.3 Surrogate Modeling With Gaussian Process 
Regression. In the subsequent stage, a fit using a Gaussian Process 
Regression algorithm [18] is performed to the optimization dataset 
obtained from the CFD simulations to create a continuous model 
enabling the estimation of emissions for any new configuration 
within the defined parameter bounds.
A Gaussian Process is a probabilistic model used to describe an 
unknown function fðxÞ by assuming that any finite set of function 
values follows a multivariate Gaussian distribution. The model is 
defined as 
fðxÞ  GPðmðxÞ, kðx, x0ÞÞ
(2)  
where mðxÞ is the mean function and kðx, x0Þ is the kernel function. 
The kernel is a combination of a radial basis function and a constant 
kernel: 
k x, x0
ð
Þ ¼ r2
f exp −k x −x0k2
2‘2


þ r2
n
(3)  
where r2
f is the data variance, ‘ is the length scale, and r2
n is the noise 
variance. The length scale ‘ represents the characteristic distance in 
the input space over which the function values (NOx or soot mass- 
flows) notably change. This distance captures how sensitive the 
output (emission mass flows) is to variations in the input features 
(geometrical parameters). This approach allows fitting the data 
points without requiring a predefined fitting function.
A separate Gaussian Process Regression model is trained for each 
operational condition, fuel type, and emission type on correspond­
ing subset of the collected data, resulting in six submodels. The 
submodel outputs are integrated into a full surrogate model using an 
objective function, which summarizes emission levels across fuel 
types and operational conditions, allowing for overall emission 
minimization.
3.4 Objective Function and Optimization. The objective 
function is based on the emission legislation for the Landing and 
Takeoff cycle prescribed by International Civil Aviation Organiza­
tion (ICAO) [19]. According to the legislation, operating modes are 
weighted by corresponding time coefficients tj: 26 min for idling and 
42 s for takeoff. The equation for the objective function is further 
extended by incorporating the probabilities of fuel usage under a 
certain operating mode PU, j and a weighting coefficient Wi, j for the 
emission massflow _Mi,j, allowing prioritization of optimization for 
soot or NOx emissions. 
E x
ð Þ ¼
X
2
i¼1
X
2
j¼1
tj Wi,j _Mi,jðxÞ
 
PU,j
(4)  
Bayesian optimization is used to find the input parameters x ¼
½a, b, h that minimize the total emissions EðxÞ.
The resulting integrated workflow is capable to identify optimal 
geometry with reduced NOx and soot emissions across different 
usage scenarios. The schematics of the workflow is summarized in 
Fig. 3.
4 Results and Discussion
The results of the comprehensive CFD study are presented next. 
Prior to delving into the details of the optimization study, the CFD 
setup is validated against available experimental data.
4.1 Validation of the Computational Fluid Dynamics 
Setup. In a preliminary investigation to evaluate the feasibility of 
hydrogen operation, various hydrogen injector geometries with 
distinct topologies were tested in a full-annular rig featuring the 
Pearl700 combustor at the German Aerospace Center (DLR) HBK5 
test facility in Cologne, Germany [20].
The tests encompassed full range of operating conditions, 
including idle, approach, climb, and takeoff.
Although these experimental data were collected using injectors 
different from those studied here, they provide a suitable dataset for 
validating the CFD setup, ensuring its reliability in accurately 
predicting emission trends based on injector geometry and operating 
conditions. The comparison between experimental and numerical 
NOx predictions are presented in Fig. 4. Geometry 1 is similar to the 
hydrogen injector configuration used in the present study, but 
without the centrally integrated kerosene injector. Geometry 2 
features central hydrogen injection, while geometries 3 and 4 
incorporate discrete jet-based hydrogen injection with different jet 
distribution. A more detailed description of the test rig, tested 
geometries, and measurement approach can be found in Ref. [20].
The CFD simulations show a consistent ranking of the geometries 
compared to the experimental measurements.
The discrepancy observed under full-load conditions—where 
CFD predicts Geometry 1 to underperform relative to Geometry 3, 
whereas measurements suggest the opposite—can be attributed to 
the small absolute difference between their NOx levels. Given the 
measurement uncertainties, the ranking remains in good qualitative 
agreement with the CFD results, indicating that CFD effectively 
Fig. 3 Automated optimization workflow 
041016-4 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                              
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 5 ---

captures the impact of injector geometry and operating conditions 
on emission level trends.
To further evaluate the CFD setup, Large Eddy Simulations 
(LES) are conducted for the full-load hydrogen operating case, 
focusing on air channel height variations of the baseline dual-fuel 
injector geometry. To model unresolved subgrid scales in LES, the 
Sigma model is used [21], which relates the SGS stresses to the 
singular values of the resolved velocity gradient tensor. A 3D 
velocity profile, obtained from a compressor simulation, is used in 
LES as a boundary condition for the inlet air to introduce a realistic 
level of turbulence into the flow.
Figure 5 presents a comparison, showing that the LES simulation 
predicts higher absolute NOx emission levels. This is attributed to 
the high temporal dynamics of the resolved scales, which reveal a 
more intense mixing field with fuel-rich pockets and high- 
temperature regions at stoichiometry, promoting NOx formation. 
Although this behavior can theoretically be captured with an 
accurately predicted subgrid probability density function shape, the 
complex mixing and flow patterns pose a significant challenge for 
presumed probability density function models. Despite these 
challenges, the consistent trends observed between RANS and 
LES simulations confirm the RANS approach’s capability to 
reliably predict overall emission trends.
For simulations of kerosene combustion, the computational setup 
used in the optimization process corresponds to the methodology 
outlined in Ref. [14]. A thorough validation of this CFD framework, 
including comparisons with LES and experimental results for a 
generic combustion chamber, is presented in Ref. [14].
4.2 Sensitivity Analysis Findings. Using the previously vali­
dated setup, the simulations of the parametric variations presented in 
Table 1 are performed. The results of the sensitivity analysis for 
single-parameter variations are presented in Fig. 6. For each 
geometrical group, only one parameter of the baseline geometry is 
varied at a time.
The emission indices for soot and NOx are normalized by the 
corresponding EI value of the baseline geometry for each pollutant. 
The analysis reveals the tradeoffs among different emission types, 
fuels, and operating conditions. The distinct combustion character­
istics of hydrogen and kerosene are reflected in opposing trends and 
differing slopes for the predicted NOx curves. Kerosene operation 
reveals a clear tradeoff between reducing soot and minimizing NOx 
emissions. Conflicting trends are also observed under different 
operating conditions, showing that designs optimized for a specific 
operating point are likely to deliver suboptimal performance under 
alternative conditions.
Hydrogen combustion emissions exhibit a higher sensitivity to 
geometric modifications, with potential emission reductions of up to 
20% under idle conditions and 8% under full-load conditions. This is 
primarily attributed to the significantly elevated adiabatic flame 
temperatures associated with hydrogen combustion. Since NOx 
formation is highly temperature-dependent, even small variations in 
the temperature field, given these elevated adiabatic temperatures, 
can lead to pronounced changes in NOx emissions. Figure 7 presents 
normalized temperature profiles, averaged over the radial cross 
section of the combustion chamber, plotted against the normalized 
distance from the injection point for the variations of the opening 
angle. The temperature normalization is based on the maximum 
radial cross section averaged temperature observed during hydrogen 
operation. Figure 7 shows considerably higher temperatures within 
the primary combustion zone for hydrogen operation.
During kerosene operation, fluctuations in soot emissions are 
more pronounced than variations in NOx mass flow. This is 
primarily due to the strong dependence of soot formation on the local 
gas-phase composition. Even minor changes in fuel-air mixing can 
lead to significant response in terms of soot production, as soot 
formation exhibits a nonlinear increase with richer fuel mixtures. 
Unlike NOx, which is primarily governed by thermal conditions and 
residence time, soot formation is highly dependent on mixing 
dynamics and the presence of hydrocarbon-rich regions that 
promote the formation of soot precursors.
Among the parameters tested, the outer air channel swirl has the 
least impact on emissions. This limited influence can be attributed to 
the dominant effect of the swirler in the central air channel. In the 
following discussion, the results of the opening angle variation and 
air channel height variation are examined in more detail to analyze 
the underlying physics of the observed emission fluctuations. The 
effects of swirl are omitted for brevity.
4.3 Effects of the Variation in the Injection Angle 
anorm. Figures 8(a) and 8(b) depict the temperature field’s 
dependence on the opening angle for hydrogen and kerosene, 
respectively. The depicted temperature fields represent planar slices 
through the center of the domain. The white line represents the 
isoline of the stoichiometric equivalence ratio for each fuel. 
Analyzing the mixing behavior and resulting temperature profiles 
indicates that the observed trends are heavily influenced by the 
mixing processes within the combustion chamber.
Below the temperature contour plots in Figs. 8(a) and 8(b), bar 
charts illustrate the equivalence ratio distributions within the flame 
region, conditioned by elevated heat release rates, showing the 
proportions of lean, stoichiometric, and rich mixtures in the primary 
zone (PZ), secondary zone (SZ), and the entire combustor. 
Additionally, the averaged equivalence ratio are given for each 
zone, providing a quantitative assessment of the mixing and 
combustion behavior for both fuels. The dashed red line marks the 
stoichiometric equivalence ratio.
Fig. 4 Comparison of measured EI NOx values with CFD- 
predicted EI NOx for conceptual dual-fuel geometries across the 
full range of operating conditions
Fig. 5 Comparison of NOx emission trends predicted by LES and 
RANS for a series of geometries with varying air channel heights 
during hydrogen operation. Normalization is performed using the 
corresponding values for the baseline geometry.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041016-5 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 6 ---

As shown in Fig. 8(a) the distributions indicate that for hydrogen 
reaction predominantly occurs under lean conditions in both the 
primary and secondary zones. Overall, a bimodal behavior is 
observed, with peaks around equivalence ratios closer to stoichio­
metric /  0:86 and at lean conditions around /  0:36. The 
primary combustion zone (PZ), characterized by elevated temper­
atures, is the predominant region for NO formation. However, to 
fully account for the observed NOx trends, contributions from both 
the primary and secondary combustion zones must be considered.
As the injection angle increases, the recirculation zone in the 
primary combustion region expands, and the proportion of near- 
stoichiometric equivalence ratios increases, leading to a rise in the 
mean temperature within this zone, as illustrated in Fig. 7. 
Simultaneously, combustion occurs over a larger volume, enhanc­
ing hydrogen consumption in the primary zone and resulting in a 
leaner secondary combustion zone. The overall trend for NOx 
emissions shows an increase for normalized opening angles (anorm) 
ranging from 0.64 to 0.82 due to the rising temperature in the 
primary zone. At anorm ¼ 0.9, a local minimum in NOx emissions is 
observed, as the higher production of NOx in the primary zone is 
partially counterbalanced by the reduced emissions in the secondary 
zone.
At the maximum injection angle, the radial velocity component 
becomes dominant, resulting in the formation of two distinct flame 
branches along the walls and an increased proportion of near- 
stoichiometric conditions, as evident in the contour plot for the 
maximum value anorm ¼ 1. Consequently, this shift in local 
equivalence ratios significantly amplifies overall NOx emissions.
For kerosene operation, shown in Fig. 8(b), the combustion 
process follows the RQL principle. Increasing the injection angle 
enhances mixing and results in a reduction in the fraction of highly 
rich equivalence ratios. Specifically, the peak at an equivalence ratio 
of /  2:5 disappears in the distribution, with the equivalence ratio 
shifting closer to stoichiometry from the rich side. As a result, the 
temperature in the primary zone increases, similar to hydrogen 
operation, a trend that is also clearly reflected in Fig. 7. 
Simultaneously, the secondary zone becomes leaner and cooler. 
Figure 7 illustrates that, for kerosene operation, unlike for hydrogen, 
temperature levels in the primary and secondary zones are 
comparable. This observation suggests that both zones contribute 
comparably to the overall NOx production, particularly when 
considering the extended length of the combustor beyond the 
dilution ports, which amplifies the influence of the secondary zone. 
The overall trend in NOx emissions for injection angle variation for 
kerosene shows a decrease, as demonstrated in Fig. 6. This is due to 
the pronounced decrease in NOx formation in the secondary zone 
outweighing the increase observed in the primary zone.
Another crucial aspect to consider is soot formation. As illustrated 
in Fig. 9, the reduced momentum—and consequently, the lower 
shear and turbulence levels—significantly affect local mixing, as 
reflected by the increased variance in the mixture fraction. This 
heightened variance suggests a greater likelihood of forming fuel- 
rich pockets near the injector, which accounts for the substantial 
increase in soot production.
4.4 Effects of the Variation in the Air Channel Height 
hnorm. The variation in air channel height influences the air split 
between the primary and secondary airflows while maintaining a 
constant total airflow rate into the combustion chamber. Figures 10
and 11 present normalized temperature fields and NOx source terms 
for different air channel heights, with temperature fields shown as 
planar slices through the central axis of the domain. The white line 
represents the isoline of the stoichiometric equivalence ratio for 
each fuel.
For the smallest air channel height, for kerosene operation, NOx 
formation is highly localized. Defined regions of NOx formation can 
be observed in the secondary zone, where, during the quenching 
Fig. 6 Sensitivity of emissions to parametrical adaptations for full load (TOP) and idle (BOTTOM) operating 
conditions. NOx EI shown in orange, soot EI in blue color. Normalization is performed using the corresponding 
values for the baseline geometry. (Color version online.)
Fig. 7 Normalized temperature averaged across the radial cross 
section of the combustion chamber as a function of distance from 
the injection point for the opening angle variation. Normalization 
done with the maximum temperature during hydrogen operation.
041016-6 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                              
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 7 ---

process, the stoichiometric mixture fraction is reached due to 
insufficient mixing rates in the primary zone and a larger amount of 
unconsumed fuel being transported downstream.
As the air channel height increases, enhanced mixing occurs due 
to the larger introduced momentum and air mass, leading to a 
broader and more gradual reaction zone where combustion 
progresses at lower average temperatures. Although NOx formation 
is distributed over a larger volume within both the primary and 
secondary combustion zones, an overall reduction in NOx emissions 
is observed as shown in Fig. 6. This can be attributed to the slower 
NOx formation kinetics by decreased temperature, which mitigates 
the impact of the extended zone of formation.
Nearly complete fuel consumption within the primary zone at the 
maximal value of the air channel height hnorm ¼ 1 is effectively 
Fig. 8 Influence of the outflow angle anorm on temperature field and equivalence ratio within flame regions conditioned by 
elevated heat release rates. Analyzes done under full-load operating condition in the primary zone (PZ), secondary zone (SZ), and 
the entire combustion chamber (full). (Color version online.)
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041016-7 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 8 ---

suppressing NO reduction through hydrocarbon radicals in the 
secondary zone. In the numerical simulations, this is reflected in low 
NOx destruction rates after the dilution ports. Consequently, for the 
largest air channel height (hnorm ¼ 1), NOx emissions increase 
significantly, as NOx formed in the primary zone is no longer 
mitigated by subsequent reduction mechanisms.
Hydrogen combustion, shown in Fig. 11, is characterized by more 
distributed NOx production due to its higher diffusivity, which 
promotes enhanced mixing. The effect of varying the air channel 
height closely resembles that observed with kerosene. As the airflow 
in the primary combustion zone increases, the mean temperature 
decreases in both the primary and secondary combustion zones. In 
the primary zone, this reduction is due to leaner fuel-air mixtures and 
intensified mixing caused by the increased momentum of the 
injected air. In the secondary zone, the temperature drop is a result of 
increased fuel consumption in the primary zone, leading to leaner 
mixtures downstream of the dilution ports, as well as improved 
homogenization of the mixture and temperature fields.
In summary, the implemented geometric modifications result in 
physically consistent changes in pollutant formation, validating the 
model’s suitability and enabling the full factorial parameter 
variation to construct a surrogate model based on these data.
4.5 Full Factorial Parameter Variation and Response 
Surface. Figure 12 presents the results of the full factorial 
parameter variation performed under full-load operating conditions. 
The dataset for idle operating conditions is not shown for the sake of 
brevity. The analysis includes 60 geometries out of the initially 
considered 100 geometries that are found to meet the constraints on 
effective area and axial velocity outlined in the section on the 
baseline geometry. The design space is constrained to a maximum 
normalized outer air channel height of 0.67, as higher values exceed 
the allowable injector effective area. The swirler vane angle is 
restricted to a maximum scaled value of 0.76 to prevent excessive 
tangential velocity components. Emission index values have been 
normalized by the highest value observed for a given emission type 
and operational load across all geometries. Consistent with the data 
representation in Fig. 6, the kerosene results are shown as dots, while 
hydrogen results are represented by triangles.
This analysis illustrates interaction effects of combined geomet­
rical modification and provides a comprehensive overview of the 
design space. Distinct trends are evident for each geometrical 
parameter variation, with the air channel height—which influencing 
the air mass injected into the primary zone—emerging as a 
particularly significant factor. While key trends from the sensitivity 
analysis are generally replicated in the full factorial numerical 
experiment, certain specific effects are not captured. This suggests 
that optimization based solely on One Factor at a Time tests may 
lead to the selection of a local minimum rather than an overall 
optimal geometry. Notably, increasing the air mass introduced into 
the primary zone (normalized air channel height values between 
0.33 and 0.53) consistently reduced emissions for both fuels. 
Furthermore, adjustments to swirl levels reduced the impact of other 
parameters, as demonstrated by smaller emission level variations in 
high-swirl cases. The resulting dataset from the full factorial study 
both for full load and idle operating conditions is utilized for model 
training. The complete surrogate model, developed using the 
obtained data and the previously described approach, is presented 
in Fig. 13. It represents a function that links the combined emission 
levels, calculated in accordance with ICAO legislation, to the 
geometric adaptations. Equal weights are assigned to the optimiza­
tion for hydrogen and soot emissions, with equal probabilities of 
usage considered for both fuels under both operating conditions.
For validation of the surrogate predictions, a test is performed on a 
geometry that is not involved in the fitting process. The results, 
shown in Fig. 14, compare the EI predicted by the fitted model to the 
CFD output, along with the uncertainty intervals. The predicted soot 
emission index shows slightly higher values for both operating 
conditions but remains in good agreement with the CFD results.
Fig. 9 Influence of the outflow angle anorm on variance of the mixture fraction under full-load operating condition for kerosene. 
Normalized opening angle values form left to the right are 0.64, 0.73, 0.82, 0.9, 1.
Fig. 10 Influence of the air channel height hnorm on temperature field and NOx formation zones under full-load operating 
condition for kerosene
041016-8 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                              
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 9 ---

The optimization results recommend selecting the largest outer 
air channel variant within the design space, a shallow injection 
angle, and low swirl for the outer air channel.
Table 2 provides an overview of emission levels predicted by 
CFD and, where available, obtained from measurements. All 
emissions are expressed as percentages relative to the standard 
kerosene injector’s values. The comparison includes four injector 
configurations: the standard kerosene injector, the baseline DF 
injector, the optimized DF injector, and Geometry 1—a hydrogen- 
only injector with an identical topology to the hydrogen injection 
system of the DF injector. Geometry 1 corresponds to the dual-fuel 
injector with the kerosene channel omitted and is characterized by 
normalized parameters: anorm ¼ 0:64, bnorm ¼ 0, and hnorm ¼ 0:2.
The optimized dual-fuel injector achieves reduced emission mass 
flows across all considered emission types and operational 
conditions compared to the baseline design, with the sole exception 
of NOx emissions during kerosene operation at full load. This 
exception results from an unavoidable tradeoff between conflicting 
optimization objectives.
Experimental measurements for Geometry 1 indicate that hydro­
gen operation results in NOx emissions that are 20% higher under 
full-load conditions and 46% higher under idle conditions compared 
to kerosene operation with the standard kerosene injector at the same 
combustor exit temperature. However, given that the combined NOx 
emissions for the standard kerosene injector remain well below the 
maximum ICAO-prescribed limits—and considering the complete 
Fig. 11 Influence of the air channel height hnorm on temperature field and NOx formation zones under full-load operating 
condition for hydrogen
Fig. 12 Results of a full factorial parameter variation under full-load operating conditions. Mean trend shown with dashed 
red line. Normalization is performed using the corresponding values for the baseline geometry. (Color version online.)
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041016-9 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 10 ---

elimination of CO and soot emissions during hydrogen operation— 
Geometry 1, even before optimization, remained within regulatory 
compliance.
Following the optimization of the dual-fuel injector NOx 
emissions were reduced to levels even lower than those of Geometry 
1 for hydrogen operation, as demonstrated by CFD results. 
Additionally, soot emissions during kerosene operation were further 
reduced, achieving levels lower than those of the standard kerosene 
injector.
These results clearly showcase the potential of designing a dual- 
fuel injector that, after geometric optimization, can match or even 
surpass the performance of established single-fuel injectors. This is 
an exciting development, as it paves the way for retrofitting existing 
architectures to support dual-fuel operation, enabling a faster 
transition to low- and zero-CO2 emission aviation.
5 Conclusion
The pressing demand for fuel infrastructure-independent aero 
engines, facilitating a swift transition to a hydrogen-based aviation 
economy, motivated the evaluation of dual-fuel capable injectors in 
this study.
An automated optimization workflow for a DF injector has been 
developed, integrating a parameterized CAD model with a RANS 
CFD setup coupled to tabulated chemistry and state-of-the-art 
emission models. The CFD framework has been successfully 
validated against experimental and LES data, demonstrating a 
general overprediction of NOx emissions, while maintaining 
consistency with experimental trends. This workflow has enabled 
efficient injector optimization with a focus on minimizing 
emissions.
An evaluation of 60 geometries has indicated that all tested 
designs comply with current legislative limits. The analysis has 
revealed a significant sensitivity of NOx emissions to injector 
geometry during hydrogen operation, with an optimization potential 
of up to 20%. Emissions are strongly influenced by the mixing 
behavior within the combustion chamber. While hydrogen operation 
has resulted in higher absolute NOx emissions compared to 
kerosene, these increases can be partially mitigated through 
geometric optimization.
This work demonstrates that retrofitting a dual-fuel injector into 
an existing combustion chamber, combined with a systematic 
optimization approach, can effectively achieve NOx emission 
standards mandated by legislation for both hydrogen and kerosene.
A comprehensive investigation of the spray behavior will be 
conducted as part of future work to validate the assumption that it 
remains identical to that of a standard kerosene injector. This 
analysis will involve high-fidelity numerical simulations using the 
Volume of Fluid method to evaluate key parameters such as droplet 
size distribution, velocity profiles, and atomization dynamics.
Additionally, future work will focus on manufacturing and testing 
of the proposed injector, as well as further examining the emission 
characteristics during blended-fuel operation, as well as during fuel 
switching scenarios.
Acknowledgment
The authors gratefully acknowledge the computing time provided 
to them on the high-performance computer Lichtenberg II at the 
Fig. 13 Visualization of the objective function with equal 
probabilities of kerosene and hydrogen usage, and equal 
weighting assigned to soot and NOx optimization
Fig. 14 Comparison of the surrogate Emission Index (EI) 
predictions for a test geometry (anorm 5 0.9, bnorm 5 0.3, 
h 5 0.33). Normalization with respect to the corresponding EI 
values for the baseline geometry.
Table 2 Comparison of CFD and measured (Mes) emission values for baseline DF geometry, optimized DF geometry, and concept 
Geometry 1 under full load (FL) and idle conditions to standard kerosene injector 
Injector (anorm, bnorm, h)
OP
CFD Soot: Ker
CFD NOx: Ker
CFD NOx: H2
Mes NOx: Ker
Mes NOx: H2
Standard Ker
FL (%)
100
100
—
52.9
—
(-, -, -)
Idle (%)
100
100
—
66.9
—
Baseline DF
FL (%)
142
106
87.2
—
—
(0.9, 0, 0.33)
Idle (%)
96.3
119
155
—
—
Optimized DF
FL (%)
97.8
114
83.9
—
—
(0.64, 0.4, 0.67)
Idle (%)
80.1
116
131
—
—
Geometry 1
FL (%)
—
—
88.8
—
63.4
(0.64, 0, 0.2)
Idle (%)
—
—
134
—
98
041016-10 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                           
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025


--- Page 11 ---

NHR Centers NHR4CES at TU Darmstadt and financial support 
from CAVENDISH (Consortium for the AdVent of aero-Engine 
Demonstration and aircraft Integration Strategy with Hydrogen), 
Grant Agreement No. 101102000, EU/HORIZON-JU-Clean-Avia­
tion-2022-01.
Funding Data
 Consortium for the AdVent of aero-Engine Demonstration and 
aircraft Integration Strategy with Hydrogen (Grant Agreement 
No. 101102000, EU/HORIZON-JU-Clean-Aviation-2022- 
01).
Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated and supporting the findings of this article 
are obtainable from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request.
References
0[1] International Energy Agency (IEA), 2024, “Global Hydrogen Review 2024,” IEA, 
Paris, accessed June 12, 2024, https://www.iea.org/reports/global-hydrogen- 
review-2024
0[2] Baroutaji, A., Wilberforce, T., Ramadan, M., and Olabi, A. G., 2019, 
“Comprehensive Investigation on Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology in the 
Aviation and Aerospace Sectors,” Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 106, 
pp. 31–40.
0[3] Chintala, V., and Subramanian, K., 2017, “A Comprehensive Review on 
Utilization of Hydrogen in a Compression Ignition Engine Under Dual Fuel 
Mode,” Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 70, pp. 472–491.
0[4] Sidey, J., and Mastorakos, E., 2017, “Visualisation of Turbulent Swirling Dual- 
Fuel Flames,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 36(2), pp. 1721–1727.
0[5] Vance, F. H., Nicolai, H., and Hasse, C., 2024, “A Numerical Investigation Into the 
Stabilization of Hydrogen Enriched n-Dodecane Premixed Flames,” Int. J. 
Hydrogen Energy, 56, pp. 611–620.
0[6] Cellek, M. S., and Pınarbas¸ı, A., 2018, “Investigations on Performance and 
Emission Characteristics of an Industrial Low Swirl Burner While Burning 
Natural Gas, Methane, Hydrogen-Enriched Natural Gas and Hydrogen as Fuels,” 
Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 43(2), pp. 1194–1207.
0[7] Jankovic, A., Chaudhary, G., and Goia, F., 2021, “Designing the Design of 
Experiments (DOE) – An Investigation on the Influence of Different Factorial 
Designs on the Characterization of Complex Systems,” Energy Build., 250, 
p. 111298.
0[8] Schneiders, R., 2000, “Octree-Based Hexahedral Mesh Generation,” Int. J. 
Comput. Geom. Appl., 10(4), 383–398.
0[9] Anand, M. S., Eggels, R., Staufer, M., Zedda, M., and Zhu, J., 2014, “An Advanced 
Unstructured-Grid Finite Volume Design System for Gas Turbine Combustion 
Analysis,” ASME Paper No. GTINDIA2013-3537.
[10] Shih, T.-H., Liou, W. W., Shabbir, A., Yang, Z., and Zhu, J., 1995, “A New k-e 
Eddy Viscosity Model for High Reynolds Number Turbulent Flows,” Comput. 
Fluids, 24(3), pp. 227–238.
[11] van Oijen, J. A., and de Goey, L. P., 2000, “Modelling of Premixed Laminar 
Flames Using Flamelet-Generated Manifolds,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 161(1), 
pp. 113–137.
[12] Hermanns, R., 2001, “CHEM1D, A One-Dimensional Laminar Flame Code,” 
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
[13] Guo, Z., Zhang, H., Chan, C., and Lin, W., 2003, “Presumed Joint 
Probability Density Function Model for Turbulent Combustion,” Fuel, 82(9), 
pp. 1091–1101.
[14] Eggels, R. L. G. M., 2018, “The Application of Combustion LES Within Industry,” 
Direct and Large-Eddy Simulation X, D. G. Grigoriadis, B. J. Geurts, H. Kuerten, 
J. Fr€ohlich, and V. Armenio, eds., Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
Switzerland, pp. 3–13.
[15] Cha, C., Zhu, J., Rizk, N., and Anand, M., 2005, “A Comprehensive Liquid Fuel 
Injection Model for CFD Simulations of Gas Turbine Combustors,” 43rd AIAA 
Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, Jan. 10–13, pp. 1–17.
[16] Ihme, M., and Pitsch, H., 2008, “Modeling of Radiation and Nitric Oxide 
Formation in Turbulent Nonpremixed Flames Using a Flamelet/Progress Variable 
Formulation,” Phys. Fluids, 20(5), p. 055110.
[17] Wen, Z., Yun, S., Thomson, M., and Lightstone, M., 2003, “Modeling Soot 
Formation in Turbulent Kerosene/Air Jet Diffusion Flames,” Combust. Flame, 
135(3), pp. 323–340.
[18] Martins, J. R. R. A., and Ning, A., 2021, Engineering Design Optimization, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
[19] ICAO, 2023, ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices: Annex 16, Volume II, 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), Montreal, Canada.
[20] Clemen, C., Ravikanti, M., La Bianca, N., Eggels, R., Wurm, B., and Y., and K., 
2024, “Considerations for Hydrogen Fueled Aerospace Gas Turbine Combustion 
Sub-System Design,” ASME Paper No. GT2024-122593.
[21] Toda, H., Cabrit, O., Balarac, G., Bose, S., Lee, J., Choi, H., and Franck, N., 2010, 
“A Subgrid-Scale Model Based on Singular Values for LES in Complex 
Geometries,” Proceedings of the Summer Program, Center for Turbulence 
Research, Standford University, Stanford, CA, pp. 1–10.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041016-11 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041016/7538124/gtp-25-1299.pdf by guest on 31 December 2025
