
--- Page 1 ---

VOL. 15, NO. 8, AUGUST 1977
AIAA JOURNAL
1063
Swirl Flows in Combustion: A Review
David G. Lilley
Concordia University, Montreal, Canada
I. Introduction
R
ECENTLY, concentrated research effort has been ex-
pended 
on understanding 
and characterizing the
combustion aerodynamics of swirl flow burning processes of
gaseous, liquid, and solid fuels. Economical design and
operation 
of practical combustion equipment can be
facilitated greatly by estimates made from complementary
experimentation and modeling studies. Such work combines
experimental and theoretical combustion aerodynamics with
sophisticated computational fluid dynamics and its im-
provement and use will reduce the cost of development
programs significantly. Detailed surveys of these studies are
to be found in the literature.M1
Swirling flows result from the application of a spiraling
motion, with a swirl velocity component (also known as a
tangential or azimuthal velocity component) being imparted
to the flow via the use of swirl vanes, in axial-plus-tangential
entry swirl generator or direct tangential entry into the
combustion chamber. Experimental studies show that swirl
has large-scale effects on flowfields: jet growth, entrainment,
and decay (for inert jets) and flame size, shape, stability, and
combustion intensity (for reacting flows) are affected by the
degree of swirl imparted to the flow. This degree of swirl
usually is characterized by the swirl number S, which is a
nondimensional number representing axial flux of swirl
momentum divided by axial flux of axial momentum times
equivalent nozzle radius. In this context, for comparison
purposes it is worth noting that swirl vane angle 0 and swirl
number S are related approximately by
5=-
tan</>« - tan</>
(1)
for dh <^d, so that vane angles of 15, 30, 45, 60, 70, and 80,
for example, correspond to 5 values of approximately 0.2,
0.4, 0.7, 1.2, 2.0, and 4.0. Here 100% efficiency also is
assumed for the swirl vanes, which deteriorates as the vane
angle increases.
The effect of a low degree of swirl (weak swirl, 5< —0.4) is
to increase the width of a free or confined jet flow: jet growth,
entrainment, and decay are enhanced progressively as the
degree of swirl is increased. At higher degrees of swirl (strong
swirl, S> —0.6), strong radial and axial pressure gradients are
set up near the nozzle exit, resulting in axial recirculation in
the form of a central toroidal recirculation zone, which is not
observed at weaker degrees of swirl. In particular, swirl is
used extensively as an aid to efficient clean combustion in a
variety of practical situations: gasoline engine, diesel engine,
gas turbine (including central toroidal recirculation zone),
industrial furnace, utility boiler, and many other practical
heating devices, including small domestic home furnaces.
Recent interest also is being shown in rotary (Wankel) and
stratified charge engines in our desire for efficiency and
cleanliness. In design situations, the engineer has co seek an
optimum path between irreconcilable alternatives of, for
example, efficiency and pollution.m5
Consideration is given to the major features of the
characterization of swirl flow combustion, with emphasis on
application to practical combustors. Recent experimental
work is surveyed in Sec. II, with special regard to the main
effects of swirl on the performance, stability, and combustion
intensity of flames in combustors. Since solution of the basic
governing equations yields predictions that are realistic only if
the physical processes are sufficiently well expressed in
mathematical form and suitable computational methods of
solution are employed, these details are discussed in Sec. III.
The treatment is brief, since extensive reviews are available in
the literature. It is possible to predict major features of these
swirling flows; some solutions are exhibited in Sec. IV. The
Closure summarizes the achievements and current status.
II. Experimental Work
Almost all industrial flames have the form of turbulent jets
issuing from round orifice burners. Sometimes the fuel gas is
introduced through a central jet (maybe premixed) and the
remaining air through an annulus surrounding it, so that
double concentric jets are formed. If the fuel enters as liquid
droplets or coal particles, it is either atomized or sprayed from
the central region, again with a surrounding annulus of air.
Either the primary or the secondary (or both) is given a certain
degree of swirl to enhance the jet and flame characteristics.
Tangentially 
fired 
equipment 
differs 
from 
wall-fired
David G. Lilley is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Concordia
University, Montreal, Canada, with responsibilities for teaching and research in fluid dynamics and combustion,
with the development and application of theoretical combustion aerodynamics being of prime concern. He was
born in England and obtained his education at Sheffield University, from which he received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees in Mathematics in 1966 and 1967 and the Ph.D. degree in Engineering in 1970. His academic career
includes two years lecturing in Mathematics and Computing at Sheffield Polytechnic, three years as Research
Associate in Mechanical Engineering at Cranfield Institute of Technology, and one year as Visiting Associate
Professor in Chemical Engineering at the University of Arizona, prior to taking up his current appointment.
During this time, he has concentrated on the modeling and prediction of swirl flows with application to furnace
and combustion chamber design. He is a corporate member of five technical societies, and Associate Fellow of
AIAA, and has been a member of the AIAA Technical Committee on Fluid Dynamics (1974-1977).
Presented as Paper 76-405 at the AIAA 9th Fluid and Plasma Dynamics Conference, San Diego, Calif., July 14-16, 1976; submitted Aug. 3,
1976; revision received April 25, 1977.
Index categories: Combustion Efficiency; Reactive Flows; Combustion and Combustor Designs.


--- Page 2 ---

1064
D. G. LILLEY
AIAA JOURNAL
r / R
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70
AXIAL DISTANCE, Cm
Fig. 1 Streamlines in swirling annular freejet; S =1.57 (Ref. 16).
0 
0.4 
0,8 
1,2 
1,6 
2.0 
2.4
M R/M Q
Fig. 2 
Variation of recirculated mass flow in freejets with swirl
number.5
equipment in that no swirl is imparted to the incoming
streams, but these streams are directed so as to aim tangen-
tially at the fireball that results in the center. These swirl
effects, documented at length in Refs. 1-70, now are
discussed.
A. 
Swirling Flows
Extensive studies of the effect of swirl on jet flows have
been made and reported elsewhere,1"4 for both single and
double concentric nozzle flows, free and confined. As an
introduction to this literature, some of the salient features
now are discussed. General effects of introducing swirl on
turbulent jets are to cause an increase in width, rate of en-
trainment, and rate of decay in the jets as the degree of swirl is
increased progressively. Pressure fields are induced to balance
centrifugal forces, and the decay of swirl caused by shear and
mixing with surrounding fluid sets up adverse axial pressure
gradients. The form of the radial distribution of time-mean
axial velocity depends on the degree of swirl S imparted to the
flow. For weak swirl, the distribution remains Gaussian in
form, with the maximum velocity on the axis of the jet. As the
swirl number is increased, the radial spread of the jet in-
creases, and, for jets with swirl greater than a certain critical
swirl number (approximately 5 = 0.6), the forces due to the
axial adverse pressure gradient exceed the forward kinetic
forces and the flow reverses its direction in the central region
of the jet, in the vicinity of the nozzle. At 5=0.64, the length
of the reverse flow region is 4 jet diameters.
For combustion applications, one of the most significant
and useful phenomena of swirling jet flows is the recirculation
bubble generated centrally for supercritical swirl numbers.
From the point of view of long-time mean averages, bound-
aries of the recirculation bubble and reverse flow zones are
well defined. The flows generally are associated with high
rates of shear and values of turbulence intensity so that in-
stantaneously large-scale spatial fluctuations of boundaries
and stagnation points occur. Streamlines calculated from
measured time-mean velocity distributions are shown for a
1-0
o
1-0
2-0
z/d
Fig. 3 Size and shape of reverse flow zone in freejets from annular
vane swirlers with straight exits.5'20
swirling annular freejet (issuing from a swirl generator) with
5=1.57 in Fig. I.16 The recirculation bubble plays an im-
portant role in flame stabilization by providing a hot flow of
recirculated combustion products and a reduced velocity
region where flame speed and flow velocity can be matched.
Flame lengths and distance from the burner at which the
flame is stabilized are shortened significantly.
Of course, the precise effect of swirl on a flowfield is found
to depend on many factors as well as the swirl number: for
example, nozzle geometry (the presence of a central hub
encourages a larger recirculation zone, as does the addition of
a divergent nozzle), size of enclosure if any (central recir-
culation zones are much more pronounced in enclosures than
those of comparable freejets), and the particular exit velocity
profiles (recirculation zones tend to the larger when the flow is
produced via swirl vanes as opposed to an axial-and-
tangential entry swirl generator).
Turbulence intensity reaches very high levels in recir-
culation bubbles. On the reverse flow boundary, where the
mean velocity is zero, the local turbulence intensity tends to
infinity. Measurements of all six different turbulent stress
components show strong variations of absolute turbulence
kinetic energy levels and strong nonisotropy of the stresses
and associated turbulent viscosity.17 The exchange coef-
ficients are found to be functions of the degree of swirl and
position in the flowfield, as can be shown also by analytical
and numerical inverse solution procedures applied to the
simpler situation of weakly swirling jets and flames.18*19
The size and shape of the recirculation zone and associated
region of high turbulence are critical to flame stability,
combustion intensity, and performance. Regardless of the
type of swirl generator (apart from hubless vane swirlers), the
"eye" of the recircualtion eddy always occurs very close to
the nozzle exit, and streamline patterns similar to those of Fig.
1 also result. The main differences lie in the recirculated mass
flow produced, and Fig. 2 shows that there is good correlation
between the swirl number 5 and recirculated mass flow
MR/M0 for free swirling jets.4 Here the suffices R and 0
stand for reverse and initial values. The presence of an oil gun
at the throat of a swirl generator appears to halve MR/M0\
the presence of a divergent outlet has a disproportionately
large effect of greatly increased MR/M0 for a given swirl
number. Although the point of onset of reversed flow
generally is taken to occur at approximately 5 = 0.6, it is clear
that divergent exit nozzles substantially reduce this
requirement.5
The size and shape of the reverse flow zone depend prin-
cipally on the degree of swirl, as shown in Fig. 3, and angle of
divergence of the outlet. The figure shows the effect of swirl
for annular vane swirlers with straight exits.5'20 The trends,
even though there are experimental difficulties in taking
measurements in regions of low velocity, are evident. As the
swirl number (associated with vane angle) is increased, the
narrow recirculation zone becomes longer, reaching a
maximum at about 5= 1.5, and subsequently becomes shorter
and wider at 5>2. Recirculation zones produced by swirl
generators 
(that 
is, 
axial-plus-tangential 
entry 
swirl
generators) generally are much smaller than those produced


--- Page 3 ---

AUGUST 1977
SWIRL FLOWS IN COMBUSTION: A REVIEW
1065
by swirl vanes, for a given swirl number. Since mass flow
rates at similar swirl numbers are similar, it is clear that
higher reverse flow velocities, higher velocity gradients,
higher turbulence levels, and higher rates of mixing are
associated with the much more compact reverse flow zone
from the swirl generator.
B. 
Swirling Flames
The length of nonswirling fully developed turbulent dif-
fusion flames is unaffected by an increase in velocity through
a given burner, in contrast to laminar flames, and in free
surroundings is dependent mainly on thq type of fuel used and
the diameter of the orifice. If the flame is confined in an
enclosed furnace, the flame length increases, owing to the lack
of entrainment of oxidant and the presence of recirculation,
by about 25%, but this depends on the oxygen concentration
of the recirculation gases and degree of confinement Did,
where D and d are enclosure and nozzle diameters. Partially
premixed flames are shorter, and the intensity of combustion
is greater, this depending on the degree of premixing.
Phenomena similar to those observed and measured in
nonreacting swirling flows have been observed and measured
in swirling flames. The recirculation bubble plays an im-
portant role in flame stabilization by providing a heat source
of recirculated combustion products and a reduced velocity
region where flame speed and flow velocity can be matched.
Flame lengths and the distance from the burner at which the
flame is stabilized are shortened significantly. Direct com-
parisons of turbulent flowfields in nonreacting media with
those in flames show that the thermal molecular and atomic
z/d
Fig. 4 Effect of increasing swirl number on the flame front
(maximum temperature) lines in free nonrecirculating swirling
flames.6
&*SW1RL NUMBER
energy changes in the flames induce comparatively small
changes in the gasdynamic flowfields of recirculating swirling
jets. Reverse flow boundaries and reverse mass flow rates are
reduced only slightly with combustion.21
With swirl, the axial velocity radial profile exhibits off-
centerline maxima at a short distance downstream of the
nozzle (exhibiting reverse flow close to nozzle), as measured
typically in an industrial furnace. The high-temperature zone
fo the flame front is deflected from an annular position for
the fuel jet without swirl to a jet center line position for the
case with swirl. This is due to the increased mixing and
reaction rates in the swirling flame. The effect of increasing
swirl number on the flame front (maximum temperature) lines
in free nonrecirculating flames is shown in Fig. 4, where R
= 0/2 is nozzle radius.6 Further details about the effect of
combustion on reverse flow boundaries, including the effect
of mixture ratio, type of fuel entry, etc., may be found in
Refs. 1-6.
The reverse flow zone of a recirculation bubble has many of
the characteristics of a well-stirred reactor in that the tem-
perature and gas composition within the reverse flow zone are
almost uniform. This well-stirred zone is fluid-dynamically
confined and surrounded by nonreacting room-temperature
air. The levels of temperature and gas composition can be
controlled by the amount and nature of the fuel injected into
the zone, and aerodynamic control is achieved by varying the
degree of swirl. A means thus is available for controlling the
rates of formation and reaction of carbon and oxides of
nitrogen, and thus, for any particular flame, optimum
conditions can be found for minimum net production of
carbon and nitrogen.
Premixed vane swirled flames in furnaces with expansion
ratios D/d=2.5 and 5.0 have been studied at Glasgow from
the aerodynamic and modeling points of view.22 It is found
that the same swirier can give different velocity patterns as the
relative furnace size D is changed, and the size ani shape of
the central recirculation zone, if present, are primarly func-
tions of D and not of d. Correlations between flow types A, B,
C, and D and the modified swirl number
= Sd/D
(2)
0-1 -
005-
O-1O O-15 O-2
20s 
305 
40s 
50s
SWIRLER VANE ANGLE 
9
O-3 
0-4 O-5 
O-7
SWIRL NUMBER 
S*
Fig. 5 
Swirl number relation to input conditions and flow type.
Fig. 6 Variation of reverse mass flow in central recirculation zone
with swirl number S* (Ref. 22).


--- Page 4 ---

1066
D. G. LILLEY
AIAA JOURNAL
based on furnace radius instead of nozzle radius are very
satisfactory and are shown in Fig. 5. The flow types con-
sidered are as follows: A, very weak swirl and no significant
through in velocity on the axis; B, through in velocity on the
axis but no reverse flow; C, weak reverse flow; and D,
strongly established central recirculation zone. Transition
between these types occurs at values of S* of 0.08, 0.11, and
0.18. Furthermore, for a given swirler and a given air-fuel
ratio (isothermal or burning flow), the 5* values are very
similar in the two relative furnace sizes. There is a change in
the slopes of both the isothermal and burning characteristics
at a vane angle of about 30°, corresponding in the burning
case to the transition to the formation of a central recir-
culation zone. Figure 6 shows the corresponding reverse mass
flow in the central recirculation zone as a function of 5*, cold
or flame conditions, with an expansion ratio D/d=2.5 and
5.0.
Recent laser anemometer measurements in free swirling
flow under flame and no-flame conditions have been
reported.23 These include measurements of velocity and
turbulent kinetic energy, and they show that substantial in-
creases are found in turbulent kinetic energy and velocity
fluctuations as a consequence of combustion.
The effect of swirl on flame length is demonstrated both
experimentally and theoretically using simple models for a
turbulent diffusion flame in a cylindrical furnace.24 Here
swirl is imparted only to the annular flow of air, surrounding
the 
central 
fuel 
nozzle, 
and 
inlet 
conditions 
are
stoichiometric. The trends resemble those for the free
premixed flames of Fig. 4.
Stability, mixing, and interaction of multijet natural-gas
flames with swirl have been investigated experimentally.25
The effect of burner crowding and separation on the flame
length, for different values of 5, shown in Fig. 7, is
representative of the results obtained. It is clear that flame
length increases with increased number of burners, greater
proximity, and lower degree of swirl. The presence of another
flame in the near vicinity of a flame decreases the surface area
that is in direct contact with the atmosphere, so that en-
trainment is hindered. Also, the influence of burner crowding
is found to be even more pronounced in fuel-rich flames
because in these cases only small changes in the amounts of air
entrained strongly affect the combustion processes. Blow-off
limits of the multiple burner systems are shifted toward the
fuel-rich region. For conditions approaching the critical blow-
off, a central flame could be lifted or blown off the burner
while the surrounding flames remain attached to their
burners.
The effect of swirl on residence time distribution and the
performance and efficiency of combustors are determined
experimentally in Ref. 26. A comparison of tracer con-
centration decay curves obtained for a water model and a
pulverized fuel furnace for varying degrees of swirl is shown
in Fig. 8. The ability to vary the ratio of mean residence time
in the perfectly stirred and plug-flow sections of the com-
bustor, by varying the degree of inlet swirl, is of great
significance in design. A similar investigation on the stability
and combustion intensity of pulverized-coal flames discusses
the effect of swirl and impingement of the secondary annular
air supply.27 Important results are that secondary air swirl
leads to a pronounced improvement in the stability of flames
and leads to a reduction in the distance between burner and
flame front.
Most complete laser anemometer measurements of swirling
flow under confined conditions, with and without com-
bustion, are available recently.28 These were obtained in the
Imperial College, London, and Harwell furnaces. As an
example, Fig. 9 shows contours of constant velocity for two
sets of results, representing isothermal flow and combusting
flow. Each set is obtained at two levels of swirl, in an
axisymmetric furnace, using a combustible mixture of air and
natural gas. The boundary and field measurements of three
26
26
24
22
S 2 0
r 18
o
Z 16
UJ
X
5 "
12
0>2 
0«3 
0-4
SWIRL NUMBER, 
S
0*5
Fig. 7 Effect of burner crowding and separation on flame length.2
*
A
•
A
O
V
o
•
G*
6*R
0
0
1*56
1-56
2*24
2*24
3-9
3'9
FURNACE
MODEL
FURNACE
MODEL
FURNACE.
MODEL
FURNACE
MODEL
t sec
15 2
20
18 3
20
17 9
20
19 3
20
Fig. 8 Comparison of tracer concentration decay curves obtained
from water model and pulverized fuel furnace for varying degrees of
swirl.26
components of time-mean velocity and corresponding normal
stresses were designed to be of good use in the evaluation of
turbulent flow prediction procedures and thus, to this end,
necessarily are far more detailed and accurate than previous
studies in the Delft, Ijmuiden, and Karlsruhe furnaces.
Results demonstrate, for example, that the regions of
recirculation under the reacting flow conditions differ sub-
stantially from those under nonreacting conditions. The
turbulence is found to be far from isotropic over most of the
flowfield. It also is clear that, as a consequence of the
combustion, the velocity fluctuations increase significantly
when appropriate integrals over the entire flowfield are
performed, thus supporting, in some sense, the hypothesis of
combustion-generated turbulence.


--- Page 5 ---

AUGUST 1977
SWIRL FLOWS IN COMBUSTION: A REVIEW
1067
At United Technologies Research Center (UTRC), East
Hartford, Conn., a substantial effort also has been given to
laser anemometer measurements of turbulent swirling
combustion flows.29 Measurements were made in the initial
mixing region of a confined turbulent diffusion flame. The
axial and swirl time-mean velocity profiles and the rms and
probability density distribution of the velocity fluctuations
show that there are significant variations of the mean and
time-dependent flowfields with changes in ambient combustor
pressure and inlet-air swirl. These variations have pronounced
effects on pollutant emissions. Substantial large-scale con-
tributions to the total rms turbulent velocity flowfield were
found. These large-scale fluctuations result in large depar-
tures from Gaussian turbulence and significant deviations
from isotropy over most of the initial region. Such large-scale
motions indicate that turbulence models based on local
equilibrium assumptions will not represent the physics of
these combusting flows adequately. Representative time-mean
axial and swirl velocity profiles at different axial stations,
over the full range of ambient combustor pressure and swirl,
are appended in the paper.
C. 
Pollutant Formation
Concentrating on pollutant formation in combustion,
detailed experimental results for the influence of aerodynamic
phenomena are available from UTRC.30 Average con-
centration levels of the pollutants nitric oxide NO, nitrogen
dioxide NO2, carbon monoxide CO, and unburned hydro-
carbons were measured at the exit of an axisymmetric
combustor over a significant range of operating conditions. In
addition, detailed species concentrations, temperature, and
velocity maps were obtained throughout the combustor for
several representative operating conditions. Gaseous fuel
(natural gas, methane, or propane) issued through a central
round tube, mixing and burning with the airstream within the
1.8-m-long cylindrical combustor. Liquid propane was used
Isothermal flow
3 
2 
1 
0 
1 
2
3
as the fuel in some of the tests. Major combustor input
parameters were varied over substantial ranges: overall fuel-
air equivalence ratio, 0.5-1.3; air-fuel velocity ratio, 0.1-40.0;
inlet air swirl number, 0.0-0.6; air flow rate (kg/sec), 0.09-
0.14; inlet air temperature (°K), 730-860; and combustor
pressure (atm), 1.0-7.0.
It was found that elevated pressure and swirl result in a shift
from chemistry- to mixing-limited behavior and create
"unmixedness" in the flowfield, producing high local tem-
peratures in an annular region around the centerline, which in
turn 
enhances 
NO 
formation 
and 
consumption 
of
hydrocarbons. Aerodynamic flame stabilization, achieved
without the benefit of swirl or physical flame holders in
systems having large air-fuel momentum flux ratios, produces
strong stirring that results in reduced temperatures, low NO
formation, and hydrocarbon consumption rates.
The NASA Lewis annular combustor includes a unique
concept that has demonstrated substantial potential for lower
oxides of nitrogen NOX emissions.31'37 The combustor is
divided into 48, 72, or 120 individual swirl-can modules
arranged in two or three concentric rows, respectively, which
distribute combustion uniformly across the annulus. Early
designs of these modules with swirler plates did not pay much
attention to fuel atomization and mixing within the individual
modules. It now is recognized that oxides of nitrogen, soot,
and unburnt hydrocarbons formed in the small reaction zones
can be frozen and omitted from the exhaust. More attention
now is being devoted to the control of mixing and im-
provement of fuel atomization in each individual module, all
of which now are designed specifically for low oxides of
nitrogen emissions. Results show that swirl-can combustors
produce oxides of nitrogen levels substantially lower than
conventional combustor designs. These reductions are at-
tributed to reduced dwell time resulting from short combustor
length, and quick mixing of combustion gases with diluent
air, and to uniform fuel distributions resulting from the swirl-
can approach. At low power conditions, the levels of carbon
monoxide and unburnt hydrocarbon emissions normally
would rise to quite high values, but these can be reduced
somewhat by radial staging of fuel into just one or two
module rows. At present, a swirl flow annular combustor for
test in-house is being designed, including radial fuel staging
capability; it complements the swirl-can module approach and
is discussed further in Sec. II. D.
Nitrogen oxides NOX are formed (primarily as nitric oxide
NO) during the combustion process as thermal NO (resulting
from the high-temperature thermal fixation of atmospheric
nitrogen in the air supply, as primarily with gas and oil fuels)
or as fuel NO (resulting from the nitrogen in the fuel, as with
oil and coal fuels). Thermal NO formation in gaseous systems
has been studied extensively. The controlling mechanism in
the postflame zone is an extended version of that proposed by
Zeldovich. In the flame zone, significant amounts of NO are
formed very rapidly as prompt NO, and these are believed to
be the result of high oxygen atom concentrations produced by
the hydrocarbon combustion process and of other undefined
carbon-nitrogen reactions.38 The mechanism for fuel NO
formation is not well established, although recent work in-
VELOCITY
m/s«c-<
19
19
26
52
27
1 
2
r/R
Fig. 9 Contours of constant velocity for swirl numbers of 0 and 0.52,
for isothermal and combusting flow.28
1 
2 " S
Fig. 10 
Nitric oxide NO emission curves for 1.76-MW pulverized
coal flame (5% excess air; injector A is 0.115 m diam; others are 0.060
mdiam).43


--- Page 6 ---

1068
D. G. LILLEY
AIAA JOURNAL
dicates that it is the primary source of NO formation in
pulverized coal flames.148
The evidence about the effect of swirl on pollutant for-
mation shows that precise effects depend on the precise
configuration being considered. As far as oxides of nitrogen
NOX are concerned, the effect of swirl may enhance its
production or not. Generally, increased swirl 1) increases
entrainment of cooled combustion products and thereby
decreases thermal NO, 2) increases local oxygen availability
and thereby increases fuel NO (and possibly also increases
prompt NO), and 3) increases combustion intensity and so
increases thermal NO.
Prompt NO may be dealt with under the second category,
where swirl increases local oxygen availability. There are two
effects of this. Hydrocarbon radicals react more with oxygen
rather than forming a nitrogen-containing hydrocarbon
radical, which is essential for the prompt NO mechanism,38'39
and so reduce prompt NO formation. On the other hand, any
nitrogen-containing free radical has more oxygen available
with which to react, which leads to the greater production of
prompt NO. There is no evidence as yet to decide which of
these competing effects of swirl predominates. Details of
other pollutant formation studies are relegated to the
references40'44; other work is described in Sec. III. B., with
additional referencing. As an example of the effect of swirl on
the level of flue gas nitric oxide concentrations, for different
types of fuel injector, Fig. 10 shows the results obtained at the
International 
Flame 
Research 
Foundation, 
Ijmuiden,
Holland, for pulverized coal flames.43 Details of the fuel
injectors used in these studies, and similar results for large-
scale gaseous diffusion flames, are available in Ref. 44.
D. 
Centrifugal Effects
Recent work at United Technologies Corp., Florida,45"48
and ONERA, France,49'50 has been concerned with the
favorable centrifugal force effects on combustion. Tests in a
combustion centrifuge demonstrate that the increased
"buoyancy" produced can increase flarnespeeds significantly
over turbulent flamespeeds, which control combustion rates
in conventional burners. In the past, when attempts have been
made to increase the turbulent flamespeed to higher values,
the pressure drop required to produce the turbulence was
prohibitive, or flame stabilization problems occurred at
higher velocities. Tests show that centrifugal force can be used
to increase flame propagation rates by an additional factor of
4 or more.47
The models were developed47 to predict the flame-
spreading rate at various burner conditions (bubble theory of
flame propagation) and the extinction limits of flames at very
high centrifugal force values (based on classical heat-transfer
correlations), respectively. The effects of Reynolds number
on turbulent flamespeeds and on limiting bubble sizes in
gravitational fields also were measured. The validity of the
experimental model was confirmed by testing a subscale 15-
in.-diam swirl augrnentor,48 which uses precombustion swirl
vanes to swirl the flow and produce a centrifugal field that
increases the burning rate of the combustible mixture. Fuel is
inserted into the swirling flow by spray rings, and the flame
bubbles move quickly to the center because of the buoyant
effect of the hot burned gases in the cold unburned gases,
igniting the fuel-air mixture as they go. Since the bubble speed
can be many times greater than turbulent flamespeed in
conventional augmentors, shorter lengths or higher burning
efficiencies result (see Fig. 11). The swirl augrnentor has the
added performance advantage of being unaffected by
pressure and Mach number changes, and pressure losses are
less than conventional augmentors. This has led to the design
of a full-scale swirl augrnentor, for advanced versions of an
Air Force turbofan engine, which is predicted to reduce the
fuel consumption and increase the stability of the engine.47
Guided by these studies, a swirl flow annular combustor is
being developed at NASA Lewis Research Center. It has
100
80
60
40
! 
20
0
D 
Ex
O 
Ex
———— Mo
E
• 
L/D
L/D =
>eri mental Da
peri mental Da
del With Bub
qua! to Pilot
/
= 1.37/^
B
0.914 '
ta (L/D = O.i
ta (L/D = 1.C
ble Diameter
Height
r^
14)
17)
/a
20 
30
Swirl Angle - deg
50
Fig. 11 Comparison of experimental and theoretical results at
augmentor equivalence ratios between 0.95 and 1.05 (Ref. 48).
radial fuel staging capability. One outer row of swirl-can
modules may be used exclusively under idle conditions. At
other conditions, fuel also may be injected further inward,
directly into an annular swirling flow region, caused by swirl
vanes positioned around the annulus further upstream. At
present, this swirl flow annular combustor is being in-
vestigated. A full-scale plastic model already has been built
for flow studies, and tests currently are in progress with
annular swirl vane angles of from 25 ° to 45 °.
In general, the application of swirl in combustion systems,
usually to the annular air surrounding the primary fuel outlet,
leads to increased rates of mixing (higher turbulence) and a
shorter, more intense stable flame. Under certain cir-
cumstances, however, swirl can have the opposite effect and
lead to reduced rates of mixing (laminarization) and a longer
lazy flame. Such an example is a turbulent jet flame, burning
in the core of the rotating flowfield set up by the rotation of a
cylindrical wire screen.51'52 Without rotation, a typical
turbulent jet flame is observed; with rotation, the flame
becomes stably confined in the vortex core. This centrifugal
stabilization of the flow reduces mixing and entrainment,
leading to a considerable increase in flame length, up to a
factor of about 5. Similar phenomena are observed in fire
whirls, dust devils, tornadoes, hurricanes, waterspouts, etc.,
and characterizations of these geophysical phenomena are of
great interest themselves.53
E. Vortex Effects
Swirling 
flows, 
with 
particular 
emphasis 
on 
the
phenomenon of vortex breakdown (the formation of a free
stagnation point and recirculation zone in the vortex core of
flows with significant stream wise vorticity), have been studied
for some time at Cornell.54'55 A gas-turbine-like combustor
using vortex breakdown to stabilize combustion has been
investigated, where a confined double concentric jet con-
figuration is used, with premixed fuel (methane) and air in the
inner jet and air in the outer jet. Swirl may be induced in both
inner and outer jets with the sense of rotation the same or
opposite (coswirl or counterswirl). The objectives were to
learn more about the influence of swirl and vortex breakdown
on combustion and to evaluate the potential of this con-
figuration as a practical device.
The double concentric swirler configurations of the various
NASA Lewis swirl modules31"36 (studied for application in
aircraft jet engines) are very similar to those of the present
study. Early studies of vortex breakdown indicate54 that the
size and position of the recirculation zone and its associated
turbulence field could be influenced by swirl level, relative
swirl direction, and jet velocity ratio. It seemed desirable and
feasible to use these flow parameters to match flow conditions
to operating conditions. Of special interest was the possibility
of using a very lean inner jet to limit the formation of oxides
of nitrogen NOX (without sacrificing carbon monoxide CO
and unburned hydrocarbon emission performance), coupled
with a large recirculation zone and intense turbulence to
counteract the loss of stability due to lean operation.
Qualitative observations of the combustion process, blow-off


--- Page 7 ---

AUGUST 1977
SWIRL FLOWS IN COMBUSTION: A REVIEW
1069
limits, exhaust temperatures, and emissions of oxides of
nitrogen NOX and carbon monoxide CO from the combustor
are reported in Ref. 54.
More recently,55 composition, temperature, and velocity
profiles have been presented for different values of swirl,
equivalence ratio, and inner-to-outer jet axial velocity ratio.
Combustion efficiency as determined by chemical and
thermal analysis also was reported. Relative swirl direction
and magnitude are found to have significant effects on
exhaust gas concentrations, exit temperatures, and com-
bustion efficiencies. Counterswirl generates a large recir-
culation zone, a short luminous combustion zone, and large
slip velocities and turbulence in the interjet shear layer. Low
nitric oxide NO levels are observed for maximum counterswirl
conditions and lean mixtures. However, this is accompanied
by low combustion efficiency, as indicated by the relatively
high carbon monoxide CO and methane CH4 levels and low
exhaust gas temperatures. It is concluded that quenching due
to rapid mixing in the interjet shear layer is the main con-
tributor to this, and this is confirmed by results obtained by
changing outer swirl and jet velocity ratio.55
It often has been assumed that the mean flow from vortex
chambers is axisymmetric. Recent studies56"58 have shown this
to be true only for low swirl numbers and low Reynolds
numbers. For a given swirl number (5>0.6), when the flow
reaches a certain critical Reynolds number, the vortex
breakdown instability develops. The initial manifestation
usually is comprised of a nearly symmetric swelling of the
vortex core, enclosing a recirculating bubble of fluid. In the
wake of this disturbance, another spiral instability often
occurs in which the central forced-vortex region starts to
precess about the axis of symmetry. This so-called precessing
vortex core lies near to the boundary of the mean reverse flow
zone, which now has become quite large, between the zero
axial velocity line and zero streamline, and it is responsible for
the very high levels of turbulence and mixing which have been
measured in swirl generators. There is now three-dimensional
(3-D) time-dependent turbulent flow, which has dramatic
effects on the stability, rate of mixing, combustion intensity,
and flame length. The range of stable burning can be extended
well into the region of fuel-lean mixture ratios. Although the
precessing vortex core is useful for mixing the reactants, it can
give rise to combustion oscillations and the emission of undue
noise and other pollutants.59 As the precessing vortex core
leaves the exit, it soon is dissipated, and an axisymmetric
motion ensues.
There is, however, another instability associated with the
precessing vortex core and the exit. Near the throat region, the
eddies and mixing processes are mainly in the tangential-axial
plane, but at the exit a large eddy is formed in the radial-axial
plane, just inside the path of the vortex core. This is stable at
low Reynolds numbers, but as the Reynolds number is in-
creased the eddy is shed alternately from either side of the
exit. This is a continuous process, with the eddy being peeled
off continuously by the precessing vortex core. It is called the
RADIAL SECTION (EXIT)
radial-axial eddy. A schematic of the flow patterns occurring
with the precessing vortex core is shown in Fig. 12.
It may be shown that the precessing vortex core can be
characterized by intensity and frequency parameters.56"58
Excitation of the frequency and amplitude of the precessing
vortex core substantially increases the pressure loss, whereas
damping reduces the pressure loss. A turbulent axial jet of
fluid introduced along the central axis of the swirl generator
reduces the rate and radius of the precession. With swirling
combusting flow, either an intense excitation of the precession
occurs, or a large-scale damping occurs, depending on the
mode of fuel entry.
Premixed combustion appears to be the only method by
which the precessing vortex core is excited to higher
frequencies and intensities as compared to the isothermal
state. A fairly linear relationship between frequency and
Reynolds number is found for a combustion case, similar to
that for an isothermal case. Frequencies are, however, in-
creased by a factor of 2 or 4, dependent on flow rate and
mixture ratios. Blow-off limits of this type of flame are wide.
Any other mode of fuel entry (diffusion flame with axial or
tangential entry) damps the precessing vortex core with large
positive radial density gradients. Frequencies with axial fuel
entry are some 50% higher than those for tangential fuel
entry. Stability limits with tangential fuel entry are poor.
Intensities for the oscillations substantially reduced for these
two modes of fuel entry (as compared to very high values for
the premixed flame), and the amplitude is damped by some 3
to 4 orders of magnitude. A nondimensional frequency
parameter / D3 /Q (where / is frequency, D is chamber
diameter, and Q is mass flow) is shown to be adequate for
describing the variation of frequency with Reynolds number,
for both the isothermal and flame states.56'58
The unpleasant characteristics of the presence of a
precessing vortex core in industrial burners can be improved
by better control of both the aerodynamics and the
distribution of reactants in the burner. With this objective, a
multiannular swirl burner recently has been developed59
which has wider stability limits, better turn-down ratio, and
higher volumetric heat release rate than the conventional
single annular tangential entry (or vane type) swirl flame
stabilizer. High volumetric heat release rates are achieved
matching the concentrations and directions of flow of
reactants in such a way that regions of high fuel concentration
overlap regions of high shear stress in the flow. No evidence
of the precessing vortex core is found with this burner. The
burner consists of eight concentric annular divergent nozzles,
with the inner end of each nozzle aligned with the outer end of
RECIRCULATED
Fig. 12 Isothermal and premixed combustion flow 
patterns
dominated by the processing vortex core; note the large dissipative
precessing vortex core inside the swirler and the radial-axial eddy
being shed from the exit.56'58
^ <£*;......._ ...— —— —— —— COMBUSTION
Fig. 13 
Stabilization of pressure iet oil flame by internal
culation zone in swirling annular jet. *'60


--- Page 8 ---

1070
D. G. LILLEY
AIAA JOURNAL
the adjacent inner nozzle. Fuel and air may be supplied
tangentially to alternate annuli; tests are being made with
alternate rings coswirling and counterswirling.
F. 
Liquid Fuel Flames
Other work has been concerned with liquid fuel flames.61'70
Practical oil flames are usually in the form of one or two basic
types.
1) The first type is turbulent jet diffusion flames, in which
the oil is atomized by high-pressure air or stream (blast-
atomized) and where the momentum of the fuel spray is so
high that it is quite sufficient for the entrainment of com-
bustion air necessary to complete the combustion. The
significant dimensions of the flame, such as length and angle
of spread, can be calculated from turbulent jet theory based
on the fuel-atomizing agent spray as the momentum source.
2) The second type is pressure jet flames, in which the
momentum of the spray is small in comparison with the
momentum of the airflow. In this case, the characteristic
dimensions of the flame will depend more on the airflow
pattern than on the fuel spray.
The interaction of a pressure jet oil spray with the recir-
culation zone from a swirling annular jet in the Ijmiuden
furnace is shown schematically in Fig. 13.60 The figure shows
streamline airflow patterns as calculated from mean velocity
measurements under isothermal conditions, with details from
oil flame photographs superimposed, so as to give the
composite picture. In order to obtain flame stabilization, a
region of the flowfield must be found where the flame speed
matches the forward flow velocity, and also the heat supplied
must be sufficient to initiate the combustion process. Within a
recirculation zone, the forward flow velocity is reduced until
it reaches zero at the reverse flow boundary, and thus a region
of the flow always can be found where local flame speed will
match local forward velocity. Since the recirculation eddy
generally passes through the flame front, recirculation
combustion products are carried toward the burner and pass
through the spray, carrying small droplets to the flame front
and thus forming a flame front, as shown in the figure. The
size and strength of the recirculation zone can be controlled by
the degree of swirl in the airflow system. By adjusting the
angle of the oil spray to match the size and strength of the
recirculation zone, optimum conditions can be found for
good flame stabilization, high combustion efficiency, and
minimum production of pollutants.61 Recent work on liquid
fuel swirling flames is discussed in Refs. 63-70.
G. 
Summary
To summarize the experimental evidence, the design of
swirl burners for practical combustion equipment is still very
much an art in which the practical experience of the designer
is paramount.61 The use of bladed swirlers is one of the most
effective means of generating swirl, and there does not appear
to be a very significant difference between flat-bladed and
aerodynamically shaped swirier blades. An outlet diffuser
increases the size of a recirculation zone, and the use of a
divergent angle of 35° and a diffuser length of 1.5D has
Fig. 14 Prediction of
longitudinal decays with
swirl for inert jets (x
experimental, 
0 pre-
dicted). 123
provided good results in practice. The ability to move the
swirler in the burner along the outlet diffuser is a simple and
effective means of controlling the degree of swirl. Some
simple aerodynamic measurements of the flow distribution at
inlets to the windbox and the shape of the reverse flow zone
using a total head tube with forward- and rear-facing holes
can be of considerable help to the burner designer. In oil-fired
flames, the matching of the spray angle to the flow patterns
within and around the recirculation zone is important in order
to minimize smoke formation in the outer or inner regions of
the flame. The objective of current research is to characterize
these types of flows in a logical scientific fashion, so aiding
future designers.
III. Modeling and Prediction
A. 
Basic Governing Equations
In the modeling and prediction of swirl flow combustion,
one is involved with simulating the problem via simultaneous
nonlinear partial differential equations. These may be
parabolic (boundary-layer type) but are more often elliptic
(recirculating type), and the solution scheme differs according
to the category and is discussed in Sec. III. C. The turbulent
flux 
(Reynolds) equations of conservation of mass,
momentum, stagnation enthalpy, and chemical species, which
govern 
the 
flow 
of 
turbulent 
chemically 
reacting
multicomponent mixtures, may be solved for time-mean
pressure, velocity, temperature, and species mass fractions,
provided that the further thermodynamic and turbulent flux
unknowns are specified prior to solution. Often consideration
is given to a simplified main exothermic reaction between just
two species, fuel and oxidant; this and other assumptions lead
to many simplifications. The reaction then is characterized by
equations for 1) mfu (mass fraction of fuel), h (stagnation
enthalpy), and/(mixture fraction mox-imfu, where / is the
stoichiometric ratio) for a premixed flame; 2) h and / for a
diffusion flame; or 3)/for a diffusion flame in an adiabatic,
nonreacting, and impervious chamber with only two inlet
streams of fuel and oxidant. Solution for a variable g (mean
square fluctuating component of fuel concentration) allows a
turbulent diffusion flame to have a thick reaction zone or a
premixed flame to burn fuel at a rate dependent on eddy-
breakup concepts.
Further equations are required to simulate turbulence, two-
phase effects, radiation, pollutant formation, etc., but a
central point of the theory is that all of these equations are
similar to laminar flow ones, but the variables are time-mean
quantities, and the fluxes for momentum, stagnation en-
thalpy, and the chemical species are composed of two parts,
the laminar and turbulent parts, the latter of which are related
to correlations of turbulent fluctuations. These must be
specified via a turbulence model, often, by analogy with the
laws of Newton, Fourier, and Fick for laminar flows, using
turbulent exchange coefficients relating fluxes to local
gradients and then Prandtl, Schmidt, and rO (and other)
viscosity numbers relating other exchange coefficients to the
primary component of turbulent viscosity fjLrz. In turbulence
theory, isotropy is the term that connotes the existence of a
scalar turbulent viscosity at points in the flowfield. If the
turbulent viscosity is not equal with regard to different stress-
rate of strain directions, the term nonisotropy is used, and the
ratios of the other component with the primary component of
turbulent viscosity are called rd (and other) viscosity numbers,
by analogy with Prandtl-Schmidt numbers.
All of these linkages and complexities in the equations
provide a high degree of nonlinearity in the total problem and
give the numerical analysis of fluid flow its peculiar difficulty
and flavor. The similarity between the differential equations
and their diffusional relations allows them all to be put in the
common form
d_
dt
(3)


--- Page 9 ---

AUGUST 1977
SWIRL FLOWS IN COMBUSTION: A REVIEW
1071
where the exchange coefficient assumptions have been in-
voked. Here <£ is a general dependent variable, and equations
may be solved for </> equal to time-mean axial, radial, and
swirl velocities u, v> w, stagnation enthalpy h, fuel mass
fraction mfu, mixture fraction /, turbulent kinetic energy &,
and dissipation rate e, and mean square fluctuating com-
ponent of fuel concentration g = m'fu
2 (and possibly other
variables as well). The equations differ not only in their ex-
change coefficients but also, and primarily, in their final
source terms S^. Specific details about the equations may be
found in the literature.1'71'80
B. Simulation of the Physical Processes
Closure and completeness of the governing equation set are
effected by means of models of the physical processes taking
place within the combustion system. Either our knowledge of
these processes or computer size limitations restrict the degree
of sophistication to be used in any simulation. The simulation
problems have been reviewed extensively elsewhere71"80 and
will be touched on only obliquely here. Briefly, the four main
processes to be modeled are as follows:
1) Turbulence, where models of the exchange coefficient
type and direct stress specification type have been applied to
swirling flows, and currently energy-length models are to be
recommended and in particular the k = e model, where e
= kL5/t, and £ is the macrolength scale of turbulence.81'82 A
recent conference highlights current work in this area.83
2) Radiative 
transfer, 
where 
the 
integrodifferential
equations may be represented by Hotter s "zone method"84
or one of the "flux methods" for one, two, or three flux
sums.78'85 (The former is more exact but difficult to in-
corporate with hydrodynamics; the latter is less rigorous but
simple to employ.)
3) Chemical reaction, including the simulation of premixed
and diffusion flames,71'86 the complex equations representing
the route to pollutant formation,87'95 techniques for handling
"stiff" kinetics96'104 (where widely differing reaction rate
coefficients require special techniques for handling source
terms), and the effect of turbulence structure on time-mean
chemical reaction rates.86'105'111 Realistic simulation of
complex chemistry in turbulent reacting flows is probably the
area in combustor modeling which will prove to be most
useful to study, and the results of which will be most fruitful
to apply in practical design situations.112
4) Two-phase phenomena, for solid fuel particles and
liquid droplets, including infinite drag assumptions for small
particles113 and ordinary differential equations for larger
particle trajectories,114 and studies on the rate of burning of
droplets, clouds, and sprays.115"118
C. Computational Methods
All combustor problems entail the solution of many
simultaneous nonlinear equations, including up to three
velocity components, pressure, stagnation enthalpy, and
species concentrations. Since their equations are all similar in
form, the same solution algorithm can be used for all of them.
Problems are classed according to the degree of realism and
refinement, as represented by their dimensionality (the
number of independent variables from three space dimensions
and time) and type (parabolic or elliptic). The flow
classification of parabolic [possessing one coordinate
direction with first- but without second-order derivatives:
boundary-layer type with prominent directions(s)] or elliptic
(possessing second-order derivatives in all coordinate
directions: recirculating type with upstream influence)
governs the type of boundary conditions required and
solution method. Marching methods are appropriate for the
former (flows with weak swirl) and relaxation methods for
the latter (flows with strong swirl). The problems, methods,
and solutions are discussed in Refs. 119-147. Papers presented
at two recent conferences highlight both experimental and
theoretical studies in the fluid mechanics of combustion. 146>147
Problem classification is generally into one of the following
categories:
1) 2-D marching methods, for axisymmetric 2-D parabolic
boundary-layer flows: weak swirl (approximately 5<0.4), 1-
D storage, automatic expanding 
grid 
using non-
dimensipnalized streamfunction \l/ instead of r as the radial
coordinate, and implicit solution procedure. 122~125
2) 2-D relaxation methods, for axisymmetric 2-D elliptic
recirculating flows: strong swirl (approximately 5>0.6), 2-D
storage, streamfunction-vorticity ^ = co or primitive pressure-
velocity p-u-v formulation, and Gauss-Seidel or line-by-line
SIMPLE 
(semi-implicit 
method 
for 
pressure-linked
equations) solution procedure. 126~138
3) 3-D marching methods, for 3-D parabolic boundary-
layer flows: nonaxisymmetric, weak swirl, 2-D storage, primi-
tive formulation, and SIMPLE solution procedure.128'145
4) 3-D relaxation methods, for 3-D elliptic recirculating
flows: nonaxisymmetric, strong swirl, 3-D storage, primitive
formulation, and SIMPLE solution procedure.138-145
The essential differences between the various available
computer codes (and those that are not available) include the
complexity of the equation set for the simulation of the
physical processes, the storage requirements, the location of
variables in the grid space system, the method of deriving the
finite-difference equations that are incorporated, and the
solution technique. In primitive pressure-velocity variable
formulations, a staggered grid system normally is used, as
recommended by Los Alamos for its special .attributes. In
computational fluid dynamics, the "best" representation of
the convection and diffusion terms is essential to the accuracy
and convergence or stability of the iteration scheme or
marching procedure. At high call Reynolds numbers, a certain
degree of "upstream differencing" is essential using upwind
differencing, a hybrid formulation or the Los Alamos zip,
donor cell, etc., techniques, for example.75 Solution
procedures vary from Gauss-Seidel point methods67 to more
efficient line-by-line SIMPLE methods68'74 for steady-state
problems, with corresponding explicit and SIMPLE methods
for associated transient problems. The application of finite-
element computational methods to combustor problems, with
complex boundary geometry and complex boundary con-
ditions to apply, is in its infancy; further work in this fertile
area will be most useful.137
IV. Sample Predictions
Calculations often are performed with a nonuniform grid
system of about 500 nodes in the flowfield, and the solution
time required to solve 10 simultaneous equations is typically
10 min of CDC 6600 CP time, although this decreases in the
absence of swirl to about 5 min and in the absence of swirl and
combustion to about 2/2 min. Most relaxation procedures for
elliptic problems are under-relaxation on new values, coef-
ficients, and source terms, although this under-relaxation is
set to be less effective as the iteration procedure nears con-
vergence, so that the initial stabilizing effect does not hinder
the final convergence rate. Final convergence is decided by
way of the well-known fractional-change criterion or the
residual source sum criterion, the latter generally being
recommended. The results discussed below compare ex-
perimental evidence and predicted characteristics of weakly
and strongly swirling, free and confined, jets and flames.
A. 
Weakly Swirling Flows
Since details of the prediction of weakly swirling jet and
flame structures have been published already, only highlights
of the computations are discussed here. Predictions are made
with both the Prandtl mixing length and energy^-length tur-
bulence models so as to confirm suitable extensions of the
models to swirl flows.123 Computations with either model
produce longitudinal decays of um and wm which compare
well with experimental data (see Fig. 14). The primary use of


--- Page 10 ---

1072
D. G. LILLEY
AIAA JOURNAL
swirl in a jet is to increase the angle of spread and rate of
decay of axial velocity. The half-angle a (u/um=0.5) is
predicted to increase with swirl according to
Table 1 Development parameters for jets and premixed
(mfu =0.245) jet flames
= 4.8+14 S
(4)
as found experimentally.4 These and other results123 agree
well with the data and show that the effect of swirl on
isothermal jet growth, entrainment, and decay may be
predicted well. To make such isothermal computations, one
has to solve four simultaneous parabolic partial differential
equations for «, rw, k, and Z, where Z=kT. The com-
putation cited uses m = n = 1 .
Premixed flames (mfu= 0.245) with initial fuel/air ratio
well outside the flammability limits have been studied ex-
perimentally.4 Predictions have been made125 with an eddy-
breakup reaction model and turbulence simulated in a manner
similar to the form used in the prediction of inert jets.123
Eight parabolic partial differential equations are solved for u,
rw, k, kt, h, mfu, mox-imfu, and g. Predicted longitudinal
decays of um and wm compare well with experimental results,
and there is a progressive increase in them as S increases. It is
to be noted, however, that the velocity decays are slower than
in cold swirling jets. This is largely because of the temperature
and density changes, and a consequence of this gas expansion
is increased axial and radial velocities, giving a reduced rate of
decay of um and a wider jet initially.
Figure 15 shows longitudinal variations with swirl of Tc,
the centerline temperature, and mfu , the total mass flow rate
of unburned fuel. 125 Notice that Tc increases more rapidly as
5 increases, indicating the more rapid mixing of hot com-
bustion products with the cooler, higher-velocity core region.
Observe also that mfu decreases more rapidly as 5 increases,
indicating the more rapid consumption of fuel per unit length
of flame. Predicted flame front lines (loci of temperature
maxima) accord well with the experimental ones of Fig. 4, and
it is clear that the length of the flame decreases markedly with
swirl and that there is a progressive increase in the initial
width (at z/d= 10) of the flame as S increases. Flame lengths
may be compared favorably with experimental values, as
Table 1 shows. Downstream development of these jets and
flames often is characterized by the parameters A (for axial
velocity decay) and a (for jet half- angle), defined by
um/umo=A(Poo/pm.m)°'sd/(z + a)
(5)
(6)
where m stands for station maximum, o for orifice value, p
for density, oo for ambient conditions, and min for minimum
value. Recommendations for a, A, a, and flame lengths are
given in Table 1.
Fig. 15 Predicted longitudinal Tc (centerline temperature) and rhfu
(mass flow rate of unburned fuel) variations for partially premixed jet
flames (nifu - 0.245) (x experimental).125
Jet (S < 0.4)
aid 
2.3
A 
6.8/(l +6.S52)
a 
4.8 + 145
Flame length /d
Flame (5< 0.23)
35 + 1005
15 + 105
2.2 + 5
43 - 1005
B. Strongly Swirling Jets
The forms of strongly swirling free and enclosed jets,
issuing from vane swirlers and swirl generators, have been
predicted using the /?-o> and p-u-v approaches.74'128 The
problem is elliptic, requiring the relaxation solution
technique. Initially, enclosed flow in a cylindrical chamber
was predicted solving three equations for \j/> u/r, and rw with
a simple algebraic turbulent viscosity formula.74 Results for
the length of central recirculation zone, axial distance to
impingement, and velocity decays are encouraging when
compared with experimental data, in view of the use of a
naive turbulence model in the computations. More recently,
the primitive-variable approach has been used to predict
similar flows; then equations are solved for/?, u, v, w, k, and e
(where the additional complexity of the two-equation k-e
turbulence model has been included). Again results show good
agreement with experiment.128 As an example, Fig. 16 shows
predicted streamlines and recirculation zone for a free annular
jet from an axial-plus-tangential entry swirl generator with
swirl number 5=1.5. There is a striking resemblance to a
similar experimental figure (see Fig. 1), but the recirculation
zone is predicted slightly too wide and too short.
An enclosed swirling flow in an axisymmetric furnace
configuration recently has been predicted76 by an advanced
primitive code with advanced turbulence and combustion
models. The predictions with chemical reaction suppressed
are discussed here (those with chemical reaction are discussed
in the next section); for brevity, only those for axial velocity
distribution are considered. Figures 17 and 18 show predicted
Fig. 16 Predicted streamlines (——) and recirculation zone (—) for
a free annular jet (from an axial-plus-tangential entry swirl generator)
with swirl number S = 1.5 (Ref. 128).
1.67
1.34
Fig. 17 Radial profiles of
mean axial velocity: swirl
- 
number = 0, 
isothermal
° 
flow.76
.17


--- Page 11 ---

AUGUST 1977
SWIRL FLOWS IN COMBUSTION: A REVIEW
1073
Fig. 18 Radial profiles of
mean axial velocity: swirl
number = 0.52, isothermal
flow.76
2
0
1
0
1
0
21
0
2
0
^__
Ufc—~ •— . 
^ -
[_ ,^LL._ - _ ,. _
^-— ^__
f/v
/\
» 
— •— •
2.67
2.33
2
1
.67 
9"
N
.33
.17
.067
in r
- 2
NO REACTION
- 2
REACTION
30 
60 
90 
30 
60 
90
* 
*
Fig. 20 Effect of swirl vane angle on central recirculation zone
length (0predicted).74
r 1.0
CJ
L
fuel "P
z/d
Fig. 19 Predicted streamlines (—) and flame envelope (---) in a
combustion chamber (swirl vane angle 60°, primary velocity up =0.5
us, overall air-fuel ratio 30:1).74
axial velocity radial profiles at a variety of axial stations (Df is
furnace diameter) and compare them with experimental data
for 5 = 0.0 and 0.52, respectively. In each case, there is no
central jet velocity. Predicted results are very close to the
measurements. Some of the effects of swirl are apparent
immediately: a recirculation zone near the nozzle, off-
centerline maxima, and more rapid decay in the downstream
direction. Although not shown here, absolute values of
turbulent kinetic energy are much higher (a factor of 3) in the
swirling case in the initial region and extend further in the
radial direction. However, their decay in the downstream
direction is also quicker, indicating again that the interesting
part of the flowfield is shorter and wider with the application
of swirl.
C. 
Strongly Swirling Flames
Predictions for a strongly swirling diffusion flame in a
cylindrical combustion chamber require the use of a 2-D
elliptic program. In Refs. 74 and 126, a streamfunction-
vorticity formulation is used, solving four partial differential
equations for \l/, u/r, nv, and/. A simple algebraic formula is
used to specify the turbulent viscosity. Figure 19 illustrates a
computation74 for a cylindrical combustion chamber which
has many of the features of practical equipment: fuel and air
input at one end, exit for combustion products at the other,
arrangement of the air inlet as an annular orifice surrounding
the fuel inlet, a device for causing the air to enter with a
swirling motion, and a thick annular lip between the air and
fuel inlets. The expansion ratio Did is 2. Sizes are such that
equal axial velocities of the primary fuel stream up and
secondary airstream us give overall stoichiometric conditions
(air-fuel ratio APR = 15). It needs to be stressed that more
satisfactory turbulence and reaction models now exist; the
predictions shown are intended as demonstrative, and, as
such, the following conditions are taken at the inlet: pressure
p = 25 atm, temperature T= 850 K, and u = 36 m/sec.
The computations show some interesting features74 and
striking differences between the nonswirling and strongly
swirling (vane angle 0 = 60° corresponding to a swirl number
S=1.2 approximately) cases. The presence of strong swirl
causes a toroidal vortex to form in the middle of the com-
bustion chamber, in addition to the recirculation near the
entrance provoked by the sudden enlargement of the cross-
sectional area. It also shortens the flame. Both of these effects
are well known to combustion engineers, who strive to utilize
the recirculation of hot combustion products and the bluff-
body effect of this zone as an aid to the combustion process.
The vane angle has a strong effect on the existence (or
otherwise) and size of the central recirculation zone. Shown in
Fig. 20 is the length of this zone as a function of vane angle <t>
for a variety of values of up (and hence AFR): on the left
when no reaction is allowed to take place, and on the right
with reaction.74 In both cases, the zone lengthens as </> in-
creases for a given up (AFR). Reduction of up promotes the
existence of the zone and lengthens it for a given vane angle.
The third point to note is that, with chemical reaction sup-
pressed, zone lengths generally are longer: the presence of
reaction, gas expansion, and increased velocity tend to
shorten, and in some cases destroy (for example, 60° vanes
with up = us), the zone as compared with its nonreacting
counterpart. Despite this, zone lengths for low values of up
(high values of AFR) are quite comparable, especially at
higher degrees of swirl. This is because in these cases the
flames are short and trapped upstream of the recirculation
zone as opposed to encompassing it. Predicted also, and as
expected experimentally, is that reduction of up (increase in
AFR) and/or increase in vane angle <j> progressively reduces
the flame length and improves the temperature traverse
quality (uniformity of temperature) across the exit from the
combustor. Some general observations are that the presence
and increase in size of a central recirculation zone are en-
couraged by increasing D/d, having a central hub in the inlet
flow dh>Q, increasing dh/d, reducing primary velocity (also
shifts zone more upstream), increasing swirl number of swirl
vane angle, and suppressing chemical reaction.38 For com-
bustors, an optimum swirl strength for reasonable recir-
culation zone and pressure loss is about 5= 1.15 or swirl vane
angle <£ = 60 when D/d=2y although recent work suggests that
S based on chamber diameter D rather than nozzle diameter d
gives a better guide to similarity of flow downstream of the
inlet for different Did systems.22
More recently, a strongly swirling enclosed premixed flame
has been considered with a primitive pressure-velocity
variable code, suitably amended to include the k-e turbulence
model and the simple exothermic one-step chemical reac-
tion.128 The results of application of the aforementioned
advanced primitive-variable code (with advanced turbulence
and combustion models) to flows with chemical reaction now
are. discussed.76 Three combustion models are considered:
model 1, diffusion flame; model 2, diffusion flame with thick
flame region because of turbulence, calculation of g required
from its governing partial differential equation; and model 3,
finite reaction rate, deduced from the lesser of the Arrhenius
and eddy-breakup models, calculating g either from its
governing partial differential equation or its reduced local-
equilibrium algebraic equation. Figures 21 and 22 show
sample calculations of axial velocity at x/Df= 1.0 and 1.5, at


--- Page 12 ---

1074
D. G. LILLEY
AIAA JOURNAL
swirl numbers of .5=0.0 and 0.52, respectively. Results show
the presence of a central toroidal recirculation zone, and
further downstream more uniform velocity profiles across the
chamber, in the swirl case of the latter figure. Comparison
with experimental data suggests that combustion model 2 is
slightly preferable over model 3, with model 1 a poor third.
This results from inadequacies in the detail of model 3 rather
than the concept of recognizing finite-rate chemical reactions.
Temperature field calculations are in close agreement with
each other, but unfortunately there are no experimental data
with which to compare them. These and other results show
clearly the effect of swirl on furnace flames, both ex-
perimentally observed and theoretically predicted: swirl
generally leads to flatter, more uniform velocity distributions
across the chamber, a wider region of higher temperature
shifted further away from the axis, and higher initial values,
but lower later values, of kinetic energy of turbulence.
D. 
Three-Dimensional Flows
The discussion is restricted to two particular combustor
flows: one78 is a furnace flame without swirl, and most of the
interesting part of the flow is without axial recirculation; and
the other79'139 is the flame in a section of an annular com-
bustor, where the inlet boundary conditions favor the
generation of a swirling motion in the flowfield. Figure 23
shows the results of computations for a steady methane
diffusion flame in a square-sectioned adiabatic furnace,
where dimensions and conditions are similar to those used
experimentally in the Ijmuiden furnace.78 In this preliminary
work, no advanced turbulence model was incorporated, the
turbulent viscosity being computed from a simple algebraic
expression that gives approximate turbulent jet values of
turbulent viscosity in the inlet jet part of the flow. The results
show cross sections of the flowfield at four locations Ay B, C,
and £>, going downstream in the flow direction from left to
right. Contour plots in the frames allow interpretation of the
entire 3-D flowfield of regions of unburnt fuel and tem-
perature. Results that are not shown here indicate that the
forward-moving jet of fuel quickly entrains the combustion
air, causing a recirculation of hot combustion products in the
Fig. 21 
Radial profiles of
mean axial velocity: swirl
number = 0, 
combusting
flow.76
model
1 2 3
n n—2—r
r/d
Fig. 22 
Radial profiles of
mean axial velocity: swirl
number = 0.52, combusting
flow.76
corner regions, from which the further entrainment by the jet
is supplied. Of course, the symmetrical entry of the fuel and
air, and the absence of swirl, insures no circulation of gas in
the sectional plane: all vector velocities in the cross sections
are radially outward from the main-direction centerline.
Inspection of the results shown in the figure reveal other
physically realistic features: the flame boundary, taken to be
the fuel-air interface, widens at first with distance from the
injector nozzle, and then diminishes to zero; temperature
maxima occur at the flame envelope; and nonuniformities of
temperature diminish as the furnace exit is approached.
The second flow considered is a diffusion flame in a section
of an annular combustor, shown schematically in Fig.
24.79,139 xwelve equations are solved, including those for the
two-equation k-e turbulence model and a six-flux radiation
model. The flow is fully 3-D and exhibits a complex recir-
culation pattern. A significant swirling motion develops
mainly because of the upstream injection of dilution air along
the top boundary, but also because of the spreading of the
fuel jet flame and the circulation produced by the lateral air.
The location and angle of injection of the lateral air also
contribute to significant axial recirculation against the main
flow direction. The discussion here is restricted, however, to
the ensuing temperature field and, in particular, to the
temperature distribution at the outlet, which is especially
interesting to the combustion-chamber designer who wishes to
have a good temperature traverse quality.
Several outlet temperature distributions are shown in Fig.
24, each resulting from a different set of inlet boundary
conditions. Part A represents the standard situation: fuel and
air entering at 600 K at all locations, fuel and top wall film
cooling air entering at 100 m/sec, some inlet air through holes
at upstream boundary averaged as 1 m/sec over the entire
Air
Products
i
B 
C
Regions of unburnt 
fuel
ox
fu
ox
fu
ox
fu
ox
0fu
Temperature 
T/Tin
Fig. 23 
Predictions for a diffusion flame in an adiabatic furnace.1
FLAME-TUBE WALL
AIR
^-e-KV-
;>J>v}r Y YFILM-COOL i NO si
L FUEL'GAS V, RECIRCULATING
Fig. 24 Influence of bound-
ary 
conditions 
on 
outlet
temperature distributions for
an annular combustor.79'139
1000 
1000
1000


--- Page 13 ---

AUGUST 1977
SWIRL FLOWS IN COMBUSTION: A REVIEW
1075
area, and lateral air entry 200 m/sec normal to the top surface
and - 200 m/sec in the axial z direction, that is, at 45° in the
upstream direction. Part B shows what happens when the top
wall air film is injected at five times its standard value: the
uniformity of the temperature is significantly greater.
Comparison of the part C and part D contours with those of
the standard result of part A reveals that the direction of entry
of the lateral air radically alters the temperature pattern and
does so in an understandable way. For the standard condition
of part A, the axial velocity of the 200-m/sec vertical velocity
lateral air is - 200 m/sec, in part C it is 0 m/sec and in part D
it is + 200 m/sec. Clearly these and other design variations in
boundary conditions are simple to incorporate and can be of
great help to the combustor designer. The temperature
distributions here are far from uniform; none of the ones
shown is good enough from the points of view of efficiency
and turbine inlet temperature requirements. Clearly the
combustor being considered is not at a stage of development
which the engine designer could accept.
V. Closure
The extremely favorable effects of applying swirl to in-
jected air and fuel in combustion systems have been known
and utilized for many years. Only recently, however, has
systematic study been aimed at understanding and charac-
terizing the observed phenomena. Advances in the ex-
perimental study, modeling, and prediction of combustor
swirl flows were reviewed here. Increasingly detailed ex-
perimental observations are being modeled with increasing
realism, both in the simulation of the physical processes
occurring and solution of the resulting governing equations.
A few general hypotheses now are linking together a large
number of previously disconnected experimental data and
being incorporated into general computer programs. Practical
application of numerical predictions now is providing
designers with adequate results more cheaply and quickly than
currently possible by experimental means, which, in turn, is
providing a powerful stimulus to their further development.
Acknowledgment
The author sincerely would like to thank the following for
helpful discussions: J. M. Beer, A. A. Boni, L. S. Caretto, N.
A. Chigier, R. S. Fletcher, R. J. Gelinas, F. C. Lockwood, N.
R. L. Maccallum, D. W. Pershing, N. Syred, and J. H.
Whitelaw. Many thanks are due to Science Applications Inc.,
La Jolla, Calif., for funds to cover part of this work, which
was performed while the author was acting as a Consultant to
the Energy and Environmental Sciences Division.
References
^illey, D. G., Swirling Flows, Applied Science Publishers,
London, (to be published).
2Lilley, D. G., "Swirl Flows in Combustors," AIAA Paper 76-405,
San Diego, Calif., July 14-16, 1976.
3Lilley, D. G., "Swirling Flows in Combustion," Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science, Vol. 3, 1977.
4Beer, J. M. and Chigier, N. A., Combustion Aerodynamics,
Halsted-Wiley, New York, 1972.
5Syred, N. and Beer, J. M., "Combustion in Swirling Flows: A
Review," Combustion and Flame, Vol. 23, 1974, pp. 143-201.
6Chigier, N. A., "Gasdynamics of Swirling Flow in Combustion
Systems," AstronauticaActa, Vol. 17, 1972, pp. 387-395.
7Putnam, A. A., "Swirl Burning," American Flame Research
Committee, Jan. 18, 1967.
8Beer, J. M., "Recent Advances in the Technology of Furnace
Flames," Journal of the Institute of Fuel, Vol. 45, July 1972, pp. 370-
382.
9Bradshaw, P., "Effects of Streamline Curvature on Turbulent
Flow," AGARD-AG0169, Aug. 1973.
10Murthy, S. N. B., "Survey of Some Aspects of Swirling Flows,"
Aeronautical Research Lab., Cornell, ARL-71-0244, and National
Technical Information Service, NTIS-AD737381, 1971.
11 Lewellen, W. S., "A Review of Confined Vortex Flows," NASA
CR-1772, 1971.
12Spalding, D. B., "Combustion as Applied to Engineering,"
Journal of the Institute of Fuel, Vol. 44, April 1971, pp. 196-203.
13Hinde, P. T., "Gas Turbine Combustion," short course at
Cranfield Inst. of Technology, Bedford, England, May 14-18, 1973;
revised and repeated annually.
14Bracco, F. V. (ed.), Special Issue on Stratified Charge Engines,
Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 8, 1973, pp. 1-100.
15Boni, A. A., Gelinas, R. J., and Ludwig, C. B., "National
Combustion Applied Research and Development Plan," Science
Applications Inc., SAI-75-637-LJ, La Jolla, Calif., Aug. 1975; rev.
March 1976.
16Chigier, N. A. and Beer, J. M., "Velocity and Static-Pressure
Distributions in Swirling Air Jets Issuing from Annular and Divergent
Nozzles," Journal of Basic Engineering, Vol. 86, Dec. 1964, pp. 788-
798.
17Syred, N., Beer, J. M., and Chigier, N. A., "Turbulence
Measurement in Recirculating Flows" Proceedings of Salford
Symposium on Internal Flows, Inst. of Mechanical Engineering,
London, 1971, pp. B27-B36.
18Lilley, D. G., "An Inverse Computational Code for Turbulent
Swirling Boundary Layer Flow," International Journal of Computers
and Fluids, Vol. 4, 1976, pp. 45-48.
19Lilley, D. G., "Inverse Analysis of Turbulent Weakly Swirling
Jets," AIAA Journal, Vol. 14, May 1976, pp. 547-548.
20Mather, M. L. and Maccallum, N. R. L., "Swirling Air Jets
Issuing from Vane Swirlers. Part 1: Free Jets," Journal of the In-
stitute of Fuel, Vol. 40, May 1967, pp. 214-225.
21 Syred, N., Chigier, N. A., and Beer, J. M., "Flame Stabilization
in Recirculation Zones of Jets with Swirl," 13th Symposium (In-
ternational) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa.,
1971, pp. 617-624.
22Beltagui, S. A. and Maccallum, N. R. L., "The Modeling of
Vane-Swirled Flames in Furnaces," Journal of the Institute of Fuel,
Vol.49, 1976, pp. 193-200.
23 Chigier, N. A. and Dvorak, K., "Laser Anemometer
Measurements in Flames with Swirl," 15th Symposium (In-
ternational) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa.,
1975, pp. 573-585.
24Lockwood, F. C., El-Mahallawy, F. M., and Spalding, D. B.,
* 'An Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Turbulent Mixing
in a Cylindrical Furnace," Combustion and Flame, Vol. 23, 1974, pp.
283-293.
25Chigier, N. A. and Apak, G., "Stability, Mixing and Interaction
of Multijet Natural Gas Flames with Swirl," 2nd European Sym-
posium on Combustion, Orleans, France, Sept. 1-5, 1975, pp. 684-
689.
26Beer, J.M. and Lee, K.B., "The Effect of Residence Time
Distribution on the Performance and Efficiency of Combustors,"
10th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Inst., Pittsburgh, P., 1965, pp. 1187-1202.
27Beer, J. M. and Chigier, N. A., "Stability and Combustion
Intensity of Pulverized Coal Flames—Effect of Swirl and Im-
pingement," Journal of the Institute of Fuel, Vol. 42, Dec. 1969, pp.
443-450.
28Baker, R. J., Hutchinson, P., Khalil, E. E., and Whitelaw, J. H.,
"Measurements of Three Velocity Components in a Model Furnace
with and without Combustion," 15th Symposium (International) on
Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1975, pp. 553-
559.
29Owen, F. K., "Laser Velocimeter Measurements of a Confined
Turbulent 
Diffusion 
Flame 
Burner," 
AIAA 
Paper 
76-33,
Washington, D. C., 1976.
30Bowman, C. T. and Cohen, L. S., "Influence of Aerodynamic
Phenomena on Pollutant Formation in Combustion, Vol. 1: Ex-
perimental Results," United Technologies Research Center, Rept.
EPA-650/2-75-061 a, East Hartford, Conn., July 1975.
31Niedzwiecki, R. W., Juhasz, A. J., and Anderson, D. N.,
Performance of a Swirl-Can Primary Combustor to Outlet Tem-
peratures of 3600°F (2256 K)," NASA TM X-52902, Sept. 1970.
32Jones, R. E., "Advanced Technology for Reducing Aircraft
Engine Pollution," American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Paper
73-WA/Aero-2, Detroit, Midi., Nov. 11-15, 1973.
33Niedzwiecki, R. W. and Jones, R. E., "Pollution Measurements
of a Swirl-Can Combustor," ,4/4,4 Journal, Vol. 12, June 1974, pp.
844-849.
34Biaglow, J. A. and Trout, A. M., "Performance and Pollution
Measurements of Two-Row Swirl-Can Combustor Having 72
Modules," NASATMX-3170, Jan. 1975.


--- Page 14 ---

1076
D. G. LILLEY
AIAA JOURNAL
35Mularz, E. J., Wear, J. D., and Verbulecz, P. W., "Exhaust
Pollutant Emissions from Swirl-Can Combustor Module Arrays at
Parametric Test Conditions," NASA TM X-3237, June 1975.
36Diehl, L. A. and Biaglow, J. A., "Swirl-Can Combustor Per-
formance to Near-Stoichiometric Fuel-Air Ratio," American Society
of Mechanical Engineers, Paper 76-GT-10, New Orleans, La., March
21-25, 1976.
37Roberts, P. B., Shekleton, J. R., White, D. J., and Butze, H. F.,
"Advanced Low NOX Combustors for Supersonic High-Altitude
Aircraft Gas Turbines," American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
Paper 76-GT-12, New Orleans, La., March 21-25, 1976.
38Fenimore, C. P., "Formation of Nitric Oxide in Premixed
Hydrocarbon Flames," 13th Symposium (International) on Com-
bustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1971, pp. 373-380.
39Blauwens, J., Smets, B., and Peeters, J., "Mechanism of
'Prompt' Nitric Oxide Formation in Hydrocarbon Flames," 16th
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst.,
Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
40Nelson, H. F., "Nitric Oxide Formation in Combustion," AIAA
Journal, Vol. 14, Sept. 1976, pp. 1177-1182.
41Sadakata, M. and Beer, J. M., "Spatial Distribution of Nitric
Oxide Formation Rates in a Swirling Turbulent Methane-Air Flame,"
16th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
42Lefebvre, A. H., "Pollutant Control in Continuous Combustion
Engines," 15th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1975, pp. 1169-1180.
43Heap, M. P., Lowes, T. M., and Walmsley, R., "Nitric Oxide
Formation in Pulverized Coal Flames," 1st European Symposium on
Combustion, Sheffield, England, Sept. 16-21, 1973, edited by F. J.
Weinberg, Academic Press, London, 1973, pp. 493-498.
44Heap, M. P., Lowes, T. M., and Walmsley, R., "Emission of
Nitric Oxide from Large Turbulent Diffusion Flames," 14th Sym-
posium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst.,
Pittsburgh, Pa., 1973, pp. 883-895.
45Lewis, G. D., "Centrifugal-Force Effects on Combustion," 14th
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion In-
stitute, Pittsburgh, Pa., 1973, pp. 413-419.
46Lewis, G. D., "Swirling Flow Combustion—Fundamentals and
Applications," AIAA Paper 73-1250, Las Vegas, Nev., Nov. 5-7,
1973.
47Lewis, G. D. and Smith, C. E., "Investigation of Centrifugal
Force and Reynolds Number Effects on Combustion Processes," Air
Force Office of Scientific Research, AFOSR-TR-75-1167, 1975.
48Clements, T. R., "Effect of Swirling Flow on Augmentor
Performance: Phases I and II," NASA CR-134639, 1974, and NASA
CR-135024, 1976.
49Mestre, A., "Efficiency and Pollutant Formation Studies in a
Swirling Flow Combustor," Proceedings of the ASME Fluid
Mechanics of Combustion Conference, Montreal, Canada, 1974, pp.
89-95.
50Mestre, A. and Benoit, A., "Combustion in Swirling Flow,"
14th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1973, pp. 413-419.
51 Chigier, N. A., Beer, J. M., Grecov, D., and Bassindale, K., "Jet
Flames in a Rotating Flow Field," Combustion and Flame, Vol. 14,
1970, pp. 171-179.
52Beer, J. M., Chigier, N. A., Davies, T. W., and Bassindale, K.,
"Laminarization of Turbulent Flames in Rotating Environments,"
Combustion and Flame, Vol. 16, 1971, pp. 39-45.
53Penner, S. S., "Elementary Considerations of the Fluid
Mechanics of Tornadoes and Hurricanes," Astronautica Acta, Vol.
17, 1972, pp. 351-362.
54Martin, D. T., Gouldin, F. C., and Yetter, R. A., "Preliminary
Evaluation of Vortex Breakdown Stabilized Combustor," Eastern
States Section/Combustion Institute Fall Meeting, New York, Nov. 6-
7, 1975.
55 Yetter, R. A. and Gouldin, F. C., "Exhaust Gas Emissions of a
Vortex Breakdown Stabilized Combustor," Western States Sec-
tion/Combustion Institute Fall Meeting, Paper 76-33, La Jolla,
Calif., Oct. 18-20, 1976.
56Syred, N. and Beer, J. M., "Effect of Combustion upon
Precessing Vortex Cores Generated by Swirl Generators," 14th
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst.,
Pittsburgh, Pa., 1973, pp. 537-550.
57Syred, N. and Beer, J. M., "The Damping of Precessing Vortex
Cores by Combustion in Swirl Generators," Astronautica Acta, Vol.
17, 1972, pp. 783-801.
58Syred, N., Gupta, A. K., and Beer, J. M., "Temperature and
Density Gradient Changes Arising with the Precessing Vortex Core
and Vortex Breakdown in Swirl Burners," 15th Symposium (In-
ternational) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa.,
1975, pp. 587-597.
59Gupta, A. K., Beer, J. M., and Swithenbank, J., "Concentric
Multi-annular Swirl Burner: Stability Limits and Emission Charac-
teristics," 16th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
60Beer, J. M., "On the Stability and Combustion Intensity of
Pressure-Jet Oil Flames," Combustion, Vol. 37, 1965, pp. 27-49.
61 Chigier, N. A., "Application of Model Results to Design of
Industrial Flames," Proceedings of the 4th Symposium of Flames and
Industry, Imperial College, London, Sept. 19-20, 1972, pp. 5-12.
62Goulard, R., (ed.), "Combustion Measurements in Jet
Propulsion Systems (A Project Squid Workshop)," Purdue Univ.,
Rept. PU-R1-76, West Lafeyette, Ind., 1976.
63Spadaccini, L. J., McVey, J. B., Kennedy, J, B., and Owen, F.
K., "Pollutant Formation and Energy Release in Liquid-Fuel Tur-
bulent Diffusion Flames," AIAA Paper 77-53, Los Angeles, Calif.,
Jan. 24-26, 1977.
64Owen, F. K., "Laser Velocimeter Measurements of the Turbulent
Structure of Spray Flames," AIAA Paper 77-215, Los Angeles,
Calif., Jan. 24-26, 1977.
65Styles, A. C. and Chigier, N. A., "Combustion of Air Blast
Atomized Spray Flames," 16th Symposium (International) 
on
Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
66Khalil, E. E. and Whitelaw, J. H., "Aerodynamic and Thermal
Characteristics of Kerosene-Spray Flames," 16th Symposium (In-
ternational) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa.,
1977.
67Khalil, K. H., El-Mahallawy, F. M., and Moneib, M. A., "Effect
of Combustion Air Swirl on the Flow Pattern in a Cylindrical Oil
Fired Furnace," 16th Symposium (International) on Combustion,
The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
68Khalil, K. H., El-Mahallawy, F. M., and El-Banhawy, Y. H.,
"Effect of Combustion Intensity on the Flow Pattern of Turbulent
Confined Oil Flames," AIAA Paper 77-219, Los Angeles, Calif., Jan.
24-26, 1977.
69Tuttle, J. H., Colket, M. B., Bilger, R. W., and Mellor, A. M.,
"Characteristic Times for Combustion and Pollutant Formation in
Spray Combustion," 16th Symposium (International) 
on Com-
bustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
70Wroblewska, V., Zelkowski, J., and Wojcicki, S., "The Op-
timum Conditions for the Combustion of Low-Calorific Coal Dust in
Swirl Burners," 16th Symposium (International) on Combustion,
The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
71 Predictive Methods for Industrial Flames: Proceedings of the 4th
Symposium of Flames and Industry, British Flame Research Com-
mittee and Inst. of Fuel, Imperial College, London, Sept. 19-20, 1972.
72Boni, A. A. (Chairman), "SAI/NSF (RANN) Workshop on the
Numerical Simulation of Combustion for Application to Spark and
Compression Ignition Engines," La Jolla, Calif., April 23-25, 1975. .
73Lilley, D. G., "Modeling of Combustor Swirl Flows," Acta
Astronautica, Vol. 1, Sept. 1974, pp. 1129-1147.
74Lilley, D. G., "Swirl Flow Modeling for Combustors," AIAA
Paper 74-527, Palo Alto, Calif., June 17-19, 1974.
75Steward, F. R. and Tennankore, K. N., "Similarity Criterion for
a Confined Swirling Jet System," 16th Symposium (International)
on Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
76Khalil, E. E., Spalding, D. B., and Whitelaw, J. H., "The
Calculation of Local Flow Properties in Two-Dimensional Furnaces,"
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol. 18, 1975, pp.
775-791.
77Hutchinson, P., Khalil, E. E., and Whitelaw, J. H., "The
Measurement and Calculation of Furnace-Flow Properties," AIAA
Paper 77-50, Los Angeles, Calif., Jan. 24-26, 1977.
78Patankar, S. V. and Spalding, D. B., "A Computer Model for
Three-Dimensional Flow in Furnaces," 14th Symposium (In-
ternational) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa.,
1973, pp. 604-614.
79Patankar, S. V. and Spalding, D. B., "Simultaneous Predictions
of Flow Pattern and Radiation for Three-Dimensional Flames," Dept
of Mechanical Engineering, Imperial College, Rept. HTS/73/39,
London, 1973.
80Spalding, D. B., "Numerical Computation of Practical Com-
bustion Chamber Flows," AGARD Propulsion and Energetics Panel,
Liege, Belgium, April 1-2,1974.
81Lilley, D. G., "Nonisotropic Turbulence in Swirling Flows,"
Acta Astronautica, Vol. 4,1977.


--- Page 15 ---

AUGUST 1977
SWIRL FLOWS IN COMBUSTION: A REVIEW
1077
82Murthy, S. N. B. (ed.), Turbulent Mixing in Nonreactive and
Reactive Flow (A Project Squid Workshop), Plenum Press, New
York, 1975.
83 "ASME/Pennsylvania State University Symposium on Tur-
bulent Shear Flow," University Park, Pa., April 18-20, 1977.
84Hottel, H. C. and Sarofim, A. F., Radiative Transfer, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1967.
85Lockwood, F. C. and Shahm, N. G., "An Improved Flux Model
for the Calculation of Radiation Heat Transfer in Combustion
Chambers," American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Paper 76-
HT-55, St. Louis, Mo., Aug. 9-11, 1976.
86Bracco, F. V. (ed.), Special Issue on Reactive Turbulence,
Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 13,1976.
87Chigier, N. A. (ed.), Special Edition on Pollution, Progress in
Energy and Combustion Science, Vol. 1, 1976.
88Starkman, E. S., Mizutani, Y., Sawyer, R. F., and Teixeira, D.
P., "The Role of Chemistry in Gas Turbine Emissions," Journal of
Engineering for Power, July 1971, pp. 333-344.
89Caretto, L. S., "Modeling Pollutant Formation in Combustion
Processes," 14th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1973, pp. 661-671.
^Osgerby, I. T., "Literature Review of Turbine Combustor
Modeling and Emissions," AIAA Journal, Vol. 12, June 1974, pp.
743-754.
9IOdgers, J., "Combustion Modeling within Gas Turbine
Engines," AIAA Paper 77-52, Los Angeles, Calif., Jan. 24-26, 1977.
92Boccio, J. L., Weilerstein, G., and Edelman, R. B., "A
Mathematical 
Model 
for 
Jet 
Engine 
Combustor 
Pollutant
Emissions," NASA CR-121208, March 1973.
93Rai, C. and Siegel, R. D. (eds.), "Air: II. Control of NOX and
SOX Emissions," American Inst. of Chemical Engineers, Symposium
Ser. 148, Vol. 71, 1975.
94Altenkirch, R. A. and Mellor, A. M., "Predicting Emissions for
Prevaporizing Combustors via Continuum Flow Techniques," 16th
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst.,
Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
95Cernansky, N. P., "Formation of NO and NO2 in a Turbulent
Propane/Air Diffusion Flame," Dept of Mechanical Engineering,
Univ. of California, Rept. UCB-ME-74-5, Berkeley, Calif., Nov.
1974.
96Butler, T. D. and O'Rourke, P. J., "A Numerical Method for
Transient Reacting Flows in two Space Dimensions," 16th Sym-
posium (International) 
on Combustion, The Combustion Inst.,
Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
97Magnussen, B. F. and Hjertager, B. H., "On Mathematical
Modeling of Turbulent Combustion with Special Emphasis on Soot
Formation and Combustion," 16th Symposium (International) on
Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
98Quan, V., Bodeen, C. A., and Teixeira, D. P., "Nitric Oxide
Formation in Recirculating Flows," Combustion Science and
Technology, Vol. 7, 1973, pp. 65-75.
"Pratt, D. T., "Calculation of Chemically Reacting Flows with
Complex Chemistry," Studies in Convection, edited by B. E.
Launder, Vol. 2, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1976.
IOOWormeck, J. J. and Pratt, D. T., "Computer Modeling of
Combustion in a Longwell Jet-Stirred Reactor," 16th Symposium
(International} on Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh,
Pa., 1977.
101 Hindmarch, A. C., "GEAR: Ordinary Differential Equation
System Solver," Lawrence Livermore Lab., Univ. of Calif., Rept.
UCID-30001, Rev. 3, Dec. 1974.
102Young, T. R. and Boris, J. R., "A Numerical Technique for
Solving Stiff Ordinary Differential Equations Associated with
Reactive-Flow Problems," Naval Research Lab., Memo. Rept. 2611,
Washington, D.C., July 1973.
103Scaccia, C. and Kennedy, L. A., "Calculating Two-
Dimensional Chemically Reacting Flows," AIAA Journal, Vol. 12,
Sept. 1974, pp. 1268-1272.
104Boni, A. A., Chapman, M., Cook, J. L., and Schneyer, G. P.,
"Computer Simulation of Combustion in a Stratified Charge
Engine," 16th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
105Spalding, D. B., "A General Theory of Turbulent Combustion;
The Lagrangian Aspects," AIAA Paper 77-141, Los Angeles, Calif.,
Jan. 24-26, 1977.
106Spalding, D. B., "The Eddy Break-Up Model Applied to
Confined Turbulent Steady Flames," AIAA Paper 77-98, Los
Angeles, Calif., Jan. 24-26, 1977.
107Spalding, D. B., "Development of the "Eddy Breakup" Model
of Turbulent Combustion," 16th Symposium (International) on
Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
108Spalding, D. B., "The Escimo Theory of Turbulent Com-
bustion," Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Imperial College, Rept.
HTS/76/13, London, 1976 [extension of 16th Symposium (In-
ternational) on Combustion paper].
109Spalding, D. B., "Mathematical Models of Turbulent Flames: A
Review," Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Imperial College, Rept.
HTS/75/1, London, 1975; see also Ref. 86, 1976, pp. 1-25.
110Edelman, R. B. and Harsha, P. T., "Some Observations on
Turbulent Mixing with Chemical Reactions," AIAA Paper 77-142,
Los Angeles, Calif., Jan. 24-26, 1977.
1HGouldin, F. C., "Role of Turbulent Fluctuations in NO For-
mations," Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 9, 1974, pp. 17-
23.
112Lilley, D. G. and Habashi, W. G., "Prediction of Swirling
Flames with Complex Chemistry," Concordia Univ., Montreal,
Canada, 1977 (work in progress).
113Gibson, M. M. and Morgan, B. B., "Mathematical Model of
Combustion of Solid Particles in a Turbulent Stream with Recir-
culation," Journal of the Institute of Fuel, Vol. 43, 1970, pp. 517-523.
114Crowe, C. T., "Conservation Equations for Vapor-Droplet
Flows," Proceedings of the 25th Heat Transfer and Fluid Mechanics
Institute, edited by A. A. McKillop, J. W. Baughn, and H. A. Dwyer,
Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, Calif., 1976, pp. 214-228.
115Spalding, D. B., "The Calculation of Combustion Processes,"
Dept. 
of 
Mechanical 
Engineering, 
Imperial 
College, 
Rept.
HTS/71/41-48, London, 1971.
1I6Lilley, D. G. and Wendt, J. O. L., "Modeling Pollutant For-
mation in Coal Combustion," Proceedings of the 25th Heat Transfer
and Fluid Mechanics Institute, edited by A. A. McKillop, J. W.
Baughn, and H. A. Dwyer, Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, Calif.,
1976. pp. 196-213.
117Munz, N. and Eisenklam, P., "The Modeling of a High-
Intensity Spray Combustion Chamber," 16th Symposium (In-
ternational) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa.,
1977.
1I8Westbrook, C. K., "Three Dimensional Numerical Modeling of
Liquid Fuel Sprays," 16th Symposium (International) on Com-
bustion, The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
1I9Roache, P. J., Computational Fluid Dynamics, Heraiosa,
Albuquerque, N. Mex.s 1972.
120 Potter, D., Computational Physics, Wiley, London, 1973.
121 Bueters, K. A., Cogoli, J. G., and Habelt, W. E., "Performance
Prediction of Tangentially Fired Utility Furnances by Computer
Model," 15th Symposium (International) 
on Combustion, The
Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1975, pp. 1245-1260.
I22Spalding, D. B., "GENMIX: A General Computer Program for
Two-Dimensional Parabolic Phenomena," Dept. of Mechanical
Engineering, Imperial College, Rept. HTS/75/17, London, 1975.
123Lilley, D. G., "Prediction.of Inert Turbulent Swirl Flows,"
AIAA Journal, Vol. 11, July 1973, pp. 955-960.
124Koosinlin, M. L. and Lockwood, F. C., "The Prediction of
Axisymmetric Turbulent Swirling Boundary Layers," AIAA Journal,
Vol. 12, April 1974, pp. 547-554.
125Lilley, D. G., "Turbulent Swirling Flame Prediction," AIAA
Journal, Vol. 12, Feb. 1974, pp. 219-223.
126Gosman, A. D., Pun, W. M., Runchal, A. K., Spalding, D. B.,
and Wolfshtein, M. W., Heat and Mass Transfer in Recirculating
Flows, Academic Press, London, 1969.
127Gosman, A. D. and Pun, W. M., "Calculation of Recirculating
Flows," Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Imperial College, Rept.
HTS/74/2, London, 1974.
128Lilley, D. G., "Primitive Pressure-Velocity Code for the
Computation of Strongly Swirling Flows," AIAA Journal, Vol. 14,
June 1976, pp. 749-756.
129Kubo, I. and Gouldin, F. C., "Numerical Calculations of the
Turbulent Swirling Flow," Journal of Fluids Engineering, Sept. 1975,
pp.310-315.
130Sarnuelsen, G. S. and Starkman, E. S., "Analytical and Ex-
perimental Investigation of an Ammonia/Air Opposed Reacting Jet,"
Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 5, 1972, pp. 31-41.
131 Peck, R. E. and Samuelsen, G. S., "Analytical and Ex-
perimental Study of Turbulent Methane-Fired Backmixed Com-
bustion," AIAA Paper 75-1268, Anaheirn, Calif., Sept. 29-Oct. 1,
1975.
132Peck, R. E. and Samuelsen, G. S., "Eddy Viscosity Modeling in
the Prediction of Turbulent Backmixed Combustion Performance,"


--- Page 16 ---

1078
D. G. LILLEY
AIAA JOURNAL
16th Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Inst., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1977.
133 Kennedy, L. A. and Seaccia, C., "Modeling of Gas Turbine
Combustors," Proceedings of the International Conference on
Numerical Methods in Fluid Dynamics, edited by C. A. Brebbia and
J. J. Connor, Pentech Press, London, and Crane, Russak & Co., New
York, 1974, pp. 220-239.
134Kennedy, L. A., "Numerical Modeling of Continuous Flow
Combustors," AIAA Paper 77-139, Los Angeles, Calif., Jan. 24-26,
1977.
135Anasoulis, R. F., McDonald, H., and Buggeln, R. C.,
"Development of a Combustor Flow Analysis, Part 1: Theoretical
Studies," Air Force Aero Propulsion Lab., Air Force Systems
Command, AFAPL-TR-73-98, Pt. 1, Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base, Ohio, Jan. 1974 (see also Pts. 2 and 3).
136Schorr, C. J., Worner, G. A., and Schimke, J., "The Analytical
Modeling of a Spherical Combustor Including Recirculation," 14th
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst.,
Pittsburgh, Pa., 1973, pp. 567-574.
137Habashi, W. G. and Lilley, D. G., "A Finite Element Study of
Bluff-Body Flameholder Wakes," Ooncordia Univ., Montreal,
Canada, 1977 (work in progress).
138Patankar, S. V. and Spalding, D. B., "A Calculation Procedure
for Heat, Mass and Momentum Transfer in Three-Dimensional
Parabolic Flows," International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer,
Vol. 15, 1972, pp. 1787-1806.
139Patankar, S. V., "Numerical Prediction of Three-Dimensional
Flows," Studies in Convection, edited by B. E. Launder, Vol. 1,
Academic Press, London, 1975, pp. 1-78.
140Harlow, F. H. and Welch, J. E., "Numerical Calculation of
Time-Dependent Viscous Incompressible Flow of Fluid with Free
Surface (The MAC Method).- The Physics of Fluids, Vol. 8, 1965, pp.
2182-2189.
141Amsden, A. A. and Harlow, F. H., "The SMAC Method: A
Numerical Technique for Calculating Incompressible Fluid Flows,"
Los Alamos Scientific Lab., Rept. LA-4370, Los Alamos, N. Mex.,
1970.
142Hjertager, B. H. and Magnussen, B. F., "Numerical Prediction
of Three-Dimensional Turbulent Buoyant Flow in a Ventilated
Room," International Center for Heat and Mass Transfer, 7975
International Seminar on Turbulent Buoyant Convection, Dubrovnik,
Yugoslavia, Aug. 30-Sept. 4, 1976.
143Abou Ellail, M. M., Gosman, A. D., Lockwood, F. C., and
Megahed, I. E. A., "A Three Dimensional Procedure for Combustion
Chamber Flows," AIAA Paper 77-138, Los Angeles, Calif., Jan. 24-
26, 1977.
144Paynter, G. C., Birch, S. C., Spalding, D. B., and Tatchell, D.
G., "An Experimental and Numerical Study of the 3-D Mixing Flows
of a Turbofan Exhaust System," AIAA Paper 77-204, Los Angeles,
Calif., Jan. 24-26, 1977.
145Serag Eldin/M. A. and Spalding, D. B., "Prediction of the
Flow and Combustion Processes in a Three-Dimensional Combustion
Chamber," Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Imperial College, Rept.
HTS/76/3, London, 1976.
146Dussourd, J. L., Lohmann, R. P., and Uram, E. M. (eds.),
Fluid Mechanics of Combustion, Americal Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Book 100034, 1974.
147Fluid Mechanics of Combustion Processes Meeting, Com-
bustion Inst./Central States Sec., March 28-30, 1977.
148Pershing, D. W., private communication, 1976.
From the AIAA Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics Series...
EXPERIMENTAL DIAGNOSTICS IN GAS PHASE
COMBUSTION SYSTEMS—v. 53
Editor: Ben T. Zinn; Associate Editors: Craig T. Bowman,
Daniel L. Hartley, Edward \V. Price, and James F. Skifstad
Our scientific understanding of combustion systems has progressed in the past only as rapidly as penetrating experimental
techniques were discovered to clarify the details of the elemental processes of such systems. Prior to 1950, existing un-
derstanding about the nature of flame and combustion systems centered in the field of chemical kinetics and thermodynamics.
This situation is not surprising since the relatively advanced states of these areas could be directly related to earlier
developments by chemists in experimental chemical kinetics. However, modern problems in combustion are not simple ones,
and they involve much more than chemistry. The important problems of today often involve nonsteady phenomena, dif-
.fusional processes among initially unmixed reactants, and heterogeneous solid-liquid-gas reactions. To clarify the innermost
details of such complex systems required the development of new experimental tools. Advances in the development of novel
methods have been made steadily during the twenty-five years since 1950, based in large measure on fortuitous advances in the
physical sciences occurring at the same time. The diagnostic methods described in this volume—and the methods to be
presented in a second volume on combustion experimentation now in preparation—were largely undeveloped a decade ago.
These powerful methods make possible a far deeper understanding of the complex processes of combustion than we had
thought possible only a short time ago. This book has been planned as a means of disseminating to a wide audience of research
and development engineers the techniques that had heretofore been known mainly to specialists.
671 pp., 6x9, illus., $20.00 Member $3 7.00 List
TO ORDER WRITE: Publications Dept., AIAA, 1290 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10019
