
--- Page 1 ---

Daesik Kim
Jong Guen Lee1
Bryan D. Quay
Domenic A. Santavicca
Department of Mechanical and Nuclear
Engineering,
Penn State University,
University Park, PA 16802
Kwanwoo Kim
Shiva Srinivasan
GE Energy,
Greenville, SC 29615
Effect of Flame Structure on the
Flame Transfer Function in a
Premixed Gas Turbine Combustor
The ﬂame transfer function in a premixed gas turbine combustor is experimentally de-
termined. The fuel (natural gas) is premixed with air upstream of a choked inlet to the
combustor. Therefore, the input to the ﬂame transfer function is the imposed velocity
ﬂuctuations of the fuel/air mixture without equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations. The inlet-
velocity ﬂuctuations are achieved by a variable-speed siren over the forcing frequency of
75–280 Hz and measured using a hot-wire anemometer at the inlet to the combustor. The
output function (heat release) is determined using chemiluminescence measurement from
the whole ﬂame. Flame images are recorded to understand how the ﬂame structure plays
a role in the global heat release response of ﬂame to the inlet-velocity perturbation. The
results show that the gain and phase of the ﬂame transfer function depend on ﬂame
structure as well as the frequency and magnitude of inlet-velocity modulation and can be
generalized in terms of the relative length scale of ﬂame to convection length scale of
inlet-velocity perturbation, which is represented by a Strouhal number. Nonlinear ﬂame
response is characterized by a periodic vortex shedding from shear layer, and the non-
linearity occurs at lower magnitude of inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation as the modulation fre-
quency increases. However, for a given modulation frequency, the ﬂame structure does
not affect the magnitude of inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation at which the nonlinear ﬂame re-
sponse starts to appear. DOI: 10.1115/1.3124664
Keywords: combustion dynamics, gas turbine, combustion, ﬂame transfer function, ﬂame
structure
1
Introduction
Lean premixed gas turbine combustors were successful in meet-
ing current NOx emissions regulations. However, these have been
found to be susceptible to combustion instability, which is inti-
mately related to the feedback coupling between unsteady heat
release and acoustic pressure ﬁeld 1,2.
A quantiﬁcation of the heat release response of a ﬂame to the
unsteady inlet velocity and/or equivalence ratio, which are caused
by the pressure waves in a combustor, is critical information in the
theoretical description of combustion-induced oscillations. The
ﬂame transfer function describes its dynamic heat release response
to inlet ﬂow perturbations as a function of frequency f and with
the inlet velocity as the input function it can be deﬁned as
Tf = Qf/Qmean
Vf/Vmean
where Qmean is the temporal mean of heat release rate, Vmean is the
mean bulk velocity of the mixture entering the combustor, and Q
and V are their corresponding ﬂuctuating components.
Flame transfer function may be obtained from an analytical
description of ﬂame response 3,4, from a computational ﬂuid
dynamics CFD-based study 5,6, and from an experiment
7–10. However, both analytic and CFD-based approaches are
limited in capturing the highly complex interaction between ﬂow
ﬁeld and heat release precisely, and the experimental determina-
tion of the ﬂame transfer function is still preferred. The measured
ﬂame transfer function can be used directly in the thermoacoustic
network model where a gas turbine combustion system is modeled
as a network of its elements such as air supply, plenum, premix
duct, fuel injection, ﬂame, combustor, etc. 11,12. Both analytical
and experimental works show that the gain of transfer function
decreases as the perturbation frequency increases. And, for a
given perturbation frequency, it is constant up to a certain level of
perturbation but starts to decrease as the level increases further.
The former and the latter behavior of ﬂame response are often
referred to as linear and nonlinear responses, respectively, and are
known to be important to understand mechanism of combustion
instability 13,14 in that linear response determines the frequency
and the growth rate of combustion instability and the nonlinear
process controls the amplitude of instability.
Analytical predictions based on a kinematic analysis of the
ﬂame front evolution show that the ﬂame transfer function de-
pends on ﬂame angle 15 and ﬂame length 14 in addition to the
basic shape of undisturbed ﬂame i.e., conical, inverted wedge,
V-ﬂame, etc.. For example, the gain of transfer function is found
not to be sensitive to the ﬂame angle for a conical ﬂame but quite
sensitive for small ﬂame-angle V-ﬂame 15 i.e., the gain in-
creases as the ﬂame angle decreases. Similarly, the ratio of the
ﬂame length to the width is found to affect the magnitude of
velocity at which transfer function nonlinearities become signiﬁ-
cant 14. However, there are little data available on detailed mea-
surements of ﬂame transfer function in highly turbulent, practical
combustor. It will be interesting to see if the relatively simple
kinematic analysis of ﬂame dynamics can predict how ﬂame re-
sponds to inlet-velocity distribution under practical operating con-
ditions. Also, most ﬂame transfer function measurements were
made from the global heat release measurement where it is very
difﬁcult to understand why ﬂame behaves in a certain way for
given operating conditions.
The objective of this study is to experimentally determine the
transfer function of turbulent premixed ﬂames with main empha-
sis on the effect of ﬂame structure on how the ﬂames respond to
inlet-velocity perturbation. Also, the nonlinear response of ﬂame
will be characterized, and controlling parameters of the nonlinear-
ity will be identiﬁed.
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received April 1, 2008; ﬁnal manuscript received May 9, 2008; pub-
lished online October 16, 2009. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 021502-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

2
Experimental Approach
The experimental setup consists of an optically-accessible com-
bustor, a nozzle-assembly, and a device for modulating inlet ve-
locity, as shown in Fig. 1.
The combustor is made of an optically accessible fused-silica
combustor section 150 mm in diameter and 300 mm in length.
The combustor exit is fully open without any restriction. The
nozzle assembly consists of a center-bluff body D=40 mm
whose end face is recessed by 20 mm from the dump plane and an
annular mixing section where 45 deg swirl vanes are located.
Figure 2 shows the schematic drawing of combustor and nozzle-
assembly.
A siren type modulation device is used to impose the inlet-
velocity ﬂuctuation V. It consists of a variable-speed motor, a
rotating plate, a preplenum, and a stator, and its modulation fre-
quency range runs up to 400 Hz. The amount of inlet-velocity
ﬂuctuation V /Vmean can be varied by controlling the relative
amount of air ﬂow through the modulating device. Natural gas is
used as a fuel and is completely premixed with air at upstream of
a choked inlet in order to avoid the ﬂuctuation of equivalence
ratio.
The velocity ﬂuctuation in the annular mixing section is mea-
sured using a hot-wire anemometer HWA TSI model 1210,
which is located at 60 mm upstream of the dump plane. Chemi-
luminescence measurements are used to quantify the heat release
response
to
inlet-velocity
ﬂuctuation.
Photomultiplier
tubes
PMTs Hamamatsu model 928A are used to measure the global
CH and OH chemiluminescence intensities from the whole
ﬂame, which are collected using a narrow band-pass 5 nm
ﬁlter centered at 430 nm and 307 nm, respectively. The calculated
values of CH/CHmean or OH/OHmean through the fast
Fourier transform FFT are used as the estimates for the heat
release ﬂuctuations. The signals from HWA and PMTs are digi-
tized and recorded by a digital data acquisition system at a sam-
pling rate of 16,384 Hz. A total of 16,384 data points is taken
during each test.
Also, an intensifed charge coupled device ICCD camera
Princeton Instruments model 576 G equipped with a band-pass
ﬁlter =4305 nm is used to capture the CH chemilumines-
cence from the whole ﬂame. Both time-averaged images over one
period of inlet-velocity oscillation and phase-averaged images are
taken for each condition. For all cases, 40 individual images are
taken and averaged. For phase-averaged imaging, the camera is
synchronized with the HWA signal, and 12 averaged images over
one period of oscillation are taken with a phase interval of 30 deg.
A three-point Abel deconvolution scheme is used to reconstruct
the two-dimensional ﬂame structure 16.
The operating conditions are summarized in Table 1. The ex-
periments are conducted at room temperature and atmospheric-
pressure conditions. Figure 3 shows the maximum and the mini-
mum amplitude of inlet-velocity modulation that can be obtained
over a range of frequency: The highest magnitude is found at the
modulation frequency of 75 Hz and the lowest is found at around
230 Hz.
3
Results and Discussions
3.1
Global Characterization of Flame Response to Inlet-
Velocity Fluctuation. Figure 4 shows typical time traces and fre-
quency spectra of chemiluminescence intensity and inlet-velocity
ﬂuctuations measured for modulation frequency of 75 Hz, equiva-
lence ratio of 0.7, and V/Vmean of 0.07. Both CH- and
OH-chemiluminescence intensities lag the inlet-velocity ﬂuctua-
tion, and the frequency spectra show that both inlet-velocity and
chemiluminescence intensity ﬂuctuations occur mainly at the
Fig. 1
Schematic diagram of experimental setup
Fig. 2
Schematic drawing of the combustor and nozzle
assembly
Table 1
Operating conditions
Mean velocity in the nozzle Vmean,nozzle
30 m/s
Equivalence ratio 
0.65, 0.675, 0.7, 0.725, and 0.75
Inlet ﬂow temperature
20°C
Modulation frequency f
75, 100, 140, 200, 250, and 280 Hz
Modulation amplitude V/Vmean
up to 21%
Reynolds number
35,600
Fig. 3
Maximum and minimum amplitudes of velocity ﬂuctua-
tions at each modulation frequency „Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s…
021502-2 / Vol. 132, FEBRUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

modulation frequency with negligible amount of ﬂuctuations at
higher
harmonic
frequencies.
Since
the
CH-
and
OH-chemiluminescence intensity ﬂuctuations show similar be-
haviors both in amplitudes and in relative phases to the inlet-
velocity perturbation over operating conditions listed in Table 1,
only CH-chemiluminescence results will be discussed hereafter.
Figure 5 shows averaged chemiluminescence images over 1
cycle of ﬂow modulation at various modulation frequencies and
equivalence ratios for a given mean velocity Vmean=30 m/s.
The modulation amplitude V/Vmean was ﬁxed at 0.07. In each
image, only the upper-half of the ﬂame is shown because the
deconvoluted images are axisymmetric. As mentioned in Sec. 2,
the exposure time of the ICCD camera is set the same as the
period of modulation so that each image represents an average of
chemiluminescence images for one cycle of velocity ﬂuctuation.
These images show that the ﬂame structure is affected by the
modulation frequency as well as operating conditions i.e.,
equivalence ratio: As the modulation frequency increases for a
given equivalence ratio, the location for the maximum intensity
region gets closer to the combustor inlet and the ﬂame length
decreases.
For more quantitative analysis of the change in ﬂame structure,
the location of center of mass COM from the dump plane is
calculated for each image and plotted as a function of modulation
frequency for various equivalence ratios, as shown in Fig. 6. It is
evident that the distance of ﬂame’s COM from the dump plane
decreases with increasing modulation frequency at a given equiva-
lence ratio, and the trend is more obvious for the low equivalence
ratio cases say, =0.65 or 0.675 than the high equivalence ratio
cases say, =0.725 or 0.75. Since the location of COM can be
interpreted as an effective ﬂame location and/or the maximum
heat release location, the results shown in Fig. 6 suggest that the
actual convection time for the inlet-velocity perturbation to reach
ﬂame will change as the modulation frequency changes as well as
inlet ﬂow conditions. This will be further discussed in Secs. 3.2.
3.2
Transfer Function Measurement Results for a Fixed
Amount of Inlet-Velocity Fluctuation. Since the effect of the
magnitude of inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation on transfer function mea-
surement will be presented and discussed later, only cases for a
ﬁxed magnitude of input function V/Vmean=0.07 are presented
in this section. Figure 7 shows the amplitude of CH chemilumi-
nescence ﬂuctuation normalized by its mean value, which can be
interpreted as the gain of transfer function because the amplitude
of velocity ﬂuctuation is ﬁxed for different modulation frequen-
cies and equivalence ratios. The gain of transfer function changes
with respect to both inlet-velocity modulation frequency and inlet
equivalence ratio. For a ﬁxed equivalence ratio, the gain of trans-
fer function decreases as the modulation frequency increases.
Similar observations were made from analytical 14,15 and ex-
perimental works 7, where the global ﬂame is found to behave
as low-pass ﬁlter. Also, for a ﬁxed modulation frequency, the gain
increases as the equivalence ratio increases, indicating that the
ﬂame dynamics, which determines how ﬂame responds to inlet-
velocity ﬂuctuation, depends on ﬂame structure as well as on
modulation frequency. As mentioned previously, analytical predic-
tions have shown that the ﬂame transfer function depends on
ﬂame angle 15 and ﬂame length 14 for a given ﬂame shape. In
the present study, the ﬂame structures such as ﬂame length and the
Fig. 4
„a… Time traces and „b… frequency spectra of CH and
OH and inlet-velocity ﬂuctuations „Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s, =0.7,
f=75 Hz, and V/Vmean=0.07…
Fig. 5
Effects of modulation frequency and equivalence ratio
on the ﬂame structure „Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s and V/Vmean=0.07…
Fig. 6
Flame’s COM location as a function of modulation fre-
quency
and
equivalence
ratio
„Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s
and
V/Vmean=0.07…
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 021502-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

existence of bright corner recirculation zone are changed with
respect to the equivalence ratio, suggesting that the ﬂame response
to the same inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation will change accordingly.
Figure 8 shows the phase-averaged CH images taken for one
cycle of inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation for the equivalence ratio of 0.65
and modulation frequencies at 75 Hz and 280 Hz. The phase-
averaging is synchronized with and referenced to the output signal
from HWA. Low-frequency modulation f =75 Hz causes rela-
tively larger amount of ﬂame length change as indicated by the
variation in COM distance as well as global chemiluminescence
intensity and hence heat release than high-frequency modulation
f =280 Hz does. For the 75 Hz case, the change in global heat
release appears to be associated with the change in ﬂame length
even though they are not perfectly in phase, and the local heat
release change occurs in the center part of the ﬂame. However, for
the 280 Hz case, the change in heat release in the center portion of
the ﬂame is minimal, and the ﬂame front is more wrinkled, sug-
gesting that the local ﬂame stretch effect does not cause large
variation in global heat release. For higher equivalence ratio case
=0.75 shown in Fig. 9, where the same amount of inlet-
velocity modulation results in greater amount of ﬂuctuations in
heat release than =0.75 case, the heat release ﬂuctuation seems
to be associated with the change in ﬂame length for both low- and
high-frequency modulation cases. Also, the high-frequency modu-
lation case f =280 Hz exhibits a periodic vortex-shedding pro-
cess, which suggests that the ﬂame response to inlet-velocity ﬂuc-
tuation may not be linear anymore at this condition, as suggested
by Balachandran et al. 7.
Figure 10a shows the phase of transfer function between
CH-chemiluminescence intensity ﬂuctuation, CH, and V.
The absolute magnitude of the phase increases almost linearly as
the modulation frequency increases for a given  and decreases as
 increases for a ﬁxed modulation frequency. Shown in Fig. 10b
is the convection time delay conv calculated from the phase. It
shows that for a given , the higher the modulation frequency the
shorter the delay between the heat release and inlet-velocity ﬂuc-
tuation, and for a given modulation frequency, the higher the
equivalence ratio the shorter the delay. This is consistent with the
effect of frequency and equivalence ratio on the ﬂame’s COM
location shown in Fig. 6. This is because the closer the ﬂame’s
COM location to the inlet of the combustor of the ﬂame the
shorter the delay.
From the data presented in Figs. 6 and 10, the effective convec-
tion velocity Veff=LCOM/conv at which the inlet-velocity pertur-
bation is convected in the combustor can be calculated. The re-
sults are shown in Fig. 11. The effective convection velocity is
less than the mean inlet velocity to the combustor by a factor of
1.4–4 over the operating conditions and varies with respect to the
modulation frequency as well as the equivalence ratio. For a given
equivalence ratio, the effective convection velocity increases as
the modulation frequency increases, seemingly suggesting that the
effective convection velocity will increase as the ﬂame becomes
shorter. However, for a given modulation frequency, the effective
convection velocity decreases as the equivalence ratio increases
as the ﬂame length becomes shorter, suggesting that the effec-
tive convection velocity cannot be simply scaled with ﬂame
length but determined by the interaction of disturbance ﬁeld with
ﬂame. One possible explanation for the reason why the effective
convection velocity is not simply related to the ﬂame length may
have something to do with ﬂame structures. Undisturbed ﬂame
Fig. 7
Normalized CH intensity ﬂuctuation as a function of
modulation
frequency
and
equivalence
ratio
„Vmean,nozzle
=30 m/s and V/Vmean=0.07…
Fig. 8
Effects of modulation frequency on ﬂame structure for one period of modulation „Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s, =0.65, and
V/Vmean=0.07…
021502-4 / Vol. 132, FEBRUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

image shows that for 0.65 cases, a bright heat release zone
develops in the corner recirculation region, and this may cause the
residence time of combustible mixture relatively longer for a
given ﬂame length than for =0.65 case.
Analytical studies 9,14,15 show that the dynamics of pre-
mixed ﬂames submitted to harmonic ﬂow perturbation with modu-
lation frequency f can be characterized by the Strouhal number
determined by
St = Lflame
Lconv
= Lflame
Veff/f
which represents the ratio of ﬂame length scale to the convective
wavelength. Using the distance from the dump plane to the COM
location shown in Fig. 6 as the ﬂame length Lflame and the ef-
fective convection velocity shown in Fig. 11, the gain and phase
of transfer function are plotted, as shown in Fig. 12. It shows that
the ﬂame length scale is always greater than the convection length
scale in other words St1 for the present operating conditions.
Also, these results show that the gain and phase of transfer func-
tion for different equivalence ratios and frequencies are well rep-
resented by the Strouhal number, strongly suggesting that the
ﬂame dynamics over different equivalence ratios and modulation
frequencies could be generalized in terms of the relative length
scale of the ﬂame to the convection length scale.
Fig. 9
Effects of modulation frequency on ﬂame structure for one period of modulation „Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s, =0.75, and
V/Vmean=0.07…
Fig. 10
„a… Phase of transfer function and „b… convection time
delay as a function of modulation frequency and equivalence
ratio „Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s and V/Vmean=0.07…
Fig. 11
Effective convection velocity as a function of modula-
tion frequency and equivalence ratio „Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s and
V/Vmean=0.07…
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 021502-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

3.3
Effect of the Magnitude of Inlet-Velocity Fluctuation
on the Flame Transfer Function: Nonlinear Flame Response.
Nonlinear response of ﬂame to inlet-velocity perturbation is an-
other
important
subject
to
understand
the
mechanism
of
combustion-driven oscillation. Figure 13a shows the depen-
dence of transfer function on the inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation ampli-
tude at two different modulation frequencies f =75 Hz and 280
Hz. Normalized CH-chemiluminescence intensity increases and
then start to saturate with increasing amplitude of inlet-velocity
perturbation V/Vmean. The amplitude of inlet-velocity ﬂuctua-
tion at which the ﬂame response becomes nonlinear for the 280
Hz modulation case is lower than that of the 75 Hz modulation
case: For the latter the gain is almost constant up to V/Vmean
17%, beyond which it slightly decreases but for the former, the
gain starts to decrease when V/Vmean becomes over 7%. Previous
analytical work 15 predicts that nonlinearity is enhanced with
increasing Strouhal number. Similar observations are reported by
some experimental works 7,8 where the inception of nonlinear
ﬂame response is often manifested by the occurrence of the rollup
of the shear layer into vortices or ﬂame liftoff, which reduces the
ﬂame area. In the present study, the nonlinear response of the
ﬂame is related to the vortex shedding from the shear layer, as
shown in Fig. 9. Even though the gain decreases as V/Vmean
increases, the phase is almost constant over the entire range of
inlet-velocity
ﬂuctuation.
Figure
13b
shows
a
plot
of
V/Vmeantransition the magnitude of V/Vmean at which the ﬂame
response changes from linear to nonlinear as a function of modu-
lation frequency. As the modulation frequency increases, the non-
linearity occurs at lower V/Vmean. However, for a given modula-
tion frequency, V/Vmeantransition does not appear to be affected
much by ﬂame structure.
4
Conclusions
The transfer function of premixed ﬂames submitted to inlet-
velocity perturbation is measured experimentally for turbulent
ﬂames running in practical gas turbine combustor. Flame structure
is characterized under inlet-velocity perturbation, and its effect on
transfer function is investigated.
Flame images show that the effective ﬂame location gets closer
to the combustor inlet with increasing modulation frequency at a
given equivalence ratio. For a ﬁxed equivalence ratio, the gain of
the transfer function decreases and the absolute magnitude of the
phase increases as the modulation frequency increases. And, their
detailed relationships are affected by ﬂame structure: For a ﬁxed
modulation frequency, the gain increases and the absolute magni-
tude of the phase decreases as the equivalence ratio increases. The
gain and phase of the transfer function are well represented by the
Strouhal number, strongly suggesting that the ﬂame dynamics for
different operating conditions and modulation frequencies could
be generalized in terms of the relative length scale of the ﬂame to
the convection length scale of the inlet-velocity perturbation.
As the magnitude of inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation increases, the
gain starts to decrease but the phase is almost constant over the
entire range of inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation. This nonlinear ﬂame re-
sponse is characterized by a periodic vortex shedding from the
shear layer. As the modulation frequency increases, the nonlinear-
ity occurs at lower magnitude of inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation. How-
Fig. 12
„a… Gain and „b… phase of the transfer function versus
Strouhal number „Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s and V/Vmean=0.07…
Fig. 13
„a… Normalized amplitude of CH ﬂuctuation, gain, and
phase of the transfer function as a function of modulation am-
plitude for Vmean,nozzle=30 m/s and =0.75 and „b… magnitude
of V/Vmean at which the ﬂame response changes from linear to
nonlinear as a function of modulation frequency
021502-6 / Vol. 132, FEBRUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

ever, for a given modulation frequency, the ﬂame structure does
not affect the magnitude of inlet-velocity ﬂuctuation at which the
nonlinearity starts.
References
1 Candel, S. M., 1992, “Combustion Instabilities Coupled by Pressure Waves
and Their Active Control,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 24, pp. 1277–1296.
2 Keller, J. J., 1995, “Thermoacoustic Oscillations in Combustion Chambers of
Gas Turbines,” AIAA J., 3312, pp. 2280–2287.
3 Dowling, A. P., 1999, “A Kinematic Model of a Ducted Flame,” J. Fluid
Mech., 394, pp. 51–72.
4 Lieuwen, T., 2003, “Modeling Premixed Combustion-Acoustic Wave Interac-
tions: A Review,” J. Propul. Power, 195, pp. 765–781.
5 Armitage, C. A., Balachandran, R., Mastorakos, E., and Cant, R. S., 2006,
“Investigation of the Nonlinear Response of Turbulent Premixed Flames to
Imposed Inlet Velocity Oscillations,” Combust. Flame, 156, pp. 419–436.
6 Sengissen, A. X., Van Kampen, J. F., Huls, R. A., Stoffels, G. G. M., Kok, J.
B. W., and Poinsot, T. J., 2007, “LES and Experimental Studies of Cold and
Reacting Flow in a Swirled Partially Premixed Burner With and Without Fuel
Modulation,” Combust. Flame, 150, pp. 40–53.
7 Balachandran, R., Ayoola, B. O., Kaminski, C. F., Dowling, A. P., and Mas-
torakos, E., 2005, “Experimental Investigation of the Nonlinear Response of
Turbulent Premixed Flames to Imposed Inlet Velocity Oscillations,” Combust.
Flame, 143, pp. 37–55.
8 Bellows, B. D., Bobba, M. K., Seitzman, J. M., and Lieuwen, T., 2007, “Non-
linear Flame Transfer Function Characteristics in a Swirl-Stabilized Combus-
tor,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 1294, pp. 954–961.
9 Birbaud, A. L., Durox, D., Ducruix, S., and Candel, S., 2007, “Dynamics of
Conﬁned Premixed Flames Submitted to Upstream Acoustic Modulations,”
Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 1257–1265.
10 Külsheimer, C., and Büchner, H., 2002, “Combustion Dynamics of Turbulent,
Swirling Flows,” Combust. Flame, 131, pp. 70–84.
11 Trufﬁn, K., and Poinsot, T., 2005, “Comparison and Extension of Methods for
Acoustic Identiﬁcation of Burners,” Combust. Flame, 142, pp. 388–400.
12 Bellucci, V., Schuermans, B., Nowak, D., Flohr, P., and Paschereit, C. O.,
2005, “Thermoacoustic Modeling of a Gas Turbine Combustor Equipped With
Acoustic Dampers,” ASME J. Turbomach., 127, pp. 372–379.
13 Dowling, A. P., 1997, “Nonlinear Self-Excited Oscillations of a Ducted
Flame,” J. Fluid Mech., 346, pp. 271–290.
14 Lieuwen, T., 2005, “Nonlinear Kinematic Response of Premixed Flames to
Harmonic Velocity Disturbances,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 30, pp. 1725–1732.
15 Schuller, T., Durox, D., and Candel, S., 2003, “A Uniﬁed Model for the Pre-
diction of Laminar Flame Transfer Functions: Comparisons Between Conical
and V-Flame Dynamics,” Combust. Flame, 134, pp. 21–34.
16 Dasch, C. J., 1992, “One-Dimensional Tomography: A Comparison of Abel,
Onion-Peeling, and Filtered Backprojection Methods,” Appl. Opt., 318, pp.
1146–1152.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 021502-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
