
--- Page 1 ---

1 Certain commercial equipment, materials, or software are identi"ed
in this publication to specify adequately the experimental procedure.
Such identi"cation does not imply recommendation or endorsement by
the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply
that the materials or equipment are necessarily the best available for
this purpose.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: 1-301-975-2488; fax: 1-301-869-5924.
E-mail address: john.widmann@nist.gov (J.F. Widmann).
Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320
Aerodynamic study of a vane-cascade swirl generator
John F. Widmann*, S. Rao Charagundla, Cary Presser
Chemical Science and Technology Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Drive, Stop 8360, Gaithersburg,
MD 20899-8360, USA
Received 3 August 1999; accepted 20 March 2000
Abstract
The air #ow through a vane-cascade swirl generator is examined both experimentally and numerically to characterize the inlet
combustion air #ow entering a reference spray combustion facility at NIST. A three-dimensional model is used to simulate the
aerodynamics in the 12-vane-cascade swirl generator that imparts the desired degree of angular momentum to the air in the annulus
leading into the reactor. A numerical simulation using the renormalization group method (RNG) k}e turbulence model results in
a velocity pro"le consistent with experimental measurements, and correctly predicts a recirculation zone that is experimentally
observed at the exit of the annular passage. The standard k}e turbulence model does not compare as well with the experimental data
and fails to predict the recirculation zone at the exit. This work is part of a larger project at NIST in which benchmark data are
collected for input and validation of multiphase combustion models, and the results presented provide a well-characterized inlet
condition for the spray combustion reactor. The good agreement between the experimental data and the simulation with the RNG k}e
turbulence model provides further validation for this model in con"ned, annular #ows. ( 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights
reserved.
Keywords: Swirl; Turbulence; Fluid mechanics; Numerical analysis; Simulation; CFD; Pitot probe; Spray combustion
1. Introduction
The design and optimization of multiphase thermal
oxidation systems in the power generation, waste inciner-
ation, and chemical process industries are relying
increasingly on computational models and simulations
to provide relevant process information in a cost-e!ective
manner. System performance is dependent on the liquid
atomization, chemistry, aerodynamic design, and the de-
gree of liquid/air mixing within the reactor. In general,
there is a need for experimental data detailing the charac-
teristics of the droplet "eld and #ame structure, and an
understanding of their interrelationship with the system
operating conditions, for the development and validation
of advanced computational models. This paper is part of
a larger e!ort at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) to provide benchmark data that can
be used for input and validation of multiphase combus-
tion models and submodels.
The experimental facility consists of an enclosed spray
combustion reactor and is shown schematically in Fig. 1.
The combustion air passes through a 12-vane swirl cas-
cade, shown in Fig. 1A, that imparts the angular mo-
mentum necessary to stabilize the #ame, and #ows
around the nozzle before entering the reactor. The vane
angle and air #ow rate are 503 and 0.0158 m3 s~1, respec-
tively, and correspond to the baseline case of the NIST
database (Widmann, Charagundla, Presser & Heckert,
1999). For the reported air #ow rate, the Reynolds num-
ber, Re"(D0!Di)u6 z/l, in the annular region of the
swirl generator is equal to 1.0]104. Note that the radial
locations of the inner and outer walls of the annular
passage downstream of the swirl vanes are shown in the
"gure (Ri"0.0175 m and R0"0.0508 m, respectively).
In this paper, the air#ow through the vane-cascade
swirl generator shown in Fig. 1A was simulated using
FLUENT1
computational
#uid
dynamics
software
0009-2509/00/$- see front matter ( 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 0 0 9 - 2 5 0 9 ( 0 0 ) 0 0 1 4 5 - 7


--- Page 2 ---

Fig. 1. Schematic of (A) the 12-vane-cascade swirl generator and (B) the spray combustion reactor. Dimensions are given in millimeters.
(FLUENT Inc., 1998), and results obtained using two
turbulence models are presented and compared to ex-
perimental data. The two turbulence models, the stan-
dard k}e model (Launder & Spalding, 1972) and the
renormalized group theory (RNG) k}e model (Yakhot
& Orszag, 1986), are two equation models in which the
transport equations for two scalar quantities (the turbu-
lent kinetic energy, k, and its dissipation rate, e) are used
to describe the production, di!usion, and dissipation of
turbulence.
The standard k}e model is a semi-empirical turbulence
model based upon an isotropic eddy-viscosity hypothe-
sis. It is widely used in industrial #ow and heat transfer
simulations due to its robustness, economy, and reason-
able accuracy (Shyy, Thakur, Ouyang, Liu & Blosch,
1997). The RNG k}e model also belongs to the k}e family
of turbulence models; however, unlike the standard k}e
model, the RNG k}e model was derived using a statistical
technique called renormalization group methods. The
model equations are similar to the standard k}e model,
but the statistical derivation results in di!erent values for
the various constants in the equations.
Smith and Reynolds (1992), however, reported prob-
lems with the speci"c values of the constants in the RNG
k}e model. In response, Yakhot and coworkers refor-
mulated the earlier derivation of the di!erential equation
describing the transport of e (Yakhot, Orszag, Thangam,
Gatski, & Speziale, 1992; Yakhot & Smith, 1992). With
this change, the RNG k}e turbulence model has shown
improvement over the standard k}e model when applied
to many industrial #ows (e.g., Papageorgakis & Assanis,
1999; Yin, Shi & Xu, 1996; Lien & Leschziner, 1994;
Yakhot et al., 1992). Particularly noteworthy is the rate-
of-strain term in the transport equation for e that has
been reported to result in improved predictions of #ow
"elds with high strain rates. In particular, #ows in curved
geometries, stagnation #ows, separated #ows, and swirl-
ing #ows are situations in which the RNG k}e model has
been reported to be more accurate than the standard k}e
turbulence model. Benim (1990) compared the perfor-
mance of these two turbulence models in a swirling
combustor and found that the RNG k}e model resulted
in predictions consistent with experiment, while the stan-
dard k}e model compared poorly with the experimental
data. In this study, we apply both of these models to
simulations of #ow through a vane-cascade swirl gener-
ator, including the swirling #ow through the annulus
following the vanes. Jaw and Chen (1998) recently re-
viewed second-order closure turbulence models, and the
reader is referred there for a more detailed discussion of
these and other turbulence models.
2. Numerical methodology
The numerical formulation is for isothermal, turbulent
air#ow through the 12-vane-cascade swirl generator
shown in Fig. 1A. The relevant conservation equations
include continuity, the Reynold's averaged Navier}
Stokes equations, and an appropriate turbulence model.
The Reynolds averaged Navier}Stokes equations are
generated from the instantaneous Navier}Stokes equa-
tions using the following transformations (Bird, Stewart
& Lightfoot, 1960):
ui"u6 i#u@i,
o"o6 #o@
and
p"p6 #p@.
(1)
Here, the overbar and prime indicate a time-averaged
quantity and an instantaneous #uctuation, respectively.
Dropping the overbar for convenience, the resulting ex-
pression for the momentum equation in cartesian coordi-
nates is
L
Lt(oui)# L
Lxj
(ouiuj)
"! Lp
Lxi
# L
LxjCkA
Lui
Lxj
#Luj
LxiB!2
3k Luk
Lxk
dijD
#Fi# L
Lxj
(!ou@iu@j).
(2)
5312
J.F. Widmann et al. / Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320


--- Page 3 ---

Fig. 2. Schematic of (A) the surface mesh used to generate the unstruc-
tured grid for the numerical simulation, and (B) a top view of the
12-vane cascade and the modeled 303 section. Note that the periodic
boundaries in (A) have been omitted for clarity.
The last term in Eq. (2) is the derivative of the Reynolds
stresses, !ou@iu@j, and represents the e!ect of turbulence
on the momentum balance. The Reynolds stresses repres-
ent additional unknowns, and a set of constitutive equa-
tions is required to close these equations. The turbulence
models provide the additional equations necessary to
close the transport equations.
The Reynolds stresses in Eq. (2) are computed using
the Boussinesq hypothesis (Hinze, 1975)
!ouiuj"ktA
Lui
Lxj
#Luj
LxiB!2
3Aok#kt
Lui
LxiBdij,
(3)
where kt is the eddy or turbulent viscosity computed from
kt"oCk
k2
e .
(4)
For the standard k}e turbulence model, the scalar quant-
ities k and e are computed from the following transport
equations:
L
Lt (ok)# L
Lxi
(ouik)" L
LxiCAk#kt
pkB
Lk
LxiD#Gk!oe
(5)
and
L
Lt(oe)# L
Lxi
(ouie)" L
LxiCAk#kt
pkB
Le
LxiD
#C1e
e
kGk#C2eo e2
k .
(6)
The generation of k due to turbulent stresses, Gk, are
given by
Gk"!ouiuj
Luj
Lxi
.
(7)
The values of the constants in Eqs. (4)}(6) have been
determined experimentally to be C1e"1.44, C2e"1.92,
Ck"0.09, pk"1.0, pe"1.3, and Prt"0.85 (Launder
& Spalding, 1972).
The numerical simulations were generated using a seg-
regated, implicit solver. Integrating the transient problem
to steady state was found to be computationally less
expensive than solving the time-independent transport
equations, and this method was used for the results
presented here. The coupled equations were solved with
"rst-order accuracy in time and second-order accuracy in
space. The pressure and velocity were coupled using the
PISO algorithm (Issa, 1986) with neighbor and skewness
correction,
and
standard
wall
functions
(Launder
& Spalding, 1974) were used for the near-wall treatment.
When the RNG k}e turbulence model was implemented,
the swirl-dominated yow option was used. This option sets
the swirl constant, as, to 0.07 (FLUENT Inc., 1998). This
value was used for all simulations with the RNG k}e
turbulence model, and the e!ect of the value of as was not
investigated.
A uniform velocity pro"le with a magnitude of
2.2 m s~1 was used for the inlet condition, and an inlet
turbulence intensity of 10% was assumed with a charac-
teristic length of R0!Ri"0.0333 m. The turbulence
intensity is de"ned as the ratio of the root-mean square of
the velocity #uctuations, u@, and the mean velocity, u. The
predictions at the outlet of the domain were not found to
be sensitive to the inlet turbulence intensity. For the
conditions considered, the Reynolds number based upon
the mean axial velocity is 1.0]104 in the annular regions
of the domain. Sheen, Chen and Wu (1997) reported the
transition from laminar to turbulent #ow to occur at
Re"1600; therefore, we expect fully developed turbulent
#ow here. At the outlet, the radial velocity was assumed
to be negligible and the radial equilibrium pressure distri-
bution was calculated by
Lp
Lr"ou2h
r .
(8)
Also at the outlet, the turbulence intensity and character-
istic length used for the inlet condition were assumed in
the event of back#ow into the domain, such as in a recir-
culation zone.
The air#ow through the 12-vane-cascade swirl gener-
ator was simulated using FLUENT computational #uid
dynamics software (FLUENT Inc., 1998). A three-dimen-
sional model is required for this geometry; however, due
to symmetry it is only necessary to simulate a 303 portion
of the vane cascade. An unstructured grid was used for
the simulations, and the surface mesh is shown in Fig. 2A.
Note that the rotationally periodic symmetry planes at
h"0 and h"303 are not shown in the "gure. The mesh
was constructed so that the grid resolution gradually
increased from the inlet to the vanes, and then remained
high throughout the remainder of the domain. The number
J.F. Widmann et al. / Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320
5313


--- Page 4 ---

Fig. 3. Pitot probe calibration at four di!erent probe angles.
of cells in the mesh was systematically increased until the
solution was determined to be grid-independent, and this
strategy of gradually increasing the resolution from the
inlet plane to the vanes was used for all of the grids. The
predictions presented here correspond to results ob-
tained from a grid with approximately 277,000 cells.
A top view of the vanes is shown in Fig. 2B, and the 303
section that was modeled is depicted. Note that the vane
angle, a, is 503 and shown in the "gure.
3. Experimental
The experimental facility consists of the enclosed spray
combustion reactor shown in Fig. 1. In this facility, the
combustion air passes through a 12-vane swirl cascade,
shown in Fig. 1A, that imparts the angular momentum
necessary to stabilize the #ame, and #ows around the
nozzle before entering the reactor. The reactor consists of
a stainless-steel enclosure approximately 1.2 m in height
and 0.8 m in diameter, and is shown in Fig. 1B. The vane
angle and air #ow rate are 503 and 0.0158 m3 s~1, respec-
tively, and correspond to the baseline case of the NIST
database (Widmann et al., 1999). For these experiments,
the combined standard uncertainties in these measure-
ments are $13 and $0.0005 m3 s~1 for the vane angle
and air #ow rate, respectively. The air enters the reactor
at ambient temperature and pressure. Additional details
of the facility and the benchmark database program at
NIST are available elsewhere (Widmann et al., 1999).
The magnitude of the air velocity was measured at the
outlet of the annulus downstream of the vanes as a func-
tion of radial position to validate the simulations. A "ve-
hole pitot probe with a hemispherical head was used for
the velocity measurements. The probe has a cylindrical
tip with a length of 26 mm and a diameter of 1.7 mm.
Following the 26 mm tip, the diameter of the probe
increases smoothly from 1.7 to 3.2 mm, which is the
diameter of the main body of the probe. The probe has
one hole on the head of the probe tip for total pressure
measurements, and four holes located 13 mm from the
head and 903 apart on the side of the probe for static
pressure measurements. The four velocity measurements
corresponding to the four di!erent static pressure holes
were used to align the probe in the direction of the #ow,
and the average of the four measurements was reported
as the mean velocity. The di!erential pressures were
measured using Autotran pressure transducers (Model
750D-031) with measurement ranges of 0}24.9 and
$12.5 Pa.
To calibrate the pitot probe, velocity measurements
were obtained in a low-velocity wind tunnel at NIST.
Data are presented in Fig. 3 for four values of the probe
angle, de"ned as the angle between the direction of the
mean velocity vector and the probe, and the error bars
correspond to the standard deviation of the four velocity
measurements. A probe angle of 03 indicates that the
probe was aligned with the #ow. The ordinate corres-
ponds to the
velocity magnitude calculated using
Bernoulli's equation (Bird et al., 1960),
un"S
2
o[p0!pn],
(9)
where p0 is the measured total pressure and pn is the
measured static pressure at the nth hole. The measure-
ments obtained using Eq. (9) are in very good agreement
with the known velocity in the wind tunnel for probe
angles less than 103, and are in fair agreement for larger
probe angles. The velocity measurements reported in this
paper were not computed using Eq. (9), but were deter-
mined from the calibration in Fig. 3.
To obtain accurate results, the pitot probe must be
reasonably aligned with the mean direction of the #ow.
However, Fig. 3 reveals that some deviation in the align-
ment is acceptable and will not impact the measure-
ments. For example, probe angles of 0 and 83 result in
velocity
measurements
that
agree
within
2%
for
u'3 m s~1 in the calibration data. To facilitate aligning
the pitot probe in the #ow and quantifying the uncertain-
ties in the measurements, a non-dimensional alignment
parameter, W, was used where W is de"ned as
W"1
uN S
1
2[(u1!u3)2#(u2!u4)2].
(10)
Here, u6 is the average of the four velocity measure-
ments. The di!erences (u1}u3) and (u2}u4) in Eq. (10)
correspond to the velocities computed from the static
pressure holes that are 1803 apart on the side of the pitot
probe. The alignment parameter facilitates aligning the
probe in the #ow by utilizing the symmetry of the probe,
and should not be confused with a `fractional errora.
However, W was used to estimate the uncertainties in the
5314
J.F. Widmann et al. / Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320


--- Page 5 ---

Fig. 4. Alignment parameter, W, calculated from the pitot probe calib-
ration in Fig. 3.
measurements by comparing data obtained in the NIST
wind tunnel with data obtained in the swirling #ow. Fig.
4 presents the calculated alignment parameter from the
calibration data. Note that although W increases with
increasing probe angle as anticipated, it is below 0.07 for
probe angles as large as 153. For probe angles of 03 and
83, W is below 0.015 for u'1.5 m s~1.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. RNG k}e vs. standard k}e turbulence model
The combustion air enters at the bottom of the swirl
generator with a uniform velocity pro"le and #ows
through an annular section approximately 0.178 m long
with the same radial dimensions as the exit annulus
(Ri"0.0175 m and R0"0.0508 m). The #ow is then
directed radially outward as shown in Fig. 1B. The #ow
bends upward and then returns toward the center of the
swirl generator as it passes through the vanes. The swirl-
ing #ow is directed upward, passes through an exit
annulus approximately 0.165 m long and enters the reac-
tor. The fuel nozzle is introduced into the reactor
through the inner pipe of the annulus; therefore, the
swirling combustion air #ows around the nozzle as it
enters the reactor.
The predictions of the magnitude of the air velocity
through the vane-cascade swirl generator using the stan-
dard k}e and the RNG k}e turbulence models are
presented in Fig. 5. The standard k}e model predicts
a maximum velocity in the annulus of +4.8 m s~1, while
the RNG k}e model predicts a maximum velocity of
+5.2 m s~1. Both models predict that the air rapidly
accelerates as it enters the annulus following the swirl
vanes; however, the RNG k}e model results in larger
velocity gradients, with the high-velocity regions of the
#ow being more localized. This behavior is also evident
in the lower portion of the domain beneath the swirl
vanes. The stagnation zone in the corner corresponding
to the "rst bend as the #ow leaves the lower annulus is
larger for the RNG k}e model, and all of the recirculation
zones in the domain have higher total velocities. In com-
parison, the standard k}e model results in #ow "eld
predictions in which the velocity "eld is smoother, result-
ing in lower peak velocities and lower-velocity gradients.
The relatively smoother velocity "eld predicted by the
standard k}e model results from the higher predicted
values of the turbulent viscosity. The standard k}e model
results in peak values of the turbulent viscosity approx-
imately three times greater than those predicted by the
RNG k}e model.
Contour plots showing the predicted turbulence inten-
sity in the annulus following the swirl vanes for both
models are shown in Fig. 6. Note that the two plots have
di!erent scales, with turbulence intensities in the range
0.2}0.8 and 0}0.6 for the standard k}e model and the
RNG k}e model, respectively. The two turbulence
models result in signi"cantly di!erent predictions for the
turbulence intensity in this swirling #ow "eld. Both mod-
els predict the generation of turbulence at the corner
where the annulus intersects with the horizontal section
of the swirl generator (lower right corner of the contour
plots in Fig. 6). However, vortex shedding is noticeable in
the prediction of the RNG k}e model, while the standard
k}e model results in signi"cantly more dispersion of
turbulence. The standard k}e model predicts a central
core of turbulence in the annulus that decays with axial
position. In contrast, the RNG k}e model predicts signi"-
cantly less turbulence in the central region of the annulus,
with regions of high turbulence being primarily in the
near-wall region of the inner wall and the vortex shed-
ding near the corner of the outer wall. Further down-
stream within the annular passage, the #ow separates
from the inner wall due to the adverse pressure gradient
that results from the swirling #ow, and which in turn
produces increased turbulence.
4.2. Comparison of predictions and experiment
Fig. 7 presents values of the alignment parameter com-
puted from experimental data obtained at the outlet of
the annular region following the swirl vanes. The data
correspond to various values of the probe angle ranging
from 45 to 603 measured from vertical; however, the
values of W at a particular radial coordinate are fairly
consistent. Near the inner wall, the alignment parameter
becomes very large. It was not possible to align the probe
in the direction of the #ow in this region due to the
presence of a recirculation zone; therefore, velocity
measurements were not made in this region. The com-
bustion air #ows mainly near the outer wall, however,
J.F. Widmann et al. / Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320
5315


--- Page 6 ---

Fig. 5. Contour plots of the predicted magnitude of the velocity vector
for the standard k}e and RNG k}e turbulence models. The contour
plots correspond to the periodic boundaries at h "03 and 303, and the
scale ranges from 0 to 5.2 m s~1 for both plots.
Fig. 6. Contour plots of the predicted turbulence intensity in the
annular passage following the swirl vanes for both turbulence models.
The contour plots correspond to the periodic boundaries at h"03 and
303, and the scale ranges from 0.2 to 0.8 for the standard k}e model and
from 0 to 0.6 for the RNG k}e model.
Fig. 7. Variation of the alignment parameter, W, with radial position
computed from the experimental data collected at the outlet of the
annulus.
Fig. 8. A comparison of the total velocity pro"le at the annulus outlet
predicted from the numerical simulation using the standard and RNG
k}e turbulence models and the experimental data.
and the inability to measure the velocity in the recircula-
tion zone is not considered signi"cant.
The predicted radial pro"les of the velocity magnitude
at the outlet of the annulus are presented in Fig. 8. Note
that the location of the inner and outer walls are
r"0.0175 and 0.0508 m, respectively. Experimental data
obtained with the pitot probe are also shown for com-
parison. The RNG k}e model compares well with the
data, while the standard k}e model fails to predict
the recirculation zone observed near the inner wall of the
annulus. The recirculation zone is more apparent in Fig.
9 where the axial and tangential components of velocity
computed with the RNG k}e turbulence model are pre-
sented. The radial velocity is negligible and is not shown.
Near the inner wall the tangential velocity is essentially
zero, while the axial velocity is negative. It is this recir-
culation zone that stabilizes the #ame by transporting
fuel vapors from the evaporating spray toward the reac-
tion zone. Thermal energy is also transported by the
recirculation zone in the form of combustion products,
5316
J.F. Widmann et al. / Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320


--- Page 7 ---

Fig. 9. The axial and tangential velocity pro"les at the annulus outlet
predicted from the numerical simulation using the RNG k}e turbulence
model.
Fig. 10. Turbulent kinetic energy, k, and the turbulence dissipation
rate, e, at the annulus outlet predicted from the numerical simulation
using the RNG k}e turbulence model.
thus contributing to #ame stability. It is therefore im-
perative that predictive techniques capture this behavior
if they are to be used successfully for the design and
optimization of these processes.
The error bars in Fig. 8 correspond to expanded stan-
dard uncertainties with a coverage factor of 2 (+95%
con"dence interval if the measurements are assumed to
be normally distributed about the true mean). The pro-
cedure of Taylor and Kuyatt (1994) was used in comput-
ing the uncertainty in the experimental measurement.
Uncertainties are classi"ed as Type A or Type B, and it is
assumed that the combined variance is the sum of the
component variances. The Type A variance is a straight-
forward calculation based upon standard statistical
practices
applied
to
repeated
measurements.
The
Type B uncertainties, which cannot be quanti"ed from
replicated measurements, were estimated using the align-
ment parameters calculated for the data obtained in the
NIST wind tunnel and at the annulus outlet. Variations
in W with position and velocity were considered, and
data with unacceptably high values of W were discarded.
For this reason, data close to the recirculation zone have
not been reported.
The radial pro"les of the turbulent kinetic energy, k,
and its dissipation rate, e, at the outlet of the annulus are
presented in Fig. 10. These results were obtained with the
RNG k}e turbulence model. The turbulent kinetic energy
is relatively low in the recirculation zone, but increases
abruptly in the region of high-velocity gradients at
r+0.023 m. Note that the dissipation rate, e, is given on
a log scale and varies by six orders of magnitude. The
relative turbulence intensity varies from +35 to +45%
over the majority of the annulus outlet, with lower values
in the recirculation zone. Recall that the outlet of the
simulation domain corresponds to the combustion air
inlet for the spray combustion reactor (see Fig. 1); there-
fore, the results presented in Figs. 9 and 10 provide
detailed reactor inlet conditions for the velocity compo-
nents and turbulence parameters, k and e, when simula-
ting the spray combustion process within the reactor.
4.3. Swirl number, S
The degree of swirl present in the combustion air
entering a burner or furnace has a strong e!ect on the
structure and stability of the #ame, and it is therefore an
important parameter in the design and optimization of
such systems. Despite the importance of characterizing
the swirling #ow, several obstacles prevent the reliable
prediction of highly swirling #ow "elds. As discussed
above, one di$culty encountered when designing these
systems is the questionable accuracy of current turbu-
lence models for highly strained #ows. This uncertainty
results in #ow "eld predictions that are suspect until
validated with experimental data. In addition, geometri-
cal and empirical correlations available in the literature
are highly geometry dependent and often involve sim-
plifying assumptions (e.g., inviscid #ow) that lead to large
uncertainties in the predictions.
BeeH r and Chigier (1974) present a correlation for pre-
dicting the swirl number, S, obtained using vane-cascade
swirlers, such as the one used here. The swirl number is
a non-dimensional parameter that characterizes the de-
gree of swirl present in the #ow. It is de"ned as (Gupta,
Lilley, Syred, 1984)
S" Gh
¸Gz
,
(11)
J.F. Widmann et al. / Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320
5317


--- Page 8 ---

Fig. 11. Relationship between the vane angle, a, and the vane angle as
de"ned by BeeH r and Chigier, a@.
Fig. 12. Variation of the swirl number in the annulus with axial posi-
tion. The swirl number was calculated from the simulation using the
RNG k}e turbulence model.
where L is a characteristic length, typically chosen to be
the exit radius of the burner. The terms Gh and Gz are the
axial #ux of angular momentum and the axial #ux of
axial momentum, respectively, and are given by
Gh"P
4
0
ouzuhr2 dr
(12)
and
Gz"P
4
0
(ou2z#p)r dr.
(13)
Here uz and uh are the axial and tangential velocity
components, respectively. For the 12-vane-cascade swirl
generator investigated in the present study, the charac-
teristic length used was the radial coordinate of the outer
wall of the annulus (see Fig. 1A), ¸"R0"50.8 mm.
The correlation presented by BeeH r and Chigier is based
upon geometrical considerations and involves a number
of simpli"cations. Assumptions made in the derivation of
the correlation include inviscid #ow, a uniform axial
velocity distribution, and negligible angular momentum
losses through the annular region following the vanes.
Note that the pressure term in the denominator of
Eq. (11) is also neglected. With these constraints, the swirl
intensity can be predicted from
S"pR0
2BC1!A
Ri
R0B
2D,
(14)
where
p"
tan a@
(1!X)[1#tan a@ tan(p/nv)]
(15)
and
X"
nvj
2pRvcos a@.
(16)
Here, B is the vane height, j is the vane thickness, nv is the
number of vanes, a@ is the vane angle, and Rv is the
distance from the burner axis to the vanes. A prime is
used to denote the vane angle de"ned by BeeH r and
Chigier, a@, and to di!erentiate it from the vane angle, a,
de"ned in Fig. 2B. Fig. 11 shows the relation between a@
and a. The angle a is measured from the center of the
vane as shown in Fig. 2B, while a@ is measured from the
edge of the vane. In the above equations, p is the ratio of
the average tangential and radial velocity components
exiting the vanes, and X is a blockage factor that ac-
counts for the thickness of the vanes.
Using Eqs. (14)}(16), the calculated swirl number for
the swirl generator considered here (a"503, a@"70.73)
is S"1.0. The value of the swirl number determined
from Eqs. (11)}(13) and the results of the numerical simu-
lation (RNG k}e turbulence model) is S"0.49. Each of
the assumptions presented above will lead to a geometri-
cal correlation that overpredicts the swirl intensity. In
addition, a comparison between experimental data and
the correlation, Eqs. (14)}(16), shows that the swirl inten-
sity is overpredicted by the correlation, and the discrep-
ancy between the theory and data increases with
increasing values of p (see Fig. 5.4 in BeeH r & Chigier,
1974). The experimental data presented do not contain
values of p larger than 1.5, while the value of p computed
for the swirl generator used in this study is 2.1; thus, one
would expect the actual value of S to be considerably less
than that predicted by the correlation, as is the case here.
Eqs. (14)}(16) predict the swirl intensity immediately
following the vanes, and therefore neglect the decay of
angular momentum that occurs in the annular passage
downstream of the swirl vanes. The e!ect of neglecting
angular momentum losses can be explored using the
numerical simulation by evaluating S at various axial
locations in the annulus. Fig. 12 presents the computed
values of the swirl number in the passage. The swirl
intensity of the air entering the annulus immediately
5318
J.F. Widmann et al. / Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320


--- Page 9 ---

downstream of the vanes is approximately S"0.54, and
it is reduced to S"0.49 by the exit of the annulus. While
the swirl number is reduced due to the angular mo-
mentum losses in the annular passage, it does not appear
to be the dominant reason that the geometrical correla-
tion overpredicts the exiting swirl intensity for this
con"guration.
The swirl number, S, has been shown to be an impor-
tant similarity variable for geometrically similar swirl
generators (BeeH r & Chigier, 1974; Gupta et al., 1984).
However, it should be used with caution when compar-
ing the swirl intensity produced by di!erent types of swirl
generators. There is some ambiguity due to the choice of
a characteristic length in Eq. (11), and S is often cal-
culated neglecting the pressure term in Eq. (13), which
can result in much higher values of S. It is therefore
prudent to use care when designing or optimizing pro-
cesses based upon swirl number correlations.
5. Conclusions
The air #ow through a vane-cascade swirl generator
was investigated both experimentally and computation-
ally. The experiments reveal a recirculation region near
the inner wall at the outlet of the annulus, and this region
is predicted using the RNG k}e turbulence model. The
standard k}e turbulence model is unable to predict the
recirculation region for this #ow "eld, and results in
overly dispersive velocity and turbulence predictions.
Previous investigators have reported superior perfor-
mance for the RNG k}e model over the standard k}e
model for highly strained #ows, and the results of this
investigation provide further validation for this turbu-
lence model for con"ned, swirling #ows.
The simulation incorporating the RNG k}e model
results in a swirl number, S, of 0.49 exiting the annular
region following the swirl vanes. A geometrical correla-
tion from the literature overpredicts the swirl intensity by
a factor of two, and the likely causes have been discussed.
In addition, the inlet condition for the combustion air
corresponding to the baseline case of NIST's benchmark
database for the validation of multiphase combustion
models has been characterized.
Notation
B
vane height
C1e, C2e, Ck
constants in turbulence model equations
D0
inner diameter of the outer pipe of the
annular regions
Di
outer diameter of the inner pipe of the
annular regions
Fi
body forces
Gk
generation of k due to turbulent stresses
Gh
axial #ux of angular momentum
Gz
axial #ux of axial momentum
k
turbulent kinetic energy
¸
characteristic length
¸v
vane length
nv
number of vanes
p
static pressure
p0
total pressure
pn
static pressure at location n
Prt
turbulent Prandtl number
r
radial coordinate
R0
radial location of the outer wall of the
annular passages
Re
Reynolds number
Ri
radial location of the inner wall of the
annular passages
Rv
distance from the burner axis to the vanes
S
swirl number
t
time
¹
temperature
u,u6
mean velocity
ui, uj, uk
velocity components in Cartesian coordi-
nates
uh
tangential velocity component
uz
axial velocity component
u6 z
mean axial velocity based upon the vol-
umetric #ow rate
xi, xj, xk
Cartesian coordinates
z
axial coordinate
Greek letters
a
vane angle de"ned in Fig. 2B
a@
vane angle de"ned by BeeH r and Chigier
(1974)
as
swirl constant
dij
Kronecker delta
e
turbulence dissipation rate
h
polar angle
j
vane thickness
k
viscosity
kt
eddy or turbulent viscosity
l
kinematic viscosity
o
density
p
ratio of the average tangential and radial
velocity components
pk, pe
constants in the turbulence model equa-
tions
X
blockage factor
W
alignment parameter
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Pedro Espina and
Lanre Oshinowo for their assistance with the computa-
tional aspects of this research, Mike Hall for his help with
J.F. Widmann et al. / Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320
5319


--- Page 10 ---

the wind tunnel measurements, and Mike Carrier for
technical support. One of the authors (JFW) wishes to
acknowledge the "nancial support of the NRC/NIST
Postdoctoral Research Program. The helpful comments
of Francine Battaglia and Tim Johnson concerning this
manuscript are also acknowledged.
References
BeeH r, J. M., & Chigier, N. A. (1974). Combustion aerodynamics. London:
Applied Science.
Benim, A. C. (1990). Finite element analysis of con"ned turbulent
swirling #ows. International Journal of Numerical Methods in Fluids,
11, 697}717.
Bird, R. B., Stewart, W. E., & Lightfoot, E. N. (1960). Transport phe-
nomena. New York: Wiley.
Fluent 5 User's Guide. (1998). Fluent Incorporated, Lebanon, NH
03766 USA.
Gupta, A. K., Lilley, D. G., & Syred, N. (1984). Swirl yows. Kent:
Abacus Press.
Hinze, J. O. (1975). Turbulence. New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing
Co.
Issa, R. I. (1986). Solution of implicitly discretized #uid #ow equations
by operator splitting. Journal of Computational Physics, 62, 40}65.
Jaw, S. Y., & Chen, C. J. (1998). Present status of second-order closure
turbulence models I: Overview. Journal of Engineering Mechanics,
124, 485}501.
Launder, B. E., & Spalding, D. B. (1972). Lectures in mathematical
models of turbulence. London: Academic Press.
Launder, B. E., & Spalding, D. B. (1974). The numerical computation of
turbulent #ows. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engin-
eering, 3, 269}289.
Lien, F. S., & Leschziner, M. A. (1994). Assessment of turbulence-
transport models including non-linear RNG eddy-viscosity formu-
lation and second-moment closure for #ow over a backward-facing
step. Computers in Fluids, 23, 983}1004.
Papageorgakis, G. C., & Assanis, D. N. (1999). Comparison of linear
and nonlinear RNG-based k}e models for incompressible turbulent
#ows. Numerical Heat Transfer, Part B, 35, 1}22.
Sheen, H. J., Chen, W. J., & Wu, J. S. (1997). Flow patterns for an
annular #ow over an axisymmetric sudden expansion. Journal of
Fluid Mechanics, 350, 177}188.
Shyy, W., Thakur, S. S., Ouyang, H., Liu, J., & Blosch, E. (1997).
Computational techniques for complex transport phenomena (pp.
163}230). Cambridge, UK: University Press.
Smith, L. M., & Reynolds, W. C. (1992). On the Yakhot-Orszag renor-
malization group method for deriving turbulence statistics and
models. Physics of Fluids A, 4, 364}390.
Taylor, B. N., & Kuyatt, C. E. (1994). Guidelines for evaluating and
expressing the uncertainty of NIST measurement results. NIST
Technical Note 1297, 1994 Edition.
Widmann, J. F., Charagundla, S. R., Presser, C., & Heckert, A. (1999).
Benchmark experimental database for multiphase combustion model
input and validation: baseline case. NISTIR 6286. National Institute
of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8360,
USA.
Yakhot, V., & Orszag, S. A. (1986). Renormalization group analysis of
turbulence: I. Basic theory. Journal of Scientixc Computing, 1, 1}51.
Yakhot, V., Orszag, S. A., Thangam, S., Gatski, T. B., & Speziale, C. G.
(1992). Development of turbulence models for shear #ows by
a double expansion technique. Physics of Fluids A, 4, 1510}1520.
Yakhot, V., & Smith, L. M. (1992). The renormalization group, the
e-expansion and the derivation of turbulence models. Journal of
Scientixc Computing, 7, 35}61.
Yin, M., Shi, F., & Xu, Z. (1996). Renormalization group based k}e
turbulence model for #ows in a duct with strong curvature. Interna-
tional Journal of Engineering Science, 34, 243}248.
5320
J.F. Widmann et al. / Chemical Engineering Science 55 (2000) 5311}5320
