
--- Page 1 ---

Received: 23 October 1995/Accepted: 22 May 1996
P. Anacleto, M. V. Heitor, A. L. N. Moreira
Instituto Superior Te´ cnico
Mechanical Engineering Department,
Av. Rovisco Pais, P-1096 Lisboa Codex, Portugal
Correspondence to: M. V. Heitor
The authors are pleased to acknowledge many useful discussions with
Yves Bouchier, SNECMA, Hans Kaaling, VOLVO and Fabio Turrini,
FIAT Avio. The rig was built in the Turin facilities of FIAT Avio and
was adapted at the IST’s workshop, under the BRITE/EURAM project
‘‘Low-Emission Combustion Technology’’, contract no. AER2-CT92-
0036.
The support of Marta Fernandes during the experiments is
gratefully acknowledged and the contribution of Merss. Carlos
Carvalho and Jorge Coelho in preparing the manuscript is appreciated.
Experiments in Fluids 22 (1996) 153—164 ( Springer-Verlag 1996
The mean and turbulent flowfields in a model RQL gas-turbine combustor
P. Anacleto, M. V. Heitor, A. L. N. Moreira
Abstract This paper presents a study of the ﬂow patterns
typical of ‘‘Rich-burn, Quick-quench, Lean burn’’, RQL,
gas-turbine combustors based on detailed velocity measure-
ments of the ﬂow in a water model of a can-type combustor.
The ﬂow split along the model combustor has been ade-
quately established in order to simulate the real combusting
ﬂows. A laser-Doppler velocimeter has been used to analyse the
development of the axial, radial and tangential, mean and
turbulent velocity components along the combustor and the
results are provided for the rich, quench and lean zones. The
analysis includes consideration of four different combustor
conﬁgurations, which allowed to perform a parametric study in
terms of the ﬂow boundary conditions and ﬂow split. The
intensity of the primary recirculation zone, the penetration of
the dilution jets and the uniformity and swirl level of the ﬂow at
the outlet of the model are studied for the various conﬁgura-
tions, and the related implications for the design of practical
combustors are discussed.
1
Introduction
Rich-burn, Quick-quench and Lean-burn (hereinafter referred
to as RQL) has been considered as a suitable technology to
decrease the production of oxides of nitrogen in conventional
gas-turbine combustors, e.g. Bahr (1995), and was one of the
technologies proposed as a result of the pilot phase of the
European ‘‘Low Emission Combustor Technology Program’’,
in order to reduce pollutant emissions in future aircraft
engines (Joos and Pellischeck 1995). This technique consists in
burning the fuel far above the stoichiometric conditions in
a ﬁrst stage of the combustor (i.e., the rich zone) to avoid the
occurrence of high temperatures responsible for the produc-
tion of thermal NOX. The unburned hydrocarbons, the CO and
the carbon generated in the rich zone will burn at lean
conditions and low temperatures in a third stage of the
combustor (i.e., the lean zone), for which a sufﬁciently long
residence time is required. The transition from fuel-rich to
fuel-lean combustion is obtained through a rapid mixing of the
rich mixture with dilution air jets at the second stage of the
combustor (i.e., the quench zone), where the ﬂow is accelerated
in order to limit the residence time in potential stoichiometric
regions.
The development of this type of combustor represents
a major challenge (e.g. Bahr 1995) and must be planned with
the following objectives: i) to improve wall cooling in the
primary zone, where radiation from the carbon particles is very
intense but any wall air injection should be prevented to avoid
the formation of stoichiometric regions; ii) to optimise the
mixing pattern downstream of the quench zone, which is
strongly inﬂuenced by the effectiveness of the dilution jet
penetration at the quench stage; and iii) to limit the carbon
production at the rich conditions occurring in the primary
zone and to improve its combustion in the lean zone. Although
a considerable progress has already been made in the deve-
lopment of this type of low-NOX combustors, they are in-
herently more complex than current technology combustors
and require additional and extended research. In particular,
the solution of the technical problems mentioned before de-
mands a detailed understanding of the internal ﬂow struc-
ture in the new combustors. However, measurements of the
complete velocity ﬁeld in real combustors under burning
conditions are extremely difﬁcult, and seriously limited by the
geometry of the combustor, time and the number of instru-
ments and skills required. These limitations have attracted the
use of isothermal, constant density systems (Heitor 1989),
which, above all, provide the basis for the implementation of
the boundary conditions and the development of the turbu-
lence models required in the calculation of practical ﬂow ﬁelds.
For these constant density experiments, the use of a water ﬂow
in a Plexiglas model is often preferred due to the possibility of
optical access and the easy of laser-Doppler velocity measure-
ments in water ﬂows (e.g., Jones and Whitelaw 1985).
In this context, water ﬂow models have been used in the past,
which provided improved understanding of the complex ﬂow
pattern in gas turbines combustors (e.g. Green and Whitelaw
1983; Koutmos and McGuirk 1989; Bicen et al. 1989, McGuirk
and Palma 1995). However, it is known that exact similarity
153


--- Page 2 ---

Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of the experimental
facility
between isothermal and reacting ﬂows is clearly not possible.
For example, the primary recirculation zone used in the actual
combustors to stabilise the ﬂame is shorter and wider than that
in the equivalent isothermal ﬂow; the mass ﬂow recirculated is
smaller and the reverse velocities larger due to the decrease in
density; the velocity ﬂuctuations are generally larger and the
local turbulence intensities smaller owing to thermal expansion
(e.g. Heitor and Whitelaw 1986). A primary measure applied
to gas turbine combustor technology is to use similar ﬂow
splits along the combustor, namely through independent
control of primary and secondary ﬂows (e.g. Bicen et al. 1989).
Nevertheless, it is clear that apart from the details which
cannot be conveniently studied in isothermal non-reacting
models, a water ﬂow rig may provide the necessary insight into
gas-turbine ﬂows to allow to improve the design of practical
combustors, namely through the evaluation of the turbulent
models used in the numerical simulation of related ﬂows (e.g.
Coupland and Priddin 1987; Jones and Whitelaw 1985; Jones
and Kakhi 1995).
The work reported here is aimed at contributing for these
objectives and includes the analysis of the ﬂow in a Plexiglas
water model of a practical RQL combustor (see Turrini 1994,
for details), which was scaled at 1 : 1, keeping similar ﬂow
splits. The work includes the use of a laser-Doppler velocimeter
to study the inﬂuence of the various parameters which govern
the performance of an RQL combustor, such as the swirl level
in the rich zone, the quench module geometry, and the
momentum of the dilution jets and of the annular impinging
jet.
The paper is organised as follows: the model combustor and
the ﬂow conditions considered throughout the work are given
in the next section; the velocimeter is described in Sect. 3,
together with assessments of the accuracy of the measurements
and the method used to determine the ﬂow split along the
combustor. The results are then presented and discussed in
Sect. 4 and the main conclusions are summarised in Sect. 5.
2
The model combustor
2.1
The combustor geometry
The experiments were performed in a Plexiglas combustor
model placed in a long horizontal water tunnel, as shown in
Fig. 1. The facility includes a recirculating system whereby
water is pumped from a constant-head discharge tank to
a large pressurised tank (up to 2 bar). The water is supplied
to the model through an inlet section with straightners and
screens, located about 1.5 m downstream of the pressurised
tank.
Figure 2a shows the layout of the overall RQL test model.
The architecture of the model consists of three different
modules (namely, rich, quench and lean) assembled concentri-
cally inside a larger peripheric can with 125 mm in diameter
and 400 mm in length, so that a surrounding annular water
ﬂow is formed to feed the liner inlet ports accordingly to the
related pressure drops. The primary ﬂow enters in the model
via an inner stainless steel pipe with 40 mm inside diameter,
which provides an oriﬁce meter and a valve to measure and
regulate the primary/secondary ﬂow ratio. The primary ﬂow is
then directed to the head of the combustor through a diverging
pipe. A coaxial swirler, similar to that used in the real com-
bustor, is ﬁtted around the fuel atomizer at the head of the
model. For the results reported here the fuel atomizer was
blocked.
The rich module consists of a cylindrical barrel of 80 mm
internal diameter and 62 mm length. The quench module is
located just downstream for the rich module and consists of
a 20 mm length truncated cone, which provides a 5 : 8 area
contraction, followed by a 20 mm length constant section of
63 mm inside diameter with eight holes disposed symmetric-
ally along the wall. Part of the secondary stream is diverted
through these holes providing jets emerging normally to the
direction of the primary stream to simulate the quench jets in
practical combustors. Two different quench modules were
used in the present work with a similar geometry, but with
circular quench holes with 6.2 mm in diameter, Fig. 2b, or,
alternatively, with oblong holes with 11.3 mm in length and
2.8 mm in width and placed at 42° with the cord formed by
their centres, Fig. 2c.
At the junction of the rich with the quench modules, there
is an annular passage with 8 mm in width. Part of the
secondary stream is diverted into the primary ﬂow through
this passage to simulate the wall-cooling jet in the practical
combustor, which ﬂows along the contraction wall inclined at
42° with the direction of the primary stream. This part of the
secondary ﬂow is controlled through the positioning of
a perspex ring, which can slide forward and backward to allow
to change the blockage at the inlet port of the annular cooling
jet.
154


--- Page 3 ---

Table 1. Flow conditions
Run
Main geometric features
mt (kg/s)
Re*]105 T (°C)
Ps (bar)
U0
(m/s)
1
Circular quench holes
7.5
64
19^1
0.85
0.621
2
Oblong quench holes
7.5
64
16^1
0.85
0.621
3
Similar to Run 1, but with a different ﬂow
split and 4 new dilution holes (d\8 mm),
in the lean zone
7.5
57
15^1
0.65
0.621
4
Similr to Run 1, but without the
impinging, cooling annular jet
7.5
39
18^1
0.95
0.621
* Re — Reynolds number, Re\(4]mt](1[jd))/(p]l]d0)
mt — total mass ﬂow rate (kg/s)
k — dynamic viscosity
d0 — diameter at the outlet of the primary ﬂow in the water model
jd — (dilution ﬂow rate)/total ﬂow rate
o — speciﬁc weight
U0 — bulk velocity at the exit section of the lean zone
Ps — state pressure at the upstream duct
D0 — inside diameter of the peripheric can (125 mm)
Fig. 2a–c. Schematic drawing of the combustor model (source:
Turrini 1994). a The RQL water test model and measuring stations
along the combustion model, with indication of two typical measuring
plans (A and B, respectively across the quench holes and between two
holes); b quench model with circular holes; c quench model with
oblong hole
The third module, which simulates the lean zone in practical
combustors, includes a 98 mm diameter cylinder with 76 mm
in length and is followed by a sudden enlargement to 124 mm
with 45 mm in length. At the expansion between the quench
and the lean zones, 96 small holes with 0.8 mm in diameter
discharge part of the secondary ﬂuid into the primary ﬂow,
which simulates the air used to cool the wall in this region. In
one of the conﬁgurations considered here, four additional
holes with 8 mm in diameter were included in the lean zone, to
provide crossing jets to decrease the swirl motion of the outlet
ﬂow. Nevertheless, all the conﬁgurations tested include also 60
concentric holes with 4.1 mm in diameter in the plan of the
sudden expansion downstream of the lean zone, which
simulate the dilution jets in the practical combustors.
2.2
The flow conditions
The measurements were performed at a water temperature in
the range 15\T (°C)\19 and the overall ﬂow rate was kept
constant and equal to 7.5 kg/s. The Reynolds number based on
the mean axial velocity at the outlet section varied between
39]105 and 64]105.
Table 1 shows the various ﬂow conditions considered, which
have been planned to study the effects of the quench jets, of the
ﬂow split between the primary and the secondary ﬂow and of
the cooling jet at the inlet of the quench module, on the ﬂow
pattern typical of RQL combustors.
3
The experimental procedure and the measuring accuracy
3.1
The experimental technique
The mean and ﬂuctuating velocities were measured by a laser-
Doppler velocimeter based on a 2W Argon-lon laser and ope-
rated in the dual-beam, forward-scatter mode with sensi-
tivity to the ﬂow direction provided by light-frequency shifting
from acousto-optic modulation (Bragg cells), normally set at
2 MHz.
The light scattered by naturally-occurring centres in the
water was collected by a lens (focal length of 200 mm) and
focused onto the pinhole aperture (0.3 mm) of a photomulti-
plier (OEI, type LD-0-810) with a magniﬁcation of 1.0. The
output of the photomultiplier was band-pass ﬁltered and the
resulting signal processed by a commercial frequency counter
155


--- Page 4 ---

(TSI 1980-B), which was operated in the single-measurement-
per-burst mode with ﬁxed cycles (N\8) validated in the time
domain within 1%. The validated data were transferred to
a laboratory 16-bit minicomputer, where the time averaged
moments of velocity were evaluated.
The complete LDV system was mounted on a three-
dimensional traversing unit, allowing the positioning of the
laser-velocimeter control volume within ^0.25 mm. Measure-
ments were obtained with the laser beams in the horizontal and
vertical planes and by traversing the control volume along the
horizontal and vertical directions to allow the determination of
the axial, U, radial V, and tangential, W, mean and turbulent
velocities. The results are presented either along a longitudinal
plan containing the quench holes (i.e., plan A in Fig. 2a), or
along a longitudinal plan passing between a pair of holes (i.e.,
plan B in Fig. 2a).
A cylindrical polar system was used to represent the results,
with the origin of the radial coordinate taken at the centreline
of the combustor and the origin of the axial coordinate taken at
the entrance plane of the rich zone. The tangential velocity is
taken positive in the anticlockwise direction, as viewed from
upstream.
The effects of refraction at the external surface were reduced
by immersing the model in a water through. The location of the
measuring volume and the associated changes in the transfer
function were calculated as suggested by Bicen (1982) and
Pereira (1989). Measurements of the axial, U, and tangential,
W, velocity components along the horizontal diameters may be
obtained without refraction corrections (which were typically
found to be below 1%). A limitation lay in the measurement of
the radial velocity, which becomes progressively more difﬁcult
as the measuring volume approaches the top and bottom pipe
walls, because of the increasing refraction and dispersion of
light at the solid—liquid interfaces. The furthest position at
which measurements can be reliably obtained is about 0.8
(r/R). The deterioration in the signal quality of radial velocity
as the measuring volume lies further off axis, impairs the
reliability of demodulation and measurements were avoided
when the data-rate decreases below 50% of the data rate at the
centreline. However, no corrections have been applied to the
positioning of the measuring point and to the transfer function
of the velocimeter. A further restriction imposed by the curved
pipe surface is that quantiﬁcation of the cross correlation u@@3v@@
is unpracticable with the present LDV system.
3.2
The accuracy of the velocity measurements
This section summarises the main sources of error related with
the conﬁned water ﬂow and with the optical arrangement used
and gives estimates of those errors.
The most serious potential systematic errors may be due to
measuring-volume positioning, Doppler-frequency broaden-
ing and velocity bias. The main sources of random errors
affecting the accuracy of the measurements are due to statisti-
cal sampling uncertainty.
The uncertainty in locating the probe volume at the cen-
treline of the combustor is estimated to be less than half of the
effective probe volume length and, therefore, below 0.5 mm.
This uncertainty varies as the beams traverse the curved
pipes because of the wall curvature effects, but may be
estimated from the relations given by Bicen (1982). These
relations depend on the velocity component of interest and on
the shape of the surfaces at the measurement station and show
that the error incurred in the half angle between the beams in
water is negligible. Similar calculations show that the posi-
tioning uncertainty is only signiﬁcant very close to the pipe
walls. The maximum systematic errors are typically found to be
about 1% of the undisturbed value for the measurements of
the axial and tangential velocities, and up to 5% for the radial
velocity, but measurements close to the wall have been
excluded as mentioned before.
Doppler broadening occurs because the Doppler-frequency
probability density function is affected by sources other than
true velocity ﬂuctuations at a point. Full accounts of these
sources are to be found in the literature (e.g. Durst et al. 1981),
and are not given here. The net effect is that the measured
distribution is broader than that of the velocity. However, the
main errors incurred in the measurements are due to transit
broadening, Zhang and Wu (1987), and for the present tests are
below 5]10~3 Umax, where Umax is the maximum velocity at
each radial proﬁle.
Although various weighting methods have been proposed to
correct for velocity bias effects (e.g. Durst et al. 1981), no
corrections were applied to the measurements reported here.
The systematic errors that could have arisen were minimised
by using high data acquisition rates in relation to the
fundamentalvelocity ﬂuctuation rate, as suggested for example
by Dimotakis (1978) and Erdman and Tropea (1981). This
could be easily achieved because the rate of naturally-occurring
particles was sufﬁciently high for the ﬂow conditions con-
sidered here.
Statistical sampling uncertainty due to the ﬁnite size of
the sample was estimated based on the analysis of Yanta and
Smith (1978). The number of individual velocity values used to
form the averages were always above 10 000 so that, for a 95%
conﬁdence interval, the largest statistical errors are smaller
than 0.5% and 3%, for the mean and variance values
respectively.
Spectral analysis of LDV signals was carried out by sampling
and holding the velocity at each new Doppler burst until
another valid signals arrives. The condition under which the
output of the counter yields a satisfactory spectral analysis has
been discussed by, for example, Edwards and Jensen (1983),
Adrian and Yao (1985) and Srikantaiah and Coleman (1985)
and was satisﬁed in the present experiments. A mean sampling
frequency 2 KHz was used, suggesting that structures of the
order of 1.0 mm and above can be resolved. This is at least one
order of magnitude smaller than the expected large length
scales in the ﬂow, which implies that the energy containing
motions are resolved by the counter.
3.3
The flow split analysis
A primary measure to guide the use of water models in the
study of gas-turbine combustors is to establish adequate ﬂow
splits (e.g. Bicen et al. 1989). This has been achieved in the
present work through a detailed analysis of the secondary ﬂow,
as described below.
A proper method to deﬁne the ﬂow split between the
primary and the secondary streams was found based on the
156


--- Page 5 ---

Table 2. Flow split along the
combustor
Run
kp (%)
kI
kq
km
kd
(ﬂowmeter)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
1
24
29
10
—
27
2
24
38
11
—
27
3
15
31
13
8
33
4
25
0.0
18
—
57
rate of the primary ﬂow (measured by the oriﬁce ﬂowmeter)
and on the total ﬂow, measured by an ultrasonic meter. The
oriﬁce meter has been calibrated in the present rig to account
for sensitivity to the ﬂow conditions at the inlet section. The
calibration was performed against the ultrasonic ﬂowmeter,
with an error smaller than 1%, and the total error of this
method is considered to be smaller than 5%.
The ﬂow split along the combustor was obtained based on
the volumetric rate of water ﬂowing through the secondary
stream. This was calculated at several axial locations by
integration of radial velocity proﬁles, based on the method
described by Spencer et al. (1995) for pipe ﬂows, which
includes the use of the law of the wall in the regions where LDV
measurements could not be obtained (i.e. for r/R[0.95).
The analysis has shown that the secondary ﬂow is axisym-
metric only downstream of the quench module, which may be
due to the perturbation induced by the three supporting screws
located at the dome of the water model. As a consequence, an
accurate determination of the ﬂow rate required consideration
of the angular variation of mean velocity in the secondary (i.e.
outer) ﬂow. The procedure consisted in the analysis of four
radial proﬁles along half the distance between two consecutive
screws. Since the mean ﬂow has been shown to have an angular
repeatability in each sector between two consecutive screws,
these proﬁles are effectively representative of 24 radial proﬁles
around the secondary ﬂow.
In the lean zone, the secondary ﬂow was found axisymmetric
and integration of the velocity proﬁles was used to obtain the
dilution ﬂow split. The related error in the ﬂow measurement
has been estimated to be smaller than 5%. Nevertheless, larger
errors may arise due to the fact that the ﬂow is not fully deve-
loped and of the inadequacy of the ‘law of the wall’.
Table 2 summarises the ﬂow split along the combustor for all
the ﬂow conditions considered in the present experiments, as
percentages of the total ﬂow rate.
4
Results and discussion
The results are presented and discussed in this section under
two headings. First, Run 1 is considered as a standard case, for
which the main features of the ﬂow are described in detail.
Secondary, a parametric study is described based on the
analysis of the effects of the shape of the quench holes, of the
ﬂow split at the entrance of the combustor and of the aperture
of the annular cooling jet, on the ﬂow pattern in the model
combustor.
To ease analysis, the results are presented in terms of
velocity vectors along the longitudinal planes A and B of
Fig. 2a) and/or along transversal sections of the combustor.
The former have been calculated from the measurements of the
axial and radial velocity components, while the latter represent
the tangential velocity component.
4.1
The standard case — RUN 1
Figure 3 shows sample results characteristic of the mean ﬂow
along the combustor. The primary zone is characterised by
a central swirl-driven recirculation zone, which is essential to
provide mixing and stable combustion, Mellor (1990). The
maximum measured reverse velocity is about 0.98 U0 and,
therefore, 27% of the maximum axial velocity for larger radius.
In addition, the maximum tangential velocity is about 2.6 U0
and occurs in the shear layer surrounding the central reverse
ﬂow zone, in a way that the central core of the ﬂow rotates as
a solid body. On the other hand, this tangential mean velocity
distribution remains constant in the outer ﬂow region,
suggesting a linear decrease of the angular momentum with the
radial distance. In this zone, the results show an annular
recirculation zone established at the inlet of the sudden
expansion, whose size may depend on the geometry of the
dome and also on the size of the inner recirculation zone as
discussed, for example, by Rhode et al. (1983). For the present
geometry and ﬂow conditions, the length of that annular
recirculation zone is limited by the contraction at the entrance
of the quench zone.
In the secondary stream, an annular recirculation zone is
formed at the expansion close to the entrance of the quench
holes, which promotes the uniformity of the momentum ﬂuxes
in all the jets. The internal ﬂow in the quench module has
a cyclic repeatability comprising eight similar sectors of 45°.
Measurements were obtained along the two longitudinal planes
of Fig. 2a), respectively passing through the centre of the
quench holes (in plane A), and passing midway between two
consecutive holes (i.e. plane B). The pattern followed by the
quench jets is similar to those represented by jets in cross
ﬂow (e.g.: Andreopoulos and Rodi 1984), but with a weak
penetration. This may be partially due to the deﬂection im-
parted by the impingement of the annular wall-cooling jet,
which also inﬂuences the central swirling ﬂow. In fact, an
undesirable central core of unmixed swirled ﬂuid is observed
throughout the combustor for all the conﬁgurations con-
sidered here.
In general, the results show increased mean axial velocities
at the quench module close to the wall, due to the simultaneous
contribution of the annular cooling jet and of the contraction
at the exit of the rich zone. The magnitude of the peaks in the
velocity distributions is, however, larger in the region between
holes (Fig. 3b), which may be attributed to the blockage
imparted by the quench jets which emerge with a radial
velocity 25% larger than the maximum axial velocity in the
157


--- Page 6 ---

Fig. 3a–c. Mean ﬂow patterns for Run 1. a Mean velocity vectors
along a longitudinal plan passing through the centre of the quench
holes (plan A in Fig. 2a) for x/D0\0.32; 0.745; 0.786; 0.826; 1.174;
1.414; b mean velocity vectors along a longitudinal plan passing
between two consecutive quench holes (plan B in Fig. 2a) for
x/D0\0.435; 0.786; 0.826; 1.174; c transversal velocity distribution
related with the vectors of a
primary ﬂow. A recirculation zone is formed in the wake of the
jets, close to the wall, where negative axial velocities are of the
same order of those in the swirl-induced recirculating zone.
Also, the distributions of the tangential mean velocity show
similar values, whether upstream and downstream of the
quench holes, suggesting that the quench jets are not strong
enough to disturb the tangential velocity of the primary ﬂow.
The core ﬂuid remains in solid body rotation within the
quench module, and the simultaneous effect of the contraction
and of the annular cooling jet is mainly to alter the rotating
motion of the annular ﬂuid, closer to the wall, to a pattern
typical of a free vortex.
The results also show that the sudden expansion down-
stream of the quench zone fulﬁll the need to increase the
residence time in the lean zone of practical combustors, in
order to promote the oxidation of the unburned products
generated at the rich zone. Nevertheless, an outer annular
recirculation zone is found close to the wall, which may
increase combustor wall temperature.
In addition, the results show that the swirling motion is not
eliminated up to the exit section of the combustor, as one could
expect from the type of ﬂow in the quench module where
mainly radial momentum is added to the ﬂow. It should be
noted that the strength of swirl along plane B is similar to that
in plane A (as shown in Fig. 3c) and is not shown here for lack
of space. Similar aspects have been reported in other model
combustors (e.g. Koutmos and McGuirk 1989), but the related
ﬂow pattern should be clearly avoided in any combustor design
because it will give rise to high concentrations of unburned
products in the central core of the ﬂow at the exit of the
combustor section.
Figure 4 shows radial proﬁles of the axial, tangential and
radial ﬂuctuating velocity components for Run 1 measured at
the rich, quench and the lean zones of the combustor and
characterise the turbulence levels typical of RQL combustors.
The central ﬂow in the primary zone is surrounded by a shear
layer with large positive gradients of the mean axial and
tangential velocities, where maximum turbulent ﬂuctuations
occur with local values up to Ju@2\1.9U0. These values
are comparable with other published in the literature (e.g.
Koutmos and McGuirk 1989; Palma and McGuirk 1995), and
suggest the likely representativity of the present ﬂow pattern.
The results are typical of high strained recirculating ﬂows with
swirl (see Sislian and Cusworth 1986; Heitor and Moreira 1992
for reference), in that the distribution of velocity ﬂuctuations
peak in the inner shear layer where the mean shear strains
LUM /Lr and LWM /Lr are positive, but do not peak in the outer
shear layer, suggesting the likely contribution of streamline
curvature to turbulent production and transport. Although the
detailed analysis of the turbulent ﬂow requires plotting the
results in streamline coordinates, Fig. 4 shows also that the
magnitude of the axial velocity ﬂuctuations in the primary
zone is larger than those in the radial and tangential directions,
with maxima differences up to 40%. In spite of the lack of
optical access, which precluded measurements to be obtained
in the stagnation region, it is likely that the radial velocity
ﬂuctuations increase further downstream, as observed in other
recirculating ﬂows with a free stagnation point (e.g. Taylor and
Whitelaw 1984), because the relative magnitude of the three
ﬂuctuating velocity components is altered downstream of the
quench module. These features suggest the likely importance
of the generation of turbulent kinetic energy through the
interaction between normal strains and normal stresses and
are important to be noted because they imply that calculations
158


--- Page 7 ---

Fig. 4. Radial proﬁles of the axial, tangential
and radial ﬂuctuating velocity components for
Run 1 along the model combustor, for
x/D0\0.32; 0.786; 0.826; 1.174; 1.414
using a scalar effective-viscosity turbulence model (e.g.
Coupland and Priddin 1987; McGuirk and Palma 1992) will be
inaccurate, at least for the turbulence upstream of the exit of
the combustor.
The velocity ﬂuctuations in the quench zone peak in the
highly strained shear layer surrounding the quench ﬂow and
show larger values in the axial direction in accordance with the
generally accepted mechanism of production of turbulent
kinetic energy by the interaction between turbulent motion
and the mean rate of shear strain. As noted before, the
tangential and radial velocity ﬂuctuations in the central part of
the ﬂow have local maximum with values about twice larger
than those of Ju@2. Similar trends have been reported by Green
and Whitelaw (1983), and Koutmos and McGuirk (1989) and
have been attributed by Bicen et al. (1989) to the impingement
of opposed jets at the centreline. Nevertheless, the same trend
has also been observed downstream of a free stagnation point
and it is likely that this mechanism holds in the present case.
Further downstream, although Jv@2 and Jw@2 have local
maximum around the centreline, they are of the order of
magnitude of those of Ju@2, suggesting the important role of
turbulent diffusion and dissipation.
The anisotropy of the turbulent ﬂow observed so far in some
zones of the ﬂow may raise the question of whether velocity
ﬂuctuations are associated with unsteady mechanisms, such as
precessing of the vortex core or vortex shedding in highly
strained regions. The existence of such mechanisms would not
only affect the performance of the combustor, but also would
invalidate any attempt to simulate the ﬂow with numerical
models based on steady equations (McGuirk and Palma
1995b). In order to address this question, the probability
density functions of velocity ﬂuctuations and the related
spectra were analysed and sample results are presented in
Fig. 5. Clear bimodal probability distributions were not
observed throughout the measurable ﬂow, suggesting that
instabilities, if present, do not contain enough energy to
dominate over the turbulence generated ﬂuctuations. The
distribution of skewness and ﬂatness showed axisymmetric
patterns with trends in accordance with gradient transport
assumptions and with values ranging within [[1, 1] and
[2.5, 4.5], respectively. It is worth mentioning that the
skewness and the ﬂatness values do not vary along the
azimuthal direction, even in the vicinity of the quenching jets,
suggesting the likely contribution of swirl to decrease the
azimuthal gradients in the quench module.
These results are to be contrasted with those recently
published by McGuirk and Palma (1995a, b) in a model of
a can-type gas turbine combustor, where bimodal PDFs of the
azimuthal velocity distributions were observed with a broad
range of frequencies (10—150 Hz), due to the jet instabilities.
It was shown that imparting the swirl to the primary ﬂow
improved stability but, above a certain level, it gave rise to
precessing of the vortex core along the combustor centreline.
The present spectra of velocity ﬂuctuations in regions of
large anisotropy do not show any evidence of ﬂow periodicity,
except at the edge of the annular reverse ﬂow set up in the rich
module, where a sharp peak around 10 Hz is observed. This
peak is associated with skewness and ﬂatness values around 0.5
and 3, respectively. If a Strouthal number is deﬁned as fL/U,
where f is the measured frequency, L is the width of the
expansion (30 mm) and U\2 m/s is the mean velocity at the
edge of the step, a value of about 0.15 is obtained, which is
close to the values reported by other authors in the wake of
bidimensional obstacles (e.g., Dura8 o et al. 1988).
4.2
Parametric analysis
In terms of the performance of a practical combustor, the
results obtained for the standard case and discussed in the
previous paragraphs show that the mixing pattern downstream
of the primary zone is poor and may limit the application of the
technology studied here. Possible corrections to the combustor
design include the following aspects: i) elongate the quench
jets, so that they impinge over a larger zone of the primary
ﬂow; ii) decrease the mass ﬂow rate through the swirler and
add crossing jets in the lean zone, in order to decrease the
159


--- Page 8 ---

Fig. 5. Sample spectra of axial and tangential velocity ﬂuctuations obtained in regions of large turbulence ﬂuctuations
Fig. 6a, b. Mean ﬂow pattern for Run 2. a Mean velocity vectors along the longitudinal plans A and B for x/D0\0.192; 0.320; 0.480; 0.745; 0.786;
0.826; 1.174; 1.414; b transversal velocity distribution related with the vectors of a
angular momentum at the combustor outlet; iii) close the
annular cooling jet at the entrance of the quench module, in
order to avoid the deﬂection of the quench jets. These three
solutions correspond to Runs 2, 3 and 4 of Tables 1 and 2 and
are analysed in the following paragraphs in terms of their
effects on the performance of the combustor.
i) Analysis of the inﬂuence of the shape of the quench
holes — Run 2
Run 2 is characterised by the operating conditions of Run 1,
but with the combustor operated with oblong quench holes,
although with an area similar to the circular holes of Run 1.
Figures 6 and 7 show the related mean and ﬂuctuating velocity
160


--- Page 9 ---

Fig. 7. Radial proﬁles of axial, tangential and
radial ﬂuctuating velocity components for Run
2 along the model combustor, for x/D0\0.192;
0.320; 0.480; 0.786; 0.826; 1.174; 1.414
Fig. 8a, b. Mean ﬂow patterns for Run 3. a Mean velocity vectors
along the longitudinal plans A and B for x/D0\0.192; 0.352; 0.745;
0.786; 0.826; 1.174; 1.270; 1.414; b transversal velocity distribution
related with the vectors of a
distributions throughout the model combustor. The measure-
ments included analysis of three different stations in the
primary zone and, in general, the results show ﬂow character-
istics similar to those described before, without any major
inﬂuence of the shape of the quench holes on the mean and
turbulent ﬂow patterns. The unique exception is concerned
with the proﬁles of tangential velocity, which now displays
a signiﬁcant peak close to the entrance of the quench jets. This
is attributed to the shape and inclination of the quench holes,
which favour the exchange of angular momentum with the
primary ﬂow.
The turbulent ﬂow, Fig. 7, is affected in accordance with the
changes observed in the mean velocity proﬁles. Nevertheless, it
should be noted that in the vicinity of the centreline, the radial
velocity ﬂuctuations increase by about 50%, probably due to
a higher relative intensity of the vortex core which is associated
with the smaller penetration of the quench jets.
The relative alterations in the ﬂow observed in the quench
module are suppressed further downstream by turbulent
diffusion. The mean and the turbulent ﬁelds in the lean zone
show quantitative features similar to those observed in the
standard case, in that the oblong jets do not attenuate the swirl
motion at the outlet of the combustor.
ii) Analysis of the inﬂuence of the ﬂow split on the ﬂow
pattern
Run 3 was achieved by decreasing the rate of primary ﬂow to
the total mass ﬂow from 24% to 15% and making use of four
holes with 8 mm in diameter in the lean zone, 49 mm down-
stream of the sudden expansion, in order to suppress the swirl
motion at the outlet of the combustor. The ring mounted at the
external surface of the rich module was moved to a forward
position, which increased the blockage at the inlet port of the
annular cooling jet. As a consequence, the ﬂow rate of the
annular cooling jet decreased from 39% to 31% and the ﬂow
rate of the quench jets increased from 11 to 13% of the total
mass ﬂow rate. For these conditions, the ﬂow rate through the
four dilution jets is about 8% of the total mass ﬂow rate.
Figures 8 and 9 show sample results which characterise the
mean and ﬂuctuating velocities measured in the rich, quench
and lean zones of the combustor. The results in the rich zone
show a ﬂow pattern similar to that measured for the standard
case with maximum values of the axial and tangential mean
velocities smaller by about 48% at x/D0\0.352 (second
measuring station in the rich zone), although the ﬂow rate
161


--- Page 10 ---

Fig. 9. Radial proﬁles of axial, tangential and
radial ﬂuctuating velocity components for Run
3 along the model combustor, for x/D0\0.192;
0.352; 0.745; 0.786; 0.826; 1.174; 1.270; 1.414
through the swirler decreased by only 30%. This is associa-
ted with the different shapes and intensities of the central
recirculation zones formed for the two ﬂow conditions, which
has increased in width by about 50% from Run 1 to Run 3.
Although the penetration of the quench jets has increased in
the present conﬁguration, they do not generate any back ﬂow
towards the primary zone as in McGuirk and Palma (1995).
The results quantify a different pattern in the quench module
relative to that described before, in that immediately upstream
of the quench holes (ﬁrst station in the quench module in
Fig. 8) the mean radial velocity is zero around the centreline,
as a result of the comparatively smaller pressure forces exerted
by the contraction. The magnitude of the mean tangential
velocity in the vicinity of the wall is now very small, which
may favour the penetration of the quench jets. However, and
despite these jets now emerge with a radial velocity 20%
larger than in the standard case, the hump-like proﬁle of
the mean axial velocity measured further downstream in the
lean zone, show that the jets still do not impinge at the
centreline. Also, the peak values of the axial mean velocity
close to the wall remain similar to those measured in the
standard case, suggesting the likely importance of the annular
cooling jet.
For the analysis of the ﬂow in the dilution zone, it should
be noted that since the dilution holes are aligned with the
quench holes but they are half in number, the plan A of the
measurements crosses the centres of the dilution holes, but the
plan B does not cross at half distance between two consecutive
holes. The results show that the use of holes in the lean zone
gives rise to a new set of small recirculation zones in the wake
of the related jets, which emerge with a radial velocity similar
to that of the quench jets. The dilution jets penetrate through
the ﬂow within a radial distance similar to that of the quench
jets, although the velocity ﬂuctuations in their wake are re-
latively smaller and with considerably low values along
plane B. This may be associated with the large distance
between two consecutive holes and the large diameter of the
lean zone, which give rise to smaller velocity gradients in the
ﬂow region close to the entrance of the jets.
Analysis shows that the tangential momentum decreases
effectively from the quench to the lean zones in contrast to
the standard case, which suggests the beneﬁcial effect of the
dilution jets. However, this is brought together with a reduc-
tion of the expected fuel/air ratio in the lean zone of practical
combustors, which may limit the present concept. Practical
operation may also have to consider other aspects, such as the
onset of aerodynamic induced oscillations associate with the
coupling between the various sets of jets.
iii) Analysis of the inﬂuence of the annular cooling jet
strength on the ﬂow
The analysis above emphasises the importance of the annular
cooling jet in deﬂecting the quench jets, thus precluding their
penetration through the primary ﬂow. To allow to complete
the analysis, Run 4 was considered with the inlet port of the
cooling jet closed. Although this may not be suitable for pra-
ctical combustors, it provides a better understanding of the
mixing pattern within the quench module. As a consequence,
the ﬂow split at the entrance of the model remained similar to
the standard case, but the ﬂow rate of the quench jets increased
by about 72% and those of the dilution jets by about 115% (see
Table 2).
Figure 10 and 11 characterise the main features of the mean
and turbulent ﬂows associated with Run 4, which show a pri-
mary ﬂow similar to that of Run 1, thus conﬁrming the
dominant role of swirl in the upstream ﬂow. Nevertheless, the
distribution of the axial mean velocity measured further
downstream shows that the swirl induced recirculation zone is
now forced by the quench jets to stagnate at the plane of the
holes. The quench jets emerge with a radial velocity about six
times larger than the maximum axial velocity of the primary
ﬂow and induce large azimuthal gradients of mean and
ﬂuctuating velocities. In addition, the impingement of opposed
jets in the centre of the combustor enhances turbulent pro-
duction, giving rise to velocity ﬂuctuations about ﬁve times
larger than in the standard case. This is clearly observed either
in the shear layer where turbulent ﬂuctuations are mainly
due to shear induced mechanisms, or in the vicinity of the
162


--- Page 11 ---

Fig. 10a, b. Mean ﬂow patterns for Run 4. a Mean velocity vectors
along the longitudinal plans A and B for x/D0\0.192; 0.745; 0.786;
0.826; 1.174; 1.414; b transversal velocity distribution related with the
vectors of a
Fig. 11. Radial proﬁles of axial, tangential and
radial ﬂuctuating velocity components for Run
4 along the model combustor for x/D0\0.192;
0.745; 0.786; 1.174; 1.414
centreline where the contribution of normal strains to turbu-
lence production is expected to be important (e.g. Heitor and
Whitelaw 1986).
For the present ﬂow conditions, the primary ﬂow interacts
with a smaller mass rate of non-swirling ﬂuid and the quench
jets are only able to deﬂect the peaks of the tangential mean
velocity towards the centreline. As a result, the core ﬂuid in the
quench module now rotates with an angular velocity about
twice larger than in the standard case. Consequently, the axial
mean velocity exhibits a single peak at the centreline due to the
absence of the annular cooling jet and the angular motion
diffuses radially outwards, giving rise to a solid body rotation
pattern over all the cross section of the combustor. The ﬂuid
leaving the lean zone interacts further downstream with the
annular row of dilution jets, which reduce the swirl motion at
the outlet of the model in terms of absolute ﬂow rates.
5
Conclusions
The ﬂow in a RQL tubular gas-turbine combustor was studied
based on detailed laser-Doppler measurements of the velocity
ﬁeld in a water model. The study includes analysis of a basic
ﬂow conﬁguration and a series of geometrical modiﬁcations in
order to study the inﬂuence of different parameters on the
performance of the combustor, such as the swirl level in
the rich zone, the geometry of the quench holes, and the
momentum of the inﬂowing jets and of the annular cooling jet
on the internal ﬂow ﬁeld. The ﬂows studied encompassed
Reynolds numbers based on the bulk axial velocity at the outlet
of the model, about 105, which are representative of real
combustor ﬂows.
The work has been derived from the need to extend know-
ledge of preliminary full-scale combusting experiments, which
have been shown to be limited in extent, time and the skills
required. The prime objectives are to improve understanding
of major ﬂow features and of the effect of the details of the
combustor geometry on the ﬂow pattern, as well as to provide
the basis for the numerical calculation of the ﬂow in this type of
combustors.
Detailed measurements of the three mean and ﬂuctuating
velocity components of the ﬂow show that the performance of
the combustor is strongly inﬂuenced by the mixing rates at the
quench stage and by the momentum transfer throughout the
combustor. The main features of the ﬂow structure are as
follows: i) a swirl driven recirculation zone at the rich zone,
which is surrounded by a shear layer characterised by strong
velocity ﬂuctuations and limited in extent by the ﬂow in the
163


--- Page 12 ---

quench zone; ii) an outer recirculation zone of low intensity
close to the wall in the rich zone, which is limited by the
contraction at the entrance of the quench module and cha-
racterised by periodic motions at about 10 Hz; iii) a reduced
penetration of the quench jets, which is in part limited by
the impingement of the annular cooling jet; iv) a core ﬂuid at
the outlet of the lean zone, with a signiﬁcant swirl component.
Other main conditions include the following aspects:
— The decrease of the angular momentum at the outlet of the
lean zone can only be achieved by decreasing the ﬂow rate of
primary ﬂuid through the swirl cup and by adding a row of
crossing jets at the lean stage. In practical operation, such
method may be limited by the minimum fuel/air ratio
necessary for the oxidation of unburned gases in the lean
stage.
— The turbulent ﬂuctuations at the quench stage, which
determine the tubulent mixing under burning operation,
only depend on the ﬂow pattern induced by the annular
jet used to cool the front wall of the rich module and by
the quench jets. Enhanced turbulent ﬂuctuations can be
achieved by increasing the momentum of the quench jets
relatively to the axial momentum of the annular cooling jet.
However, a limitation is also imposed since the pressure
distribution imparted by the annular jet is essential to keep
the swirl induced recirculation zone within the rich zone of
the combustor and, thus, to avoid combustion reactions to
propagate down to the quench stage.
The present results provide detailed information on the
aerodynamic ﬁeld in a practical geometry and can be used to
evaluate the performance of calculation methods, which can
then be used to interpolate and extrapolate the experimentally-
acquired information, in order to improve the design of
practical combustors. The mean ﬂow includes zones of ﬂow
reversal, rotation, jet impingement through a cross ﬂow and
dilution, resulting in complex 3-D ﬂow patterns. In addition,
the distribution of normal stresses show substantial departures
from local isotropy and their ratios appear to be strongly
dependent on the local mean strain rates. In general the results
suggest that it is necessary to calculate the individual normal
stresses adequately, if the correct turbulent kinetic energy is to
be obtained. This may preclude the use of turbulence models
at the level of a turbulent viscosity closure and requires
consideration of adequate mixing models.
References
Adrian RJ; Yao CS (1985) Power Spectra of Fluid Velocities Measured
by Laser-Doppler Velocimetry. ASME, Winter Annual Meeting,
Miami Beach, Florida, November 17—22, 1995
Andreopoulos J; Rodi W (1984) Experimental investigation of jets in
crossﬂow. J Fluid Mech 138: 93—127
Barh D (1995) Aircraft turbine engine NOX emission abatement. In:
Unsteady Combustion. Eds. Culick, Heitor and Whitelaw, Kluwer
Academic Publ. Dordrecht, NATO/ASI series, pp. 243—264
Bicen A (1982) Refraction Correction for LDA Measurements in Flows
with Curved Optical Boundaries. TSI Quart. 8: 10—12
Bicen AF; McGuirk JJ; Palma JMLM (1989) Modelling gas turbine
combustor ﬂow ﬁelds in isothermal ﬂow experiments. J Power Eng.
203: 113—122
Coupland J; Priddin CH (1987) Modelling the Flow and Combustion in
a Production Gas Turbine Combustor. In: Turbulent Shear Flows 5.
Eds. Durst et al., Springer, Berlin pp. 310—323
Dimotakis F (1978) Single Scattering Particle Laser Doppler
Measurements of Turbulence AGARD CP 193, PAPER 10.7
Dura8 o DFG; Heitor MV; Pereira JCF (1988) Measurements of
Turbulent and Periodic Flows around a Square Cross-section
Cylinder. Exp Fluids 6: 298—304
Durst F; Melling A; Whitelaw JH (1981) Principles and Practice of
laser-Doppler Anemoetry. Academic Press, New York
Edwards RV; Jensen AS (1983) Particle Sampling Statistics in Laser
Anemometers: Sample-and-Hold and Saturable Systems. J Fluid
Mech 133: 397—411
Erdman JC; Tropea CD (1981) Turbulence-induced Statistical Bias in
Laser Anemometry. Proc 7th Biennal Synmp. on Turbulence, Rolla,
Missouri
Green AS; Whitelaw JH (1983) Isothermal models of gas-turbine
combustors. Fluid Mech 126: 399—412
Heitor MV (1989) Velocity and scalar measurements in model and real
gas turbine combustors. In: Instrumentation for Combustion and
Flow in Engines. D.F.G. Dura8 o et al. (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publ,
NATO/Asi Series, pp. 1—44
Heitor MV; Moreira ALN (1992) Velocity Chracteristics of a Swirling
Recirculating Flow. Exp Thermal Fluid Sci 5(3): 369—380
Heitor MV; Whitelaw JH (1986) Velocity, temperature and species
characteristics of the ﬂow in a gas-turbine combustor. Combustion
and Flame 64: 1—32
Jones WP; Whitelaw JH (1985) Modelling and Measurements in
Turbulent Combustion. 20th Symp. (Intl) on Combustion. The
Combustion Institute, pp. 233—249
Jones WP; Kakhi M (1985) Mathematical Modelling of Turbulent
Flames. In: Unsteady Combustion. Eds. Cullick, Heitor and Whitelaw,
Kluwer Academic Publ., Dordrecht, NATO/ASI Series, pp. 411—491
Joos F; Pellischeck G (1995) Low Emission Combustor Technology. In:
Advances in Engine Technology. Ed. R. Dunker, Wiley, New York,
pp. 105—152
Koutmos P; McGuirk JJ (1989) Investigation of swirler/dilution jet
ﬂow split on primary zone ﬂow patterns in a water model can-type
combustor. Transactions of the ASME. J Eng for Gas Turbines
Power 111: 310—317
Mellor AM (1990) Design of modern turbine combustors. Academic
Press, New York
McGuirk JJ; Palma JMLM (1992) Calculations of the dilution system in
an annular gas turbine combustor. AIAA 30: 963—972
McGuirk JJ; Palma JMLM (1995a) Experimental investigation of the
ﬂow inside a water model of a gas turbine combustor. Part 1: Mean
and turbulent ﬂowﬁeld. J Fluids Eng 117:
McGuirk JJ; Palma JMLM (1995b) Experimental investigation of the
ﬂow inside a water model of a gas turbine combustor. Part 2: Higher
order moments and ﬂow visualization. Fluids Eng 117:
Pereira JCF (1989) Refractive index matching for LDV measurements
near walls and in complex geometries. In: Instrumentation for
Combustion and Flow in Engines. Eds. Dura8 o et al., Martinus
Nijhoff Publ., NATO/ASI Series, pp. 267—284
Rhode DL; Liley DG; McLaughlin DK (1983) Mean ﬂow ﬁelds in
axisymmetric combustor geometries with swirl. AIAA J 21: 593—600
Sislian JP; Cusworth RD (1986) Measurements of mean velocity and tur-
bulent intensities in free isothermal swirling jets. AIAA J 24: 303—309
Spencer EA; Heitor MV; Castro IP (1993) Intercomparison of
measurements and computations of ﬂow through a contraction and
a diffuser. Flow Meas Instrum 6: 3—14
Srikantaiah DV; Coleman HW (1985) Turbulence Spectra from
Individual Realisation Laser Velocimeter Data. Exp Fluids 3: 35—44
Syred N; Beer JH (1984) Combustion in swirling ﬂows: a review.
Combustion and Flame 23: 143—201
Taylor AMKP; Whitelaw JH (1984) Velocity characteristics in the
turbulent mean wakes of conﬁned axisymmetric bluff bodies J Fluid
Mech 139: 391—416
Turrini F (1994) FIAT AVIO Report BRITE/EURAM Low NOX II,
Theme 1.1 — RQL Turbular Combustor. Subtask 1.1.3
Yanta WJ; Smith RA (1978) Measurements of turbulent-transport
properties with a laser Doppler velocimeter. AIAA paper 73—169,
11th Aerospace Science Meeting, Washington
Zhang Z; Wu J (1987) On principal noise of the laser Doppler
velocimeter. Exp Fluids 5: 193—196
164
