
--- Page 1 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
NOx DEPENDENCY ON RESIDENCE TIME AND INLET TEMPERATURE FOR LEAN-
PREMIXED COMBUSTION IN JET-STIRRED REACTORS 
 
 
 
Teodora Rutar‡, David C. Horning, John C. Y. Lee, and Philip C. Malte 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Box 352600 
University of Washington 
Seattle, WA  98195-2600 
(‡ Corresponding author)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The effect of the residence time variation on NOx formation in 
high-intensity, lean-premixed (LP) methane combustion is explored 
through experiments conducted in a high-pressure jet-stirred reactor 
(HP-JSR) operated at 6.5 atm pressure.  The residence time is varied 
between 0.5 ms and 4 ms, holding the measured reactor recirculation 
zone temperature constant at 1803 K.  Air preheat is not used.  The 
results indicate a minimum NOx level of 3.5 ppmvd (15% O2) for 
reactor mean residence times between 2 and 2.5 ms.  As the residence 
time is reduced from 2.0 ms to 0.5 ms, the NOx increases, consistent 
with a spreading of super-equilibrium concentrations of free-radicals 
throughout the reactor.  For the shortest residence times examined, 
PSR modeling agrees with the NOx measurements.  At long residence 
times, (i.e., above 2.5 ms), the measured CO behavior indicates the 
super-equilibrium free radicals, and thus the rapid NOx production, are 
confined mainly to the jet zone of the reactor.  For the long residence 
time range, the measured NOx increases with increasing residence 
time, and is significantly less than the PSR predictions.  A simple two-
zone model of the HP-JSR is used to interpret and evaluate the NOx 
formation.   
Experiments exploring the effect of inlet temperature on NOx are 
conducted in an atmospheric pressure, methane-fired, jet-stirred 
reactor (A-JSR).  The reactor temperature is held constant at 1788 K, 
and the inlet mixture temperature is varied between the no-preheat 
case and 623 K.  These experiments show that increasing the inlet air 
temperature over the full range tested decreases the NOx by about 
30%.  Several explanations are offered for the behavior.  For both 
reactors, i.e., the HP-JSR and A-JSR, single inlet jet nozzles are used.  
The results lead to a practical conclusion that very low NOx levels can 
be achieved for combustion in strongly back-mixed reaction cavities 
adjusted to optimal residence time and inlet temperature.   
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
This study has been undertaken to determine if a jet-stirred 
reactor operated in lean-premixed (LP) mode at high pressure could 
attain well-stirred behavior for NOx formation.  Initial work by Steele 
(1995) and Steele et al. (1996) on NOx formation in a high-pressure 
jet-stirred reactor (HP-JSR) showed this not to be the case.  That is, the 
NOx was indicated to form non-uniformly in the reactor, mainly in the 
inlet jet, rather than uniformly, as in a well-stirred reactor (WSR).  
However, Steele (1995) only examined residence times of 2.0 and 4.0 
ms.  In the present work, a reactor, geometrically similar to Steele’s, 
has been operated at 6.5 atm for residence time as low as 0.5 ms, and 
examined for WSR formation of NOx.  As a consequence, the NOx 
dependency on residence time has been examined over an eight-fold 
range, from 0.5 to 4.0 ms, while holding measured combustion 
temperature constant.  Interestingly, minimum NOx is formed in the 
2.0 to 2.5 ms range.  In an attempt to further decrease the NOx, inlet 
temperature was increased, while holding combustion temperature 
constant.  (That is, the fuel-air ratio was decreased.)  These 
measurements have been performed in the atmospheric pressure jet-
stirred reactor (A-JSR), and clearly show a decrease in NOx with 
increasing inlet temperature.  
Laboratory jet-stirred reactors provide important process data on 
the effect examined, in this case the NOx, even if not well stirred, i.e., 
even if the chemical effect examined is not uniformly dispersed 
throughout the reactor.  If the ratio of the chemical time to the mixing 
time can be increased to the point where well-stirred behavior is 
approached, the data can be interpreted by chemical kinetics.  That is, 
global rates of reaction can be obtained, and the measurements can be 
compared to full chemical kinetic mechanisms, thereby gaining insight 
and providing a test of the full mechanism.  Thus, it is important to 
strive for WSR behavior in the jet-stirred reactor (JSR). 
When examining the fixation of air-nitrogen to NOx, two 
chemical times are of importance: the lifetime of the CH-radical and 


--- Page 2 ---

 
2
the lifetime of the O-atom.  The lifetime of the CH-radical in flames is 
very short, less than about 0.1 ms.  Thus, WSR behavior for prompt 
NOx, initiated by reaction between CH and N2, is essentially 
impossible to obtain.  But, in lean-premixed (LP) combustion, this 
may be of secondary importance, especially since O-atom should be 
the free radical that mainly impacts NOx formation.  The impact 
occurs through the nitrous oxide and Zeldovich mechanisms (Nicol et 
al., 1995).  O-atom has a lifetime of order 10 ms in atmospheric 
pressure flames, and consequently it appears possible to operate 
atmospheric pressure, lean, methane-fired JSR's essentially well-
stirred for NOx formation, (Steele et al., 1996).  At high pressure, 
however, the O-atom lifetime falls to order 1 ms, (Nicol, 1995).  Thus, 
WSR behavior becomes difficult, unless the reactor is operating at 
very short residence time. 
This is indicated in the measurements of Steele et al. (1996).  
Those results indicate NOx formation mainly in the center of the 
reactor, i.e., in the jet zone.  The NOx formation was not dispersed 
throughout the HP-JSR.  That is, in Steele’s (1995) measurements, the 
zone of high free-radical concentrations, and thus high NOx formation, 
was confined mainly to the jet zone.   
Optical access to the HP-JSR is very limited.  Thus, the free 
radicals are not measured.  However, Nicol (1995) showed a fairly 
strong correlation between O-atom and CO for lean-premixed 
combustion.  Therefore, in the present work, measurements of CO 
across the reactor are used as an indicator of free radical (O, H, OH) 
concentrations and the degree to which NOx formation moves from 
the jet zone to the bulk of the reactor.   
The HP-JSR is operated at constant measured temperature, i.e., 
the recorded thermocouple temperature is held at 1803 ± 5 K.  Because 
heat loss from the thermocouple varies with flow conditions in the 
reactor, heat transfer analysis of the reactor and the thermocouple has 
been undertaken to estimate rather closely the gas temperature.  The 
analysis indicates the gas temperature increases from about 1825 K at 
0.5 ms to about 1880 K at 4.0 ms.  Reactor pressure is held constant at 
6.5 atm, and the flow rate is increased by eight-fold, providing 
residence times from 0.5 to 4.0 ms.  For the A-JSR tests, where the 
inlet temperature effect is studied, the measured, radiation-corrected 
combustion temperature is held constant at 1788 K.  The A-JSR 
residence time is 3.5 ms, nominal, and the mixture inlet temperature is 
varied from the non-preheat case to 623 K.   
As shown below, the NOx concentration is observed to increase 
as the residence time is reduced from 2.0 to 0.5 ms, and it appears 
there is an NOx minimum in the 2.0 to 2.5 ms range. The increase in 
NOx with decreasing residence time (above 2.5 ms) was anticipated, 
since the perfectly-stirred reactor (PSR) solution for the HP-JSR 
experimental conditions gives an NOx concentration substantially 
above the level measured by Steele (1995) at 2.0 and 4.0 ms.  The 
minimum of NOx in the 2.0 to 2.5 ms range was not anticipated, 
however, but can be explained if a tradeoff in the effect of residence 
time is considered.  At long residence times, (i.e., longer than 2.5 ms), 
the predominant effect is increased time for NOx formation, while at 
short residence times, (i.e., shorter than 2.0 ms), the predominant 
effect is mixing intensity.  That is, at short residence time, the strong 
continual mixing of fresh reactants into the gases recirculating in the 
reactor acts to maintain free radical levels high throughout the reactor.  
This overcomes the effect of reduced residence time available for NOx 
production.  At the long residence times, since the mixing intensity is 
low,  the free radicals responsible for  the  NOx formation have time to  
 
4 Drain (or Exhaust)
Holes
Temperature and
Gas Sampling Ports
Premixed Air and CH4
 
Fig. 1. Schematic of the jet-stirred reactor cavity 
 
 
decay towards equilibrium levels.  NOx forms at a high rate in a jet-
zone of the reactor, and then at a low rate in the bulk of the reactor. 
A simple model is introduced to explain the NOx behavior.  The 
model is based on two-zone NOx formation: 1) high-rate formation in 
the jet zone, which is governed primarily by the reactions with super-
equilibrium free radicals; and, 2) low-rate formation in the 
recirculation zone, which is governed by reactions with the 
approximately equilibrium O-atom.  The fraction of the overall JSR 
residence time the gases spend in those two zones varies as a function 
of the overall JSR residence time. 
In the following sections of the paper, the experimental approach 
is summarized, the reactor temperature analysis is explained, the 
measurements and their interpretation for the HP-JSR and A-JSR are 
presented, and practical application to a design for a low-emission 
combustor is shown. 
 
 
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH 
The residence time effect on the NOx formation is studied at 6.5 
atm in the high-pressure jet-stirred reactor (HP-JSR), whereas the inlet 
temperature effect is studied in the atmospheric jet-stirred reactor (A-
JSR).  The two reactors are geometrically similar.  The volume of the 
HP-JSR is 1.5 cm3 and that of the A-JSR is 15.8 cm3.  The schematic 
of the axisymmetrical reactor cavity cross-section is shown in Fig. 1.  
The HP-JSR may be thought of as a micro reactor.  The diameter at the 
widest point is 0.012 m, height is 0.020 m, and the inlet nozzle 
diameter is 0.0014 m, giving the height/diameter ratio of 14.4.  
Though geometrically similar to the HP-JSR used by Steele (1995), 
the present reactor is 25% smaller then Steele’s reactor, and the jet 
diameter is 40% larger.  The smaller volume promotes short residence 
time, and the larger jet diameter permits high mass flow rate, and thus 
short residence time operation.  The reactor material is cast alumina, 
whereas Steele (1995) used cast zirconia.  With the changes made in 
the HP-JSR, it is possible to obtain 0.5 ms operation with an inlet jet 
that is close to sonic.  The A-JSR is ten times larger in volume than the 
HP-JSR.  Diameter at the widest point is 0.025 m, height is 0.044 m, 
and the inlet nozzle diameter is 0.002 and 0.004 m, giving the 


--- Page 3 ---

 
3
height/diameter ratio of 22 and 11, respectively.  Differences 
compared to the atmospheric pressure, 15.8 cm3 JSR used by Steele 
(1995) are the refractory material (cast alumina in this case), thicker 
wall, and different inlet jet diameter. 
With the single inlet jet diameter of 1.4 mm, the HP-JSR could be 
run over the 0.5 to 4.0 ms residence time range.  Because of the eight-
fold range in the corresponding flow rates, the jet velocity and system 
pressure loss vary significantly.  For operation at 0.5 ms mean 
residence time, the pressure loss is 45% and the jet velocity is close to 
sonic.  Whereas, for operation at 4.0 ms mean residence time, the 
pressure loss is about 3% and the velocity is about 60 m/s.  For the A-
JSR, the residence time is held constant at 3.5 ms (nominal).   
Both reactors use single inlet jets, and the fuel is exclusively 
methane.   
The methane and air entering the JSRs are premixed in a pre-
chamber positioned below the jet nozzle and the JSR.  The residence 
time in the pre-chamber exceeds 100 ms for all of the flow rates used 
in this study.  Calculations indicate the premixer residence time is two 
orders of magnitude greater than the eddy turnover times associated 
with the baffles in the premixer.  This argues for the assumption that 
the gases enter the JSR well premixed.  Further, because of the mixing 
intensity within the JSRs, any unmixedness entering the reactor tends 
to be washed-out.  Calculations with a partially stirred reactor model 
indicate that the effect of unmixedness on NOx formation in JSRs is 
weak to negligible (Rutar et al., 1997).   
The sample-probing and temperature measurements are done at 
the two-thirds height of the JSR, which is the widest part of the 
reactor, as shown in Fig. 1.  Gas sampling is done with small probes.  
A ceramic probe is used for the HP-JSR experiments, and a quartz 
probe is used for the A-JSR experiments.  The quartz suffers intense 
devitrification in the HP-JSR, and its use is not practical.  Temperature 
measurements are described in the next section.  The HP-JSR facilities 
are fully described in Steele et al. (1996), and the A-JSR facilities are 
fully described by Capehart et al. (1997).  
 
 
GAS TEMPERATURE 
Knowledge of gas temperature is important for the interpretation 
of NOx measurements.  Two temperature zones are observed in JSRs 
– the jet zone and the recirculation zone. Steele (1995) and Steele et al. 
(1996) have shown typical temperature profiles in the JSRs.  
Temperature sharply increases from the jet centerline to the edge of 
the jet zone.  Farther out in the reactor and throughout the recirculation 
zone, the temperature is uniform.  The temperatures reported herein 
are measured with the thermocouple positioned in the middle of the 
recirculation zone.  This region has the lowest level of CO, which 
might react at the thermocouple surface and, consequently, increase 
the measured temperature over the true gas temperature.  All of the 
temperature measurements are done with R-type thermocouples coated 
with alumina based coating.  Thermocouples are inspected daily for 
cracks in the alumina to assure minimal catalytic reaction at the 
surface of the thermocouple wires and bead.  The measured reactor 
temperature is held constant at 1803 ± 5 K throughout the HP-JSR 
experiments, as shown by the dark circles in Fig. 2.  During the 
experiments, sufficient time was allowed for the reactor to reach 
steady state temperature conditions.  Optical pyrometry is used to 
measure the HP-JSR inside wall temperature. These measurements, 
shown in Fig. 2 as dark triangles, have been adjusted for finite 
transmissivity  through the viewing ports of the high pressure housing.  
Fig. 2.  HP-JSR temperature measurements and 
calculations. 
 
 
 
As noted in Fig. 2, the reactor inside wall temperature falls with 
increasing residence time.  The increasing temperature difference 
between the reactor gas and the inside wall is indicative of increasing 
thermal resistance in the boundary layer as the reactor mass flow rate 
and velocity decrease with increasing residence time. 
Although the HP-JSR measurements are conducted for constant 
thermocouple temperature, the gas temperature in the reactor increases 
with increasing residence time.  The gas temperature in the 
recirculation zone is calculated by two methods.  The first method is 
based on a heat balance for the thermocouple.  Convective 
thermocouple heating is balanced by radiative loss to the walls and 
ports of the reactor.  As the reactor residence time increases and 
velocity decreases, the convective heat transfer coefficient for the 
thermocouple surface decreases.  Further, as shown in Fig. 2, the wall 
temperature drops with increasing residence time.  This increases the 
radiative loss of the thermocouple, since the thermocouple views a 
surface of decreasing temperature.  Both effects, i.e., the greater 
radiative loss and the smaller convection coefficient, drive up the 
temperature difference between the gas and thermocouple, and thus 
indicate an increasing gas temperature with increasing residence time 
in the experiment. 
The second method is based on a procedure that considers the 
chemical energy release in the reactor, and the reactor heat loss.  In the 
first step of the procedure, the adiabatic equilibrium temperature for 
the measured fuel-air equivalence ratio and measured mixture inlet 
temperature is computed.  This is plotted in Fig. 2 with dark squares.  
The fuel-air equivalence ratio is determined in two ways.  It is based 
on the measurement of the sum of CO2 and CO in the recirculation 
zone of the reactor, i.e., on the total carbon, and on the measurements 
1450
1500
1550
1600
1650
1700
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Residence Time [ms]
Temperature [K]
Calc. Adiab. Equil. Reactor T
Calc. Adiabatic Reactor T
Calculated Reactor T
Measured Reactor T
Measured Wall T
Calculated Wall T


--- Page 4 ---

 
4
of the O2 concentration in this zone.  The fuel-air equivalence ratio 
calculated with these two methods is only up to 1.5% different.  For 
the present experiments, unburned hydrocarbon has a weak influence 
on the carbon balance.  Reactor profiles of unburned hydrocarbons 
were measured at different reactor temperatures at 0.5 and 1.0 ms 
residence times using a packed-column, FID chromatography.  Based 
on these measurements, the hydrocarbon levels estimated for the 
recirculation zone in the present experiments cannot exceed a few 
hundreds of parts per million.  This would change the calculated fuel-
air equivalence ratio based on measured CO and CO2 concentrations 
by less then 1%.  The mixture inlet temperature is measured with a 
thermocouple located in the downstream end of the premixer.  Because 
of heat transfer from the reactor, some preheating of the reactants 
occurs.  Measurements of inlet mixture temperature for residence 
times of 2.5 to 4.0 ms have been extrapolated to the full regime of 
residence times, and used in this analysis.  At 4.0 ms the inlet 
temperature is measured as 384 K, whereas at 0.5 ms it is estimated as 
330 K.  Inlet temperature decreases with decreasing residence time, 
because the higher gas flow rates inhibit the heating of the inlet gases. 
A minimum fuel-air equivalence ratio of 0.68 occurs in the 1.5 
ms to 2.5 ms residence time range.  At longer residence times, the 
mixture is enriched to overcome heat loss, and reaches 0.73 at 4.0 ms.  
At shorter residence times, incomplete combustion occurs, i.e., CO is 
not oxidized to CO2, and the fuel-air equivalence ratio is enriched to 
overcome this.  At 0.5 ms, the fuel-air equivalence ratio is 0.74. 
As the second step in the gas temperature calculation, the gas 
temperature is adjusted for the unburned CO.  If this CO were burned, 
significant energy would be released.  Our estimates, (using chemical 
equilibrium and chemical reactor modeling), show that 1% ppmv CO, 
if oxidized forming CO2, increases the gas temperature about 80 K.  
The adiabatic equilibrium temperature is debited using this result, 
giving the adiabatic temperature plotted in Fig. 2 as open squares.  
Detailed CO measurements are shown in the next section (see Fig. 5).  
For the recirculation zone, i.e., for the (R/Rmax)2 between 0.36 and 
1.00, the volume-averaged, as-measured CO increases from about 
0.05% (dry) at 4.0 ms residence time to about 0.65% (dry) at 0.5 ms.  
The CO measurements are adjusted for CO loss in the sampling probe 
based on the chemical kinetic modeling of the probe reactions by 
Steele (1995) and Horning (1996).  The probe loss is dependent on the 
initial CO concentration and increases at higher CO levels, because the 
reaction rate for CO destruction is dependent on the initial CO 
concentration as well as the OH concentration.  In lean-premixed 
combustion there is tendency for OH levels (and O-atom levels) to 
correlate with CO levels (Nicol, 1995).  The CO concentration in the 
reactor [%, wet] is calculated from the measured CO (CO meas.) by 
the following equation, which is a curve fit from the modeling results 
given by Steele (1995) and Horning (1996). 
 
[CO in reactor, % wet] =  
=[CO meas., % wet]/{1.6327-0.1366 ln[CO meas., ppm wet]} (1) 
 
The third step in the calculation of the reactor temperature is the 
treatment of the reactor heat loss.  This is conducted using engineering 
analysis to estimate the resistances for the convective, conductive, and 
radiative heat transfer processes.  Because of the small view factor 
from the inside of the reactor to the outside environment, the radiative 
resistance is high, and because of the high gas velocities inside the 
reactor, the internal convective resistance is low.  Comparison of the 
measured and calculated inside wall temperature serves as a check on 
the  calculation.   As  shown  in  Fig.  2,  this  agreement  is  good,  and  
Fig. 3.  NOx versus residence time at 6.5 atm for methane 
combustion.  Measured temperature is 1803K. 
 
 
provides confidence in the heat loss calculation for the reactor.  The 
loss in gas temperature predicted by the reactor heat loss is about 10 K 
at 0.5 ms and 68 K at 4.0 ms.  Consequently, the difference between 
the predicted gas temperature and the measured thermocouple 
temperature is 28 K at 0.5 ms, and 80 K at 4.0 ms.  These values are in 
close agreement with the independent calculation of thermocouple 
heat loss, which gives the following difference between the gas 
temperature and measured temperature: 13 K at 0.5 ms, and 75 K at 
4.0 ms.  The two methods, because of this close agreement, are 
averaged to give the final result for the reactor gas temperature.  This 
average is plotted in Fig. 2 as the open circles.  In the region from 0.5 
to 2.0 ms, the reactor gas temperature (in the recirculation zone) is 
nearly constant at 1825 K, whereas in the region from 2.0 to 4.0 ms, 
the reactor gas temperature increases to 1880 K. 
 
NOx AS A FUNCTION OF MEAN RESIDENCE TIME IN THE 
HP-JSR: RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The effect of the residence time on measured NOx is shown in 
Fig. 3, for the pressure of 6.5 atm.  Over the mean residence time 
range, starting with 0.5 ms, the NOx concentration drops substantially 
with increasing residence time, attains a minimum in the vicinity of 
2.5 ms, and then increases as the time is increased to 4.0 ms.  The 
measurements of NOx are for the recirculation zone of the HP-JSR.  
Generally, the recirculation zone is nearly uniform in temperature and 
NOx concentration, and the measurements of NOx may be treated as 
reactor emissions.  
In order to more exactly assess the influence of the residence time 
on the NOx concentration, the data of Fig. 3 are corrected to the NOx 
concentration which would occur if the reactor gas temperature, (i.e., 
recirculation zone temperature), were constant at the 1825 K, (the gas 
temperature of the 0.5 ms case).  The NOx correction is made using 
the NOx temperature dependence for lean-premixed methane 
combustion developed by Steele (1995): 
 
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
JSR Residence Time [ms]
NOx [ppmv, dry, 15%O2]
6.5 atm
1 atm, 1825 K
MB Mech.
GRI 2.11 Mech.
PSR (1825 K, 6.5 atm)
unheated inlet jet
methane-air equivalence ratio = 0.68 to 0.74
measured (thermocouple) temperature = 1803 K


--- Page 5 ---

 
5
Fig. 4.  Measured and corrected NOx data.  Corrected values 
correspond to a reactor  temperature of 1825 K. 
 
 
 
NOx [ppmvd, 15% O2] = 1.724.106 exp(-23650/T). 
(2) 
 
Figure 4 shows the measured data and data corrected to a constant 
temperature of 1825 K.  The correction suggests about 30% of the 
NOx formed at 4.0 ms comes from the reactor temperature rise, and 
the increase in NOx above the 2.5 ms case is mainly caused by the 
increase in the gas temperature.   
Profiles of CO and NOx concentration measured between the 
centerline and the wall of the HP-JSR at the two-thirds reactor height 
are shown in Figures 5 and 6, respectively.  The CO profiles clearly 
show that as the mean residence time of the reactor is decreased, the 
recirculation 
zone 
becomes 
increasingly 
filled 
with 
high 
concentrations of CO.  This implies a spreading of the free-radical rich 
gas from the jet zone (i.e., the centerline region) into the recirculation 
zone (i.e., the bulk of the reactor).  For lean-premixed combustion, 
NOx should form mainly in the free-radical rich (high CO) regions due 
to attack of super-equilibrium concentrations of O-atom (and the CH 
radical) on N2 through the Zeldovich and nitrous oxide mechanisms 
(and the prompt mechanism).  In Fig. 6, one can note the decrease in 
the peak NOx as the residence time increases.  For the data taken at 
2.5 ms residence time, an increase of the NOx in the jet zone is noted 
followed by a near flattening out of the profile in the recirculation 
zone.  This behavior, considered together with the sharp fall-off in the 
CO concentration at (R/Rmax)2 ≅ 0.2, suggests that the NOx forms 
predominantly in the jet zone (or jet shear layer).  On the other hand, 
for 0.5 ms residence time, the NOx profile, together with the CO 
profile, suggests NOx formation in the recirculation zone.  Evidence 
for this is the inverse correlation between the NOx and CO 
concentrations in the recirculation zone.  In the region of (R/Rmax)2 ≅ 
0.4, the NOx reaches its maximum and the CO reaches its minimum 
concentration.  This region appears to be the eye of the recirculation 
zone.   Here the NOx has greater time to form,  and the CO has greater 
 
Fig. 5.  CO profiles in the HP-JSR for residence times between 
0.5 and 4.0 ms. 
 
 
Fig. 6.  NOx profiles in the HP-JSR for residence times between 
0.5 and 4.0 ms. 
 
 
 
time to oxidize. 
These results suggest a conceptual model for NOx formation in 
the HP-JSR.  At the shortest mean residence times tested, there is 
insufficient time for the O-atom to relax to equilibrium concentration.  
[The characteristic O-atom relaxation time is about 1 to 2 ms for the 
pressures  tested  in  the  HP-JSR,  per  Nicol  (1995)  and  Steele et al.  
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Residence Time [ms]
NOx [ppmv, dry, 15%O2]
Measured NOx
Corrected NOx
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
[R/Rmax]^2
Measured CO [%, dry]
0.5ms
1ms
1.5ms
2ms
2.5ms
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
[R/Rmax]^2
Measured NOx [ppmv, dry]
0.5ms
1.0ms
1.5ms
2.0ms
2.5ms


--- Page 6 ---

 
6
Fig. 7a.  NOx data corrected to a constant temperature of 1825 
K.  Two linear curve-fits are used.  One for data in the 0.5 to 2.5 
ms range, and the other for the data in the 2.5 ms to 4.0 ms 
range. 
 
 
Fig. 7b.  Function f, calculated using Eq. (3) and the power law, 
versus residence time. 
 
 
(1996)].  Thus, there is an opportunity for the recirculation zone to 
maintain high O-atom concentration and to form NOx at a significant 
rate.  On the other hand, as the mean residence time is increased, it 
appears that the free-radical rich, high NOx production region exists 
mainly in the jet zone (or jet shear layer), and the overall rate of NOx 
production decreases.  For the longest residence times tested, the 
increase in NOx with residence time noted in the data is probably 
caused by two factors, i.e., an increase in reactor gas temperature and 
an increase in the time available for the NOx to form.  
As the pressure is decreased, the O-atom relaxation time 
increases until it reaches a value of 10 to 20 ms for lean-premixed 
combustion at 1 atm (Nicol, 1995).  In this case, the bulk of the reactor 
again becomes free-radical rich, and NOx forms at a high rate 
throughout most of the reactor.  This is indicated in Fig. 3: note the 
datum point at 3.5 ms for the atmospheric pressure JSR operated at 
1825 K, (thermocouple temperature corrected for radiation heat loss).  
The NOx concentration at 1 atm is about double that of the 6.5 atm 
reactor operating at the same residence time (3.5 ms).  
Figure 3 also shows calculations of the NOx, assuming the HP-
JSR to be a PSR operating at the measured conditions. The NOx 
production rate calculated at 0.5 ms is 10.1±0.3 ppmvd (15% O2) per  
ms.  The spread in the calculated value is caused by the two chemical 
kinetic mechanisms used.  The GRI 2.11 (1995) mechanism gives less 
NOx production at the conditions tested than the Miller-Bowman 
(1989) mechanism.  If the NOx measured at 0.5 ms (left most data 
points) is assumed to have formed uniformly in the reactor, then the 
measured NOx production rate is found to be 13.5±0.3 ppmvd (15% 
O2) per ms.  The agreement between the measured and calculated rates 
at the minimum residence time tested is relatively good.  However, for 
the longer residence time tested, the PSR model significantly 
overpredicts the measured NOx. 
Much slower rates of NOx formation are calculated when the O-
atom concentration is assumed the equilibrium value.  For conditions 
of 6.5 atm and 1825 K, the thermal NOx formation is only 0.05 ppmvd 
(15% O2) per ms.  The nitrous oxide mechanism, assuming the 
nominal concentration of 2 ppmvd N2O measured for the reactor 
recirculation zone, and again using the equilibrium O-atom 
concentration (as well as the equilibrium H-atom concentration), forms 
NOx at about 0.15 ppmvd (15% O2) per ms.  Thus, the total NOx 
production rate for the recirculation zone under the assumption of 
equilibrium free-radical concentrations is about 0.2 ppmvd (15% O2) 
per ms. 
In order to explain the NOx production by a two-zone model, the 
following expression is introduced:  
 
NOx  =  τ∗[rH*f + rL*(1 − f)] 
 (3) 
 
The terms rH and rL are the NOx production rates in the high- and 
low-NOx forming regions, respectively; τ is the residence time of the 
reactor; and f is the fraction of the residence time associated with the 
high-NOx production rate. 
The function f is determined in a two step process.  First, the NOx 
data for 6.5 atm, adjusted to 1825 K, are curve-fitted.  The data are 
best fitted with two linear equations, one for 0.5 to 2.5 ms and the 
other for residence times greater than 2.5 ms, as shown in Fig. 7a.  
Then, the function f is determined from the fitted data, assuming rH = 
12 ppm/ms and rL = 0.2 ppm/ms.  (The term ppm denotes ppmv, dry @ 
15% O2.)  The function f is plotted in Fig. 7b.  For mean residence 
times below 2 ms, the function f is well approximated as f = 0.415/τ1.3.  
Thus, as the overall residence time of the reactor decreases, and the 
mixing intensity increases, NOx formation occurs predominately at the 
high production rate. 
The high-NOx production rate used in the model, i.e., rH = 12 
ppm/ms, is a rounded off intermediate value between the measured 
NOx production rate of 13.5±0.3 ppm/ms and the calculated rate of 
10.1±0.3 ppm/ms for the reactor operated at 0.5 ms residence time.  
The value of the low-NOx production rate, i.e., rL = 0.2 ppm/ms, is the 
value estimated above assuming equilibrium free-radical levels.  By 
this interpretation of the data, the fraction of the reactor time used in 
high-NOx production varies from f = 0.96 to 0.05.  Under the 
minimum f condition, 75% of the NOx forms in the high-NOx 
production region.  If, instead, rL = 0 is assumed, then the minimum 
value of f is 0.07, and the NOx forms exclusively in the high-NOx 
production region for all conditions.  If rL = 0.80 is assumed, which is 
the maximum value possible based on the NOx data, (i.e., 3.2 ppm 
NOx formed at 4.0 ms), then the minimum value of f is 0, and all of 
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
JSR Residence Time [ms]
NOx [ppmv, dry, 15%O2]
pressure = 6.5 atm
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Mean Residence Time [ms]
f 
f = [NOx/res.time - 0.2]/[12 - 0.2]
f = 0.415/(res. time)^1.3
pressure = 6.5 atm


--- Page 7 ---

 
7
the NOx forms in the low-NOx production region under minimum f 
conditions. 
Although the results and discussion given in this section are 
centered on the residence time effect, and draw the reader away from 
the original objective of well-stirred behavior, it is interesting to 
examine the evidence for well-stirred NOx formation.  Two pieces of 
evidence exist for the approach to well stirred behavior at 0.5 ms 
residence time.  The relatively good agreement between the measured 
and PSR predicted NOx for 0.5 ms supports an approach to WSR NOx 
formation.  Additionally, the spreading of the high concentrations of 
CO into the bulk of the reactor at 0.5 ms is consistent with a spreading 
of high O-atom levels throughout the reactor, and thus WSR NOx 
formation.  
 
 
NOx AS A FUNCTION OF INLET TEMPERATURE IN THE A-
JSR: RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The atmospheric pressure JSR (A-JSR) is used to determine the 
effect of inlet temperature on NOx.  Measurements are done with two 
inlet jet nozzle sizes (i.e., 2 and 4 mm diameter).  The results are 
described below. The inlet temperature recorded is that measured for 
the fuel-air mixture just before the mixture leaves the premixer and 
accelerates through the nozzle to form the JSR inlet jet.  With no 
preheating of the inlet air, the inlet temperature is 390 K.  Because of 
back heating from the JSR to the premixer, the measured inlet 
temperature is greater than the ambient temperature.  The maximum 
inlet temperature tested is 623 K.  This is obtained by applying 
electrical resistance heating to the air entering the premixer (Capehart 
et al., 1997).  
Results are plotted in Fig. 8.  The measured NOx, corrected to 
15% O2, is plotted versus the inlet temperature.  The measured reactor 
temperature is corrected for radiation losses.  The corrected 
temperature in the recirculation zone is 1788 K for all inlet 
temperatures, and the nominal residence time of the reactor is 3.5 ms.  
All NOx data are adjusted to 3.5 ms assuming a linear dependency of 
NOx on residence time for atmospheric pressure, lean-premixed JSRs, 
(Steele et al., 1996).  This adjustment does not affect the trends shown 
in the data. 
The effect of the inlet temperature on the NOx is seen to be 
significant.  An increase in the inlet temperature from 390 K (i.e., 
without preheating) to 623 K decreases the NOx from about 6 to about 
4 ppmvd, 15% O2.  The results do not appear to be significantly 
affected by the change in the jet diameter from the 2 to 4 mm, though 
more data are needed for the 4-mm diameter jet to confirm this. 
Because O-atom relaxation times are relatively long at 
atmospheric pressure, super-equilibrium concentrations of O-atom 
uniformly fill the recirculation zone of the A-JSR, and thus, the A-JSR 
should be effectively well stirred with respect to NOx formation.  
Steele et al. (1996) discuss this.  Given this situation, PSR modeling of 
the NOx is useful.  In previous work, PSR modeling has correctly 
predicted NOx as a function of combustion temperature (Steele et al., 
1995).  Application of the PSR code with the GRI 2.11 (1995)  
mechanism to the present condition predicts a small decrease in NOx 
with increasing inlet temperature.  Although this trend matches that of 
the data, the levels of NOx reduction obtained by the modeling are 
significantly less than those measured.  Application of the Miller 
Bowman  (1989) mechanism gives a slight increase in the NOx with 
increasing inlet temperature.   
Modeling of the A-JSR as a PSR should provide a fairly good 
prediction  of  O,  H,  and  OH  free-radical  concentrations  within  the  
Fig. 8.  NOx versus inlet temperature for 1788 K gas 
temperature in the A-JSR.  Inlet nozzle diameters are 2 and 4 
mm. 
 
 
recirculation zone of the reactor, and thus, a good prediction of the 
NOx formed by the reaction of these free radicals with N2 and N2O in 
the recirculation zone.  However, since it is not possible to explain the 
inlet temperature effect through such chemical kinetic modeling, it 
may be that the turbulence-chemistry interactions within the jet zone, 
which cannot be treated by the PSR model, are affecting the total NOx 
yield.  [This effect was not resolved in the earlier work (Steele et al., 
1995).]  High inlet temperature causes the jet gas to mix more rapidly 
with the reactor gas than in the unheated inlet jet case, and effects 
quicker ignition.  Reaction in the jet zone could influence the NOx 
through changes in the free-radical levels leaving the jet zone and 
flowing into the recirculation zone.  In addition, reactions leading to 
reduction of NOx might be promoted by higher jet temperature.  That 
is, NOx mixed into the jet zone from the recirculation zone could be 
converted into cyano species by reaction with hydrocarbon radicals.  
Although some of the cyano nitrogen would be re-converted to NOx 
under the lean conditions, some would be converted to N2, leading to a 
net reduction in NOx and to a decrease in reactor NOx with increasing 
inlet temperature. 
Prompt NOx is another possible explanation.  With increasing 
inlet temperature, the fuel-air ratio decreases (for constant combustion 
temperature of 1788 K), and thus prompt NOx, which is related to fuel 
concentration, should decrease.  This explanation would require the 
prompt NOx to be a significant fraction of the reactor NOx, because of 
the significant dependency of the measured NOx on inlet temperature.  
The prompt NOx explanation is not strongly supported by PSR 
modeling of the reactor, which shows a prompt NOx contribution of 
only 10 to 30% (Nicol et al., 1995).  If there were a significant prompt 
NOx effect, it would have to occur in the jet zone.  Although possible, 
such behavior is not consistent with interpretation of the available 
database on NOx formation in the atmospheric pressure jet-stirred 
reactors.   As shown by Steele et al. (1996), the  NOx depends  linearly  
 
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Measured Inlet Temperature (K)
NOx [ppmv, dry, 15% O2]
Jet Diameter = 2 mm
Jet Diameter = 4 mm
Pressure = 1 atm


--- Page 8 ---

 
8
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secondary Air 
 
Secondary Air 
 
 
 
 
 
Primary Fuel-Air Mixture 
 
 
Fig. 9.  Conceptual design of the circular cavity positioned 
above single premixed fuel-air nozzle in a lean-premixed 
combustor primary zone. 
 
 
on reactor residence time for the atmospheric pressure JSR, which 
implies  NOx  formation  throughout  the  reactor and argues  against a  
large fraction of jet zone NOx formation.  In addition, the PSR 
modeling predicts absolute NOx concentrations rather well, though not 
the trend of NOx with inlet temperature, by mainly considering O-
atom attack on N2 leading to NOx through the Zeldovich and nitrous 
oxide mechanisms.  Although prompt NOx cannot be ruled out as the 
explanation for the trend of decreasing NOx with increasing inlet 
temperature, it is suspected the effect may be more complex than 
prompt NOx alone. 
 
 
APPLICATION TO COMBUSTOR DESIGN 
The findings for laboratory jet-stirred reactors with a single-jet 
nozzle indicate the following: 
1. 
There appears to be an optimum residence time range for 
which NOx levels are at their minimum. 
2. 
Preheating the inlet combustion air appears to favor the 
reduction in NOx formation. 
The present work proposes a conceptual design for the primary 
zone of a lean-premixed combustor that takes advantage of the above 
findings.  The findings may have practical applicability because the 
measured pressure loss of the reactor, between the premixer and the 
outside environment into which the reactor exhaust gases flow, is 
about 5% at minimum NOx conditions, and because combustion 
temperatures correspond to the new generation of gas turbine engines.  
The restrictions on the design are the following: combustion in a 
relatively small cavity strongly back-mixed by a single jet reflecting at 
the end-wall of the cavity; operating conditions resulting in optimal 
residence time; and, materials which withstand combustion 
temperatures.   
A sketch of the conceptual design is given in Fig. 9.  It is 
proposed that each such structure enclose one premixed fuel/air 
nozzle. 
The advantages of this design are as follows: 
1. 
NOx formation is reduced, i.e., NOx is formed primarily in 
the jet zone.  Based on the results shown in this paper, the NOx should 
be in the 2 to 4 ppmvd (15% O2) range for engine operating 
temperatures and pressures.  In order to terminate all post-flame NOx 
formation, a relatively small amount of secondary air could be injected 
at the exit of the back-mixed cavity. 
2. 
Low CO levels.  The HP-JSR shows CO levels of a few 
hundreds of parts per million.  By providing additional residence time 
in the coaxial space between the back-mixed cavity and the outer wall 
of the combustor, CO should oxidize to low levels of order 10 ppmvd 
(15% O2). 
Still to be tested with this design are variations in the length and 
geometry of the premixer.  As discussed earlier in the paper, the 
laboratory experiments have been conducted with a premixer of long 
residence time, thought to give nearly complete fuel-air premixing.  As 
also indicated earlier, modeling by Rutar et al. (1997) supports the 
theory that mixing in JSR’s washes out the tendency of fuel-air 
unmixedness to increase NOx levels.  Thus, if future work shows it 
possible to inject the fuel into the air stream in the nozzle close to the 
reactor entrance without increasing NOx, the design will have two 
additional advantages: 
1. 
Reduction of preignition in the premixer, and 
2. 
Ability to burn a relatively wide range of fuel compositions. 
Drawbacks to this design are as follows: 
1. 
Limited turn-down ratio (approximately 2 for the minimum 
NOx condition).   
2. 
Material for the construction of the cavity should be ceramic 
in order to withstand combustion temperatures.  Cost and mechanical 
properties of ceramics, although rapidly improving, still pose a 
challenge for combustor design. 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
Experiments in the HP-JSR at 6.5 atm show that NOx decreases 
between 0.5 and 2.5 ms, attains a minimum at approximately 2.5 ms, 
and then increases from 2.5 to 4.0 ms.  The minimum NOx is 
approximately 3.5 ppmvd (15% O2).  The measured thermocouple 
temperature is 1803 K and the fuel is methane.  The CO and NOx 
profiles across the reactor indicate that there are two zones: the jet 
zone rich in free radicals in which most of the NOx may be formed, 
and the recirculation zone where NOx formation rates appear to be 
much slower.  The reactor approaches well stirred reactor behavior 
with respect to NOx formation at the lowest residence time tested (0.5 
ms).  At this condition, the reactor is filled with free radicals that 
contribute to the increased NOx formation.  At residence times of 2.5 
to 4.0 ms, the reactor losses progressively more heat as residence time 
increases, so the gases are enriched and true reactor temperature 
increases.  This increasing temperature coupled with the prolonged 
time in the reactor, results in increased NOx formation.  The HP-JSR 
results are obtained without air-preheat.  Results obtained in the A-JSR 
indicate the NOx emissions decrease when preheated air is used.  
About a 30% decrease in NOx is observed as the mixture inlet 
temperature is increased from the no-preheat case to 623 K (with 


--- Page 9 ---

 
9
combustion temperature held constant at about 1788 K).  These results 
were obtained using methane fuel and a single inlet jet, and may be 
restricted to these conditions.  
The data from the HP-JSR and A-JSR suggest that primary 
combustion zones based on the back-mixed cavity design could be 
useful for obtaining very low NOx emissions from LP combustors.  A 
conceptual design is proposed. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Support for this research has been in the form of gifts to the 
Combustion Laboratory of the University of Washington, including 
supplies and materials support from Asea Brown Boveri Company, 
and equipment from the Fluke and Watlow Companies. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Capehart, S.A., Lee, J.C.Y., Williams, J.T., and Malte, P.C., 
1997, “Effect of fuel composition on NOx formation in lean premixed 
prevaporized combustion,” ASME Paper No. 97-GT-336, ASME, 
New York, NY. 
GRI 
Mech. 
2.11, 
1995, 
“World 
Wide 
Web 
Site, 
http://www.gri.org/.” 
Horning, D.C., 1996, “Pollutant Formation by Lean-Premixed 
Combustion in a High Pressure Jet-Stirred Reactor,” M.S. Thesis, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 
Miller, J. A. and Bowman, C. T., 1989, “Mechanism And 
Nodeling of Nitrogen Chemistry in Combustion,” Prog. In Energy and 
Combust. Science, Vol. 15, pp. 287-338. 
Nicol, D.G., 1995, “A Chemical and Numerical Study of NOx 
and Pollutant Formation in Low-Emission Combustion,” Ph.D. Thesis, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 
Nicol, D.G., Steele, R.C., Marinov, N. M., Malte, P.C., 1995, 
“The importance of the nitrous oxide pathway to NOx in lean-
premixed combustion,” Transactions of the ASME, Journal of 
Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 117:100-111. 
Rutar, T., Martin, S.M., Nicol, D.G., Malte, P.C., and Pratt, D.T., 
1997, “Effects of incomplete premixing on NOx formation at 
temperature and pressure conditions of LP combustion turbines,” 
ASME Paper No. 97-GT-335, ASME, New York, NY. 
Steele, R. C., 1995, “NOx and N2O Formation in Lean-Premixed 
Jet-Stirred Reactors Operated from 1 to 7 atm,” Ph.D. Thesis, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 
Steele, R.C., Jarrett, A.C., Malte, P.C., Tonouchi, J.H., and Nicol, 
D.G., 1995, “Variables affecting NOx formation in lean-premixed 
combustion,” ASME Paper No. 95-GT-107, ASME, New York, NY. 
Steele, R.C., Tonouchi, J.H., Nicol, D.G., Horning, D.C., Malte, 
P.C., and Pratt, D.T., 1996, “Characterization of NOx, N2O, and CO 
for lean-premixed combustion in a high-pressure jet-stirred reactor,” 
ASME 
Paper 
No. 
96-GT-128, 
ASME, 
New 
York, 
NY.
 
