
--- Page 1 ---

1229
Twenty-Seventh Symposium (International) on Combustion/The Combustion Institute, 1998/pp. 1229–1237
EFFECTS OF FUEL-AIR MIXING ON FLAME STRUCTURES AND NOx
EMISSIONS IN SWIRLING METHANE JET FLAMES
T. S. CHENG,1 Y.-C. CHAO,2 D.-C. WU,2 T. YUAN,2 C.-C. LU,2 C.-K. CHENG2 and J.-M. CHANG2
1Department of Mechanical Engineering
Chung Hua University
Hsinchu, Taiwan, 300, ROC
2Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
National Cheng Kung University
Tainan, Taiwan, 701, ROC
An experimental investigation is performed to study the effects of initial fuel-air mixing on NOx and CO
emissions in swirling methane jet ﬂames. The major parameters used to modify the initial fuel-air mixing
ahead of the swirling ﬂame are the swirl number, the fuel-air momentum ﬂux ratio, and the fuel injection
location. Two characteristic swirling combustion modes, the fuel jet-dominated (type-1) and the strongly
recirculating (type-2) ﬂames, are identiﬁed from ﬂame visualization and 2-D laser-induced predissociative
ﬂuorescence imaging of OH by varying the fuel-air momentum ﬂux ratio. Laser Doppler velocimetry(LDV)
measurements show that the shear layer between the edge of the swirling recirculation zone and the
external ﬂow is a highly turbulent and rapid mixing region. The maximum mean ﬂame temperature is
located at the edge of the recirculation zone, indicating violent combustion and strong mixing of fuel, air,
and hot products in this region. Strong and rapid mixing of the strongly recirculating ﬂame, which increases
mixture homogeneity and shortens the characteristic time for NOx formation, results in a lower NOx
emission index than that in the fuel jet-dominated ﬂame. Excess cold air entrained by the swirling ﬂow
may quench the combustion and the hot products, resulting in an increase of CO emission, indicating poor
combustion efﬁciency. By modifying the fuel injection pattern with the annular fuel injector, which changes
the fuel-air mixing pattern and properly smooths the rapid mixing leading to a higher ﬂame temperature,
the NOx emission level can further be reduced with a signiﬁcant decrease in CO emission.
Introduction
Swirling ﬂows are widely used in industrial burn-
ers in order to increase fuel-air mixing and to im-
prove ﬂame stabilization. As swirl is introduced in
the ﬂow, the tangential component of the swirling
ﬂow enhances the turbulent mixing of fuel and air,
and the swirl-induced recirculation stabilizes the
ﬂame. In general, if the swirl strength is strong
enough, characterized by the nondimensional swirl
number S, an internal recirculation zone can be es-
tablished that serves as a reservoir of heat and chem-
ical radicals. The existence and shape of this zone
strongly inﬂuence the ﬂame stability. Chigier et al.
[1] showed that the addition of swirl does increase
the blow-off velocity by more than a factor of 7 rela-
tive to an unswirled ﬂame. The effects of heat re-
lease, rapid mixing due to swirl, and coaxial air ve-
locities on swirling ﬂame characteristics have been
extensively studied by Driscoll and coworkers [2–6].
For strongly recirculating ﬂows, the oscillation of
the forward stagnation point of the recirculation
zone causes unsteady motion of the swirling ﬂame
as shown by many researchers [7–11]. The formation
of NOx is known to strongly relate to the combustion
temperature and the mixing level of cold fresh com-
bustible mixture with hot gas product, especially for
the non-premixed ﬂame in which the ﬂuid mechan-
ics may play an important role. Claypole and Syred
[12] and Chen and Driscoll [13] found that the swirl
effect can signiﬁcantly decrease the NOx emission
relative to the simple jet ﬂame. Although the swirling
ﬂows have been extensively used in combustor de-
sign, the relation between the combustion charac-
teristics of swirling ﬂames and pollutant emissions
still needs to be established. The recent laser mea-
surements in swirling hydrogen diffusion ﬂames
showed that swirl-induced rapid mixing results in ﬁ-
nite-rate chemistry effects that reduce ﬂame tem-
perature well below the adiabatic equilibrium value
at the upstream end of the recirculation zone
[14,15]. Swirl strongly affects the fuel-air mixing and
combustion process at the upstream end of the re-
circulation zone where the ﬂame stabilizes. Both ef-
fects have a strong inﬂuence on stabilization of the
swirl ﬂame and its characteristics of pollutant emis-
sions. This fact indicates that the initial fuel-air mix-
ing ahead of the swirl ﬂame is an important factor
to ﬂame stabilization and pollutant formation [16].
Because swirling ﬂow induces high turbulenceand


--- Page 2 ---

1230
NON-PREMIXED TURBULENT COMBUSTION
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the swirl burner.
rapid mixing, proper manipulation of the initial fuel-
air mixing by modifying the swirl strength, the fuel
and
swirl-air
momentum
ﬂux
ratio
(MR 4
), and the fuel injector will be beneﬁcial
2
2
q U /q U
F
F
A
A
in controlling the ﬂame stability and pollutant emis-
sions. In the present experimental study, a laboratory
scale of swirl burner is used to investigate the char-
acteristics of the initial fuel-air mixing of the swirling
ﬂame and their effects on ﬂame structures and pol-
lutant emissions. Laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV)
is used to determine the properties of the ﬂow ﬁelds.
Two-dimensional detection by planar laser-induced
ﬂuorescence (PLIF) is used to obtain the spatial
structure of the OH and NO.
Experimental Apparatus
The swirl burner is schematically shown in Fig. 1.
The swirling component is generated by the swirler
with six guide vanes at the angle of 458 or 558, which
is placed coaxially with the central fuel tube. The
corresponding geometrical swirl number, deﬁned
following the literature [17] as
3
2
1 1 (R / R)
h
S 4
tan a
(1)
3
4
2
3
1 1 (R / R)
h
is calculated from the hub radius Rh, the swirler ra-
dius R, and the angle of guide vanes a to be 0.7 and
1.0, respectively. Methane is supplied from an axial
injector with 5-mm inner diameter or from an an-
nular injector with four 2.5-mm holes inclined by 458
to investigate the effect of fuel injection. An R-type
(Pt/Pt-13Rh) thermocouple with 125 lm in diameter
is used to measure the temperature. BeO and 10–
15% Y2O3 coating is applied to eliminate catalytic
reaction of platinum in ﬂame. The maximum radia-
tion loss is calculated to be 5% of the measured tem-
perature, and it is applied to the thermocouple mea-
surements. The gas analyzers are used to detect the
combustion products. The analyzer system is cali-
brated with standard span gases of 20 ppm NO in
N2 and 250 ppm CO. The accuracy of the gas ana-
lyzer is 4% for NO and CO measurements. A stain-
less steel sampling probe that located more than two
ﬂame lengths downstream from the jet exit is used
to measure the postﬂame emission levels, as sug-
gested by Drake et al. [18]. The emission indices,
EINOx and EICO, as suggested by Turns and Lovett
[19], are used here to correct the measured emission
data of NOx and CO.
The experimental setup of the LDV and PLIF sys-
tems is shown in Fig. 2. The LDV used for velocity
measurements is based on a two-color, four-beam
system working in the backward-scattering mode.
We measure u and v components ﬁrst and then ro-
tate two components for measuring u and w. Al2O3
seeding particles (nominal diameter 1 lm) are pro-
vided to both the fuel jet and air annulus. The max-
imum error is estimated to be 10% for the longitu-
dinal and 20% for the lateral velocity measurements,
which is comparable to other LDV measurements in
swirling ﬂames [15]. Details of the LDV system has
been described previously [20].
For 2-D laser-induced predissociative ﬂuores-
cence imaging of OH [21], a narrowband tunable
KrF excimer laser is used to excite the P2(8) rota-
tional line of the A–X (3,0) transition at k 4 248.46
nm. The laser beam is formed to a thin sheet of 25
mm height and 0.2 mm thick by a single cylindrical
lens (f 4 1000 mm) and intersected the ﬂame axis
vertically. The OH ﬂuorescence signal is imaged
onto an intensiﬁed charge-coupled device (CCD)
camera (576 2 384 pixels) with an UV camera lens
(Nikkor, f 4 105 mm, f/4.5). A 10-mm-thick butyl
acetate liquid ﬁlter is placed in front of the camera
to reject the Rayleigh light. Although the Stokes–
Raman signals may also enter into the camera, the
inﬂuence of the Raman signal on OH ﬂuorescence
signal is small due to high ﬂuorescence/Ramansignal
ratio (;1000/1).
For PLIF NO imaging [22,23], a broadband XeCl
excimer laser is used to pump a narrowband dye la-
ser coupled with a frequency doubler. The dye laser
is tunable from 225 to 227 nm with a nominal band-
width of 0.04 cm11. Again, the laser beam is formed


--- Page 3 ---

MIXING EFFECTS IN SWIRLING METHANE FLAMES
1231
Fig. 2. Experimental setup of the LDV and PLIF systems.
to a sheet with a combination of a spherical lens (f
4 1000 mm) and a cylindrical lens (f 4 1100 mm).
The laser is tuned to excite Q11(18.5) rotational line
of the A–X (0,0) band at k 4 225.86 nm. The ﬂuo-
rescence signal in the spectral region of the c (0,1)
band (;236 nm) is imaged onto the camera. An UV
camera interference band-pass ﬁlter with a center
transmission of 239 nm and a half-width of 20 nm is
used to reduce scattered 225.86-nm light.
Results and Discussion
Flame Visualization and Combustion Modes
Photographs of the swirling methane jet ﬂames
with S 4 1.0 for three different momentum ﬂux
ratios (MR 4 1.50, 0.67, and 0.14) and two different
fuel injectors (axial and annular) are compared in
Fig. 3. As swirl is introduced and the momentum
ﬂux ratio is high (MR 4 1.50), a bubblelike recir-
culation zone appears at the ﬂame base as shown in
Fig. 3a. The ﬂame is long, yellow in color, quiet, and
highly luminous, indicating improper mixing and
poor combustion as evidenced by soot accumulation
on the surface of the fuel injector. However, the
ﬂame length is a little bit shorter than the unswirled
jet diffusion ﬂame. This type of ﬂame can be clas-
siﬁed as the fully penetrated jetlike, or fuel jet-dom-
inated ﬂame (type-1 ﬂame). When the ﬂow rate of
the swirling air is increased (MR 4 0.67), the ﬂame
becomes shorter as shown in Fig. 3b. The central
fuel jet appears to penetrate the recirculation zone
from time to time and causes violent ﬂame oscilla-
tion. This can be classiﬁed as the partially penetrated
jetlike ﬂame. As the ﬂow rate of the swirling air is
further increased (MR 4 0.14, as shown in Fig. 3c),
the ﬂame length is shortened by a factor of 5 from
that in Fig. 3a. The ﬂame is blue in color, indicating
high and compact temperature distribution, and the
ﬂame is noisy resulting from the violent interaction
of central jet and recirculation vortex at the location
of the forward stagnation point. Neither further re-
duction in ﬂame length nor change in shape can be
achieved by further increasing the swirling air ﬂow
rate. This type of ﬂame can be classiﬁed as the
strongly recirculating ﬂame (type-2 ﬂame). Similar
trends are found for S 4 0.7 ﬂames.
The effects of the annular fuel injector are shown
in Figs. 3d–3f. For MR 4 1.50 and 0.67 ﬂames, the
appearances of the ﬂames are different from the ax-
ial-injection ﬂames. These ﬂames are shorter and
broader without an obvious central jet ﬂame. For
MR 4 0.14, the appearance is similar to the axial-
injection one. However, the ﬂame structure is totally
different (shown later in OH image). It should be
noted that because the fuel jets are inclined in di-
rection, there is no forward stagnation point, and the
recirculation vortex stabilizes closer to the fuel in-
jector.
Velocity and Temperature Distributions
Velocity and temperature measurements are made
in the radial direction at several axial locations for
each swirl number, momentum ﬂux ratio, and fuel
injector. In this paper, due to space limitation, we
only present the results of S 4 1.0 with both axial
and annular fuel injections. The oscillation of the
swirling ﬂame is quite periodic, and the frequency


--- Page 4 ---

1232
NON-PREMIXED TURBULENT COMBUSTION
Fig. 3. Photographs of the swirling methane jet ﬂames.
Fig. 4. Radial proﬁles of normal-
ized turbulent kinetic energy and
mean axial and radial velocities for
the strongly recirculating ﬂames (S
4 1.0, MR 4 0.14) with axial fuel
injection. Turbulent kinetic energy K
4 (
)1/2. UA is the
2
2
2
u8 ` v8 ` w8
calculated swirling air exit velocity
based on the ﬂow rate and exit di-
ameter.


--- Page 5 ---

MIXING EFFECTS IN SWIRLING METHANE FLAMES
1233
Fig. 5. Radial proﬁles of normal-
ized turbulent kinetic energy and
mean axial and radial velocities for
the strongly recirculating ﬂames (S
4 1.0, MR 4 0.14) with annular fuel
injection. Turbulent kinetic energy K
4 (
)1/2. UA is the
2
2
2
u8 ` v8 ` w8
calculated swirling air exit velocity
based on the ﬂow rate and exit di-
ameter.
of each ﬂame is below 60 Hz. Thus, the operating
frequencies of the LDV system (40 MHz) and the
thermocouple (200 kHz) are adequate for the mea-
surements. The radial proﬁles of normalized turbu-
lent kinetic energy and mean axial and radial veloc-
ities at four axial locations (X 4 10, 20, 40, and 60
mm) for the strongly recirculating ﬂame (MR 4
0.14) with axial fuel injection are shown in Fig. 4.
The radial proﬁles of velocity at X 4 30 and 50 mm
have been omitted for clarity. The centerline axial
velocity is still positive at X 4 10 mm and becomes
zero around X 4 20 mm, which is the location of
the forward stagnation point. The length of the re-
circulation zone extends from X 4 20 mm to near
X 4 60 mm, and the lateral boundary of the recir-
culation zone is located near Y 4 15 mm where
maximum radial velocity occurs. The normalized
maximum turbulent kinetic energy distributes near
the edge of the recirculation zone, indicating strong
turbulent mixing at this location. The level of the
normalized turbulent kinetic energy along the cen-
terline is strongly related to the ﬂuctuation of the
forward stagnation point and the oscillation of the
recirculation zone. For the case with the annular fuel
injector, as shown in Fig. 5, the recirculation zone
moves upstream very close to the fuel nozzle and
extends to near X 4 45 mm because there is no
direct head-on impingement of the central jet.
Again, the maximum axial, radial velocity, and tur-
bulent kinetic energy distribute near the edge of the
recirculation zone at around Y 4 15 mm. The mix-
ing trend of the case with the annular injector is that
the fuel stream is directly injected into the edge of
the recirculation zone where maximum kinetic en-
ergy occurs.
The temperature distributions at X 4 10, 20, 30,
and 40 mm for the strongly recirculating ﬂames (S
4 1.0 and MR 4 0.14) with axial and annular in-
jectors are shown in Fig. 6. The radial proﬁles of
temperature at X 4 5, 15, 25, and 35 mm have been
omitted for clarity. For the axial injection case (Fig.
6a), the maximum mean ﬂame temperature deter-
mined from the radial proﬁles increases from X 4
10 mm to X 4 30 mm and decreases thereafter to
the ﬂame tip. The centerline temperature is low, and
the radial peak temperature is located at around Y
4 15 mm. Corresponding mean temperature pro-
ﬁles for the annular injection case are shown in Fig.
6b. In contrast to the axial fuel injection case, the
maximum mean ﬂame temperature decreases from
X 4 10 mm toward downstream. With identical
swirl number and momentum ratio, the recirculation


--- Page 6 ---

1234
NON-PREMIXED TURBULENT COMBUSTION
Fig. 6. Radial proﬁles of mean
temperature for the strongly recir-
culating ﬂames (S 4 1.0, MR 4
0.14) with (a) axial and (b) annular
fuel injections.
Fig. 7. Effects of swirl number, momentum ﬂux ratio,
and fuel injection on the (a) NOx and (b) CO emissions.
strength is basically the same. However, the different
ﬂame-temperature distribution lies in the different
mixing histories due to different fuel injection types.
The temperature gradient is steeper near the edge
of the recirculation zone revealing that combustion
is intensive and the ﬂame is thin. The higher tem-
perature in the centerline is due to the recirculated
hot product.
NOx and CO Emissions
Effects of initial fuel-air mixing ahead of the swirl-
ing ﬂame on the NOx and CO emissions are exam-
ined by varying the swirl number, the momentum
ﬂux ratio, and the fuel injection as shown in Fig. 7.
Figure 7a clearly shows that strong swirl, low mo-
mentum ﬂux ratio, and annular injection reduce the
NOx emissions. The strong swirl and low momentum
ﬂux ratio cause strong and rapid mixing of the ﬂame,
which increase mixture homogeneity and shorten
the characteristic time for NOx formation and result
in a lower NOx emission index. With annular fuel
injection in high swirl number and high MR ﬂame
(S 4 1.0, MR 4 1.50), the NOx emissions can be
greatly reduced to as high as 63% compared to the
low swirl number (S 4 0.7) with axial fuel injection
ﬂame. A low value of 0.2 g/kg fuel NOx emission
index is obtained in S 4 1.0 and MR 4 0.14 ﬂame
with annular fuel injection, which is lower than a
previously reported value of 0.5 g/kg fuel [16]. The
results demonstrate that the annular fuel injection is
useful for further NOx reduction in swirling jet
ﬂames.
For CO emission, a completely opposite trend is
found. Figure 7b shows that the CO emissions in-
crease with increasing swirl number and swirling air
ﬂow rate. In low MR ﬂames (MR 4 0.14), the ﬂame
length is short compared to high MR ﬂames. The
higher CO emissions in these ﬂames are both due to
excess cold air mixed strongly with the combustion
hot products and to a lack of locations with medium
high temperature for CO to convert to CO2. How-
ever, the CO emissions in these ﬂames can be effec-
tively reduced with annular fuel injection.
OH and NO Imaging
The single-pulse images of OH corresponding to
Fig. 3 (S 4 1.0) are shown in Fig. 8. Each image is
taken at 2 mm above the burner exit to reduce Mie


--- Page 7 ---

MIXING EFFECTS IN SWIRLING METHANE FLAMES
1235
Fig. 8. Single-pulse images of OH
in S 4 1.0 ﬂames. Left column: axial
injection. Right column: annular in-
jection. As previously noted: MR 4
1.50, 0.67, 0.14. All images show the
same axial region, extending from 2
to 27 mm. The ﬂow is upward and
the object size is 32 2 43 mm. In-
tensity range, low →high: blue →
green →yellow →red →white.
scattering from the burner surface. Because the OH
intensity reaches a maximum value in the ﬂame
front, the measured two-dimensional imaging of OH
indicates the instantaneous shape of the reaction
zone. For the axial injection case, the higher OH
ﬂuorescence intensity occurs at the mixing layer be-
tween the fuel jet and the recirculation zone in the
fuel jet-dominated ﬂames. However, the higher OH
intensity is formed at the center near the burner exit
in the strongly recirculating ﬂame. These OH images
demonstrate how the reaction zone is changed with
increasing swirling air in the axial injection case. It
is noted that the end of reaction zone (X 4 25 mm)
measured by OH imaging conﬁrms the velocity mea-
surement, which is the location of the forward stag-
nation point. With the annular injector, the ﬂame
structure is totally different from that with the axial
injector. The single-shot OH images corresponding
to different momentum ﬂux ratios are shown in the
right column of Fig. 8. Because there is no head-on
impingement of the central jet, the ﬂame is in bowl
shape. The maximum OH ﬂuorescence intensity oc-
curs at the edge of the recirculation zone where most
reactions take place. Flame extinctions are observed
in these ﬂames.
The ﬂuorescence distributions from the combus-
tion-generated NO corresponding to the conditions
for OH imaging measurements are also made with
PLIF technique. Because the NO ﬂuorescence sig-
nals are extremely low compared to the OH signals,
the images of NO are not shown in the paper. How-
ever, the measured NO signals in the higher mo-
mentum ﬂux ratio ﬂames conﬁrm the NOx emission
measurements and reﬂect roughly the temperature
distribution. For the strongly recirculating ﬂames,
the NO ﬂuorescence is not detectable. This is mainly
due to the low NO formed in these ﬂames. The other
possible reason may be that single rotational line
Q11(18.5) excitation is used in our measurements
compared with the two line Q11(23.5) ` P11(31.5)
excitation used by other researchers [23].
Conclusions
The effects of initial fuel-air mixing characteristics
on NOx and CO emissions in swirling methane jet
ﬂame are experimentally studied by varying the swirl
number, the fuel-air momentum ﬂux ratio, and the
fuel injection. Two characteristic swirl combustion
modes, the fuel jet-dominated (type 1) and the
strongly recirculating (type 2) ﬂames are identiﬁed
by varying the momentum ﬂux ratio. For the type-2
ﬂame with axial fuel injection, the maximum mean
ﬂame temperature is located at the edge of the re-
circulation zone, where the turbulent intensity is also
maximum, indicating violent combustion and strong
mixing of fuel, air, and hot products in this region.
Strong and rapid mixing of this ﬂame, which in-
creases mixture homogeneity and shortens the char-
acteristic time for NOx formation, results in a lower


--- Page 8 ---

1236
NON-PREMIXED TURBULENT COMBUSTION
NOx emission index than the fuel jet-dominated
ﬂame. This is conﬁrmed by the direct 2-D LIF im-
aging of OH and NO in ﬂames. However, the type-
2 ﬂame produces higher CO emission both due to
excess cold air mixed strongly with the combustion
hot products and to a lack of locations with medium
high temperature for CO to convert to CO2. The
annular fuel injector, which changes the fuel-air mix-
ing pattern and properly smooths the rapid mixing,
enhances the combustion process leading to a higher
ﬂame temperature. Therefore, the NOx emission
level can further be reduced with signiﬁcant de-
crease in CO emission. From thermocouple tem-
perature and PLIF OH and NO measurements, we
speculate on that the NOx formation in these swirl-
ing ﬂames are possibly due to prompt NO mecha-
nism. However, this needs more quantitative data
such as temporally and spatially resolved mixture
fraction, temperature, and major and minor species
concentrations for assessment. Line-Raman and LIF
measurements are in progress to obtain the quanti-
tative data.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Science
Council of the Republic of China under Grant Numbers
NSC86-2212-E-216-001 (TSC), NSC86-2212-E006-025
(YCC), and NSC86-2212-E006-086 (TY). The ﬁnancial
supports are gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
1. Chigier, N. A., Bee´r, J. M., Grecov, D., and Bassindale,
K., Combust. Flame 14:171–180 (1970).
2. Driscoll, J. F., Chen, R. H., and Yoon, Y., Combust.
Flame 88:37–49 (1992).
3. Tangirala, V., Chen, R. H., and Driscoll, J. F., Com-
bust. Sci. Technol. 51:75–95 (1987).
4. Tangirala, V. and Driscoll, J. F., Combust. Sci. Technol.
60:143–162 (1988).
5. Chen, R. H. and Driscoll, J. F., in Twenty-SecondSym-
posium (International) on Combustion, The Combus-
tion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1988, pp. 531–540.
6. Feikema, D., Chen, R. H., and Driscoll, J. F., Com-
bust. Flame 86:347–358 (1991).
7. Chanaud, R. C., J. Fluid Mech. 22:111–127 (1965).
8. Syred, N. and Bee´r, J. M., Combust. Flame 23:143–201
(1974).
9. Garg, A. K. and Leibovich, S., Phys. Fluid 22:2053–
2063 (1979).
10. Gouldin, F. C., Halthore, R. N., and Vu, B. T., in Twen-
tieth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1984, pp. 269–276.
11. Chao, Y. C., Leu, J. H., Hung, Y. F., and Lin, C. K.,
Exp. Fluids 10:341–348 (1991).
12. Claypole, T. C. and Syred, N., in Eighteenth Sympo-
sium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, 1981, pp. 81–89.
13. Chen, R. H. and Driscoll, J. F., in Twenty-Third Sym-
posium (International) on Combustion, The Combus-
tion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1990, pp. 281–288.
14. Tacke, M. M., Cheng, T. C., Hassel, E. P., and Janicka,
J., in Twenty-Sixth Symposium (International) on
Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh,
1996, pp. 169–175.
15. Fru¨chtel, G., Hassel, E. P., and Janicka, J., in Twenty-
Sixth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1996, pp. 195–202.
16. Terasaki, T. and Hayashi, S., in Twenty-Sixth Sympo-
sium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, 1996, pp. 2733–2739.
17. Bee´r, J. M. and Chigier, N. A., in Combustion Aero-
dynamics, 1st ed., Robert E. Krieger Publishing Com-
pany, Malabar, FL, 1983, p. 112.
18. Drake, M. C., Correa, S. M., Pitz, R. W., Shyy, W., and
Fenimore, C. P., Combust. Flame 69:347–365 (1987).
19. Turns, S. R. and Lovett, J. A., Combust. Sci. Technol.
66:233–249 (1989).
20. Chao, Y. C. and Jeng, M. S., in Twenty-Fourth Sym-
posium (International) on Combustion, The Combus-
tion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1992, pp. 333–340.
21. Andresen, P., Meijer, G., Schlu¨ter, H., Voges, H.,
Koch, A., Hentschel, W., Oppermann, W., and Rothe,
E., Appl. Opt. 29:2392–2404 (1990).
22. Hanson, R. K. and Seitzman, J. M., in Instrumentation
for Flows with Combustion (A. M. P. K. Taylor, ed.),
Academic, London, 1993.
23. Bergmann, V., Meier, W., Wolff, D., and Stricker, W.,
Appl. Phys. B 66:489–502 (1998).


--- Page 9 ---

MIXING EFFECTS IN SWIRLING METHANE FLAMES
1237
COMMENTS
Ruey-Hung Chen, University of Central Florida, USA.
Your Fig. 7 shows that EINOx increases with momentum
ratio. A recent study of NOx emission from swirl-stabilizied
non-premixed ﬂames indicated similar results [1]. In that
study, as the fuel ﬂow rate is increased, while keeping swirl
number and Reynolds number ﬁxed, the ﬂame becomes
jetlike, where the long residence time associated with the
ﬂame downstream of the recirculation zone. Therefore,EI-
NOx increases with the fuel ﬂow rate (or overall equiva-
lence ratio). Also reported were studies of the roles of sur-
rounding air and recirculation zone time scale on NOx.
REFERENCE
1. Chen, R.-H., Combust Sci. Technol. 110–111:443–460
(1995).
Author’s Reply. Thanks for the comment. In our study,
we vary the swirling airﬂow rate, while keeping fuel ﬂow
rate ﬁxed. Both results, by varying either fuel ﬂow rate or
swirling airﬂow rate, show that the EINOx increases with
MR (momentum ratio).
