
--- Page 1 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
DOI 10.1007/s10494-009-9229-8
Experimental and Computational Investigations
of Flow and Mixing in a Single-Annular
Combustor Conﬁguration
Suad Jakirli´c · Björn Kniesner · Gisa Kadavelil ·
Markus Gnirß · Cameron Tropea
Received: 16 October 2008 / Accepted: 8 May 2009
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009
Abstract A complementary experimental and computational study of the ﬂow and
mixing in a single annular gas turbine combustor has been carried out. The object of
the investigation is a generic mixing chamber model, representing an unfolded seg-
ment of a simpliﬁed Rich-Quick-Lean (RQL) combustion chamber operating under
isothermal, non-reacting conditions at ambient pressure. Two conﬁgurations without
and with secondary air injection were considered. To provide an appropriate ref-
erence database several planar optical measurement techniques (time-resolved ﬂow
visualisation, PIV, QLS) were used. The PIV measurements have been performed
providing proﬁles of all velocity and Reynolds-stress components at selected loca-
tions within the combustor. Application of a two-layer hybrid LES/RANS (HLR)
method coupling a near-wall k −ε RANS model with conventional LES in the core
ﬂow was the focus of the computational work. In addition to the direct comparison
with the experimental results, the HLR performance is comparatively assessed with
the results obtained by using conventional LES using the same (coarser) grid as
HLR and two eddy-viscosity-based RANS models. The HLR model reproduced all
important ﬂow features, in particular with regard to the penetrating behaviour of the
secondary air jets, their interaction with the swirled main ﬂow, swirl-induced free
recirculation zone evolution and associated precessing-vortex core phenomenon in
good agreement with experimental ﬁndings.
Keywords Single-annular swirl combustor · PIV measurements · Quantitative
Light-Sheet (QLS) method · LES · RANS · Hybrid LES/RANS methods
Accepted for publication in special issue of Flow, Turbulence and Combustion (Springer)
Selected papers from the 7th Int. Symp. on Engineering Turbulence Modelling and
Measurements, June 4–6, 2008, Limassol, Cyprus.
S. Jakirli´c (B) · B. Kniesner · G. Kadavelil · M. Gnirß · C. Tropea
Fluid Mechanics and Aerodynamics, Technische Universität Darmstadt,
Petersenstr. 30, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany
e-mail: s.jakirlic@sla.tu-darmstadt.de


--- Page 2 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
1 Introduction
Injection of the secondary air jets into a swirled ﬂow ﬁeld of a modern gas-turbine
combustion chamber plays a key role with respect to the mixing efﬁciency. The swirl
is important for fuel-mixture generation, providing ﬂame-stabilisation through the
formation of a recirculation zone. The quality of the resulting mixing process directly
inﬂuences the stability of the combustion. The ultimate goal is to achieve a maximum
possible homogeneous fuel-mixture being directly associated with a homogeneous
combustion temperature distribution contributing strongly to minimization of the
pollutants emission. In the present work attention will be restricted to the isothermal
mixing process.
The large majority of the experimentally investigated combustor conﬁgurations,
serving for years as benchmarks for computational methods and turbulence model
validation, resemble the tubo-annular combustor geometry representing an axisym-
metric idealization of a can-type combustor without secondary air injection, e.g.
Roback and Johnson [34], Monmont and Greenhalgh [28] and Palm [30]. Com-
plementary computational studies using LES (Large-Eddy Simulation) and RANS
(Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes) methods have been reported for instance in the
studies of Pierce and Moin [32], Tang et al. [36], Jester-Zürker et al. [17] and Palm
et al. [31]. The experimental investigations of the can-combustor-like geometries
exhibiting mixing of the swirled main ﬂow and the radially injected air jets were
the topic of the works of Koutmos [20], Heitor and Whitelaw [13] and Koutmos
and McGuirk [21]. Whereas the work of Koutmos and McGuirk dealt with an
isothermal ﬂow, Heitor and Whitelaw investigated a reacting ﬂow conﬁguration
providing the results of the temperature and species (O2, UHC, H2, CO2, CO and
NOx) concentration ﬁelds in addition to the mean velocity and turbulence ﬁeld. The
water model of a gas turbine combustor investigated experimentally by McGuirk and
Palma [27] was a replica of the model combustor used by Koutmos and Heitor and
Whitelaw, differing primarily in number and size of dilution holes and swirler size.
The corresponding computational studies using the high Reynolds number versions
of the standard k −ε and differential Reynolds stress models (RSM) in the RANS
framework were performed by Lin [24], Koutmos and McGuirk [22] and Mueller and
Knill [29]. The latter one relates to the Heitor and Whitelaw’s reacting combustor
conﬁguration. Lin and Leschziner [25] compared their k −ε and RSM results of an
isolated jet injected into a swirling cross-ﬂow with the experimental database of Gan
[7] displaying a more realistic ﬂow pattern obtained by the Reynolds-stress model
versions applied.
The tubo-annular combustor types belong to the older generation of gas turbines,
being no longer in use. A more common geometry for gas turbines is nowadays
the ring-shaped combustor, that is a single-annular combustor, being relevant to
the presently investigated conﬁguration. In this conﬁguration the fuel-air mixture
is introduced into the combustor through a series of circumferentially arranged swirl
nozzles. To systematically study the mixing of the stream introduced centrally into
the primary zone through the swirl nozzles and the secondary air injected through
the rows of holes situated in the upper and lower combustor walls an experimental
facility has been built at the Chair of Fluid Mechanics and Aerodynamics of the
Technische Universität in Darmstadt within the framework of the Collaborative
Research Center 568 “Flow and Combustion in Future Gas Turbine Combustion


--- Page 3 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
Chambers”, Fig. 1. This geometry yields highly unsteady behaviour of the ﬂow in
general, featuring by coherent structures arising from the swirl nozzles, such as a
precessing vortex core (PVC), and its interaction with the secondary air streams with
respect to their penetrating characteristics (the conﬁguration resembling the multiple
jets in a swirling cross-ﬂow), multiple recirculation zones (swirl-induced ﬂow reversal
in the core region, ﬂow recirculation between swirl nozzles and ring-shaped corner
bubble) and the wall boundary layer subjected to alternating pressure gradient
arising from the varying (spatially and temporally) ﬂow blockage caused by the free
back-ﬂow region. The main objective of the present work was the validation of the
recently developed hybrid LES/RANS method in this complex ﬂow geometry of
practical relevance along the experimental database focussing on the mean velocity
and Reynolds stress ﬁelds as well as characteristic frequencies pertinent to the PVC
phenomenon. The intensity of the mixing process between the main swirled ﬂow
and the secondary jets issuing from dilute holes into the combustion chamber was
assessed by analysing the secondary air concentration ﬁeld. Further results displaying
correlations between the ﬂow ﬁeld and the local concentration established by using
a POD (Proper Orthogonal Decomposition) analysis are given in Gnirß and Tropea
[9]. The present hybrid scheme represents a two-layer model formulation, coupling
a RANS model in the wall layer with an LES in the core ﬂow. Hereby, special
attention was paid to the treatment of the interface separating the RANS and LES
sub-regions concerning its position (determination and control) and the exchange of
the RANS- and LES-related variables across it. Both algorithms are formulated in a
way providing large range of applicability. Both the RANS model and the Subgrid-
Scale (SGS) model in the LES framework utilize the turbulent viscosity as the model
variable. Presently a two-equation k −ε RANS model and the SGS model due to
Smagorinsky were adopted, although the method could be easily extended to other
eddy-viscosity-based RANS models as well as SGS models, see e.g. Jakirli´c et al. [16]
and Kniesner [19].
Upper secondary air orifices 
 
Main flow (swirled) 
 
Lower secondary air orifices 
a)
hMF
Li
d
hSF
w
s
z
x
y
b)
c)
Fig. 1 Example of a single-annular combustor (a) and its appropriate simpliﬁcation pertinent to the
present experimental (b) and computational investigations (c)


--- Page 4 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
Table 1 Geometry parameters
of combustor model
Width
w = 300 mm
Main channel height
hMF = 100 mm
Secondary channel height
hSF = 50 mm
Nozzles separation
s = 100 mm
Nozzle’s outer diameter
Dnozzle = 25 mm
Injection plane
Li = 70 mm
Oriﬁce diameter
d = 12 mm
2 Experimental Facility
The combustor model (Fig. 1; the geometry parameters are summarized in Table 1)
was integrated in a test rig consisting of three parallel rectangular channels (main
ﬂow channel and two secondary ﬂow channels), which were all driven by one 22 kW
blower. The constant global mass ﬂux was reduced using a blow-off pipe and adjusted
to the different channels by air regulators. The central main ﬂow (MF) was operated
at a mass ﬂow of ˙m = 20 g/s per nozzle (Dnozzle = 25 mm) that corresponds to the
typical relative pressure loss of p/p = 3%. The air (ρ = 1.205 kg/m3, μ = 1.82 ×
10−5 N s/m2) enters the test section through the three swirl nozzles (the geometry
with ﬁve swirl nozzles was investigated in the work of Gnirß and Tropea [9]) and
discharges into the primary zone (x < 0) at an ambient pressure of pa = 1 bar. The
geometry of the swirl nozzles was taken from an original swirl burner (MTU Aero
Engines) scaled up by the factor 2 (Fig. 2a). The coaxial swirl which was generated
by tangential rectangular ducts has an overall swirl number of S ≈1. The ﬂow in a
tangential duct has the Reynolds number based on the duct height of approximately
Fig. 2 Schematic (a) and corresponding numerical grid (b) of the air blast nozzle and numerical grid
of the combustor channel (c). H is the main channel height (= hMF; see Table 1)


--- Page 5 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
11,700. The fuel injection nozzle was deactivated. The Reynolds number of the ﬂow
discharging from the outer ring of the swirl nozzle (based on vnozzle = 33.83 m/s and
Dnozzle = 25 mm) corresponds approximately to 56,000. The Reynolds number of the
ﬂow in the main channel is ReMF = ρν MFhMF

μ ≈11, 000 with ν MF = 1.66 m

s.
The secondary ﬂow (SF) enters the primary zone from the top and bottom through
two rows of oriﬁces. The momentum ﬂux ratio of the secondary air to that of the
(swirled) main ﬂow

J = ν2
SF

ν2
MF

was kept constant: J = 100 and 400 (only the
ﬁrst one was investigated computationally). The conﬁguration without secondary air
injection (J = 0) was also considered.
Measurement techniques
Non-intrusive optical measurement techniques have been
used based on the measurement of the light scattered from tracer particles. A
standard fog generator (SAFEX Fog 2005 Loop) was used with a corresponding
ﬂuid to generate these liquid droplets. The resulting aerosol turned out to be almost
mono-dispersed with an average particle diameter of dp ≈1.1 μm, ensuring that the
tracer particles could follow the ﬂow up to a limiting frequency of fmax = 7 kHz
[2]. As shown in Böhm et al. [3] this frequency was sufﬁcient for Laser-Doppler
measurements (LDA) within the entire primary zone of the combustor model.
However, Gnirß et al. [8] presented planar time-resolved ﬂow-visualizations using
a static light-sheet, which was observed by a high-speed camera at 8,000 fps. They
pointed out that at the nozzle exit particle-free patches appear and concluded that
these patches arose from a limited particle response within the swirl nozzles. It was
also shown that this lack of particles in the vortex core could be used to visualize
coherent ﬂow structures like the precessing vortex core (PVC) and determine the
characteristic frequencies. Böhm et al. [4] suggested to combine this technique with
the method of the proper orthogonal decomposition (POD), which is capable of
revealing the coherent structures from a set of images. Figure 3 shows the result
of such an analysis using the time-resolved images of the case with J = 0. The
blue (dark) patches in Mode 1 and Mode 2 represent the helical structures of the
PVC which is centrally intersected by the light-sheet. A dominant frequency in
the spectrum of these two modes, which was calculated from the Fourier transform of
Fig. 3 Visualization of the PVC and corresponding frequencies using POD analysis


--- Page 6 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
the amplitudes ai(t), appeared at fPVC ≈1,450 Hz. Another characteristic behaviour
was found in Mode 3 which represents a pulsation of the conical outﬂow at a 100
times lower frequency fPuls ≈14 Hz. Böhm et al. [4] showed with a spectral analysis
of their LDA data that this effect must appear due to an interaction of adjacent swirl
nozzles, as it could not be measured after turning off two of the three swirl nozzles.
An analysis of the jet penetration behaviour with J = 100 reveals that this pulsation
also inﬂuences the trajectories of the secondary air. They assumed that there were
connections between the mixing quality and the underlying ﬂow ﬁeld, which should
be investigated.
PIV measurements were carried out in several horizontal and vertical planes to
gain global information of the velocity and Reynolds stress ﬁelds. The PIV image
processing algorithm was set to an interrogation area size of 32 × 32 pixels with a
window overlap of 50% using window shifting and window deformation. A validation
of the correlation peak (peak validation) with an acceptance factor of 1.2 as well as
a validation of the velocity range was used to separate outliers. This PIV system was
also used for concentration measurements based on Mie-Scattering (Quantitative
Light-Sheet—QLS, [38]). For this purpose the setup of Findeisen et al. [6] was
slightly modiﬁed for measurements to be conducted in the longitudinal measurement
situation. The readers interested in the details about data procession are referred to
Gnirß and Tropea [9].
The velocity vector plots obtained by the PIV method in the horizontal x −y (z =
0) plane within the mixing chamber indicate a non-periodic ﬂow behaviour between
adjacent swirl nozzles, Fig. 6. These results, representing the average of 200 pictures,
were obtained by using the test rig with ﬁve swirl nozzles. Such a non-periodicity,
characterized by a highly unsteady ﬂow reversal between adjacent swirl nozzles,
intensiﬁes with increase of the momentum ﬂux ratio J. It is especially visible in the
case with J = 400 (not treated computationally in the present work). In the work
of Gnirß [10] this phenomenon was traced back to the presence of the side walls
(positioned at y = ±250 mm from the central swirl nozzle), still affecting signiﬁcantly
the ﬂow issuing from the centrally (y = 0) located swirl nozzle. In the simulations
only the central swirl nozzle was accounted for with the periodic boundary conditions
applied at the planes positioned symmetrically between two neighbouring nozzles,
Fig. 1c. The ﬂow behaviour described can certainly not be captured computationally
in such a way. Consequently, some departures of the computational results from the
experimental ones can be explained to a certain extent by using these arguments.
3 Computational Model
The continuity (∂Ui/∂xi = 0), momentum and concentration equations governing
incompressible ﬂow and mixing under the constant ﬂuid property conditions read:
∂Ui
∂t +
∂

Ui U j

∂x j
= −1
ρ
∂P
∂xi
+ ∂
∂x j

τ ν
ij + τ t
ij

(1)
∂C
∂t +
∂

U j C

∂x j
=
∂
∂x j

dν
j + dt
j

(2)


--- Page 7 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
Here, τ ν
ij = 2νSij (with Sij = 0.5

∂Ui

∂x j + ∂U j

∂xi

being the rate of strain
tensor) and dν
j =

ν

Sc

∂C

∂x j, with Sc = 0.71, represent the viscous stress tensor
and viscous concentration ﬂux, whereas the turbulent stress tensor τ t
ij and turbulent
concentration ﬂux dt
j are to be modelled. ρ and ν are ﬂuid density and kinematic vis-
cosity respectively. The rationale and the most important features of the turbulence
model used in the present work are outlined in the following subsections.
Hybrid LES/RANS (HLR) model
In the present hybrid LES/RANS formulation,
the RANS model covers the near-wall region and the LES model the remainder
of the ﬂow domain. The unsteadiness in the RANS sub-region is largely caused
by the intensive interaction with the unsteady LES ﬂow ﬁeld. Both methods share
the same temporal resolution. The equations governing the velocity (Eq. 1) and
mixture fraction (Eq. 2) ﬁelds operate as the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes
equations in the near-wall layer (Ui and C represent the ensemble-averaged ﬁelds)
or as the ﬁltered Navier–Stokes equations in the outer layer (Ui and C represent
the spatially ﬁltered ﬁelds). The turbulent stress tensor τ t
ij in Eq. 1 representing
either the subgrid-stress tensor

τ t
ij ≡−τij = 2νtSij −τkkδij

3

or the Reynolds-stress
tensor

τ t
ij ≡−uiu j = 2νtSij −2ρkδij

3

is expressed in terms of the mean strain
tensor via Boussinesq’s relationship. The turbulent concentration ﬂux in the equation
governing the mixture fraction ﬁeld is modelled using the simple gradient diffusion
hypothesis dt
j =

νt

Sct

∂C

∂x j, with Sct = 0.7. The equations governing the veloc-
ity and concentration ﬁelds in the hybrid LES/RANS framework read:
DUi
Dt
= −1
ρ
∂p
∂xi
+ ∂
∂x j

(ν + νt)

∂Ui
∂x j
+ ∂U j
∂xi
	
(3)
DC
Dt =
∂
∂x j
 ν
Sc + νt
Sct
 ∂C
∂x j

(4)
In the present two-layer hybrid LES/RANS scheme the coupling of the instanta-
neous LES ﬁeld and the ensemble-averaged RANS ﬁeld at the interface is realized
via the turbulent viscosity, which makes it possible to obtain solutions using one
system of equations. This means practically that the governing equations (1) and (2)
are solved in the entire solution domain irrespective of the ﬂow sub-region (LES or
RANS). Depending on the ﬂow zone, the hybrid model implies the determination of
the turbulent viscosity νt either from a k −ε RANS model: νt = Cμ fμk2
ε or from
the subgrid-scale (SGS) model in the LES formulation: νt = νSGS = (CS)2 S
. The
Smagorinsky constant Cs takes the value of 0.1.  = (x × y × z)1/3 represents
the ﬁlter width and
S
 =

SijSij
1/2 the strain rate modulus. The near-wall variation
of the turbulent viscosity νt is obtained from a k −ε RANS model implying solving
of the following two transport equations:
∂k
∂t + U j
∂k
∂x j
=
∂
∂x j

ν + νt
σk
 ∂k
∂x j

+ Pk −ε
(5)


--- Page 8 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
∂ε
∂t + U j
∂ε
∂x j
=
∂
∂x j

ν + νt
σε
 ∂ε
∂x j

+ Cε,1Pk
ε
k −fε Cε,2
ε2
k −Pε,3
(6)
The near-wall and viscous damping functions ( fμ, fε) and the production term
Pε,3 (Eqs. 5 and 6), are presently modelled in line with the proposal of Launder
and Sharma [23] with ε representing the isotropic part of the total viscous dissi-
pation rate

ε →˜ε = ε −2ν

∂k1/2
∂xk
 
∂k1/2
∂xk

taking zero value at the wall
( ˜εwall = 0). This near-wall model is a straightforward extension of the standard high-
Reynolds number k −ε model (used presently for the RANS and hybrid LES/RANS
computations of the second combustor case, Sections 4) aiming at capturing of the
enhanced viscosity inﬂuence onto turbulence in the immediate wall vicinity (viscous
sub-layer and buffer layer). The differences (instead of the total viscous dissipation
rate ε, its “isotropic part” ˜ε is used as the scale-supplying variable; addition of a
model production term originating from the so-called gradient production term Pε,3
into the dissipation equation; introduction of a damping function fμ into the eddy-
viscosity model formulation) are limited only to the near-wall region. Solving the
equations for k and ε in the RANS sub-domain (being necessary for the turbulent
viscosity determination, Eqs. 3 and 4) requires appropriate boundary conditions at
the RANS–LES interface. The approach used presently is based on the equality
of the RANS interface-values for k and ε with corresponding SGS values. This
condition, originating from the equivalence of the total stresses at both sides of
interface (the RANS total stress, similar to the LES one, comprises both resolved
and modelled parts) - τ LES
tot
= τ RANS
tot
, reduces to the equality of their modelled
contributions by assuming the continuity of the resolved fractions across the interface
(ifce), Hanjali´c [12] and Temmerman et al. [37]: −2νSGSSij = −2νtSij. Finally, the
condition applied at the interface implies the equality of the (modelled) turbulent
viscosities:
νt,ifce|RANS−side = νSGS,ifce|LES−side
(7)
The statement concerning the equivalence of the resolved fractions in the imme-
diate interface vicinity originates from the fact that the HLR method deals with a
unique, LES-like velocity ﬁeld in the entire solution domain independent of the
sub-region. It should also be noted that this is not entirely true, as we have also
experienced in the process of the method validation, but the differences are very
small. Introduction of the resolved contributions into the matching criteria led to
discontinuities (kinks) at the proﬁles of turbulent quantities across the interface.
These are the consequence of the strong damping of LES unsteadiness in the RANS
sub-region and its weaker receptivity to the turbulence ﬂuctuations. Furthermore,
accounting for the resolved parts would require their evaluation at each time step,
the procedure being not in accordance with requirements for an efﬁcient method.
Because k and ε are not provided within the LES sub-domain in the case of the
subgrid-scale model of Smagorinsky, their SGS values are presently estimated utiliz-
ing the local equilibrium hypothesis assuming the equality between the production,
dissipation and energy ﬂux through the cutoff and the analogy to the eddy-viscosity-
based RANS modeling in line with the proposal of Mason and Callen [26]:
kSGS = (CS)2 S
2

Cμ
,
εSGS = (CS)2 S
3
(8)


--- Page 9 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
Fig. 4 Variation of modelled
turbulent viscosity

ν+
m = νt

ν

across the interface (ifce) in a
fully-developed channel ﬂow
(DNS: [1])
with Cμ = 0.09. The algorithm being used to numerically ensure the fulﬁlment
of the condition expressed by Eq. 7, resembling the well-known procedure for
setting the value of a variable at a computational node, is explained as follows.
The RANS equations for k and ε are solved in the entire ﬂow ﬁeld, but with the
discretization coefﬁcients taking zero values in the LES sub-region (Ak,SGS = 0).
By manipulating appropriately the source terms in the corresponding discretization
equations

k Ak + SP

SGS 
P,SGS = 
k Ak
k,SGS + SU,SGS by taking SU,SGS =
1030
SGS and SP,SGS = 1030, with 
SGS ≡kSGS, εSGS, their numerical solution in the
framework of the ﬁnite volume method provides the interface values of the kRANS
and εRANS being equal to the corresponding SGS values. By doing so, the boundary
condition at the LES/RANS interface (ifce), expressed by Eq. 7, is implicitly imposed
without introduction of any empirical “transitional” function. Both the RANS model
and the SGS model are used in their original form without any further adjustment
or modiﬁcation. This is illustrated in Fig. 4 displaying the variation of the modelled
turbulent viscosity across the interface in a fully-developed channel ﬂow. One can
clearly see the damping of the RANS viscosity towards the one of the SGS motion.
A gradual adjustment of the turbulent viscosities at both interface sides to each other
(within the numerical method applied) is ensured, providing in such a way their
smooth transition.
One of the advantages of a zonal approach is the possibility to predeﬁne the LES–
RANS interface. However, in unknown ﬂow conﬁgurations, this could be a difﬁcult
issue. Therefore, a certain criteria expressed in terms of a control parameter should
be introduced. Presently, the following control parameter
k∗=

k mod
k mod + kres

(9)
is adopted, representing the ratio of the modelled (kmod = kSGS) to the total turbu-
lent kinetic energy in the LES region (with kres representing the resolved part, whose
evaluation requires the on-line averaging), averaged over all grid cells bordering
the interface on the LES side. Thus, the interface will be positioned in accordance
with the requirement for the k∗-parameter, i.e. for the modelled turbulent kinetic
energy, to stay under a certain limit which is to be prescribed. A typical value
of 20% was adopted in the present work, corresponding approximately to the
reference value an LES resolution should comply with, Pope [33]. As soon as the


--- Page 10 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
k∗-value exceeds 20% (implying a coarser grid at this position, being inadequate
for LES to be applied), the interface is moved farther from the wall (the RANS
sub-region will be enlarged) and in the opposite direction when the value goes
below 20% (denoting a ﬁner grid at the respective position being suitable for LES
to be appropriately applied). This additionally ensures that in the limit of a very
ﬁne grid (low level of the residual turbulence) LES is performed over most of the
solution domain. In contrast, in the case of a coarse grid, RANS prevails. As the
interface separates the near-wall region from the reminder of the ﬂow, it would be
suitable to choose a wall-deﬁned parameter for denoting the interface location. For
present computations of the model combustor (Fig. 1b and c), both dimensionless
wall distances z+ (made dimensionless by applying the wall units ν and Uτ) and
z/ (with  = (x × y × z)1/3 representing the corresponding mesh size) were
adopted (see Section 4 for more details). Despite possible difﬁculties with respect
to the deﬁnition of z+ in ﬂow domains where the wall shear stress

τw = ρU2
τ

approaches zero, as e.g. in separation and reattachment regions, no problems in
the course of the computations have arisen. It should be noted, that the interface
z+ doesn’t represent a model parameter in the HLR method. It only denotes, i.e.
“labels” the computational nodes at which the prescribed value of k∗is obtained,
i.e. “detected”. Figure 5a illustrates the behaviour of the interface position in a fully-
developed channel ﬂow by displaying its temporal variation in terms of dimensionless
wall distance y+. In this ﬂow being two-dimensional in the mean, the wall-normal
coordinate is denoted by y, unlike z in the combustor conﬁguration (Fig. 1b). The
ﬁnal position of the interface obtained at the end of this computation corresponds
to y+
ifce ≈50. It should be noted that the grid used here, comprising (Nx, Ny, Nz) =
(48, 64, 72) grid cells, is substantially ﬁner than one used for the HLR simulation
whose results are shown in Fig. 4. In Fig. 5b the variation of the instantaneous k∗
value, determined from Eq. 9, along the interface whose wall distance corresponds to
y+
ifce ≈50 is depicted. If the interface position is deﬁned by the non-dimensional wall
distance y/h (with h representing the channel height) the ﬁnal value of the control
parameter k∗(Eq. 9) corresponds exactly to the prescribed value of 20%. On the
other hand, if the wall distance y+ was applied for the deﬁnition of the interface
position a certain variation of the instantaneous k* value around the averaged, i.e.
Fig. 5 Temporal variation of the interface position in terms of dimensional wall distance y+ (a) and
variation of the instantaneous k* value around the averaged, i.e. prescribed one (20%) along the
interface (b) in a fully-developed channel ﬂow


--- Page 11 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
prescribed one was obtained due to changes in wall shear stress value. These changes
are fairly weak in the case of a fully-developed channel ﬂow. In the case of the
ﬂows affected e.g. by separation these variations are much more intensive. However,
the prescribed averaged value of 20% will be always achieved. The determination
and control of the interface location is numerically realized in accordance with the
following procedure. The computation is started with an initially prescribed interface
whose position corresponds to a certain dimensionless wall distance, z+ or z/. The
value of the k∗parameter is evaluated after every (typically) 10–15 time steps (at
the very beginning of the iterative procedure this evaluation can be performed after
several hundreds temporal iterations) in accordance with Eq. 9 and compared to its
prescribed value of 20%. Depending on its departure from this value, the interface
is shifted appropriately, as explained above. This procedure is repeated until the
prescribed k∗value is reached. After the interface converges towards a position
corresponding to k∗≈20% the algorithm can be deactivated.
The present HLR model has been thoroughly validated in conﬁgurations of
different geometrical complexity featured by ﬂow separation (from sharp-edged and
continuous curved surfaces) and strong heating under the conditions of constant
and variable ﬂuid properties. Readers interested in more details about the present
hybrid LES/RANS method are referred to Jakirli´c et al. [16], Kniesner et al. [18] and
Kniesner [19].
RANS models
The RANS calculations of the case without secondary jets were
performed using a robust, eddy-viscosity-based k–ε–ζ– f turbulence model (Hanjali´c
et al. [14]), denoted by KZF throughout the manuscript. This model represent a near-
wall model implying the integration of the governing equations through the entire
near wall region, i.e. the application of the exact wall boundary conditions. Similar
to the LS model, employed to model the near-wall region in the hybrid LES/RANS
framework, the standard k–ε model serves as the high Reynolds number asymptote
also in this case. The k–ε–ζ– f is a four-equation turbulence model. Simultaneously
with the equations governing k and ε the equations for the variable ζ and elliptic
function f are to be solved. The model relies on the Durbin’s elliptic relaxation
concept providing a continuous modiﬁcation of the homogeneous pressure-strain
process as the wall is approached to satisfy the wall conditions, thus avoiding the need
for any wall topography parameter. The variable ζ represents the ratio ν2/k (ν2 is a
scalar property in the Durbin’s ν2– f model, which reduces to the wall-normal stress
in the near-wall region) providing more convenient formulation of the equation for ζ
and especially of the wall boundary conditions for the elliptic function f. This model
approach represents a further contribution towards more robust use of advanced
closure models. The most important difference between this model and the LS model
is in the improved modelling of the near-wall region, related primarily to the model
formulation of the eddy-viscosity. Unlike the LS model, which accounts only for the
viscosity effects in the near-wall region, the k–ε–ζ– f model accounts also for the
Reynolds stress anisotropy through better modelling of the characteristic velocity
scale ϑ and through introduction of the Kolmogorov scale τ K = (ν/ε)1/2 into the
characteristic time scale τ into the model of νt ∝ϑ2τ: ϑ2 = k and τ = k/ε in the
LS model and ϑ2 = ζk and τ ∝max (τ K; k/ε) in the k–ε–ζ– f model. The readers
interesting in more details are referred to the original publication of Hanjali´c et al.
[14]. The second combustor conﬁguration accounting for the secondary air injection


--- Page 12 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
has been computed using the basic, high-Re k–ε model (denoted by KE throughout
the work) in conjunction with the standard wall functions for treating the near-wall
region. The three RANS models used in the present work are highly complementary.
Numerical method
All computations were performed with the in-house computer
code FASTEST [5] based on a ﬁnite volume numerical method for solving both
the three-dimensional ﬁltered and Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes equations on
block structured, body ﬁtted, non-orthogonal meshes. Block interfaces are treated
in a conservative manner, consistent with the treatment of the inner cell faces. A
cell-centered (collocated) variable arrangement and Cartesian vector and tensor
components are used. The well-known SIMPLE algorithm is applied for coupling the
velocity and pressure ﬁelds. The convective terms in all equations are discretized by
a second-order central differencing scheme, implemented by utilizing the deferred
correction approach. The time discretization is accomplished applying the second
order (implicit) Crank–Nicolson method. The adopted time step in simulations of
both combustor conﬁgurations without and with secondary injection corresponds
to t = 5 × 10−6 s The resulting CFL number takes approximately unity value in
the swirl generator. Its value in the mixing chamber amounts to 0.1. The RANS
computations were performed in the steady manner (the initially started unsteady
computations ended up with the steady solutions).
4 Results and Discussion
Selected results obtained by computing both conﬁgurations without (J = 0) and
with secondary air injection (J = 100) are illustrated in Figs. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
and 14. The computational domain comprises only one air-blast nozzle with side
boundaries located in the middle between two consecutive nozzles, Fig. 1c. This
enables application of the periodic boundary conditions in the spanwise direction
(y-direction in Fig. 1b). The bulk velocity in such a main channel corresponds to
ν MF = 1.66 m

s leading to the Reynolds number ReMF ≈11,000. The ﬂow in the
swirl nozzle, i.e. swirl generator was accounted for (see Fig. 2b for appropriate
numerical grid). The nozzle consists of two rings with eight and 12 rectangular
channels respectively. At each channel inlet a uniform velocity proﬁle obtained
from a given mass ﬂow rate was prescribed. The air was sufﬁciently perturbed when
ﬂowing through the nozzle so that no turbulent ﬂuctuations had to be imposed at
the inlet. The generated central and annular nozzle streams discharge into the main
channel swirling in the same sense. The outlet plane was located at four main channel
heights (≈400 mm) from the nozzles. The convective boundary conditions were
applied there.
Combustor without secondary air injection (J = 0)
The numerical grid (Fig. 2c)
consists of 180 blocks comprising in total 460,000 grid cells. Such a relatively coarse
grid was intentionally designed keeping in mind that the basic motivation behind
the HLR method is to obtain results at a coarser grid whose quality is comparable
with that of a well-resolved LES. This grid represents an appropriately coarsened
version of the grid containing 3.7 million grid cells Sternel et al. [35] have applied
for their LES study. Detailed analysis with respect to an optimum grid size, time


--- Page 13 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
step and convergence criteria has been performed. However, as they computed the
case with ˙m = 50 g

s per nozzle, being 2.5 times higher than the mass ﬂow rate
considered here ˙m = 20 g

s, a direct comparison with the present computational
results was not possible. It should also be noted that the grid they used would
be even ﬁner for the case with lower mass ﬂow rate, i.e. lower ﬂow Reynolds
number. We adopted their grid and coarsened it appropriately concerning its use
in conjunction with a hybrid LES/RANS method. As the basic idea behind a zonal
hybrid method with RANS covering the near-wall region is to obtain results of the
quality of a ﬁne LES by using coarser spatial and temporal resolution, the use of
HLR in conjunction with an LES-like, ﬁne grid wouldn’t make sense. In the present
zonal model a discrete, ﬂow-dependent interface changes its position in the course
of the computation in accordance with the prescribed value of the control parameter
k∗= 20% (see Section 3 for more details). In the case of an appropriately ﬁne grid
for an LES, as used by Sternel et al., the interface would be placed between z+ ≈
30–50. As the characteristics of the ﬂow in the present combustor model deviate
strongly from those encountered in an equilibrium ﬂow, as e.g. in a fully-developed
channel ﬂow considered in Section 3, the latter values would indicate an interface
being positioned too close to the wall, as it can be concluded from Fig. 7. Here,
the evolution of the interface location separating the RANS and LES sub-regions in
the framework of the present hybrid LES/RANS, performed at the coarsened grid,
is displayed. The interface position expressed in terms of the non-dimensional wall
distance was approximately z+
ifce ≈200. The average z+ value along the combustor
symmetry plane is about 1,800. However, there are regions, especially within the
free recirculation zone, where z+ values exceed 4,000. Besides using the present
HLR model, the computations, applying the same grid, were also performed by
applying the conventional LES (with the SGS model due to Smagorinsky) and the
k–ε–ζ– f model. The present LES aims solely at comparing directly the predictive
capabilities of both schemes. The computational time needed for the hybrid model
is approximately 30% longer then for the coarse LES, due to solving two additional
transport equations (for k and ε) and the interface treatment.
The ﬂow topology in the present combustor conﬁguration is illustrated by the
time-averaged streamlines and the iso-contours of the axial velocity component in
the lower half of the horizontal x–y plane, Fig. 8a. A strong inﬂuence of the swirling
jets resulting in a closed recirculation zone in the core ﬂow can be observed. This
swirl-induced back-ﬂow region penetrates into the combustor interior up to the
position corresponding to x/L ≈0.0. Its computationally (HLR) obtained length is
about 130 mm. The strong swirl promotes the back-ﬂow already within the air-blast
nozzle (see also the experimental outcome in Fig. 6a for direct comparison). The
free recirculation zone covers the largest part of the nozzle’s central opening. Thus,
a high velocity jet (up to 50 m/s) in the outer radial part of the nozzle outﬂow is
generated. Lower boundary in Fig. 8a at y/H = −0.5 represents the side boundary
plane of the solution domain being positioned in the middle between the presently
accounted nozzle and the neighbouring nozzle (taken indirectly into account through
the periodic boundary conditions). Between two nozzles a wall-bounded low velocity
zone arises. The ﬂow between two separation zones aligned with the mean dividing
streamline, whose high velocity (up to 20 m/s) originates from the cross-section
constriction, spreads gradually until the side boundaries are reached. In order to
experimentally investigate the interaction between the swirling streams discharging


--- Page 14 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
Fig. 6 Velocity vectors
obtained by PIV
measurements for several
momentum ﬂux ratios J in
the horizontal combustor
plane (z = 0)
-100 -75
-50
-25
0
25
50
75
100
50
30
10
-10
-30
-50
-70
y [mm]
x [mm]
a) J=0 
-100 -75
-50
-25
0
25
50
75
100
50
30
10
-10
-30
-50
-70
y [mm]
x [mm]
b) J=100 
-100 -75
-50
-25
0
25
50
75
100
50
30
10
-10
-30
-50
-70
y [mm]
x [mm]
c) J=400 
the nozzle, the mixing chambers with three and ﬁve air-blast nozzles were built. It
would have been desirable to consider more than one nozzle in the simulations,
however, one can justify the application of the periodic boundary conditions between
the nozzles when analysing the resulting velocity and stress proﬁles, Figs. 8b and 9.
They display the comparison of the experimentally obtained axial velocity proﬁles,
streamwise and shear stress components and corresponding computational results at
six streamwise locations in the horizontal x–y plane (denoted in Fig. 1b). The velocity
proﬁle evolution exhibiting regions with negative velocity values in the mixing cham-
ber core and positive peak values coinciding with the shear layer regions is a typical
representative of the ﬂow in a swirl combustor. The development of the Reynolds
stress proﬁles within the combustor, whose maxima correspond to the regions with
the most intensive mean ﬂow deformation, are displayed in Fig. 9. The results,
especially those obtained by the present HLR model follow closely the experimental


--- Page 15 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
Fig. 7 Evolution of the interface (in the vertical plane y = 0) within combustor interior separating
the RANS sub-region (black area) and the LES sub-regions (grey area) in the framework of the
present hybrid LES/RANS. The interface position corresponds approximately to z+
ifce ≈200
ones. Proper capturing of the velocity proﬁles with respect to their local maxima and
minima indicates the correctly predicted rate of spreading of the swirling jets and the
form, size and intensity of the ﬂow reversal zone. It is also in accordance with the rate
of entrainment of the curved, annular swirling stream into the core ﬂow. In contrast,
the k–ε–ζ– f model returns velocity proﬁles indicating a continuous overprediction of
ﬂow rate in this central combustor region and magniﬁcation of the ﬂow reversal in the
region between current nozzle and the neighbouring ones accounted for by imposing
the periodic conditions at the side planes of solution domain. The LES results
Fig. 8 Computationally (HLR) obtained time-averaged streamlines and axial velocity contours
(a) and their proﬁles (b) at selected streamwise positions in the horizontal plane (z = 0) of the mixing
chamber for the case without secondary air injection (J = 0). L is the solution domain width (= w/3;
see Table 1). KZF denotes the k–ε–ζ– f RANS model; HLR-LS denotes the hybrid LES/RANS
method employing the Launder–Sharma (LS) RANS model


--- Page 16 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
exhibit signiﬁcant deviation already at the location x/L ≈−0.6 situated immediately
after the swirling ﬂow expansion. This is manifested through a narrower central
back-ﬂow zone characterized by the velocity magnitude overprediction in the mixing
layer region. Corresponding turbulence intensity, represented by the streamwise and
shear Reynolds stress components (Fig. 9), conﬁrms excessive turbulence production
being compatible with steep mean velocity gradients. A plausible reason for such
performance can be attributed to the incorrect capturing of the ﬂow within the swirl
nozzle, having its cause in the inadequate resolution of the wall boundary layer
within the swirl generator section. This was very important keeping in mind that
these wall layers unify in the combustor passing into the region of shear layer. After
that, the LES velocity proﬁle development exhibits strong decay of the velocity
maximum indicating more intensive spreading of the central stream in contrast to
the experimental observation. The outcome of the LES in conjunction with the
coarse grid applied was not unexpected. The turbulent intensity overprediction is
a typical indication for an inadequate grid resolution in the LES framework. This
relates especially to the wall region within the combustor channel. The boundary
layer at the combustor walls is subjected to the pressure gradient variation caused
by alternating ﬂow acceleration and deceleration inﬂuencing to a large extent the
core ﬂow. Impression about that could be gained by analysing Fig. 7. A narrower
Fig. 9 Evolution of the streamwise and shear stress component proﬁles in the horizontal plane
(z = 0) of the mixing chamber for the case without secondary air injection (J = 0). Legend as in
Fig. 8


--- Page 17 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
RANS sub-region corresponds to the boundary layer acceleration occurring in the
region of the largest constriction of the positive axial ﬂow due to presence of the free
recirculation zone. After that a certain ﬂow relaxation follows, being manifested by
its deceleration towards the right end of the combustor channel (thicker RANS sub-
region). Capturing all these phenomena by employing conventional LES requires
appropriate grid resolution also in the streamwise and spanwise directions. A zonal
hybrid LES/RANS method is less sensitive, as illustrated in Figs. 8 and 9. Despite the
fairly coarse grid being used, the results obtained by the HLR method exhibit rea-
sonable agreement with measurements in all characteristic ﬂow regions, in contrast
to the LES results obtained with the same grid.
A general impression about the vortex structure in the combustor at the swirl
generator exit can be obtained by analyzing the Q-parameter (Q = 0.5(ijij −
SijSij)) illustrated in Fig. 10a. Here, the Q-value corresponding to −5 × 104 s−2 is
presented. A helical structure surrounding the recirculation zone is associated with
the revolving motion of the central vortex around the symmetry axis. It indicates
the well-known Precessing-Vortex-Core (PVC) representing a periodical, axially
asymmetrical instability, typical for swirl intensities above approx. 0.6. Figure 10b
displays the one-dimensional spectra of the velocity ﬂuctuations illustrating their
energy content over two frequency decades. In the lower frequency range the energy
level captured computationally agrees reasonably with the experimental ﬁndings.
The afore-mentioned PVC phenomenon is characterized by a certain (dominant)
frequency corresponding to the peak at the power spectral density function for the
Fig. 10 Computationally
(HLR-LE) obtained vortex
structure visualized by the
Q-criterion (a) and spectral
density functions for velocities
(b) recorded at the denoted
point for the case without
secondary air injection
(J = 0). Consult Fig. 1 for
coordinate directions


--- Page 18 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
streamwise (x-direction) and normal (z-direction) velocity components, measured at
the point situated in the shear layer (in the horizontal x–y plane; no peak pertinent
to the velocity component in y-direction could be measured at this point). The
computationally obtained frequency corresponds to f ≈1,470 Hz being very close
to the experimentally determined one fPVC ≈1,450 Hz (Fig. 3). Furthermore, the
entire frequency range characterizing the PVC phenomenon (between 1,100 Hz and
2,000 Hz) as well as the corresponding energy content exhibit good agreement with
the measured values.
Combustor with secondary air injection (J = 100)
For the computations of this
second conﬁguration three holes on both the lower and upper walls of the mixing
chamber are added, through which the secondary air is introduced into the primary
zone. Accordingly, a new computational mesh requiring a certain reﬁnement in
the regions of secondary jets had to be appropriately designed. Similar to the ﬁrst
case (with J = 0) the original ﬁne-LES grid, consisting of approximately 7 million
grid cells (used for the simulations of the case with
˙m = 50 g

s), was suitably
coarsened with respect to its use within the hybrid LES/RANS framework (see
related discussion in the part concerning the ﬁrst case). This coarse grid comprises
870,000 grid cells in total. The secondary air injection was considered by prescribing
the air jet velocity direct at the hole opening. Its value vSF = 16.6 m

s is obtained
in accordance with the prescribed momentum ﬂux ratio (J = 100) and the mass
ﬂow rate of the main ﬂow
 ˙m = 20 g

s

, i.e. the corresponding bulk velocity vMF =
1.66 m

s. The experimentally observed contraction of the effective jet cross-section
within the secondary air hole (from 12 mm to 10 mm) was accounted for in the
computational framework. The other boundary conditions correspond to those
applied in the case with J = 0. It turned out in the course of the computational
campaign that the wall-closest computational nodes was situated between z+ ≈15–
25. It is well known that the exact wall boundary conditions can be applied only
if the wall-adjacent node is situated within the viscous sublayer characterized by
the linear velocity proﬁle (U+ = z+). In the case of the ﬂow subjected to sudden
expansion the edge of this viscosity-inﬂuenced region is at z+ ≈2–3. Accordingly
the near-wall, eddy-viscosity-based RANS model couldn’t be applied in the RANS
sub-region, but its high-Reynolds number counterpart. Consequently, the standard
wall functions were used for near-wall treatment. On the other hand, one knows
that the wall functions are derived under the assumptions of an equilibrium ﬂow,
underlying to the logarithmic law for the velocity ﬁeld, which is not encountered
Fig. 11 Computationally
(HLR-KE) obtained
time-averaged streamlines and
axial velocity contours in the
vertical mixing chamber plane
y = 0. H is the main channel
height (= hMF; see Table 1).
HLR-KE denotes the hybrid
LES/RANS method
employing the k −ε
RANS model


--- Page 19 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
here. Underprediction of the velocity values corresponding to the logarithmic law is a
typical departure for a velocity ﬁeld subjected to the adverse pressure gradient effects
due to sudden expansion, e.g. Hanjali´c and Jakirli´c [11]. However, the actual velocity
proﬁle follows also the logarithmic law but with a somewhat reduced value of the log-
law coefﬁcient. It justiﬁes to a certain extent the employment of the standard wall
functions for modelling the near-wall region in the conﬁguration considered. The
HLR interface is located at z/ ≈2. In the case of a uniform grid it would result in
only two grid cells within the RANS layer. However, the non-uniform grid squeezed
gradually by approaching the walls applied in the present simulation implies about
six to seven grid cells being accommodated within the RANS sub-region of the ﬂow
domain. The pure RANS computations using the same k–ε model (KE) were also
performed.
An impression about the ﬂow topology can be obtained by analysing the com-
putationally (HLR-KE) obtained time-averaged streamlines and iso-contours of
the axial velocity component in the vertical plane (y = 0) of the mixing chamber,
containing also the secondary hole outlets, Fig. 11. Similar to the previous case,
the free back-ﬂow region will be created following the swirled outﬂow from the
air-blast nozzle. The bulk velocity of the ring-shaped shear layer surrounding the
Fig. 12 Computationally obtained proﬁles of the axial (a) and normal (b) mean velocity components
at selected streamwise positions in the vertical mixing chamber plane y = 0. KE denotes the standard
k −ε RANS model; HLR-KE denotes the hybrid LES/RANS method employing the k −ε RANS
model


--- Page 20 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
separation bubble of approx. 16 m/s corresponds exactly to the secondary air jet
velocity vSF. These two streams are equally deﬂected after impinging onto each
other. Thereby, the spreading of the inner recirculation zone towards combustor
walls, i.e. the evolution of its size, is suppressed to a certain extent. The same outcome
is obtained experimentally (see Fig. 12). Whereas the secondary air jets are skewed
towards the combustor exit and continue parallel to its walls, the major part of the
ring-shaped main stream ﬂows back into the recirculation zone. The local separation
regions around the secondary jets are also recognizable in Figs. 11 and 12a.
Figures 12 and 13 display the experimentally and computationally obtained evo-
lution of the proﬁles of the axial and normal (z-direction) velocities, streamwise and
shear stress components in the vertical mixing chamber plane (y = 0). Characteristic
streamwise locations ahead of and after the injection plane were selected. One should
note that the experimental data are not available in the immediate wall vicinity
(z/H ≥0.45). The proﬁle shapes of all quantities characterized by local minima and
maxima and sign changes (the latter is pertinent to the velocity components) are
similar to those documented in the previous conﬁguration. The suppression of the
free recirculation zone illustrated in the computationally obtained streamline pattern
(Fig. 11) is reﬂected in the intensiﬁcation of the ﬂow reversal (corresponding to a
larger negative velocity peak in Fig. 12a) and the ﬂow in the shear layer region.
Fig. 13 Evolution of the proﬁles of the streamwise (a) and shear (b) stress components in the vertical
mixing chamber plane (y = 0) for the case with secondary air injection (J = 100). Legend as in
Fig. 12


--- Page 21 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
Such an enhanced mean ﬂow deformation contributes strongly to the turbulence
production resulting in large peaks of the turbulence stress components (Fig. 13), the
situation being compatible with the previously investigated ﬂow conﬁguration. The
time-averaged structure of the ﬂow ﬁeld is well reproduced by both computational
methods applied. Apart from somewhat higher negative axial velocity values and
a somewhat weaker intensity of the suppression of the central back-ﬂow region
characterized by an overprediction of the vertical velocity component in the shear
layer (both departures being pertinent to the near ﬁeld), the quantitative agreement
with available experimental results is very good, especially with respect to the HLR
method. The same is valid with respect to the turbulence ﬁeld. An “unexpectedly”
good agreement obtained by applying the standard k–ε model can be explained by
the fact, that the large expansion ratio (the ratio of the mean channel height to
the outlet nozzle diameter is about 4), associated with the strong adverse pressure
a) 
 
b)
-70 -50 -30 -10 10 30 50 70
-50
-30
-10
10
30
50
z  [ m m ]
c [-]
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Fig. 14 Computationally (HLR) obtained time-averaged iso-contours of the mixture fraction
(a) for the case with secondary air injection, J = 100 (ﬁgure in the middle shows the experimentally
obtained velocity and concentration results) and evolution of the concentration proﬁles (b) in the
vertical mixing chamber plane (y = 0) for the case with secondary air injection (J = 100). Legend as
in Fig. 12


--- Page 22 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
gradient effects (dominating over the stress gradients in the equation of motion
relativizing their inﬂuence), acts towards Reynolds stress anisotropy weakening, i.e.
towards promotion (to a certain extent) of an isotropic state of the turbulence (the
eddy-viscosity models are based upon), beneﬁting in such a way its good predictive
performance. There is a detailed evidence in the published literature about the latter
phenomena, e.g. Wennerberg and Obi [39] and Jakirli´c et al. [15]. The results of
the concentration ﬁeld are shown in Fig. 14. The prescribed inﬂow values of the
concentration ﬁeld C = 0.0 and C = 1.0 correspond to the swirl nozzle interior and
secondary hole outlets (x/H = 0.0) respectively. Based on the contour plots analysis,
it is clearly evident that the regions of the high shear strain and high gradient of
the local concentration coincide and that the mixing between the main ﬂow and
secondary air jets is completed at the location x/H = 0.2. The corresponding value
of the mixture fraction C is about 0.4. In the combustor near ﬁeld (x/H < 0.0)
values about 0.35 prevail, being reasonably well reproduced by the present HLR
model (it is especially the case with respect to the core ﬂow, −0.25 ≤z/H ≤+0.25),
despite somewhat steeper gradients in the region of the ring-shaped main ﬂow stream
(z/H ≈0.25).
5 Conclusions
The experimental and computational study of the ﬂow in the mixing chamber of
a single annular combustor model has been performed. Two ﬂow conﬁgurations,
without and with secondary air jet injection into the primary combustor zone,
were investigated. The computational part focussed on the performance of a zonal
hybrid LES/RANS (HLR) method, merging an eddy-viscosity-based RANS model
resolving the near-wall region with the LES covering the outer layer (ﬂow core).
The coupling between the two sub-regions is realized by interchanging velocities
and modelled turbulent quantities: kinetic energy of turbulence, its dissipation rate
and turbulence viscosity. Large attention was paid to two key questions concerning
the matching of both methods: the exchange of the variables across the LES/RANS
interface (being realized by implicit imposition of the condition of equality of
the modelled turbulent viscosities) and the interface position control (depending
on the portion of the SGS turbulence kinetic energy to the total one). Hereby,
great importance is attached to simplicity, efﬁciency and applicability to complex
geometries.
Concerning the result presentation the emphasis was placed on the evolution
of the time-averaged velocity and turbulence ﬁelds reﬂecting the structure of the
swirl-induced recirculation zone and its interaction with the penetrating air jets. The
development of the secondary air concentration under the described conditions was
also the topic of the result analysis. The comparison with the experimental database
displays good agreement of the results obtained by the present hybrid model scheme
in all characteristic ﬂow regions in the mixing chamber considered. This is especially
the case with respect to a suppression of the opening angle of the ring-shaped shear
layer bordering the recirculation zone due to secondary jets injection, whose effect
is manifested in an appropriate deformation of the velocity ﬁeld corresponding to
the intensiﬁed back-ﬂow. In addition to the correctly captured spatial evolution of
the velocity, turbulence and concentration ﬁelds, comparative analysis of the time-


--- Page 23 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
resolved images with respect to the precessing vortex core (PVC) phenomenon
associated with the swirled main ﬂow has been performed. It reveals good agreement
between measurements and computations, especially pertaining to its high-frequency
oscillation of fPVC ≈1, 450 −1, 470 Hz.
Acknowledgements
The work of B. Kniesner, G. Kadavelil and M. Gnirß is ﬁnancially supported
by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the framework of the German Collaborative Re-
search Center (SFB 568 TP C2 and C3) “Flow and Combustion in Future Gas Turbine Combustion
Chambers”.
References
1. Abe, H., Kawamura, H., Matsuo, Y.: Surface heat-ﬂux ﬂuctuations in a turbulent channel ﬂow
up to Reτ = 1020 with Pr = 0.025 and 0.71. Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 25, 404–419 (2004)
2. Albrecht, H.-E., Borys, M., Damaschke, N., Tropea, C.: Laser Doppler and Phase Doppler
Measurement Techniques. Springer, Berlin (2002)
3. Böhm, B., Findeisen, J., Dreizler, A., Hennecke, D.K.: Untersuchung der Turbulenzstruktur
einer verdrallten Brennkammerströmung, GALA, Karlsruhe, Germany, 7–9 September 2004
4. Böhm, B., Dreizler, A., Gnirß, M., Tropea, C., Findeisen, J., Schiffer, H.-P.: Experimental
investigation of turbulence structure in a three-nozzle combustor. Paper No. GT2007-27111
(2007)
5. FASTEST-Manual: Chair of Numerical Methods in Mechanical Engineering. Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany (2005)
6. Findeisen, J., Gnirß, M., Damaschke, N., Schiffer, H.-P., Tropea, C.: 2D-concentration measure-
ments based on Mie scattering using a commercial PIV system. In: Proc. 6th Int. Symposium on
Particle Image Velocimetry, Pasadena, USA, 21–23 September 2005
7. Gan, X.P.: Experimental and analytical studies of jets in quiescent or rotating ﬂow ﬁelds. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Bath, UK (1990)
8. Gnirß, M., Findeisen, J., Damaschke, N., Tropea, C., Schiffer, H.-P.: Experimental investigation
of coherent ﬂow structures in a gas-turbine combustor model. In: Proc. 5th Int. Symp. on
Turbulence, Heat and Mass Transfer, Dubrovnik, Croatia, 25–29 September 2006
9. Gnirß, M., Tropea, C.: Simultaneous PIV and concentration measurements in a gas-turbine
combustor model. Exp. Fluids 45(4), 643–656 (2008)
10. Gnirß, M.: Strömung und Mischung im Primärzonenbereich von modernen Gasturbinen-
brennkammern. Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany, Shaker Verlag,
ISBN 978-3-8322-7821-2 (2008)
11. Hanjali´c, K., Jakirli´c, S.: Contribution towards the second-moment closure modelling of separat-
ing turbulent ﬂows. Comput. Fluids 27(2), 137–156 (1998)
12. Hanjali´c, K.: Hybrid RANS-LES—a Critical Appraisal and a Proposal. Internal Report, De-
partment of Aeronautics, Imperial College London, UK and Technical University Delft, The
Netherlands (2001)
13. Heitor, M.V., Whitelaw, J.H.: Velocity, temperature and species characteristic of the ﬂow in a
gas-turbine combustor. Combust. Flame 64, 1–32 (1986)
14. Hanjali´c, K., Popovac, M., Hadziabdi´c, M.: A robust near-wall elliptic-relaxation eddy-viscosity
model for CFD. Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 25, 1047–1051 (2004)
15. Jakirli´c, S., Hanjali´c, K., Tropea, C.: Modelling rotating and swirling ﬂows; a perpetual challenge.
AIAA J. 40(10), 1984–1996 (2002)
16. Jakirli´c, S., Kniesner, B., Šari´c, S., Hanjali´c, K.: Merging near-wall RANS models with LES for
separating and reattaching ﬂows. In: ASME Joint U.S.–European Fluids Engineering Summer
Meeting: Symposium on “DNS, LES and Hybrid RANS/LES Techniques”, Miami, FL, USA,
17–20 July, Paper No. FEDSM2006-98039 (2006)
17. Jester-Zürker, R., Jakirli´c, S., Tropea, C.: Computational modelling of turbulent mixing in
conﬁned swirling environment under constant and variable density conditions. Flow Turbul.
Combust. 75(1–4), 217–244 (2005)
18. Kniesner, B., Jester-Zürker, R., Jakirli´c, S., Hanjali´c, K.: RANS-SMC and hybrid LES/RANS of
a backward-facing step ﬂow subjected to increasingly enhanced wall heating. In: 5th International


--- Page 24 ---

Flow Turbulence Combust
Symposium on Turbulence and Shear Flow Phenomena (TSFP5), Munich, Germany, 27–29
August 2007
19. Kniesner, B.: Ein hybrides LES/RANS Verfahren für konjugierte Strömung, Wärme- und
Stoffübertragung mit Relevanz zu Drallbrennerkonﬁgurationen (A hybrid LES/RANS method
for conjugated ﬂow, heat and mass transfer with relevance to swirl combustor conﬁgu-
rations). Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany (2008). http://tuprints.
ulb.tu-darmstadt.de/950/
20. Koutmos, P.: An isothermal study of gas turbine ﬂows. Ph.D. thesis, University of London (1985)
21. Koutmos, P., McGuirk, J.J.: Isothermal ﬂow in a gas-turbine combustor—a benchmark experi-
mental study. Exp. Fluids 7(5), 344–354 (1989)
22. Koutmos, P., McGuirk, J.J.: Isothermal modeling of gas-turbine combustors—computational
study. J. Propuls. Power 7(6), 1064–1071 (1991)
23. Launder, B.E., Sharma, B.I.: Application of the energy-dissipation model of turbulence to the
calculation of ﬂow near a spinning disc. Lett. Heat Mass Transf. 1, 131–138 (1974)
24. Lin, C.A.: Three-dimensional computation of injection into swirling cross ﬂow using second-
moment closure. Ph.D. thesis, Faculty of Technology, University of Manchester (1990)
25. Lin, C.A., Leschziner, M.A.: Three-dimensional computation of transient interaction between
radially injected jet and swirling cross-ﬂow using second-moment closure. Comput. Fluid Dyn.
J. 1(4), 419–428 (1993)
26. Mason, P.J., Callen, N.S.: On the magnitude of the subgrid-scale eddy coefﬁcient in large-eddy
simulation of turbulent channel ﬂow. J. Fluid Mech. 162, 439–462 (1986)
27. McGuirk, J.J., Palma, J.M.L.M.: Experimental investigation of the ﬂow inside a water model of
a gas turbine combustor: part 1—mean and turbulent ﬂowﬁeld. ASME J. Fluids Eng. 117(3),
450–458 (2002)
28. Monmont, F., Greenhalgh, D.: Cranﬁeld University Contribution to Final Report on
Brite-Euram III Project LES4LPP. Technical Report LES4LPP-BE95-1953 (1999)
29. Mueller, C.M., Knill, K.J.: Numerical simulation of emissions in a gas turbine combustor.
Combustion Canada ‘96 (1996)
30. Palm,
R.:
Experimentelle
Untersuchung
der
Strömung
und
Vermischung
in
einem
Drallbrennermodell (Experimental investigation of ﬂow and mixing in a model of swirl com-
bustor). Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany (2006). http://tuprints.ulb.
tu-darmstadt.de/723/
31. Palm, R., Grundmann, S., Weismüller, M., Šari´c, S., Jakirli´c, S., Tropea, C.: Experimental char-
acterization and modelling of inﬂow conditions for a gas turbine swirl combustor. Int. J. Heat
Fluid Flow 27(5), 924–936 (2006)
32. Pierce, C.D., Moin, P.: Method for generating equilibrium swirling inﬂow conditions. AIAA J.
36(7), 1325–1327 (1998)
33. Pope, S.: Turbulent ﬂows. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-59886-9 (2000)
34. Roback, R., Johnson, B.V.: Mass and Momentum Turbulent Transport Experiments with
Conﬁned Swirling Coaxial Jets. NASA Contractor Report 168252 (1983)
35. Sternel, D.C., Schäfer, M., Gauß, F., Jigit, S.: Inﬂuence of numerical parameters for LES of
complex ﬂow ﬁelds. In: Wesseling, P., Oñate, E., Périaux, J. (eds.) European Conference on
Computational Fluid Dynamics, ECCOMAS CFD 2006. TU Delft, The Netherlands (2006)
36. Tang, G., Yang, Z., McGuirk, J.J.: Large eddy simulation of isothermal conﬁned swirling ﬂow
with recirculation. In: Rodi, W., Fueyo, N. (eds.) Proc. 5th Int. Symp. on Engineering Turbulence
Modelling and Measurements, pp. 885–894. Elsevier Science Ltd. (2002)
37. Temmerman, L., Hadziabdic, M., Leschziner, M.A., Hanjalic, K.: A hybrid two-layer URANS-
LES approach for large eddy simulation at high Reynolds numbers. Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 26,
173–190 (2005)
38. Voigt, P., Schodl, R., Griebel, P.: Using the laser light sheet technique in combustion research.
In: 90th Symp. of AGARD–PEP on Advanced Non-intrusive Instrumentation for Propulsion
Engines (1997)
39. Wennerberg, D., Obi, S.: Prediction of strongly swirling ﬂows in quarl expansions with a
non-orthogonal ﬁnite-volume method and a second-moment turbulence closure. In: Rodi, W.,
Martelli, F. (eds.) Engineering Turbulence Modelling and Experiments, vol. 2, pp. 197–206. ISBN
0444898026 (1993)
