
--- Page 1 ---

PIV, 2D-LIF and 1D-Raman measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld, composition
and temperature in premixed gas turbine ﬂames
U. Stopper a,*, M. Aigner a, H. Ax a, W. Meier a, R. Sadanandan a, M. Stöhr a, A. Bonaldo b
a German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Combustion Technology, Pfaffenwaldring 38-40, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany
b Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery Ltd., Combustion Group, P. O. Box 1, Waterside South, Lincoln LN5 7FD, UK
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 14 October 2009
Accepted 16 October 2009
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Combustion
High-pressure
Turbulence–chemistry interaction
Laser diagnostics
Velocity
Raman spectroscopy
a b s t r a c t
Several laser diagnostic measurement techniques have been applied to study the lean premixed natural
gas/air ﬂames of an industrial swirl burner. This was made possible by equipping the burner with an opti-
cal combustion chamber that was installed in the high-pressure test rig facility at the DLR Institute of
Combustion Technology in Stuttgart. The burner was operated with preheated air at various operating
conditions with pressures up to p = 6 bar and a maximum thermal power of P = 1 MW.
The instantaneous planar ﬂow ﬁeld inside the combustor was studied with particle image velocimetry
(PIV). Planar laser induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) of OH radicals on a single-shot basis was used to determine
the shape and the location of the ﬂame front as well as the spatial distribution of reaction products. 1D
laser Raman spectroscopy was successfully applied for the measurement of the temperature and the con-
centration of major species under realistic gas turbine conditions.
Results of the ﬂow ﬁeld analysis show the shape and the size of the main ﬂow regimes: the inﬂow
region, the inner and the outer recirculation zone. The highly turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld of the inner shear layer
is found to be dominated by small and medium sized vortices. High RMS ﬂuctuations of the ﬂow velocity
in the exhaust gas indicate the existence of a rotating exhaust gas swirl. From the PLIF images it is seen
that the primary reactions happened in the shear layers between inﬂow and the recirculation zones and
that the appearance of the reaction zones changed with ﬂame parameters. The results of the multiscalar
Raman measurements show a strong variation of the local mixture fraction allowing conclusions to be
drawn about the premix quality. Furthermore, mixing effects of unburnt fuel and air with fully reacted
combustion products are studied giving insights into the processes of the turbulence–chemistry
interaction.
 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
In modern stationary gas turbine (GT) combustors the concept
of lean premixed combustion is mostly applied in order to achieve
a homogenous temperature distribution at lean ﬂame conditions.
In this way, local temperature peaks are avoided and NOx emis-
sions are reduced. However, this concept is prone to combustion
instabilities, especially in combination with commonly used swirl
burners. Of particular practical relevance are thermo-acoustic
instabilities which can arise from the interaction of the heat re-
lease rate, the ﬂow ﬁeld and the combustor geometry [1–5]. Fur-
ther effects which limit the exploitation of the full potential of
lean premixed combustion are unmixedness of fuel and air [6,7],
unsteady ﬂame stabilization [8] or hydrodynamic instabilities
[9,10]. In general, GT-like ﬂames are highly turbulent and exhibit
strong effects of turbulence–chemistry interactions like ignition
delay or local ﬂame extinction [11–13]. Up to date there is still a
lack in understanding these phenomena, and further experimental
and numerical investigations are necessary.
Recently, detailed laser diagnostic studies in GT-relevant com-
bustors have contributed to an improved understanding of the
phenomena mentioned above. Frequently used measuring tech-
niques were particle image velocimetry (PIV) or laser Doppler
velocimetry (LDV) for the ﬂow ﬁeld, laser induced ﬂuorescence
(LIF) for ﬂame radicals, tracers, pollutants or temperature, coherent
anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) for temperature, and laser
Raman scattering for species concentrations [14]. In some research
groups, high-pressure test rigs have been equipped with optical ac-
cess in order to apply these techniques to GT combustion processes
under realistic conditions, i.e. preheated air, high thermal loads,
high turbulence levels and relevant combustor geometries, see
for example [15–24].
In the investigations presented here, an industrial GT burner was
equipped with an optical combustion chamber, installed in the
high-pressure test rig at the Institute of Combustion Technology
0894-1777/$ - see front matter  2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2009.10.012
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 711 6862 357; fax: +49 711 6862 578.
E-mail address: ulrich.stopper@dlr.de (U. Stopper).
Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science xxx (2009) xxx–xxx
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/etfs
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Please cite this article in press as: U. Stopper et al., PIV, 2D-LIF and 1D-Raman measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld, composition and temperature in premixed gas
turbine ﬂames, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. (2009), doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2009.10.012


--- Page 2 ---

of the German Aerospace Center (DLR) in Stuttgart and investigated
using different laser diagnostic techniques. The combustor was
operated with natural gas and preheated air and the operating con-
ditions were varied in a wide range of thermal power, equivalence
ratio and pressure. Main goals of the study were a detailed charac-
terization of the ﬂow ﬁeld and the combustion process, the quanti-
ﬁcation of the degree of mixing, the identiﬁcation of effects of
turbulence–chemistry interactions and the investigation of tran-
sient ﬂame behavior. Planar LIF of OH and OH* chemiluminescence
imaging were applied to determine the ﬂame structures and the
stabilization region, PIV was used for the measurement of the ﬂow
velocities and 1D laser Raman scattering was used to quantitatively
measure the major species concentrations (N2, O2, H2O, CxHy, CO4,
CO and H2) and the temperature. The Raman technique also enabled
the determination of the local mixture fraction and the reaction
progress, revealing effects of unmixedness and turbulence–chemis-
try interactions.
The foci of this paper lie on the demonstration of the potential
of laser techniques for the investigation of GT ﬂames under realis-
tic conditions and on the experimental characterization of an
industrial GT burner at elevated pressure. Not all details of the bur-
ner and operating conditions can be published because some de-
tails of the industrial burner are subject to conﬁdentiality.
2. Experimental setup
2.1. Combustor and high-pressure test rig
The GT burner under investigation was a G30 DLE (Dry Low
Emissions) burner manufactured by Siemens Industrial Turboma-
chinery in Lincoln, UK [25]. It is installed in the range of small
industrial gas turbines from the SGT-100 at 5 MW to the SGT-
400 at 13.4 MW. For optical and laser measurements it was
equipped
with
an
optically
accessible
combustion
chamber
(Fig. 1) which is capable of securely conﬁning ﬂames with a ther-
mal power of up to 1 MW. This burner was operated at high mass
ﬂows and with preheated air in a high-pressure test rig. The inner
dimensions of the square combustor resemble the size of the SGT-
100 combustor. Cooling channels in the side walls reduced the
thermal load of the quartz windows. The preheated air had a tem-
perature of 400 C and was guided through these channels before
reaching the burner plenum. A water-cooled transition duct feeds
the hot exhaust gas into the rig’s exhaust channel. For the veloci-
metry measurements the ﬂow had to be seeded with small parti-
cles (1 lm) of titanium dioxide. A perforated ring tube upstream
of the swirler was used for their injection. All measurements were
performed at pressures p between 1.5 and 6 bars and relative bur-
ner pressure drops Dp/p between 1% and 3%.
This combustor was installed at the high-pressure test rig facil-
ity HBK-S of the Institute of Combustion Technology in Stuttgart.
The pressure vessel housing the combustor also has quartz win-
dows for the optical access accompanied by several probes for
measuring temperature, absolute pressure, differential pressure,
acoustics and exhaust gas composition.
2.2. Particle image velocimetry (PIV)
The diagnostic setup for the velocity measurements can be seen
in Fig. 2. A ﬂashlamp pumped frequency-doubled Nd:YAG laser
Nomenclature
CFD
computational ﬂuid dynamics
GT
gas turbine
ICCD
intensiﬁed charge-coupled device
IRZ
inner recirculation zone
LIF
laser induced ﬂuorescence
OH*
electronically excited OH
ORZ
outer recirculation zone
PDF
probability density function
PIV
particle image velocimetry
PLIF
planar LIF
RMS
absolute standard deviation (root mean square)
SHG
second-harmonic generation
YAG
yttrium–aluminum-garnet
f
focal length
P
thermal power
p
absolute pressure inside combustion chamber
Dp
pressure drop over the burner
T
gas temperature
X
volume fraction
U
equivalence ratio
n
mixture fraction
particle seeding
preheated air
exhaust 
window
natural 
gas 
window
Fig. 1. The optical combustor with particles seeded into the air upstream of the
swirler.
Fig. 2. Experimental setup for particle image velocimetry. The video camera was
used for controlling purposes only.
2
U. Stopper et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science xxx (2009) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Please cite this article in press as: U. Stopper et al., PIV, 2D-LIF and 1D-Raman measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld, composition and temperature in premixed gas
turbine ﬂames, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. (2009), doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2009.10.012


--- Page 3 ---

(New Wave Solo PIV 120) was used for illuminating the PIV parti-
cles. The laser pulse energy was 120 mJ at a pulse duration of 5 ns.
Before entering the combustion chamber, the laser beam was
expanded into a light sheet using two cylindrical lenses (f1 =
12.7 mm and f2 = 200 mm) and a spherical lens (f = 1000 mm).
With a double-pulse delay of 10–15 ls particle imaging was per-
formed
at
a
repetition
rate
of
5 Hz.
A
camera
lens
with
f = 50 mm, f/5.6 and a narrow band ﬁlter (532 nm) in front of it
depicted the PIV images onto a CCD chip (LaVision, 1376 
1024 pixels).
The spatial resolution of the measured velocity depends on the
seeding particle density, the degree of window contamination, and
the turbulence of the ﬂow. At good conditions, an interrogation
window size of 12  12 pixels could be achieved. The accuracy of
the single-shot velocity can reach ±0.7 m/s (assuming a subpixel
accuracy of the particle displacement of 0.1 pixel and neglecting
the inﬂuence of unrecognized erroneous vectors).
The ICCD camera with the ﬁlter shown in Fig. 2 was installed to
provide images of the OH* chemiluminescence. It was used for
observing the shape of the ﬂame.
2.3. Planar laser induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) of OH
A frequency-doubled dye laser (Lumonics HD-500, spulse  8 ns,
Epulse  4.6–5.5 mJ) pumped by a Nd:YAG laser (Quanta Ray, DCR-
2) was used for the excitation of OH radicals. The light sheet for
planar
measurements
was
generated
by
one
cylindrical
(f = 50 mm) and one spherical lens (f = 750 mm). Before the laser
beam reached the expansion optics, a small portion of the pulse en-
ergy was coupled out by a beam splitter (Fig. 3) and guided
through the ﬂat laminar ﬂame of a matrix burner. The LIF emission
from this ﬂame was observed by a photo multiplier tube equipped
with a spectral bandpass ﬁlter that is transparent for wavelengths
between 300 nm and 325 nm. The signal of the photo multiplier
was used as a reference for the adjustment of the laser wavelength.
With this setup it was possible to tune the dye laser to 283.55 nm
(output of the SHG crystal), which is resonant with the Q1(8) line of
the A–X (1–0) band of the OH radical. A second beam splitter
reﬂected a fraction of the laser sheet into a dye cell that was
observed by an intensiﬁed CCD camera (Princeton Instruments
PI-Max). The ﬂuorescence distribution from the dye cell which is
proportional to the intensity distribution of the laser sheet was
recorded with this camera for every single shot. Such intensity
proﬁles are essential for a proper processing of the raw data. The
largest part of the pulse energy was irradiated into the combustor.
Like the laser sheet of the PIV system, the PLIF laser sheet was al-
ways located in the central plane of the combustor. It was only
moved along the axial direction in order to measure OH distribu-
tions in different sections of the combustor as the sheet was only
about half as wide as the ﬁeld of view. The detection of the LIF sig-
nal from the combustion chamber was done with a further ICCD
camera (Princeton Instruments PI-Max, 512  512 pixels). An
objective suitable for UV imaging (f = 100 mm, f/2) and a bandpass
ﬁlter identical to the one in front of the photo multiplier were
mounted on the camera. The processing of the raw PLIF images in-
cluded corrections for background, camera sensitivity, and laser
intensity proﬁle.
Again, an additional ICCD camera was included in the setup for
acquiring images of the OH* chemiluminescence giving important
information about the size and the shape of the ﬂame zone.
2.4. 1D laser Raman spectroscopy
A unique laser system designed at the DLR was used for the
Raman experiments [12]. It consists of three double-pulse Nd:YAG
lasers (Spectra-Physics PIV-400, frequency-doubled to 532 nm,
5  300 mJ pulse energy, one resonator out of operation, 7 ns pulse
duration each). The ﬁve pulses are emitted with short delay times
of about 50 ns between the single peaks. They pass a pulse stretch-
ing unit reducing the peak power of the pulse to a ﬁfth of the ori-
ginal value while the complete pulse energy is nearly maintained.
Because of the naturally low quantum efﬁciency of the Raman scat-
tering process, high laser pulse energies have to be used for single-
shot measurements. If the peak power is not reduced, the high
power density can either damage the combustor windows or pro-
duce an interfering plasma breakdown in the laser focus. The
whole laser system is integrated in two temperature stabilized mo-
bile containers enabling the application of the Raman technique at
test rig facilities. The complete diagnostic setup is shown in Fig. 4.
After an expansion of the laser beam to a diameter of about
40 mm, it passed through the focusing optics consisting of two
cylindrical lenses which were oriented perpendicular towards each
other. This astigmatic arrangement generated a stretched focus
with a much lower energy density than a simple point-focus. Along
the observed section of the laser beam the beam diameter was be-
low 0.5 mm. The initial pulse power was reduced by several beam
forming devices, the windows of the pressure vessel and impurities
in the combustor windows. Therefore, the laser energy inside the
combustion chamber never exceeded 890 mJ/pulse. After passing
through the pressure vessel, the beam was collimated into the
detector head of a power meter. The scattered light from the focus
was collected at 90 with a large f/2 apochromatic lens system that
relayed the focal region of the laser beam onto the entrance slit of a
grating spectrograph (Acton Research SpectraPro 300i, f = 300 mm,
490 lines/mm, f/4, dispersion 6 nm/mm). The magniﬁcation of the
detection optics was 2. A holographic notch ﬁlter in front of the
spectrograph blocked the Rayleigh scattered light and the stray
light at 532 nm. The spectrally dispersed image of the beam was
captured
by
a
CCD
chip
(Princeton
Instruments
PI-Max,
1340  1300 pixels, 26.8 mm  26 mm) equipped with an image
intensiﬁer. By applying a hardware binning of the pixel intensities
it was possible to lower the effect of readout noise. In this way, the
1D measurement volume was divided into 28 cells each with a
diameter of 0.5 mm and 0.25 mm length. The 28 spectra from
these cells were recorded simultaneously. In total 7 mm of the
beam were used for probing the gas composition and temperature.
The whole diagnostic setup (except for the containers housing
the laser system) was built on computer controlled 3D translation
stages. This made it possible to scan a wide range of measurement
locations. At some of the operating points up to 60 spatial
locations were investigated. With a repetition rate of 10 Hz the
Fig. 3. Experimental setup for the PLIF imaging. The video camera was used for
controlling purposes only.
U. Stopper et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science xxx (2009) xxx–xxx
3
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Please cite this article in press as: U. Stopper et al., PIV, 2D-LIF and 1D-Raman measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld, composition and temperature in premixed gas
turbine ﬂames, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. (2009), doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2009.10.012


--- Page 4 ---

concentrations of the major chemical species (CO2, O2, CO, N2, Cx-
Hy, H2O, H2) were measured. Further important scalars such as
the temperature and the mixture fraction can be derived from
these values [26].
Extensive calibration measurements are indispensable for the
correct analysis of the raw data. For this purpose, the setup was
used to measure the temperature and the chemical composition
of different electrically heated gas ﬂows as well as ﬂat laminar
CH4/air and H2/air ﬂames with known exhaust gas temperatures.
These atmospheric calibration ﬂames were provided by a cus-
tom-built matrix burner installed in the high-pressure test rig.
The relative standard deviation of the single-shot temperature
measurements in lean CH4/air calibration ﬂames was typically
8%. This value can be regarded as a rough assessment of the uncer-
tainty of the temperature measurements at the gas turbine ﬂames.
More detailed speciﬁcations concerning the accuracy and the pre-
cision
of
the
multiscalar
measurements
are
currently
in
preparation.
3. Experimental results
3.1. Results from planar ﬂow ﬁeld measurements
Fig. 5 shows a vector plot of the average ﬂow ﬁeld together with
the RMS ﬂuctuations (in grey scales) for a ﬂame at a pressure of
p = 3 bar, a relative pressure drop over the burner of Dp/p = 1%
and an equivalence ratio of U = 0.59. The burner mouth is on the
left side, indicated by two marks.
The main characteristics of the mean ﬂow ﬁeld are a conically
shaped region of the inﬂow with the highest ﬂow velocities, an in-
ner recirculation zone (IRZ) which extends back into the burner
mouth and an outer recirculation zone (ORZ). The ORZ could not
be imaged completely, because the outermost regions of the com-
bustion chamber were vignetted by mechanical elements. Between
the inﬂow and the recirculation zones, shear layers are established
which can be recognized in the ﬁgure by the high RMS values. An-
other region of large RMS ﬂuctuations is seen on the right-hand
side near the ﬂame axis. This is probably caused by an exhaust
gas swirl attached to the exit of the exhaust gas transition duct
and reaching far upstream towards the burner. This assumption
is supported by CFD simulations of the ﬂow ﬁeld in combustors
with similar geometries [27,28]. A slight deviation of the ﬂow ﬁeld
from axial symmetry is visible near the ﬂame axis. This is not really
surprising because swirling ﬂows are very sensitive even to very
small deviations of the boundary conditions from axial symmetry,
e.g. induced by the feed pipes or other mechanical parts. A remark-
able feature of the ﬂow ﬁeld was observed by comparing the mean
ﬂow ﬁeld for different operating conditions. The shape did not
change by varying the system pressure, the mass ﬂow or the equiv-
alence ratio. This indicates that the averaged ﬂow ﬁeld (except of
its absolute velocity values) is mainly dictated by the combustor
geometry.
The instantaneous structures of the ﬂow ﬁeld were visualized
by single-shot PIV measurements. Fig. 6 shows two examples from
a
series
of
measurements
at
identical
operating
conditions
(p = 3 bar, Dp/p = 1%, U = 0.59). It is immediately seen that the
instantaneous ﬂow ﬁeld looks totally different from the mean ﬂow
ﬁeld and that strong temporal ﬂuctuations of the structures occur.
The instantaneous velocity ﬁeld in the inner shear layer is domi-
nated by small vortices which form and dissipate spontaneously.
The observed vortex diameters range typically from 0.5 cm to
2 cm. The largest diameters are about 5 cm. Single shots of the
PIV also show a varying backﬂow into the burner nozzle. While
Fig. 4. Experimental setup for 1D laser Raman spectroscopy.
Fig. 5. Background: mapping of the absolute standard deviation of the planar ﬂow
velocity. Overlay: vector array of the average planar ﬂow ﬁeld.
4
U. Stopper et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science xxx (2009) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Please cite this article in press as: U. Stopper et al., PIV, 2D-LIF and 1D-Raman measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld, composition and temperature in premixed gas
turbine ﬂames, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. (2009), doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2009.10.012


--- Page 5 ---

the backﬂow is relatively slow and undirected in Fig. 6a, two
remarkable vortices in Fig. 6b are located close to the burner
mouth generating a massive backﬂow with planar velocities nearly
as high as in the inﬂow region.
Complete vortices of the outer recirculation zone are rarely
seen. This might indicate that the ORZ consists of only a few large
vortices with their centers located close to the combustor side wall
which cannot be viewed due to the vignetting effect mentioned
above.
Some of the instantaneous ﬂow ﬁelds contain spots of high
velocity located close to the combustor axis. Fig. 6b shows an
example on the right-hand side of the ﬁeld of view. The intensity
of this phenomenon is strongly varying and its location matches
with the axial region of high RMS ﬂuctuations described above.
Thus, it is most likely caused by the rotating exhaust gas swirl.
3.2. Planar OH distribution
At chemical equilibrium, the concentration of OH radicals is
exponentially dependent on the local temperature. With a typical
OH PLIF system OH concentrations can be detected at tempera-
tures above 1400 K in case of lean ﬂames. The radicals are formed
in super-equilibrium concentrations close to the ﬂame front and
the relaxation towards equilibrium is taking place within several
milliseconds at atmospheric pressure [29]. Because the relaxation
happens via three-body collisions, the decay time decreases rap-
idly with increasing pressure.
Fig. 7a shows a single shot of the LIF distribution at a relatively
low pressure (p = 1.5 bar) and a low mass ﬂow rate. The black re-
gions represent the cold inﬂow of the unburnt fuel/air mixture.
The regions with maximum LIF intensity seen in the shear layers
are reﬂecting super-equilibrium concentration. The steep gradient
from the dark inﬂow region to the ﬂuorescence maximum is a good
marker for the ﬂame front [29]. The inner and the outer recircula-
tion zones are characterized by medium and low LIF intensities
with a more homogeneous distribution. This is typical of equilib-
rium OH concentrations indicating hot exhaust gas.
The instantaneous PLIF image exhibits corrugated ﬂame fronts
in the inner and outer shear layers. The lower LIF intensity seen
in the lower part of the image is due to absorption of the laser light
which is irradiated from the top to the bottom. In this single-shot
exposure we see a large relatively homogeneous region of OH in
the IRZ indicating gas at high temperature. An operating point with
a higher pressure (p = 4 bar) and a higher mass ﬂow was used to
produce the single shot image of Fig. 7b. Here we clearly see an in-
creased corrugation together with a fragmentation of the ﬂame
front. The isolated ﬂame front fragments lead to the assumption
of the occurrence of local ﬂame extinction and spontaneous igni-
tion. In contrast to the image at lower pressure, the shape of the
regions with and without OH (IRZ and inﬂow) is subject to more
ﬂuctuations reﬂecting the higher degree of turbulence. By compar-
ing the OH distributions of both shown operating conditions, it can
be seen that maximum OH concentrations occur more frequently
in the inner than in the outer shear layer, when the pressure is in-
creased. This ﬁnding is consistent with the results of parameter
studies investigating the OH* chemiluminescence distribution in
the same combustor [23].
Although the OH PLIF measurements of this project do not pro-
vide quantitative results concerning the radical concentration, the
high spatial resolution allows a statistical analysis of the fragmen-
tation and the location of the ﬂame front.
3.3. Mixture fraction and temperature statistics
The Raman technique enables the measurement of the instanta-
neous gas composition and therefore provides insight into the de-
gree of mixing of fuel and air entering the combustion chamber.
The scatter plot in Fig. 8 shows the result of such a measurement
(p = 3 bar). It illustrates the correlation of the temperature T with
the local mixture fraction n.
The spots represent the results obtained for each of the 28 mea-
suring volumes along the laser line for a series of 500 single-shot
measurements. The blue spots (dark gray in black and white print)
in the plot indicate single shot results with H2O concentrations be-
low 1 vol.-‰, i.e. unburnt gas at inlet temperature. A signiﬁcant
variation of n is reﬂected by the broad distribution of the spots.
This ﬂuctuation exceeds the measurement uncertainty by far,
and does not stem from an unstable mass ﬂow of the fuel supply
of the test rig. Therefore, the variation of n reﬂects the degree of
mixing of fuel and air. The equivalence ratio ranges from lean mix-
tures with fuel concentrations below the ignition limit to nearly
stoichiometric mixtures. It is known that a perfect mixing is
impossible to achieve under industrial conditions because of the
short residence time in the premix region. However, the degree
of mixing of fuel and air plays an important role for the combustion
behavior, for example for the ﬂame stabilization and NOx forma-
tion. The quality of the mixing and its spatial and temporal ﬂuctu-
ations can hardly be measured quantitatively by methods other
Fig. 6. Two examples of streamline plots of the instantaneous ﬂow ﬁeld measured at the same operating point. Arrows indicate the local ﬂow direction. The pair of marks
drawn on the left side of each image indicates the diameter of the burner exit.
U. Stopper et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science xxx (2009) xxx–xxx
5
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Please cite this article in press as: U. Stopper et al., PIV, 2D-LIF and 1D-Raman measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld, composition and temperature in premixed gas
turbine ﬂames, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. (2009), doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2009.10.012


--- Page 6 ---

than Raman scattering, and this is the ﬁrst time the level of unmix-
edness was directly determined for an industrial GT burner.
Our Raman measurements also show how the hot reaction
products mix with the reactants in the shear layer of the ﬂow.
The scatter plot in Fig. 9 was recorded with the measuring volume
located inside the inner shear layer a few centimeters downstream
of the burner mouth. Again, blue spots (dark gray) represent the
non-reacted fuel/air mixture, whereas the red spots (light gray in
black and white print) indicate single shot results with less than
1 vol.-‰ of natural gas corresponding to the hot reaction products.
It is clearly seen, that reactants as well as products are present in
the inner shear layer. In some single shots both compositions are
present next to each other at the same time. In that case some of
the CCD pixel rows show spectra of cold fuel and air while the oth-
ers detect hot exhaust gas. Some of these single shots were possi-
bly recorded at a point of time when the laser beam was
penetrating the ﬂame front.
Fig. 7. PLIF images showing the instantaneous distribution of OH radicals for two
operating conditions: (a) p = 1.5 bar, Dp/p = 1.1%, U = 0.53 and (b) p = 4 bar,
Dp/p = 3%, U = 0.50. Each ﬁgure is a composite of two different laser sheet positions
imaged at different points in time.
Fig. 8. Scatter plot (14,000 points) of the temperature and the mixture fraction
measured in the inﬂow of the unburnt fuel/air mixture. Blue points (dark gray in
black and white print): XH2O = 0. The curve represents the calculated adiabatic
temperature of the reaction products.
Fig. 9. Scatter plot (14,000 points) of the temperature and the mixture fraction
measured in the inner shear layer. Blue points (dark gray in black and white print):
XH2O = 0. Red points (light gray): Xfuel = 0. The curve represents the calculated
adiabatic temperature of the reaction products.
6
U. Stopper et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science xxx (2009) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Please cite this article in press as: U. Stopper et al., PIV, 2D-LIF and 1D-Raman measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld, composition and temperature in premixed gas
turbine ﬂames, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. (2009), doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2009.10.012


--- Page 7 ---

The green curve displayed in the scatter plots indicates the adi-
abatic ﬂame temperature calculated with the program Gaseq [30].
As can be seen, some of the single shot measurements exhibit tem-
peratures above the adiabatic temperature. This discrepancy is
mainly due to the uncertainty of the diagnostic method. Possible
pressure ﬂuctuations and the shot noise of the detected photons
are two examples for phenomena leading to an increased standard
deviation of the statistical distribution of the scalar values. Addi-
tionally, some processes are conceivable that may in fact cause
super-equilibrium temperatures, e.g. temperature increase of un-
burned gas by contact to hot surfaces prior to combustion. The
black spots in the ﬁgure represent single shots with intermediate
temperatures and chemical compositions of burnt and unburnt
gas. At least three processes can theoretically lead to such
distributions:
 Events of local ﬂame extinction caused by a high strain rate of
the ﬂow interrupt the chemical reaction before all of the fuel
is consumed. Though local ﬂame extinction does certainly occur
it is not likely that this scenario happens frequently enough to
explain the observed high density of intermediate points.
 Spatial averaging across the ﬂame front: If the laser is passing
through a ﬂame front, gradients of temperature and composition
may be present in one single observation volume or across sev-
eral
observation
volumes,
depending
on
the
angle
of
intersection.
 The mixing of exhaust gas with unburnt fuel and air may instan-
taneously generate regions within the shear layer where reac-
tants and products are completely mixed. This kind of mixture
seems to be captured by the Raman system before it ignites
spontaneously or by ﬂame propagation.
Because of the short turbulent mixing time scale in such ﬂows, a
large portion of the intermediate points in the scatter plot is most
likely formed by the third process where mixtures formed from the
fresh fuel/air and exhaust gases did not react completely due to
their ignition delay time.
4. Summary and Conclusions
Several laser optical diagnostic methods have been used to study
lean premixed natural gas/air ﬂames of an industrial swirl burner at
elevated pressures. For this purpose the burner was equipped with
an optical combustion chamber and installed at the high-pressure
test rig facility in Stuttgart. The burner was operated at gas turbine
relevant conditions with preheated air, high thermal power and a
lean air/fuel ratio. The ﬂow velocities were measured by particle
image velocimetry (PIV), the ﬂame structures by planar laser in-
duced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) of OH and the joint probability density
functions (PDFs) of the major species concentrations, mixture frac-
tion and temperature by 1D laser Raman scattering.
The averaged ﬂow ﬁeld can be divided into three main regimes:
The conically shaped inﬂow region, the large inner recirculation
zone and the outer recirculation zone. Parameter studies proved
that the spatial structure of these three regions was not inﬂuenced
by the operating conditions. By analyzing the PIV single shots it
was seen that the instantaneous structure of the IRZ consisted of
several small vortices mainly located inside the inner shear layer.
According to this, the standard deviation of the ﬂow velocity indi-
cated a high level of turbulence in the shear layers. RMS mappings
of the velocity also revealed the existence of an exhaust gas swirl.
Instantaneous planar LIF measurements of OH revealed wrin-
kled ﬂame fronts between the inﬂow and the recirculation zones.
Fragmentation and corrugation of the ﬂame front increased when
the Reynolds number of the ﬂow was increased.
The multiscalar measurements provided by 1D laser Raman
spectroscopy yielded the major species and temperature distribu-
tions for different ﬂame conditions. They were used to determine
the composition of the unburnt fuel/air mixture indicating a signif-
icant variation of the local equivalence ratio. For the ﬁrst time it
was possible to quantify the degree of unmixedness in an indus-
trial GT combustor under realistic operating conditions. Raman
measurements at locations inside the inner shear layer revealed
a large variation of the thermo-chemical state of the ﬂame, reach-
ing from non-reacted via partially reacted to completely reacted.
The intermediate partially reacted mixtures are probably to be ex-
plained as mixing of hot reaction products with the fresh fuel/air
mixture which have not reacted yet due to ignition delay.
In conclusion, the experimental data base provides a better
understanding of the interaction between turbulent ﬂow and
chemical processes and will be useful for the validation and the
improvement of numerical ﬂame simulations. Future work will
be carried out by the German Aerospace Center (DLR) in coopera-
tion with Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery Ltd. in order to fur-
ther
develop
modeling
capabilities
and
design
tools
for
commercial gas turbine combustors.
Acknowledgment
The presented work was conducted at the German Aerospace
Center (DLR) in cooperation with SIEMENS Industrial Turboma-
chinery. We gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from
the State of Baden-Württemberg within the KW21 research
program.
References
[1] C.O. Paschereit, E. Gutmark, W. Weisenstein, Structure and control of
thermoacoustic
instabilities
in
a
gas-turbine
combustor,
Combust.
Sci.
Technol. 138 (1998) 213–232.
[2] A.H. Lefebvre, Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor & Francis, Philadelphia, 1999.
[3] J.G. Lee, D.A. Santavicca, Experimental diagnostics for the study of combustion
instabilities in lean premixed combustors, J. Propulsion Power 19 (2003) 735–
750.
[4] T. Sattelmayer, Inﬂuence of the combustor aerodynamics on combustion
instabilities from equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power
125 (2003) 11–19.
[5] T.C. Lieuwen, V. Yang, Combustion instabilities in gas turbine engines:
operational experience, fundamental mechanisms, and modeling, Progr.
Astronaut. Aeronaut. 210 (2006).
[6] K.J. Syed, E. Buchanan, The Nature of NOx Formation within an Industrial Gas
Turbine Dry Low Emission Combustor, in: Proc. ASME Turbo Expo 2005, Reno-
Tahoe, Nevada, USA, June 6–9, 2005, paper GT-2005-68070.
[7] W.
Meier,
P.
Weigand,
X.R.
Duan,
R.
Giezendanner-Thoben,
Detailed
characterization of the dynamics of thermoacoustic pulsations in a lean
premixed swirl ﬂame, Combust. Flame 150 (2007) 2–26.
[8] X.R. Duan, W. Meier, P. Weigand, O. Keck, B. Lehmann, W. Stricker, M. Aigner,
Experimental investigation and laser based validation measurements in a gas
turbine model combustor, Prog. Comp. Fluid Dynamics 4 (2004) 175–182.
[9] N. Syred, A review of oscillation mechanisms and the role of precessing vortex
core (PVC) in swirl combustion systems, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 32 (2006)
93–161.
[10] M. Stöhr, R. Sadanandan, W. Meier, Experimental study of unsteady ﬂame
structures of an oscillating swirl ﬂame in a gas turbine model combustor, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 32 (2009) 2925–2932.
[11] W.A. Guttenfelder, M.W. Renfro, N.M. Laurendeau, J. Ji, G.B. Galen, J.P. Gore,
Hydroxyl time-series and recirculation in turbulent nonpremixed swirling
ﬂames, Combust. Flame 147 (2006) 11–21.
[12] L. Wehr, W. Meier, P. Kutne, C. Hassa, Single-pulse 1D laser Raman scattering
applied in a gas turbine model combustor at elevated pressure, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 31 (2007) 3099–3106.
[13] W. Meier, X.R. Duan, P. Weigand, Investigations of swirl ﬂames in a gas turbine
model combustor. Part II: turbulence–chemistry interactions, Combust. Flame
144 (2006) 225–236.
[14] R.S. Barlow, Laser diagnostics and their interplay with computations to
understand turbulent combustion, Proc. Combust. Inst. 31 (2007) 49–75.
[15] S.-Y. Lee, S. Seo, J.C. Broda, S. Pal, R.J. Santoro, An Experimental estimation of
mean reaction rate and ﬂame structure during combustion instability in a lean
premixed gas turbine combustor, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28 (2000) 775–782.
U. Stopper et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science xxx (2009) xxx–xxx
7
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Please cite this article in press as: U. Stopper et al., PIV, 2D-LIF and 1D-Raman measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld, composition and temperature in premixed gas
turbine ﬂames, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. (2009), doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2009.10.012


--- Page 8 ---

[16] U.E. Meier, D. Wolff-Gaßmann, W. Stricker, LIF imaging and 2D temperature
mapping in a model combustor at elevated pressure, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 4
(2000) 403–414.
[17] C. Löfström, J. Engström, M. Richter, C.F. Kaminski, P. Johansson, K. Nyholm, J.
Nygren,
M.
Aldén,
Feasibility
studies
and
application
of
laser/optical
diagnostics for characterisation of a practical low-emission gas turbine
combustor, in: Proc. ASME Turbo Expo 2000, Munich, Germany, May 8–11,
2000, paper 2000-GT-0124.
[18] J.R. Gord, M.S. Brown, T.R. Meyer, Optical diagnostics for characterizing
advanced
combustors
and
pulsed-detonation
engines,
in:
22nd
AIAA
Aerodynamic Measurement Technology and Ground Testing Conference, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA, 24–26, June 2002, paper AIAA2002-3030.
[19] J. Kojima, Q.-V. Nguyen, Measurement and Simulation of Spontaneous Raman
Scattering in High-Pressure Fuel-Rich H2-Air Flames, Meas. Sci. Technol. 15
(2004) 565–580.
[20] C. Willert, C. Hassa, G. Stockhausen, M. Jarius, M. Voges, J. Klinner, Combines
PIV and DGV applied to a pressurized gas turbine combustor facility, Meas. Sci.
Technol. 17 (2006) 1670–1679.
[21] P. Griebel, P. Siewert, P. Jansohn, Flame characteristics of turbulent lean
premixed methane/air ﬂames at high pressure: turbulent ﬂame speed and
ﬂame brush thickness, Proc. Combust. Inst. 31 (2007) 3083–3090.
[22] B. Janus, A. Dreizler, J. Janickam, Experiments on swirl-stabilized non-
premixed natural gas ﬂames in a model gasturbine combustor, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 31 (2007) 3091–3098.
[23] U. Stopper, M. Aigner, W. Meier, R. Sadanandan, M. Stöhr, I.S. Kim, Flow ﬁeld
and combustion characterization of premixed gas turbine ﬂames by planar
laser techniques, J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power 131 (2009) 21504.
[24] P.A.
Strakey,
S.D.
Woodruff,
T.C.
Williams,
R.W.
Schefer,
OH-Planar
ﬂuorescence measurements of pressurized hydrogen premixed ﬂames in the
simval combustor, AIAA J. 46 (2008) 1604–1613.
[25] W. Ng, K. Syed, Y. Zhang, The study of ﬂame dynamics and structures in an
industrial-scale gas turbine combustor using digital data processing and
computer vision techniques, Meas. Sci. Technol. 15 (2004) 2303–2309.
[26] R.W. Bilger, The structure of turbulent nonpremixed ﬂames, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 22 (1988) 475–488.
[27] M.D. Turrell, P.J. Stopford, K.J. Syed, E. Buchanan, CFD simulation of the ﬂow
within and downstream of a high-swirl lean premixed gas turbine combustor,
in: Proc. ASME Turbo Expo 2004, Vienna, Austria, June 14-17 2004, paper GT-
2004-53112.
[28] T.C. Williams, R.W. Schefer, J.C. Oefelein, C.R. Shaddix, Idealized gas turbine
combustor for performance research and validation of large eddy simulations,
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78 (2007) 035114.
[29] R.
Sadanandan,
M.
Stöhr,
W.
Meier,
Simultaneous
OH-PLIF
and
PIV
measurements in a gas turbine model combustor, Appl. Phys. B 90 (2008)
609–618.
[30] C. Morley, Gaseq, A chemical equilibrium program for windows, <http://
www.gaseq.co.uk>, 2009.
8
U. Stopper et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science xxx (2009) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Please cite this article in press as: U. Stopper et al., PIV, 2D-LIF and 1D-Raman measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld, composition and temperature in premixed gas
turbine ﬂames, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. (2009), doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2009.10.012
