
--- Page 1 ---

A. H. Lefebvre 
Reilly Professor Emeritus of 
Combustion Engineering, 
Thermal Science and Propulsion Center, 
Purdue UniversLty, 
West Lafayette, IN 47907 
The Role of Fuel Preparation in 
Low-Emission Combustion 
The attainment of very low pollutant emissions, in particular oxides of nitrogen 
( NOx), from gas turbines is not only of considerable environmental concern but has 
also become an area of increasing competitiveness between the different engine 
manufacturers. For stationary engines, the attainment of ultralow NO~ has become 
the foremost marketing issue. This paper is devoted primarily to current and emerging 
technologies in the development of ultralow emissions combustors for application to 
aircraft and stationary engines. Short descriptions of the basic design features of 
conventional gas turbine combustors and the methods of fuel injection now in wide- 
spread use are followed by a review of fuel spray characteristics and recent develop- 
ments in the measurement and modeling of these characteristics. The main gas- 
turbine-generated pollutants and their mechanisms of formation are described, along 
with related environmental risks and various issues concerning emissions regulations 
and recently enacted legislation for limiting the pollutant levels emitted by both 
aircraft and stationary engines. The impacts of these emissions regulations on com- 
bustor and engine design are discussed first in relation to conventional combustors 
and then in the context of variable-geometry and staged combustors. Both these 
concepts are founded on emissions reduction by control of flame temperature. Basic 
approaches to the design of "dry" low-NOx and ultralow-NOx combustors are re- 
viewed. At the present time lean, premix, prevaporize combustion appears to be 
the only technology available for achieving ultralow NOx emissions from practical 
combustors. This concept is discussed in some detail, along with its inherent problems 
of autoignition, flashback, and acoustic resonance. Attention is also given to alterna- 
tive methods of achieving ultralow NOx emissions, notably the rich-burn, quick- 
quench, lean-burn, and catalytic combustors. These concepts are now being actively 
developed, despite the formidable problems they present in terms of mixing and 
durability. The final section reviews the various correlations now being used to 
predict the exhaust gas concentrations of the main gaseous pollutant emissions from 
gas turbine engines. Comprehensive numerical methods have not yet completely 
displaced these semi-empirical correlations but are nevertheless providing useful 
insight into the interactions of swirling and recirculating flows with fuel sprays, as 
well as guidance to the combustion engineer during the design and development 
stages. Throughout the paper emphasis is placed on the important and sometimes 
pivotal role played by the fuel preparation process in the reduction of pollutant 
emissions from gas turbines. 
Introduction 
The gas turbine is often described as the prime mover of the 
twentieth century. The tremendous advantages offered by the 
aircraft gas turbine in terms of range, speed, fuel economy, and 
passenger comfort have assured its preeminent position as the 
power plant for aircraft. Also, it continues to find increasingly 
wide applications as a power source in a wide variety of indus- 
trial and transport applications. In particular, the gas turbine is 
widely used for both mechanical drive and electrical power 
generation within the oil and gas industry. Its advantages in 
terms of high thermal efficiency and potential for low pollutant 
emissions in the combined cycle mode will ensure that most 
new utility power generation plants will also utilize the gas 
turbine as the prime mover. 
When faced with new and challenging problems, the combus- 
tion engineer has traditionally looked to the fuel injector to 
provide a solution. This is not merely a pious hope, because in 
the past more than one problem that appeared at first sight to 
constitute a fundamental barrier to further progress in combus- 
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute and presented at the 40th 
International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition, Houston, 
Texas, June 5-8, 1995. Manuscript received by the International Gas Turbine 
Institute April 12, 1995. Paper No. 95-GT-465. Associate Technical Editor: C. J. 
Russo. 
tion performance was solved either by modifications to existing 
fuel injector designs or by the introduction of new and some- 
times revolutionary atomizer concepts. So today, when faced 
with continuous and growing pressure to minimize pollutant 
emissions from gas turbines, the combustion engineer regards 
the fuel preparation process as one that must necessarily play 
a key role in achieving this objective. 
This paper is a review of recent and current research activities 
in low-emissions gas turbine combustors. It describes research 
and development work that is directly related to fuel injector 
and combustor design and performance, as opposed to the more 
fundamental aspects of atomization, fuel-air mixing, and com- 
bustion. The subject matter is divided into seven main sections: 
• 
An introduction to the main components of a conventional 
gas turbine combustor and their principal functions, along 
with brief descriptions of the types of fuel injectors now 
in widespread use. 
• 
The properties of fuel sprays and recent developments in 
the measurement and modeling of spray characteristics. 
• 
A general overview of emissions concerns, their mecha- 
nisms of formation, and the methods employed to alleviate 
pollutant emissions in conventional combustors. 
• 
The use of variable geometry and staged combustion for 
emissions reduction by control of flame temperature. 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 617 
Copyright © 1995 by ASME
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

• 
Basic approaches to the design of "dry" low NOx and 
ultralow NOx combustors, with emphasis on the need to 
feed the combustion zone with completely homogeneous 
fuel-air mixtures, with the attendant problems of autoig- 
nition and flashback. 
• 
Alternative methods for achieving ultralow NOx emis- 
sions, notably rich-burn, quick-quench, lean-burn, and 
catalytic combustors, both of which combine high poten- 
tial for very low levels of nitric oxides with formidable 
mixing and mechanical design problems. 
• 
Correlation and modeling of nitric oxides and carbon 
monoxide emissions. 
Throughout the paper emphasis is placed on the important 
and sometimes pivotal role played by the fuel preparation pro- 
cess in all efforts to reduce pollutant emissions from gas tur- 
bines. Today the pollutant emission of primary concern is oxides 
of nitrogen (NOx), and it is of interest to recall that combustors 
designed specifically for low NOx first appeared on the scene 
in the 1970s, but remained "on the shelf" for another decade 
due to a greater interest during that time in reducing the other 
important emissions of carbon monoxide (CO), unburned hy- 
drocarbons (UHC), and smoke. 
An attempt is made to address both aircraft and stationary 
gas turbines because neither one is more or less important than 
the other in regard to their contribution to atmospheric pollution. 
However, there are two compelling reasons why aircraft engines 
should receive the most attention. One is that aircraft engines 
employ liquid fuels, which must first be atomized and vaporized 
before they can burn. These additional processes increase the 
degree of difficulty in achieving low emissions by almost an 
order of magnitude. The second reason is that natural gas-- 
the favored fuel for stationary gas turbines--has a peak flame 
temperature around 140°C less than that of the distillate fuels 
employed in aircraft engines. As the formation of NO~ is expo- 
nentially dependent on temperature, this lower flame tempera- 
ture reduces NOx levels by a factor of around two. For these 
reasons the emissions goals set for stationary engines tend to 
be much more severe than for aero-engines. 
Conventional Combustors 
There are two basic types of gas turbine combustor: tubular, 
or can, and annular. A tubular chamber is composed of a cylin- 
drical liner mounted concentrically inside a cylindrical casing. 
Most of the early jet engines featured tubular chambers, usually 
in numbers varying from seven to sixteen per engine. For air- 
craft applications, the tubular system is now regarded as too 
long and too heavy and the annular system is now the automatic 
choice for all new engines. However, tubular chambers do have 
significant advantages in terms of easy accessibility and mainte- 
nance, and they are still preferred for large stationary engines 
in the 80-plus megawatt range, such as the General Electric 
MS7001 engine, which has ten separate cans. 
The annular combustor comprises an annular liner mounted 
concentrically inside an annular casing. In many ways it repre- 
sents an ideal form of chamber, since its "clean" aerodynamic 
layout results in a compact unit of lower pressure loss than other 
combustor designs. All modern aero-engines employ annular 
combustors, which means that modern aero-derived industrial 
engines, such as the General Electric LM6000 and the Rolls 
Royce RB211, all have annular combustors. 
The volume contained within the liner of a conventional com- 
bustor may be divided conveniently into three main zones: pri- 
mary, intermediate, and dilution. The function of the primary 
zone is to anchor the flame and to provide sufficient time, tem- 
perature, and turbulence to achieve essentially complete com- 
bustion of the fuel. The hot combustion products issuing from 
the primary zone flow into the intermediate zone, which pro- 
vides a region in which combustion can proceed to completion 
,, PRIMAR.y.=L__ 
IN TERMEDIATE_~.L__ 
DILUTION____,= 
FUEL 
ZONE T 
ZONE Z O N E  
INJECTOR~ 
I 
( 
Fig. 1 Main components of a conventional gas turbine combustor 
upstream of the dilution zone. The role of the dilution zone is 
to admit the air remaining after the combustion and wall-cooling 
requirements have been met, and to provide an outlet gas stream 
with a mean temperature and a temperature distribution that are 
acceptable to the turbine. 
The locations of the three main zones described above in 
relation to the various combustor components and the air admis- 
sion holes, are shown in Fig, 1. 
Liquid Fuel Injection. 
The liquid fuels employed in air- 
craft engines must first be atomized before being injected into 
the combustion zone. Fortunately, atomization is easy to accom- 
plish; for most liquids, all that is needed is a high relative 
velocity between the liquid to be atomized and the surrounding 
air or gas. Pressure atomizers accomplish this by discharging 
the liquid at high velocity into a relatively slow-moving stream 
of air. An alternative approach is to expose a slow-moving 
liquid to a high-velocity airstream. The latter method is gener- 
ally known as airblast atomization. Pressure atomizers are usu- 
ally of the "dual-orifice" type, as shown in Fig. 2. As its 
name suggests, this atomizer incorporates two orifices, arranged 
concentrically. The inner primary orifice is small, while the 
outer secondary orifice is of larger area. At low fuel flows, only 
the primary operates and atomization quality is good because 
injection pressures are fairly high. With increasing fuel flow, 
the injection pressure rises and would soon become excessive 
but, at a predetermined pressure, a valve opens and fuel is 
then conveyed to the secondary orifice. This arrangement gives 
satisfactory atomization over a wide range of fuel flows without 
calling for excessive fuel delivery pressures. The principal ad- 
vantage of dual-orifice nozzles is good mechanical reliability. 
Their drawbacks include potential plugging of the small pas- 
sages and orifices by contaminants in the fuel and an inate 
tendency toward high concentrations of exhaust smoke at high 
combustion pressures. 
The most widely used type of airblast atomizer is illustrated 
in Fig. 3. In this design the bulk fuel is first spread into a 
thin continuous sheet, a process called "prefilming," and then 
exposed to high-velocity, swirling air streams on both sides of 
the sheet. Prefilming airblast atomizers are capable of producing 
fine atomization and a virtually smoke-free exhaust at high 
combustion pressures. The main drawbacks of airblast atomiz- 
ers are poor lean blowout performance and poor atomization 
dunng engine startup when air velocities are low. These prob- 
lems can be readily overcome by incorporating a pilot or pri- 
mary nozzle. At low fuel flows, all of the fuel is supplied 
through the pilot nozzle, and a well-atomized spray is obtained, 
giving efficient combustion at start-up and idling. At higher 
power settings, fuel is supplied to both the airblast and pilot 
nozzles. The relative amounts are such that at the highest fuel 
flow conditions most of the fuel is supplied to the airblast atom- 
izer. By this means, the performance requirements of wide burn- 
ing range and low exhaust are both realized. 
618 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

~ 
InlRliatlon Tubll 
. _ , _ . .  
~ SlcOndl~ NoIzle 
Fig. 2 Dual-orifice, pressure-swirl atomizer (courtesy of the Parker 
Hannifin Corporation) 
Gas Injection. 
For almost all stationary gas turbines the 
fuel employed is natural gas. Some engines are fitted with dual- 
fuel nozzles, which allow both liquid and gaseous fuels to be 
used, but usually the liquid fuel is for backup purposes only. 
The methods used to inject gaseous fuels tend to be simple as 
there are no requirements for atomization and fuel evaporation. 
They include injecting the gas through plain orifices, slots, 
swirlers, and venturi nozzles. 
The main problem with gas injection is that of achieving 
the optimal level of mixing between air, fuel, and combustion 
products in the combustion zone. Too high a mixing rate pro- 
duces narrow burning limits. On the other hand, if the rate of 
mixing is too low, the system may be prone to low-frequency, 
combustion-induced pressure oscillations. On engines designed 
to operate on both gaseous and liquid fuels, it is important that 
the gas flow pattern be matched to that of the liquid fuel; other- 
wise some variation in the temperature distribution of the com- 
bustor outlet gases would occur during changeover from one 
fuel to the other. 
Fuel Spray Characteristics 
The spray properties of most relevance to the formation of 
pollutant emissions are mean drop size, drop size distribution, 
cone angle, and patternation. Other properties of special impor- 
tance for the successful modeling of spray characteristics in- 
clude droplet and gas velocities, droplet trajectories, and mass 
flux distributions. 
Mean Drop Size. 
Various definitions of mean drop size 
are available, of which the most widely used is the Sauter mean 
diameter (SMD), which represents the volume/surface ratio of 
the liquid in the spray. Unfortunately, the physical processes 
involved in atomization are not yet sufficiently well understood 
for mean diameters to be expressed in terms of equations de- 
Inner Ai 
~
F
 shr°ud 
uterAit Swider 
uel Swider 
Fig. 3 Prefllming airblast atomizer (courtesy of the Parker Hannifin Cor- 
poration) 
2.0 
1.6 
~ 
SMD = 50 Ira1, q = 3 
¢3 1.2 
0.8 
/ 
~
0
 
I.tm, q - 2 
0.4 
00 
I 
I 
~ 
I 
~l 
I 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
DROP DIAMETER, IJ.rn 
Fig. 4 Influence of drop size distribution parameter on frequency distri- 
bution curve 
rived from basic principles. In consequence, the majority of 
investigations into the drop sizes produced in atomization have 
resulted in empirical equations for mean drop size. Lefebvre 
(1989) has reviewed the available equations for the mean drop 
sizes produced by the types of atomizers employed in gas tur- 
bine combustion. They show that mean drop sizes are largely 
dependent on atomizer size, design features, and operating con- 
ditions, and also on the physical properties of the liquids em- 
ployed and the density of the surrounding gaseous medium. 
Most of the equations for mean drop size published before 
around 1970 should be regarded as suspect due to deficiencies 
in the methods available for drop size measurements. Even 
expressions based on accurate experimental data should only 
be used within the ranges of air properties, liquid properties, 
and atomizer operating conditions employed in their derivation. 
Extrapolation to other conditions is fraught with risk because 
changes in any of these variables could produce a change in 
the mode of atomization, which could have a significant effect 
on the manner and extent to which variations in the relevant 
flow parameters affect the drop size distribution in the spray. 
Drop Size Distribution. 
Owing to the random and chaotic 
nature of the atomization process, the threads and ligaments 
formed by the various mechanisms of jet and sheet disintegra- 
tion vary widely in diameter, and their subsequent breakup 
yields a correspondingly wide range of drop sizes. Most practi- 
cal atomizers produce droplets in the size range from a few 
microns up to several hundred microns. 
As no complete theory has yet been developed to describe 
the hydrodynamic and aerodynamic processes involved when 
jet and sheet disintegration occurs under normal atomizing con- 
ditions, a number of functions have been proposed, based on 
either probability or purely empirical considerations, that allow 
the mathematical representation of measured drop size distribu- 
tions. The simplest expression for drop size distribution is that 
of Rosin and Rammler (1933). It may be expressed in the form 
1 - Q = exp - (D/X) q 
(1) 
where Q is the fraction of the total volume contained in drops 
of diameter less than D, and X and q are constants. Thus, the 
Rosin-Rammler relationship describes the drop size distribu- 
tion in terms of the two parameters X and q. The exponent q 
provides a measure of the spread of drop sizes. The higher the 
value of q, the more uniform is the spray. 
Figure 4 shows frequency distribution plots for two sprays, 
both having the same SMD of 50 /zm, but in one case the 
distribution parameter q has a value of 2 and in the other case 
a value of 3. This figure clearly demonstrates that knowledge 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 619 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

of SMD alone is not sufficient to determine the spray evapora- 
tion time. One spray contains no drops larger than 130 #m 
whereas the other contains drops up to 200 /zm in diameter. 
This represents a difference in total spray evaporation time 
of more than two to one. Differences of this magnitude must 
necessarily have a pronounced effect on the formation rates of 
all the main pollutants. 
Cone Angle. 
A major difficulty in the definition and mea- 
surement of cone angle is that the spray cone has curved bound- 
aries, owing to the effects of air interaction with the spray. To 
overcome this problem, the cone angle is often given as the 
initial angle as measured close to the nozzle where the spray 
contour is still in the form of a perfect cone. Rizk and Lefebvre 
(1987) used their own results and those of other workers to 
derive the following expression in which the cone angle, as 
measured close to the nozzle, is expressed as the product of 
two dimensionless groups: 
,K-OlS,Ap 
d z 
, 2,011 
20 = o 
" ~ 
L oPL/#L) " 
(2) 
where K is the dimensionless geometric group AJDsdo. 
A~, is 
the inlet port area, Ds is the swirl chamber diameter, do is the 
diameter of the discharge orifice, AP L is the liquid injection 
pressure, and PL and #r are the liquid density and absolute 
viscosity, respectively. 
This equation shows that spray cone angles widen with in- 
crease in fuel injection pressure, corresponding to an increase 
in fuel flow rate. This effect has been confirmed in a number 
of experimental studies; for example, Chen et al. (1992). Equa- 
tion (2) also suggests that ambient air or gas pressure has no 
effect on cone angle, but this is only true in the region near the 
nozzle. As the droplets move away from the nozzle they are 
subjected to radial air currents generated by their own kinetic 
energy, as described by De Corso and Kemeny (1957). These 
air currents become stronger with increase in ambient air pres- 
sure, with the result that although the cone angle as measured 
close to the nozzle does not change appreciably as the pressure 
is increased, the spray width further downstream contracts 
markedly. This decrease in spray cone angle with increase in 
ambient pressure is one of the main reasons why combustors 
featuring pressure-swirl atomizers generate more soot and 
smoke as the combustion pressure is increased. 
Airblast atomizers are much less susceptible to variations in 
fuel and ambient air pressure than pressure-swirl atomizers. 
The liquid sheet or jet exposed to the atomizing air has little 
momentum and the droplets formed in atomization are entirely 
dependent on the kinetic energy of the atomizing air to transport 
them away from the nozzle. This means that droplet trajectories 
are dictated by the air movements created by air swirlers and 
other aerodynamic devices, which form an integral part of the 
nozzle configuration. Thus, airblast atomizers are characterized 
by a lack of sensitivity of spray geometry characteristics to the 
physical properties of both the liquid and the surrounding gas- 
eous medium. 
From tests carried out on prefilming airblast atomizers, Ort- 
man and Lefebvre (1985) found that increasing the air pressure 
differential across the nozzle caused the spray angle to contract 
slightly. Custer and Rizk (1988) observed a similar effect. For 
one prefilming atomizer, operating at an air/fuel ratio of 5, they 
found that a large increase in air pressure differential from 1 
to 4 percent caused the spray angle to be reduced from 100 to 
80 deg. 
Circumferential Fuel Distribution, Drop sizes are, of 
course, of great importance in low-emission combustion be- 
cause of their strong influence on fuel evaporation rates and 
droplet lifetimes. Of equal importance, however, is the symme- 
try of the spatial distribution of fuel within the spray. Failure 
to achieve a symmetric mass flux distribution can result in local 
regions of mixture inhomogeneity in the combustion zone, a 
0.36 
0.30 
0.24 
~c 
0.18 
Z 
0.12 
0.06 - 
,~_PL, MPa (psi) 
SIMPLEXATOMIZER 
0 
1.03 (150) 
d o - 0.457 mm 
A 1.38 (200) 
I"1 1.72 (250) 
I 
I 
I 
0 0 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4,0 
5.0 
/0/d0 
Fig. 5 
Influence of discharge orifice length/diameter ratio on circumfer- 
ential fuel distribution 
situation that is highly detrimental to low-emissions combus- 
tion. The term adopted by the gas turbine industry for the pur- 
pose of defining spray distribution is "spray patternation" and 
the instruments used to measure liquid flux distributions in 
sprays are commonly referred to as "spray patternators." 
The simplest form of patternator comprises a cluster of col- 
lection tubes, which are located under the test nozzle. The noz- 
zle sprays downward into the tubes and the duration of each 
test is the time required for one of the sampling tubes to become 
nearly full. After the level of fuel in each tube is measured and 
recorded, the values are averaged to get a mean height. The 
levels of the tubes are normalized against the mean, and the 
standard deviation of the normalized values is calculated. The 
normalized standard deviation provides a quantitative indication 
of the symmetry of the distribution of fuel within the spray. 
More sophisticated spray patternators have been devised that 
are capable of high-resolution measurements of the mass flux 
distributions produced by gas turbine fuel injectors (McVey et 
al., 1987, 1989). These methods are not necessarily more accu- 
rate than the simple patternators described above, but they do 
allow a large amount of data to be collected in a relatively short 
time. 
Circumferential patternation is sensitive to the dimensional 
relationships characteristic of a particular nozzle design. For 
example, for pressure-swirl atomizers, patternation has been 
correlated with the degree of eccentricity between the swirl 
chamber and the final discharge orifice (Tate, 1960). Nozzle 
quality is also important, and spray patternation may be im- 
paired by poor surface finish, orifice imperfections, plugged or 
contaminated flow passages, eccentric alignment of key nozzle 
components, and other conditions. For alrblast atomizers, lack 
of symmetry in the various air passages and swirlers can also 
have an adverse effect on spray patternation, as discussed below. 
Chert et al. (1993) used several different pressure-swirl noz- 
zles to examine the effects of variations in liquid properties, 
operating conditions, and atomizer design features, on spray 
patternation. Of special interest are the results obtained on the 
effects of varying the length/diameter ratio of the final dis- 
charge orifice, lo/do, as illustrated in Fig. 5. In this figure the 
circumferential maldistribution is expressed in terms of a stan- 
dard deviation, a. If the circumferential distribution of liquid 
within the spray were completely uniform, the value of a would 
be zero. Figure 5 shows that a declines, i.e., patternation ira- 
620 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

proves, with increase in liquid injection pressure, presumably 
because high injection pressures promote more turbulence and 
better mixing in the swirl chamber. It also shows that the cir- 
cumferential distribution is most uniform for a value of lo/do 
of 2. This optimum value of 2 was found to apply at all operating 
conditions to all of the liquids tested, some of which varied in 
viscosity by a factor of twelve. This result is of considerable 
practical interest because for many years the trend in pressure- 
swirl atomizer design has been toward lower values of It~do in 
order to reduce internal losses and thereby improve atomization. 
Most current atomizer designs have values of lo/do of 0.5 or 
less. Figure 5 clearly demonstrates that reducing It~do can appre- 
ciably worsen the spray patternation. 
Spray Diagnostics. In recent years considerable advances 
have been made in the development of laser diagnostic tech- 
niques for measuring the properties of sprays. The methods 
used in spray analysis have been reviewed by Chigier (1983), 
Chigier and Stewart (1984), and Durst et al. (1981). Laser- 
Doppler velocimetry and phase-Doppler anemometry, inter- 
faced with signal processing and high-speed data acquisition 
systems, are now being used routinely in simultaneous measure- 
ments of drop size, drop velocity, and local drop drag coeffi- 
cients (Bauckhage, 1988; Delarosa et al., 1993; Dittmann et al., 
1992; Naqwi et al., 1991). High-speed pulsed microphotogra- 
phy, cinematography, and holography are also used to study 
drop size distributions and spray structure (Santangello and 
Sojka, 1994). Much of the tedium normally involved in detailed 
studies of drop size distributions in various regions of the spray 
can now be alleviated using automatic image analysis, in which 
droplet images are enlarged, counted, and sorted by electronic 
scanning devices and analyzed by microprocessors. 
Many efforts are now underway to gain a better understanding 
of the basic phenomena occurring within complex practical sys- 
tems currently in service on advanced turbojet engines. Wang 
et al. (1992a, b, 1994, 1995) and McDonell et al. (1994a, b) 
used a two-component phase-Doppler interferometry system to 
make detailed measurements in the flows downstream of a 
SNECMA/GE CFM-56 airblast atomizer. In addition to time- 
averaged properties, transient phenomena were also examined. 
These studies have provided great insight into the general struc- 
ture of the gas phase as well as details regarding the complex 
behavior of drops. Of special interest from a practical viewpoint 
is that actual engine hardware was used to examine the sensitiv- 
ity of the spray structure to scaling and hardware variations. 
One study was devoted to an examination of the effects of 
nozzle defects on spray characteristics. Figure 6 presents a sche- 
matic diagram of the CFM-56 atomizer and swirl cup used in 
this investigation. It features a pair of concentric air inlets, 
which generate two separate swirling airflows in opposite direc- 
tions. The swirl cup acts as a "hybrid" injector, with drops 
produced from a combination of airblast and pressure atomiza- 
tion. This figure illustrates what can happen to the swirl cup 
assembly during the engine operating cycle. The design calls 
for concentric alignment at altitude cruise conditions. However, 
due to "throttle pushes" over the years, the assembly can be- 
come eccentric by up to around 3 mm (0.125 in.), as indicated 
in Fig. 6. This occurs because the secondary swirler is attached 
to the combustor liner, whereas the burner feed arm is mounted 
directly onto the combustor casing. Since the two components 
are pinned at two different locations to the casing, the thermal 
expansion of the casing causes misalignment. 
Results showing the effect of misalignment on the flow field 
downstream of the atomizer are presented in Fig. 7. In this 
figure the two circles on each cartoon represent the primary 
and secondary swirlers. The vector quantities represent the gas 
velocities in the r-Z plane, while the contours are the turbulent 
kinetic energies based on the measured rms velocity compo- 
nents. The highest velocity variations occur in the shear layer 
between the recirculating flow and the surrounding flow moving 
CONFIGURATION 
CONCENTRIC 
_2 
Rp= 9.7mm 
A 
J 
i 
",, 
~PRIMARY 
SWIRL 
~.1 NOZZLE 
VENTURI 
RADIAL SWlRLER 
FLARE 
ECCENTRIC 
.  .,.ARYsw,RL 
+ 
++ +.!" 
..,I=" 
® 
I~ 
....... 'R- ,/~1~/~ SECONDARY 
SW,RL 
tz+ " 
• NOZZLE 
VENTURI 
(3) RADIAL SWlRLER 
FLARE 
0.125" 
Fig. 6 
Concentric and eccentric airblast atomizers 
downstream. The slight flow asymmetries observed with con- 
centric alignment of the swirlers is attributed to normal hard- 
ware tolerance. The measurements obtained with the eccentric 
swirler assembly exhibit asymmetries in both mean velocities 
and turbulence. 
Hebrard et al. (1991, 1993) also used two-component phase- 
Doppler interferometry to characterize the two-phase flow field 
generated by an engine airblast atomizer. Their measurements 
included mean axial and transverse velocities for each phase as 
well as volume flux and drop size distributions. They used 
surface plots to illustrate the local variation of Sauter mean 
diameter for cross sections of the spray at several different 
distances downstream from the atomizer. Close to the nozzle, 
they observed a dome-shaped distribution of drop sizes. Air 
flowing through the inner and outer swirlers of the airblast 
atomizer produced a nearly uniform drop size distribution, but 
recirculating air jets caused some secondary atomization. Some 
large drops were observed in the core, generated by the inner 
swirling air. Farther downstream the drop size distribution 
broadened and indentations appeared on the spray boundary, 
caused by the presence of air jets emanating from the holes 
located near the edge of the atomizer cup. 
Wynne and Jasuja (1991) and Jasuja and Lefebvre (1994) 
used various nonintrusive techniques, including phase-Doppler 
interferometry, high-intensity spark photography, high-speed 
cinephotography, and video imaging to capture the dynamic and 
unsteady spray characteristics produced in prefilming airblast 
atomization. All of the injectors used in this program were 
typical of modern gas turbine practice and differed from each 
other only in regard to various design features, such as swirler 
flow area and vane angle, m special feature of this work is that 
it covers a very wide range of ambient air pressures. The results 
obtained are generally consistent with the findings reported 
above in showing that the sprays produced by actual engine 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 621 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

GAS PHASE STRUCTURE 
Klneffo End 
170 
1311 
102 
aSt 
....... 34t 
~ 
0 to 
Fig. 7 
E 
Z = 1.7S Rp 
Z- 2.75 Rp 
Q 
Z = 3.7S Rp 
Z = 4.7S Rp 
• 50 
-40 
-30 
-20 
-10 
O 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
RADIAL POSITION, mm 
"§ I 
20 
-15 
~i'L 
~ 
~'" ~.~:'~ !: 
:i:(~ 
Z = 1.7S Rp 
I 
.-50 
-40 
-30 
-20 
-10 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
SO 
RADIAL PosmoN, mm 
Influence of atomizer misalignment on flow field 
nozzles exhibit appreciable nonuniformities in regard to droplet 
trajectories and mass flux distributions. 
A number of laboratories throughout the world are now using 
advanced laser diagnostics to characterize the sprays produced 
in airblast atomization. Much of this work is confined to dilute 
and simple sprays operating in easily probed laboratory condi- 
tions at normal atmospheric pressure. The special merit of the 
researches summarized above is their focus on full-scale engine 
nozzles, operating in some cases over wide ranges of ambient 
air pressure. The information they are providing on the complex, 
near-field bulk liquid behavior and droplet physical processes 
is making a significant contribution to fuel injector modeling 
capabilities and the development of low-emissions combustors. 
Modeling of Spray Characteristics. The development of 
new diagnostic techniques as discussed above has encouraged 
the formulation of empirical and analytical models to describe 
the fuel injection process. Rizk and his co-workers (see, for 
example, Rizk et al., 1987; Custer and Rizk, 1988; and Rizk 
and Mongia, 1992a, b) have been especially active in this field. 
One overall model, which combines three submodels, addresses 
various processes of fuel and air preparation for atomization 
and formation of the final spray. The first submodel describes 
the velocity profiles of the air passing through and exiting from 
the nozzle passages. The second submodel deals with the fuel 
prefilming process and the conversion of the thin fuel sheet 
into droplets. Finally, the third model represents the turbulent 
dispersion effects on the spray. 
The results of this model highlight the need to define both 
the air flowfield and the film breakup process with good accu- 
racy. The model also indicates how improvements in atomiza- 
tion quality can be achieved by careful design of the prefilmer 
and internal passages of the atomizer. A thinner fuel film, which, 
for any given fuel flow rate, is governed by local air velocity 
and nozzle geometry, results in shorter ligaments that disinte- 
grate into drops closer to the nozzle in regions of relatively 
high air velocity. This enhances the secondary atomization pro- 
cess and reduces the final drop sizes in the spray. 
Sultanian and Mongia (1986) used the k- e turbulence model 
in conjunction with a boundary-fitted curvilinear orthogonal 
grid to compute the internal flow characteristics of an injector. 
Their calculations were compared with LDV measurements on 
four nozzle configurations with variations in size, swirl strength, 
and swirl direction. For most mean velocity components, the 
agreement between measurements and calculations was good. 
These workers concluded that the modeling results indicate that 
calculations can be used for design and analysis. 
Hebrard et al. (1993) have reported on the development of 
a similar k-c code, which shows good correlations between 
predictions and measurements of drop trajectories from an air- 
blast atomizer. Data were taken using a high-speed video cam- 
era. A Weber number relationship was derived for predicting 
whether a droplet will bounce or film when hitting a wall, and 
it was also noted that fuel droplets are capable of burning either 
singly, in groups, or en masse. 
The examples given above are intended to illustrate current 
efforts in fuel injector modeling. These models, in conjunction 
with the detailed knowledge on spray characteristics that new 
advances in laser diagnostics are making available at an ever- 
increasing rate, are providing better insight on the critical role 
of the fuel injection process on low-emissions combustor perfor- 
mance. 
Fuel Nozzle Coking 
No discussion on spray characteristics would be complete 
without reference to the deleterious effects on atomization and 
spray symmetry caused by the partial or complete blockage by 
carbon deposition of one or more of the flow passages within 
the fuel nozzle. This problem is one of growing importance and 
has special implications for the development of many types of 
low-emission combustors for which a uniform distribution of 
fuel within the spray is a basic requirement. It is especially 
serious for advanced turbojet engines due to the growing use 
of the fuel as a heat sink for cooling the airframe, avionics, and 
engine lubricating oil. The problem is further exacerbated by 
the fact that the fuel feed arm is immersed in the compressor 
efflux air. This high-temperature, high-pressure, high-velocity 
airflow causes convective heating, which further raises the tem- 
perature of the fuel before it flows into the fuel injector. The 
combined effect of all these various inputs is that by the time 
the fuel is sprayed into the combustion zone, its temperature is 
appreciably higher than when it left the fuel tank. 
From a combustion viewpoint this elevation in fuel tempera- 
ture is not altogether undesirable because it reduces fuel viscos- 
ity and thereby promotes finer atomization. Unfortunately, high 
fuel temperatures stimulate oxidation reactions, which lead to 
the formation of gums and other insoluble materials (including 
carbon), which tend to deposit on the walls of the passages and 
metering orifices within the nozzle. These deposits can distort 
the fuel spray and create appreciable nonuniformities in spray 
pattemation. 
The problems created by the deposition of carbonaceous ma- 
terials, generally referred to as "coke," within the fuel nozzle 
are of special importance for small gas turbines. As the engine 
size is reduced, the dimensions of various engine components 
must also decrease. This is particularly disadvantageous for the 
fuel injector because it embodies small internal flow passages, 
which are especially prone to plugging and blockage. In small 
gas turbines, the swirl-inducing and fuel metering passages can 
have linear dimensions as small as 200/~m (McCaldon et al., 
1993). Fuel passages are often convoluted, thus creating local 
regions in which the flow velocity is low and thermal degrada- 
tion and coking can occur. The pressure-swirl atomizer, having 
very small hole and passage sizes, is especially prone to coke 
formation. Coke agglomerates, formed either upstream of the 
nozzle tip or within the nozzle itself, can break off and be 
carried in to the metering passages. 
Airblast atomizers are inherently less susceptible than pres- 
sure-swirl atomizers to the problems of fuel coking because 
622 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

they employ much larger fuel passages in the nozzle tip. How- 
ever, the inability of airblast atomizers always to meet the re- 
quirements of cold day starting has prevented pure airblast sys- 
tems from completely displacing pressure-swirl atomizers from 
engine designs. 
The effects of partially or totally blocked fuel metering pas- 
sages on the fuel-air distributions produced by an airblast atom- 
izer have been examined by McCaldon et al. (1993). They 
found that as more and more fuel metering holes become ob- 
structed with increasing operating time, more fuel is forced 
through the remaining nozzles. Consequently, engine damage 
may be caused by those injectors, which, if tested individually, 
still flow within tolerances. Although the report of McCaldon 
et al. contains no data on NOx, it is clear that the fuel flux 
variations found must also give rise to substantial increases in 
NOx emissions at high power conditions and increased emis- 
sions of CO and UHC at low power conditions. 
The studies carried out by Nickolaus and Lefebvre (1987) 
and McCaldon et al. (1993), among others, have demonstrated 
that coke formation within fuel nozzles can have a serious ad- 
verse effect on spray pattern. Although it has long been recog- 
nized that "cleaner" fuels of low aromatics content can greatly 
reduce the potential for fuel coking, this has never been regarded 
as a practical option due to the requirements of fuel flexibility 
for the military and lower-cost, heavier distillate fuels for civil- 
ian and commercial applications. 
The discussion above on the effects of fuel thermal degrada- 
tion on fuel injector performance has tended to focus on the 
deleterious effects caused by the elevation in temperature expe- 
rienced by the fuel upstream of the nozzle tip. Another important 
effect on fuel coking is the fuel-wetted wall temperature within 
the nozzle. An increase in wall temperature greatly accelerates 
the rate of coke deposition. The flow of heat into the nozzle tip 
by air flows introduced to prevent soot accumulation, and by 
intense radiation from the combustion gases, cause fuel-wetted 
wall temperatures to be appreciably higher than the temperature 
of the adjacent fuel. This temperature gradient near the wall not 
only enhances deposition rates by raising the fuel temperature 
but also has a separate additional effect due to the higher wall 
temperature. 
In recent years the U.S. Naval Air Propulsion Center has 
sponsored an innovative high-temperature fuel nozzle program 
with the objective of designing and evaluating fuel nozzles 
capable of operating satisfactorily despite extreme fuel and air 
inlet temperatures. As part of this program, Stickles et al. ( 1993 ) 
evaluated 27 different nozzle designs, all of which were based 
on the production GE F404 fuel nozzle. The design approach 
was to use improved thermal protection and fuel passage geom- 
etry in combination with fuel passage surface treatment to mini- 
mize coking. Heat transfer analysis highlighted several im- 
portant design features for reducing wetted-wall temperatures. 
1 Reduce fuel flow passage area to increase fuel velocity 
* 
Increases heat transfer coefficients 
* 
Reduces wetted-wall temperature 
* 
Reduces fuel residence time 
2 
Add air gaps 
* 
Metals with air gaps are more effective than solid 
ceramics 
3 
Substitute ceramics for metal parts 
* 
Ceramics are very effective in combination with air 
gaps 
4 
Avoid bends and steps in the fuel flow path 
* 
They create stagnant fuel regions that have low trans- 
fer coefficients and thus high wetted-wall tempera- 
tures 
Sample tube coking test results showed the importance of 
surface finish on the fuel coklng rate. Reducing the surface 
roughness from 3.1 #m to 0.25 #m reduced the deposition rate 
by 26 percent. In summary, Stickles et al. found that reduced 
Table 1 Principal pollutants emitted by gas turbines 
POLLUTANT 
EFFECT 
Carbon monoxide (CO) 
Unburned hydrocarbons (UHC) 
Particulate ma~er (C) 
Oxides of nitrogen (NOx) 
Oxides of sulfur (Sex) 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) 
Toxic 
Contributes to urban smog 
Visible. Possible link to 
asthma and other respiratory 
diseases 
Toxic, precursor of chemical 
smog, depletion of ozone in 
stratosphere 
Toxic, corrosive 
Contributes to greenhouse 
effect 
passage flow area, reduced surface roughness, additional insu- 
lating air gaps, and replacement of metallic tip components with 
ceramics minimized the wetted-wall temperature. Vacuum gaps, 
reduced emissivity coatings, and thermal barrier coatings did 
not offer significant wall-temperature reductions. 
Thermal modeling studies carried out by Myers et al. (1992) 
suggested that the two major sources of heat absorption into 
the fuel nozzle were the air swirl vanes and any surface exposed 
to the flame. At an altitude cruise condition, for example, the 
predicted heat flux entering the nozzle face from flame radiation 
is more than 20 times that absorbed by conduction and convec- 
tion through the burner feed arm. The frontal area exposed to 
the flame is thus a key element in nozzle thermal loading. 
Myers et al. concluded that substantial reductions in wetted- 
wall temperatures can be realized at extreme fuel and air inlet 
temperatures by using simple air gaps as thermal barriers. De- 
tailed thermal analysis and simple thermal barriers, rather than 
exotic cooling schemes, can produce dramatic improvements in 
thermal protection. 
The problem of fuel coking and its strong adverse effects on 
spray uniformity and pollutant emissions is one of growing 
concern due to the anticipated gradual deteriorations in fuel 
quality and the continuing trends toward higher temperature 
engines. 
Emissions Concerns 
The exhaust from an aircraft gas turbine is composed of 
carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2), water vapor 
(H20), unburned hydrocarbons (UHC), particulate matter 
(mainly carbon), oxides of nitrogen, and excess atmospheric 
oxygen and nitrogen. Carbon dioxide and water vapor have not 
always been regarded as pollutants because they are the natural 
consequence of complete combustion of a hydrocarbon fuel. 
However, they both contribute to global warming and can only 
be reduced by burning less fuel. With industrial gas turbines 
burning residual fuels, an additional pollutant of concern is 
oxides of sulfur, mainly SO2 and SO3. They are toxic and corro- 
sive and lead to the formation of sulfuric acid in the atmosphere. 
Since virtually all the sulfur in the fuel is oxidized to SOx, the 
only viable limitation strategy is to remove sulfur from the fuel 
prior to combustion. 
The principal pollutants are listed in Table 1. Carbon monox- 
ide reduces the capacity of the blood to absorb oxygen and, in 
high concentrations, can cause asphyxiation and even death. 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 623 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

Unburned hydrocarbons are not only toxic, but they also com- 
bine with oxides of nitrogen to form photochemical smog. Par- 
ticulate matter, often called soot or smoke, is generally not 
considered toxic at the levels emitted, but recent studies by 
Seaton et al. (1995) indicate a strong association between 
asthma and other respiratory diseases and atmospheric pollution 
by concentrations of small particles in the microgram range. 
Oxides of nitrogen (NO + NO2), of which the predominant 
compound at high emission levels is NO, not 0nly contribute 
to the production of photochemical smog at ground level but 
also cause damage to plant life and add to the problem of acid 
rain. Relative to other sources, aircraft engines are only minor 
contributors to the overall NOx burden. For example, in the 
United States NO~ emissions from aircraft engines account for 
only about 0.5 percent of the total emissions nationwide from 
all sources (Bahr, 1991). On a global basis, NOx emissions 
from aircraft engines constitute less than 3 percent of all man- 
made NOx emissions. However, of special concern is that these 
emissions are released at altitude and lead to the formation of 
ozone in the troposphere. This is the region in which stationary 
gas turbines and subsonic aircraft operate. Measurements taken 
over a long period of time at altitudes from one to three kilome- 
ters indicate that the level of ozone over Western Europe is now 
approaching 50 ppb (parts per billion). Prolonged exposure to 
ozone concentrations around 100 ppb is associated with respira- 
tory illnesses, impaired vision, headaches, and allergies. Ground 
level ozone is especially important in regions where the topo- 
graphical features prevent the local weather system from remov- 
ing the ozone formed in combustion and where strong sunshine 
can promote the photochemical reactions that lead to smog. Los 
Angeles is the classic example of such a region. It is hardly 
surprising therefore that the drive toward very stringent emis- 
sions legislation on NOx first emanated from this city. 
Similar studies indicate that NOx emissions emitted at higher 
altitudes can contribute to the depletion of the stratospheric 
ozone layer. Unfortunately, supersonic aircraft are required to 
operate at such high altitudes. Ozone depletion results in an 
increase in ground level ultraviolet radiation, which leads to an 
increase in the incidence of skin cancer. 
For industrial gas turbines the problems posed by exhaust 
gas emissions are no less challenging than for aero-engines. 
World energy demand is forecast to grow over the next 30 years 
at around 1.4 percent per annum. This demand will be met 
predominantly by the combustion of fossil fuels (Singh, 1994). 
Thus the manufacturers and users of gas turbines for utility 
power generation now find themselves at the forefront in regard 
to responsibility for emissions issues. 
Emissions Regulations 
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) has 
promulgated regulations for civil subsonic turbojet/turbofan en- 
gines with rated thrust levels above 26.7 kN (6,000 pounds) 
for a defined landing-takeoff cycle (LTO) which is based on 
Table 2 ICAO gaseous emissions standards 
Emission, 
Subsonic turbojet/ 
Supersonic turbojet/ 
g/kN 
turbofan engines* 
turbofan engines 
o I-K2 
19.6 
o CO 
118.0 
o NOx 
40+2goo 
*Newly manufactured engines with rated takeoff 
thrust greater than 26.7 kN. 
~oo = engine pressure ratio at takeoff 
140(0.92)~r,0o 
4550(~oo)-I.03 
36+2.421r.oo 
Table 3 Typical aircraft emissions 
TYPICAL DISTRIBUTION OF TOTAL EMISSION MASS 
QUANTITIES GENERATED DURING A FLIGHT OF AN 
AIRCRAFT EQUIPPED WITH MODERN ENGINES 
o 
Aircraft: 
Twin-engine transport 
o 
Range: 
500 nautical miles 
Category 
Percent of total emission mass 
, During ICAO 
! 
Overall 
Smoke 
HC 
CO 
NOx 
Total 
During 
landing-takeoff 
cycle 
0.6 
5.4 
7.8 
13.8 
(56.5% NOx) 
During elimbout/ 
cruise/descent 
0.1 
t.0 
7.0 
78.1 
86.2 
(90.6%NOx) 
0.1 
1.6 
12.4 
85.9 
I00.0 
an operational cycle around airports. This LTO cycle is intended 
to be representative of operations performed by an aircraft as 
it descends from an altitude of 914 m (3000 ft) on its approach 
path to the time it subsequently attains the same altitude after 
takeoff. 
The standards for CO, UHC, and NOx emissions are presented 
in Table 2, in which 7r0o is the engine pressure ratio at takeoff. 
They are expressed in terms of a parameter that consists of the 
total mass in grams of any given gaseous pollutant emitted 
during the LTO cycle per kilonewton of rated thrust at sea level. 
We have 
Emission = Emission Index (EI) 
g/kN 
g/kg fuel 
× Engine SFC × Time in Mode 
(3) 
kg fuel/h kN 
h 
This equation demonstrates that improving (i.e., reducing) the 
specific fuel consumption results directly in a reduction of the 
pollution levels. Because the CO and UHC levels of modem 
engines have been greatly reduced at all low power conditions, 
and only NOx is emitted in appreciable amounts at altitude 
cruise, in practice the emissions generated by aircraft engines 
consist primarily of NOx. A typical example of the emissions 
mass distribution associated with the flight of a modem subsonic 
aircraft has been provided by Bahr (1992) and is shown in 
Table 3. This table represents a flight of 900 km (500 nautical 
miles) and shows that NOx emissions predominate both in the 
vicinity of the airport and during altitude cruise. For a longer 
flight, NOx emissions would account for an even larger fraction 
of the total emissions mass. 
The ICAO standard for smoke measurement is expressed in 
terms of a Smoke Number (SN), which is related to the engine 
takeoff thrust (F00) by the expression 
SN = 83.6(F0o) -°'274 
(4) 
This expression is shown graphically in Fig. 8. The intention 
of this standard is to eliminate any visible smoke from the 
engine exhaust. As smoke visibility depends on both the smoke 
624 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

Ul 
II1 
z 
W 
0 
50 
40 
30 
10 
0 0 
ICAO SMOKE EMISSION STANDARD 
(Fo0)-0.274 
• 
el = 83.6 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
RATED THRUST (F0o), kN 
Fig. 8 
ICAO smoke emissions standards 
I 
300 
concentration, as indicated by the value of SN, and on the 
viewing path length, the allowable SN of a high thrust engine 
is lower than for a low thrust engine because of its larger exhaust 
diameter. 
As far as subsonic aircraft engines are concerned, the situa- 
tion in regard to compliance with ICAO regulations is generally 
satisfactory, due mainly to the engine manufacturers' efforts 
during the past 20 years in improving combustor design and in 
reducing engine specific fuel consumption. However, in view 
of the continuing pressure to reduce NOx emissions from all 
sources, efforts by ICAO to formulate more rigorous NOx stan- 
dards are in progress and a 20 percent increase in the stringency 
of the current ICAO standard has been enacted and will come 
into effect at the end of 1995. In Sweden a tax is now imposed 
on NOx and UHC emissions generated during domestic flights, 
while limits on the total yearly emissions quantities at some 
airports are being considered in both Sweden and Switzerland 
(Bahr, 1995). These steps could constitute important prece- 
dents. For future supersonic aircraft engines, very stringent 
goals have been established. The future of second-generation 
supersonic aircraft depends crucially on compliance with these 
goals, which can only be met by the use of yet-to-be-developed 
ultralow NOx combustor designs. 
The discussion so far has focused mainly on aircraft engines, 
but the same general considerations apply with equal force to the 
use of gas turbines in other applications. Regulations governing 
emissions from gas turbines at ground level tend to be highly 
complex because the legislation varies from one country to 
another and is supplemented by local or site-specific regulations 
and ordinances governing the size and usage of the plant under 
consideration and the type of fuel to be used. Figure 9, due to 
100 
90 
8O 
LLI 
i 
 7o 
60 
.~ 40 
o> 
2o 
10 
0 
SOME EMISSIONS REGULATIONS 
• NOX 
(LIQUID) 
NOX 
(GAS) 
• CO 
(LIQUID) 
• CO 
(GAS) 
>50 MW 
<50 MW 
US 
Japan 
EEC DIRECTIVE (19 AUG 92) 
Fig. 9 
Some emissions regulations for industrial engines 
Fig. 10 
I 
I 
NO,, 
\ 
/^ 
I 
I 
co 
I"i 
~ H C  
I 
I 
IDLE 
MAX 
POWER 
Emissions characteristics of gas turbine engines 
Singh (1994), summarizes the EEC Directive of August 19, 
1992, concerning CO and NOx emissions for gaseous and liquid 
fuels for gas turbines over and under 50 MW. These levels are 
then compared with some legislation from the U.S. and Japan. 
Most of the drive toward more stringent regulations for sta- 
tionary gas turbines has been directed at oxides of nitrogen. 
Changes in legislation are now calling for NOx requirements as 
low as 25 ppm and even 9 ppm. In some locations the installa- 
tion of a new gas turbine power generating facility calls for 
NOx emissions levels below 5 ppm. Moreover, there is often a 
requirement to use the "Best Available Control Technology" 
(BACT) or the "Lowest Available Emission Rate" (LAER). 
This has led to concerns such as those expressed by Angello 
and Lowe (1989), that if a new technology is developed that 
significantly improves the ability to reduce NOx emissions, it 
effectively sets the emission standard that all subsequent plants 
must meet. Thus, as new technologies are developed to meet 
the ever-increasingly restrictive emission limits, they become 
the standard by which the next round of emission regulations 
is guided. 
Combustors designed specifically for low-NOx emissions are 
often described as "low-NOx" or "ultralow-NOx". Broadly 
speaking, the term "low-NOx" relates to emissions in the range 
from 25 to 50 ppm (corrected to 15 percent O2), whereas "ul- 
tralow NOx" generally denotes emissions below 25 ppm. With 
advances in low emissions technology, the description "ul- 
tralow-NOx" is becoming increasingly reserved for emission 
levels below 10 ppm. 
Mechanisms 
of Pollutant Formation 
The concentration levels of pollutants in gas turbine exhausts 
can be related directly to the temperature, time, and concentra- 
tion histories of the combustion process. These vary fi'om one 
combustor to another and, for any given combustor, with 
changes in operating conditions. The nature of pollutant forma- 
tion is such that the concentrations of carbon monoxide and 
unburned hydrocarbons are highest at low-power conditions and 
diminish with increase in power. In contrast, oxides of nitrogen 
and smoke are fairly insignificant at low power settings and 
attain maximum values at the highest power condition. These 
characteristic trends are sketched in Fig. 10. 
Carbon Monoxide. 
In combustion zones designed to oper- 
ate fuel-rich, large amounts of CO are formed owing to the lack 
of sufficient oxygen to complete the reaction to CO2. If, how- 
ever, the combustion zone mixture strength is stoichiometric or 
moderately fuel-lean, significant amounts of CO will be present 
owing to the dissociation of CO2. In principle, it should be 
possible to reduce this CO to a very low level by the staged 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 625 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 10 ---

200 
100 
80 
60 
,~ 
40 
20 
10- 
8 
6 
Fig. 11 
FUEL - DF 2 
SMD - 110 pm 
P^ - 1.27 MPa 
o T A = 473 K 
E1 TA. 573 K 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
EQUIVALENCE RATIO, 
Influence of inlet air temperature on CO emissions 
admission of additional air downstream of the primary zone to 
achieve a gradual reduction in burned gas temperature. In prac- 
tice, CO emissions are found to be much higher than predicted 
from equilibrium calculations and to be highest at low-power 
conditions, where burning rates and peak temperatures are rela- 
tively low. 
The main factors influencing burning rates, and hence also 
CO emissions, are engine and combustor inlet temperatures, 
combustion pressure, and primary-zone equivalence ratio. (Note 
that equivalence ratio is the actual fuel/air ratio divided by the 
stoichiometric value of fuel/air ratio.) All these aspects have 
been investigated by many workers, including Bahr (1982, 
1987, 1991, 1992), Bayle Labour6 (1991), Correa (1991), 
Desaulty ( 1991 ), Koff (1993), Mosier and Pierce (1980), and 
40 
Sturgess et al. (1993). In their studies on pollutant emissions 
from continuous flow combustors, Rink and Lefebvre (1989a) 
used a continuous flow tubular combustor, 150 mm in diameter, 
85 
in conjunction with an array of 36 equally spaced "micro- 
scopic" airblast atomizers, to achieve a uniform distribution of 
fuel in the mixture entering the combustion zone. This method 
30 - 
of fuel injection had another useful advantage in that it allowed 
the mean drop size in the fuel spray to be varied in a controlled 
._ 
manner while maintaining all other flow conditions constant. 
~. 25 - 
All measurements of pollutant emissions were carried out at a 
9) 
distance of 170 mm from the fuel injectors. 
5, 
Influence of Equivalence Ratio. Some of the results ob- 
O 
~ 
20- 
tained by Rink and Lefebvre are presented in Fig. 11, which 
shows the variation of CO emissions with equivalence ratio for 
two values of inlet air temperature, namely 473 and 573 K. 
15 - 
Both curves exhibit the same general characteristics. They show 
that CO emissions diminish with increase in equivalence ratio, 
reaching a minimum value at an equivalence ratio, ~b, of around 
10 - 
0.8. Beyond this point any further increase in equivalence ratio 
causes CO emissions to rise. These trends are typical of those 
observed for other types of combustion systems. The high levels 
5 = 
of CO at low equivalence ratios are due to the slow rates of 
0.4 
oxidation associated with low combustion temperatures. In- 
crease in equivalence ratio raises the flame temperature, which 
accelerates the rate of oxidation so that CO emissions decline. 
Fig. 12 
However, at temperatures higher than around 1800 K the pro- 
duction of CO by chemical dissociation of CO2 starts to become 
significant. Thus, at high equivalence ratios CO levels are high 
because they attain equilibrium values. Only in the fairly narrow 
range of equivalence ratios from around 0.7 to 0.9 can low 
levels of CO be achieved. 
Measurements of CO emissions from more practical combus- 
tion chambers are fully consistent with these results. For exam- 
pie, Sturgess et al. (1993) used a JT9D-70A combustor supplied 
with aviation fuel to examine the effects of combustor operating 
conditions and airflow distribution on the emissions of CO, 
UHC, NOx, and smoke. The results obtained for CO at engine 
idle conditions are shown in Fig. 12. Although this figure dem- 
onstrates minimum CO at an equivalence ratio around 1.0 as 
opposed to the value of 0.8 obtained by Rink and Lefebvre, 
this difference is not considered significant because the amount 
of air participating in primary combustion is notoriously diffi- 
cult to estimate accurately. 
Influence oflnlet Air Temperature. The effect of an increase 
in inlet air temperature is to reduce CO, as illustrated in Fig. 
11. This it does by raising the flame temperature, which acceler- 
ates the conversion of CO into CO2. At equivalence ratios of 
stoichiometdc and above, this higher flame temperature pro- 
motes the formation of CO by dissociation so that, at the highest 
equivalence ratios, the CO concentrations are highest for the 
higher inlet air temperature. These trends are clearly illustrated 
in Fig. 11. 
Influence of Pressure. Figure 13 demonstrates the beneficial 
effect of an increase in combustion pressure in reducing CO 
emissions. At low equivalence ratios, increase in pressure di- 
minishes CO by accelerating the rate of conversion of CO into 
CO2. At high equivalence ratios, increase in combustion pres- 
sure reduces CO emissions, albeit to a lesser extent, by sup- 
pressing chemical dissociation. 
Influence of Ambient Air Temperature. Hung and Agan 
(1985) have examined the influence of ambient air temperature 
on the CO emissions from a 7 MW industrial engine supplied 
with natural gas fuel. A strong air temperature effect on mea- 
sured CO was observed. CO emissions for an air temperature 
P&W JT9D-70A 
IDLE 
O 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
PRIMARY ZONE EQUIVALENCE RATIO 
Influence of primary zone equivalence ratio on co emissions 
626 / Vol. "117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 11 ---

J' 
d 
¢J 
200 
I00-- 
80- 
60- 
40- 
20 
I0 
8 
6 
Fig. 13 
0 
~...j~ 
/ 
FUEL, OF 2 
$M0=70 vm 
U A = 5 rn/s 
_PA' MPo (am) 
0 0.76 
(7.5) 
1.01 {10.0) 
-- 
0 
1.27 (12.5) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
EQUIVALENCE RATIO, 
Influence of combustion pressure on CO emissions 
of 287 K were around three times higher than the corresponding 
values at 298 K. A correlation of these data carried out by Hung 
(1993) yielded the following expression for calculating the ef- 
fect of ambient air temperature on CO. It is considered valid 
for values of temperature up to 303 K. 
COr/CO2ss = 1 - 0.0634(T- 288) 
(5) 
where COt = emissions of CO in ppm at 15 percent 02 at 
ambient temperature, T, and CO28s = emissions of CO in ppm 
at 15 percent 02 at 288 K. This equation should be used with 
caution because it is likely to be very engine specific. Neverthe- 
less, it describes quantitatively what many other workers have 
observed, namely the high sensitivity of CO emissions to inlet 
air temperature. This small but important point needs to be 
borne in mind constantly when making comparative combustor 
tests for CO emissions at different times. 
A further important factor influencing CO emissions is the 
amount of liner wall-cooling air employed in the primary com- 
bustion zone. CO and UHC formed in primary combustion can 
migrate toward the liner walls and become entrained in the 
wall-cooling air. The temperature of this air is so low that all 
chemical reactions are effectively "chilled." Thus the film- 
cooling air emanating from the primary zone normally contains 
high concentrations of CO and UHC. Unless these species are 
subsequently entrained into the hot central core with sufficient 
time to react to completion, they will appear in the exhaust gas. 
Thus, reduction in film-cooling air by more efficient cooling 
(or even ceramic liners) in the primary zone is effective in 
reducing CO. 
Unburned 
Hydrocarbons. 
These 
include 
fuel 
that 
emerges from the combustor in the form of drops or vapor, as 
well as the products of the thermal degradation of the parent 
fuel into species of lower molecular weight. They are normally 
associated with poor atomization, inadequate burning rates, the 
chilling effects of film-cooling air, or any combination of these. 
The reaction kinetics of UHC formation are more complex than 
for CO formation, but generally it is found that those factors 
that influence CO emissions also influence UHC emissions and 
in much the same manner. Thus, in common with CO, UHC 
emissions are reduced by increases in inlet air temperature and 
combustor pressure, and by any change in equivalence ratio 
toward the optimum value of around 0.8. 
Smoke. 
Exhaust smoke is caused by the production of 
finely divided soot particles in fuel-rich regions of the flame. 
With pressure-swirl atomizers, the main soot-forming region 
lies inside the fuel spray, at the center of the combustor, as 
illustrated in Fig. 14. This is the region in which the recirculat- 
ing burned products move upstream toward the fuel spray, and 
in which local pockets of fuel vapor are enveloped in oxygen- 
deficient gases at high temperature. In these fuel-rich regions, 
soot may be produced in considerable quantities. Most of the 
soot produced in the primary zone is consumed in the high- 
temperature regions downstream. Thus, from a smoke view- 
point, a combustor may be considered to comprise two separate 
zones--the primary zone, which governs the rate of soot forma- 
tion, and the intermediate zone (and, on modern high-tempera- 
ture engines, the dilution zone also), which determines the rate 
of soot consumption. The soot concentration actually observed 
in the exhaust gas is an indication of the dominance of one 
zone over the other. 
Influence of Pressure. 
Problems of soot and smoke are 
always most severe at high pressures. There are several reasons 
for this; some derive from chemical effects, while others stem 
from physical factors that affect spray characteristics and hence 
the distribution of mixture strength in the soot-forming regions 
of the flame. For premixed kerosine/air flames it is found that 
no soot is formed at pressures below 0.6 MPa and equivalence 
ratios below 1.3. 
One adverse effect of an increase in pressure is to extend the 
limits of flammability, so that soot is produced in regions that, 
at lower pressures, would be too rich to burn (see Fig. 15). 
Increased pressure also accelerates chemical reaction rates, so 
that combustion is initiated earlier and a larger proportion of 
the fuel is burned in the fuel-rich regions adjacent to the spray. 
With pressure atomizers, reduced spray penetration is one of 
the main causes of smoke at high pressures. Thus whereas at 
low pressures the fuel is distributed across the entire combustion 
zone, at high pressures it tends to concentrate in the soot-form- 
ing region just downstream of the nozzle. Still another adverse 
effect of an increase in pressure is to reduce the cone angle of 
the spray. This encourages soot formation, partly by increasing 
the mean fuel drop size, but mainly by raising the mixture 
strength in the soot-forming zone. 
The total effect of all these factors is that smoke emission 
increases steeply with pressure, as shown in Fig. 16. Airblast 
atomizers are spared these problems because the fuel drops they 
produce are always airborne. The distribution of fuel through 
the combustion zone is dictated solely by the liner airflow pat- 
tern, which is not susceptible to changes in pressure. 
f 
\ 
Fig. 14 
FFUEL 
SPRAY 
f 
MAIN SOOT-FORMING ZONE. 
COMBINES HIGH TEMPERATURE 
WITH HIGH FUEL CONCENTRATION 
AND LOW OXYGEN CONTENT. 
,•/RECIRCULATING 
BURNED 
PRODU:TS 
Soot-forming zone for conventional combustors 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 627 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 12 ---

Fig. 16 
RICH 
~
l
,
~
,
~
7
~
 
LIMIT 
LSOOT THRESHOLD 
WEAK 
LIMIT 
% 
COMBUSTION PRESSURE 
Fig. 15 
Influence of pressure on flammability limits 
Influence of Fuel Type. 
Fuel properties can influence smoke 
production in two ways: first by inducing the formation of local 
fuel-rich regions, and second, by exerting variable resistance to 
carbon formation. The former is controlled by physical proper- 
ties, such as viscosity and volatility, which affect the mean drop 
size, penetration, and rate of evaporation of the fuel spray, 
whereas the latter relate to molecular structure. It is well estab- 
lished that smoking tendency increases with a reduction in hy- 
drogen content and, in fact, hydrogen content is commonly used 
in correlating rig and engine test data on various soot-related 
parameters such as smoke emissions, flame radiation, and liner 
wall temperature. However, Chin and Lefebvre (1993) have 
shown that a better index of sooting tendency is the ASTM 
smoke point, which is obtained experimentally by burning the 
test fuel in a wick lamp and slowly increasing the height of 
the flame until it begins to smoke. The height of the flame in 
millimeters is the smoke point; the higher this is, the lower is 
the tendency of the fuel to soot formation. 
The correlations shown in Figs. 17 and 18 were obtained 
from measurements of smoke number carried out on Pratt and 
Whitney TF33 and F100 combustors, respectively. The gener- 
0.5 
IO 
20 
INLET AIR PRESSURE, MPo 
200 
I00 
50 
z 
0d 
co 
<t 
bJ 
Data illustrating the effect of pressure on exhaust smoke 
TF 55 CRUISE 2 
P3 ~ 0.54 MPo 
5{ 
FAR=OOI[ 
~ 
o 
o 
~ 4c 
~( 
0 
0 
2C 
I 
I 
10 
' 
I0 
I 
2~ 
50 
SMOKE POINT 
Fig. 17 
Correlation of smoke number with smoke point for a TF 33 
combustor 
ally high quality of the data fit obtained with these and several 
other aircraft combustors led Chin and Lefebvre to conclude 
that smoke point is superior to hydrogen content as a correlating 
parameter for soot-related combustion phenomena. 
Oxides of Nitrogen. 
Some of the nitric oxide (NO) formed 
in combustion can subsequently oxidize to NO2. For this reason 
it is customary to lump NO and NO2 together and express results 
in terms of oxides of nitrogen (NOx), rather than NO. At high 
emission levels the predominant compound is nitric oxide, 
which is produced mainly by the oxidation of atmospheric nitro- 
gen in high-temperature regions of the flame. The process is 
endothermic and it proceeds at a significant rate only at tempera- 
tures above around 1850 K. It can be produced by four different 
mechanisms, as discussed below. 
1 
Thermal NO. 
This is produced by oxidation of atmo- 
spheric nitrogen in the postflame gases. Most of the proposed 
reaction schemes for thermal NO utilize the extended Zeldovich 
mechanism: 
N2 + O = NO + N 
N + 02 = NO + O 
N + OH = NO + H 
NO formation is found to peak on the fuel-lean side of stoichio- 
metric. This is a consequence of the competition between fuel 
and nitrogen for the available oxygen. Although the combustion 
temperature is higher slightly on the rich side of stoichiometric, 
the available oxygen is then consumed preferentially by the 
fuel. For even richer mixtures, a further reduction of NO may 
F I00 CRUISE 
30 
P:5" H2-LI8 MPo 
FAR ,0.020 
o 
IC 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I0 
20 
50 
SMOKE POINT 
Fig. 18 
Correlation of smoke number with smoke point for an F 100 
combustor 
628 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 13 ---

Fig. 19 
fuels 
50 
40 
30 
20 
~. lO 
P - 1.44 MPa (14.2 aim) 
T - 650- 730 K 
LIQUID FUEL 
11/050 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1600 
1700 
1800 
1900 
2000 
FLAME TEMPERATURE, K 
Dependence of NOx on flame temperature for liquid and gaseous 
750 
60(3 
45C 
3OC 
15C 
Fig. 20 
occur if sufficient hydrocarbon radicals and adequate residence 
time are available. 
Figure 19 illustrates the exponential dependence of NOx on 
flame temperature for both gaseous and liquid fuels. It is based 
on experimental data (not shown in the figure) obtained by 
Snyder et al. (1994) in their studies on the combustion perfor- 
mance achieved when using a tangential entry lean-premixed 
fuel nozzle. Data similar to those shown in Fig. 19 have been 
IO.O 
obtained by many different workers using many different types 
of combustion systems. Of special interest in this figure is that 
the well-known difference in NOx emissions between liquid and 
gaseous fuels diminishes with increase in flame temperature, 
becoming negligibly small at the highest levels of temperature. 
With liquid fuels there is always the potential for near-stoichio- 
59 
metric combustion temperatures, and consequently high NOx 
formation, in the region surrounding the fuel drops, even though 
the average equivalence ratio throughout the combustion zone 
is appreciably less than stoichiometric. With increase in equiva- 
lence ratio, the ambient flame temperature becomes closer to 
t.tJ 
the stoichiometric value, so that local conditions around the fuel 
Z 
drops have less influence on the overall combustion process 
~ 
2.0 
and the NOv emissions begin to approximate those produced by 
O 
gaseous fuels. 
As NO emissions are very dependent on flame temperature, 
a. 
an increase in inlet air temperature would be expected to pro- 
..~ 
duce a significant increase in NO, and this is confirmed by the 
"~ 
results shown in Fig. 20 from Rink and Lefebvre (1989b). This 
l.O 
figure contains data for a mean fuel drop size (SMD) of 110/zm, 
but similar results were obtained when the SMD was reduced to 
O 
30/.zm. 
Z 
Combustor residence time can also influence NOx emissions, 
as shown in Fig. 21, which contains results obtained by Ander- 
son (1975) when using a premix-prevaporize combustor burn- 
0.5 
ing gaseous propane fuel. It shows that NOx emissions increase 
with increase in residence time, except for very lean mixtures 
(th = 0.4), for which the rate of formation is so low that it 
becomes fairly insensitive to time. Similar results showing the 
insensitivity of NOx formation to residence time in lean pre- 
mixed combustion have been obtained by Leonard and Steg- 
maier (1994) and Rizk and Mongia (1993a). These findings 
have important practical implications to the design of lean pre- 
mixed combustors. 
The key points regarding thermal NO may be summarized 
as follows: 
Fig. 21 
FUEL=DF 2 
_TA, K 
PA = 1.01 MPo 
0 57'3 
SMD =110 p.rn 
0 473 
I 
I 
I 
I 
06 
0.8 
ID 
1.2 
EQUIVALENCE RATIO 
Influence of inlet air temperature on nitric oxide emissions 
1 
Thermal NO formation is controlled largely by flame tem- 
perature. 
2 
Little NO is formed at temperatures below around 1850 K. 
3 
For conditions typical of those encountered in conventional 
gas turbine combustors (high temperatures for less than a 
few milliseconds), NO increases linearly with time but does 
not attain its equilibrium value. 
4 
For very lean premixed combustors (~b < 0.5), NO forma- 
tion is largely independent of residence time. 
m 
O.5 
0.4 
,.b 
,£ 
2!o 
RESIDENCE TIME, ms 
Effect of residence time on NO. in a premixed fuel-air system 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 629 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 14 ---

2 Nitrous Oxide Mechanism. 
According to Nicol et al. 
(1992) this mechanism is initiated by the reaction 
N2 + O = N20 
and the N20 (nitrous oxide) formed is then oxidized to NO 
mainly by the reaction 
N20 + O =NO + NO 
but also by the reactions 
N20 +H =NO +NH 
NzO + CO =NO + NCO 
3 
Prompt NO. 
Under certain conditions, NO is found very 
early in the flame region--a fact that is in conflict with the 
idea of a kinetically controlled process. According to Nicol et 
al. the initiating reaction is 
N2 +CH =HCN+ 
N 
The balance of the prompt NOx mechanism involves the oxi- 
dation of the HCN molecules and N atoms. Under lean-pre- 
mixed conditions, the HCN oxidizes to NO mainly by a se- 
quence of reactions involving HCN -, CN --* NCO ~ NO. The 
N atom reacts mainly by the second Zeldovich reaction. 
Of special interest and importance is the influence of pressure 
on prompt NO formation because this could be the main contrib- 
utor to the NO emissions produced in lean premixed combustion 
(Correa, 1991 ). There are, however, few data available on this 
effect. Fennimore's (1971) pioneering study of prompt NO in 
ethylene-air flames over a range of pressures from 1 to 3 atm 
concluded that prompt NO ~ p0.5. Later work by Heberling 
(1976) over a much wider range of pressures from 1 to 18 atm 
showed that prompt NO was independent of pressure. Altemark 
and Knauber (1987) also concluded that NOx is independent of 
pressure for equivalence ratios below 0.6. The practical implica- 
tions of these findings are discussed below. 
4 
Fuel NO. 
If fuels contain organically bonded nitrogen, 
then some of this nitrogen will eventually form the so-called 
"fuel NO." The percentage of nitrogen undergoing this change 
increases only slowly with increasing flame temperature. Light 
distillate fuels contain small amounts of organic nitrogen, less 
than 0.06 percent, but the heavy distillates may contain as much 
as 1.8 percent. Thus, depending on the degree of nitrogen con- 
version, the fuel NO can represent a considerable proportion of 
the total NO (Merryman and Levy, 1975). 
Nicol et al. (1992) have examined analytically the relative 
contributions of the various mechanisms discussed above to the 
total NOn emissions produced by a lean-premixed combustor 
burning methane fuel, for which, of course, the fuel NO is 
zero. The results of their study showed that at relatively high 
temperatures of around 1900 K, and equivalence ratios of 
around 0.8, the contributions are about 60 percent thermal, 10 
percent nitrous oxide, and 30 percent prompt. With reductions 
in temperature and equivalence ratio, the contributions made 
by nitrous oxide and prompt NO increase significantly until, at 
a temperature of 1500 K and an equivalence ratio of around 
• 0.6, the relative contributions to the total NOx emissions become 
5 percent thermal, 30 percent nitrous oxide, and 65 percent 
prompt. These results clearly have great importance to the de- 
sign of ultralow NOx lean-premixed combustors. 
Influence of Pressure. 
The influence of pressure on NOx 
formation is of special importance due to the continual trend 
toward engines of higher pressure ratio to meet the need for 
lower fuel consumption. Combustor testing at high pressures is 
extremely expensive and it would therefore be highly conve- 
nient to carry out combustor development at lower levels of 
pressure and then extrapolate the results obtained to high levels 
of pressure where NOx emissions attain their highest values. 
~2 
30- 
20- 
10 
°o.~o 
Fig, 22 
J /  
P.ESsuAE 
y 
/ 
~." 
J/c~ 
oo.al 
a.1 
p 
/ 
¢ 
a o181 821 
j 
~/ 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0.65 
0.70 
0.75 
0.80 
0.8S 
0.90 
EQUIVALENCE RATIO 
Data illustrating the effect of pressure on NOx formation 
Such extrapolation could be carried out with confidence if the 
relationship between NOx and pressure were accurately known. 
Unfortunately, the experimental data obtained on different com- 
bustor types are conflicting in this regard. They vary from no 
effect of pressure on NOx to quite significant increases in NOx 
with increase in pressure. 
For conventional combustors it is generally found that NOx 
c~ pn, where n has values ranging from around 0.5 to around 
0.8. Laboratory burners can also exhibit a strong effect of pres- 
sure on NOx. For example, the results of Maughan et al.. (1994) 
from a well-mixed combustor supplied with natural gas fuel 
showed that raising the combustor outlet temperature from 1227 
to 1310 K caused n to increase from 0.38 to 0.51. Maughan et 
al. regard this result as evidence that the lowest NOx levels 
result from the nitrous oxide and prompt mechanisms which 
dominate at low temperatures and which are independent of 
pressure, whereas the higher NOx levels associated with higher 
combustion temperatures are due primarily to thermal NOx 
which exhibits a square root dependence on pressure. 
These results and conclusions are fully consistent with those 
obtained by Correa and co-workers (Leonard and Corea, 1990; 
Correa, 1991 ). These workers studied turbulent premixed meth- 
ane-air flames using an uncooled perforated plate burner op- 
erating at pressures from 1 to 10 atm, inlet air temperatures 
from 300 to 615 K, and equivalence ratios from 0.5 to 0.9. 
Their modeling featured a stirred reactor for flame stabilization 
followed by a plug flow reactor and a kinetic scheme which 
included thermal and prompt NO. The results confirmed that 
the low temperatures of lean flames preclude significant forma- 
tion of NO by the thermal mechanism. At temperatures below 
1800 K the prompt mechanism appears to be dominant. The 
implication of these results to the effect of pressure on NO2 
formation is well illustrated in Fig. 22, which contains some of 
the experimental data of Correa et al. and which highlights their 
conclusions in regard to the influence of flame temperature on 
the pressure dependence of NO~ formation. In this and in other 
figures contained in this paper, the values of NO and NOx quoted 
have been corrected to the values that would have been obtained 
if the combustion air had contained 15 percent oxygen. The 
following expression is used to make this correction: 
(NOx)15%O2 = (NOx) × 5.9/(20.9 - 02 ....... ) 
(6) 
where NOx concentrations are expressed in ppm by volume on 
a dry basis and 02 content is expressed as a percentage by 
volume on a dry basis. 
The purpose of this parameter is partly to remove ambiguity 
when comparing different sets of experimental data, but mainly 
to indicate that combustors burning less fuel are expected to 
produce less NOx. Figure 22 shows that NOx is independent 
of pressure in the leanest premixed flames. Increase in flame 
630 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 15 ---

temperature, corresponding to an increase in equivalence ratio, 
2500 
causes the pressure exponent to increase until, in the near-stoi- 
chiometric region, it attains the value of 0.5, corresponding to 
NO formation by the thermal mechanism. 
2000 - 
Additional evidence to support the argument that NOr forma- 
E 
tion in well-mixed, low-temperature flames is largely indepen- 
dent of pressure has been provided by Leonard and Stegmaier 
ui 
(1994) and Steele et al. (1995). Their experiments covered 
~ 1500- 
ranges of pressure from 1 to 30 atm and 1 to 7.1 atm, respec- 
zo 
tively. Leonard and Stegmaier found little or no effect of pres- 
sure, while the results obtained by Steele et al. using a lean, 
z 1000- 
o 
premixed, high-intensity combustor showed a neutral or even 
m 
slightly negative effect of pressure on NOn. Comparatively little 
¢ 
is known about the pressure dependence of NOx formation in 
500- 
fuel-rich flames. Rizk and Mongia (1991b) performed a three- 
dimensional analysis to examine the influences of pressure and 
residence time on NOx formation in the rich zone of a rich/ 
quench/lean (RQL) combustor. Their predictions indicate that 
0 
the value of the pressure exponent n varies with rich-zone equiv- 
alence ratio according to the relationship: 
n = 116.5 exp - (q5/0.222) 
(7) 
For a typical rich zone equivalence ratio of 1.4 this equation 
gives a value for n of 0.68. 
Pollutant Reduction in Conventional Combustors 
Although it might reasonably be argued that conventional 
combustors are no longer of any real technical interest, they do 
nevertheless constitute the big majority of combustors now in 
service. Furthermore, most of our knowledge of the key factors 
governing pollutant formation in continuous flow combustion 
systems, which is now being applied to the design and develop- 
ment of ultralow-NOx combustors, was acquired from experi- 
ence gained on what are now called "conventional" combus- 
tors. 
The main factors controlling emissions from conventional 
combustors may be considered in terms of: 
1 
The primary-zone temperature and equivalence ratio. 
2 
The degree of homogeneity of the primary-zone combustion 
process. 
3 
Residence time in the primary zone. 
4 
Liner-wall quenching characteristics. 
With liquid fuels, spray properties are also of prime importance. 
In considering practical design methods for pollutant reduc- 
tion, attention is focused first on individual pollutant species. 
It will become clear, however, that with conventional combus- 
tors a great deal of compromise is involved in design, not only 
between one species and another, but also among the many 
other performance requirements, such as lean blowout limits, 
pattern factor, and size. 
Carbon Monoxide and Unburned Hydrocarbons. 
The 
presence of these species in the exhaust gases is a manifestation 
of incomplete combustion. Thus all approaches to CO and UHC 
reduction are based on a common philosophy, which is to raise 
the level of combustion efficiency. An effective method of 
achieving this is by redistributing the airflow to bring the pri- 
mary-zone equivalence ratio closer to the optimum value of 
around 0.8. A higher equivalence ratio (up to around 1.0) would 
increase burning rates even further, but it would not necessarily 
yield lower emissions of CO and UHC due to the dearth of 
oxygen, which these species need in order to convert to CO2 
and H20. An equivalence ratio slightly less than stoichiometric 
is usually regarded as optimal for minimum CO and UHC. 
Good fuel-air mixing in the primary zone is essential for 
low CO and UHC. When operating at the optimal equivalence 
ratio of around 0.8, poor mixing could produce localized regions 
in which the mixture strength is either too fuel-lean to provide 
LEAN 
O NON FILM COOLED 
BLOWOUT 
E] FILM COOLED 
P - 110 kPa 
~ 
I 
T - 750 K_i 
I 
I 
1600 
1700 
1800 
1900 
2000 
PRIMARY COMBUSTION TEMPERATURE, K 
Effect of eliminating hot-side film cooling on CO 
Fig. 23 
adequate burning rates or so fuel-rich that there is insufficient 
02 to convert all the CO produced into CO2. 
As mentioned earlier, an effective means of reducing CO and 
UHC is by using less liner wall-cooling air, especially in the 
primary zone. Figure 23 shows the effect of replacing a conven- 
tional film-cooled wall with a non-film-cooled wall in the pri- 
mary zone of a Rolls-Royce Industrial RB211 low-emissions 
combustor when operating at atmospheric pressure. CO is sig- 
nificantly reduced (at 1850 K from 1500 ppm to 700 ppm) 
while the lean blowout temperature is lowered by 110 K (Willis 
et al., 1993). 
The development of new materials and methods of liner wall 
construction, which allow the liner to operate at higher metal 
temperatures, along with the development of new methods of 
wall cooling, which require much less cooling air, such as effu- 
sion and transpiration cooling, make a very direct and significant 
contribution to the reduction of CO and UHC emissions. 
Another method of reducing these emissions is by improved 
fuel atomization. Figure 24 shows that improvements in atom- 
ization quality, which enhance evaporation rates, yield apprecia- 
ble reductions in CO, except at low equivalence ratios where 
the influence of fuel drop size is less pronounced. This is be- 
cause the increase in evaporation rates arising from reductions 
in mean drop size offer little advantage at low equivalence 
ratios where burning rates tend to be limited more by chemical 
reaction rates than by evaporation rates. Figure 25 shows that, 
in common with CO, UHC emissions are greatly reduced by 
reductions in Sauter mean diameter (SMD). (Note the log scale 
in this figure.) 
The main effect of mean drop size on emissions stems from 
its strong influence on the volume required for fuel evaporation. 
At low power operation, where CO and UHC emissions attain 
their highest concentrations, a significant proportion of the total 
combustion volume Vc is occupied in fuel evaporation. Conse- 
quently, less volume is available for chemical reaction. Under 
these conditions, any factor that influences evaporation rates, 
such as fuel volatility and mean drop size, will have a direct 
effect on the volume available for chemical reaction (V,. - Ve) 
and, therefore, on the emissions of CO and UHC. 
Smoke. 
The main factors governing smoke emissions are 
combustor inlet air temperature, pressure, and fuel spray charac- 
teristics. The influence of inlet air temperature is complex be- 
cause an increase in this parameter serves to accelerate both the 
soot-forming and the soot-burnout processes; the net result is 
usually a reduction in smoke. Smoke problems are most severe 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 631 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 16 ---

FUEL- DF 2 
SMD, 
PA" 1.01 MPa 
0 30 
& 70 
200 
E] 110 
100 f 
80 
60 
40 
20 
I 
I 
| 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
10 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
EQUIVALENCE RATIO, 
Fig. 24 Influence of mean drop size on CO emissions 
at high pressures. There are several reasons for this, most of 
which derive from chemical effects. With liquid fuels there are 
additional physical factors, which affect spray characteristics 
and hence also the distribution of mixture strength in the soot- 
forming regions of the flame. 
One important consideration is that burning limits widen with 
pressure. Thus, at high pressures soot is produced in regions 
which, at lower pressures, would be too rich to burn. Increase 
4.0, 
~3.5 
30 
=o 
8 2.5 
$ 
z.o 
FUEL= FL 0653 
SMD~ ,u.._m. 
TA=573 K 
0 30 
UA =5 m/s 
~ "70 
- 
PA =1'01 MPo 
0 I10 
D 
1.5 0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
IO 
1.2 
EOUIVALENCE RATIO 
Fig. 25 Influence of mean drop size on UHC emissions 
50 
4.C 
3.0 
E 2.C 
o~ 
Z o_ 
U) 
bJ § ,o 
u) 0.8 
Fig. 26 
0.6 
Q5 
FUEL=KEROSINE 
//~ 
// 
TA=ST3 K 
/ 
/ / 
UA=5 m/s 
/ 
L/ 
PA =1'52 
/ 
/ 
/ 
,SMD, ~m 
I ip 
I 
dl 
/ 
// 
IZ1 II0 
>., 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
O8 
Q9 
I0 
I.I 
1.2 
13 
EQUIVALENCE RATIO 
Influence of mean drop size on smoke emissions 
in pressure also accelerates chemical reaction rates, so that com- 
bustion is initiated earlier and a larger proportion of the fuel is 
burned in the fuel-rich regions adjacent to the spray. 
In practice the elimination of exhaust smoke is basically a 
matter of preventing the occurrence of fuel-rich pockets in the 
flame. Injecting more air into the primary zone is always bene- 
ficial, especially if accompanied by more thorough mixing. Un- 
fortunately, this approach is somewhat limited in scope, owing 
to the adverse effect of an increase in primary-zone air on 
ignition and stability limits and on CO and UHC emissions at 
idle. 
The influence of mean drop size on smoke emissions derives 
from the manner in which each individual droplet evaporates. 
Conventional gas turbine fuels are generally multicomponent 
mixtures of various petroleum compounds, each of which has 
different physical and chemical properties. As evaporation pro- 
ceeds, the composition of a multicomponent fuel drop changes 
by a process of simple batch distillation. The more volatile 
constituents of the fuel drop vaporize first and the concentration 
of the higher-boiling fractions in the remaining liquid phase 
increases. 
During the droplet evaporation process the droplet receives 
heat from the surrounding combustion gases. If the droplet is 
small in diameter it is usually fully evaporated before any sig- 
nificant temperature rise can occur. However, with droplets of 
large diameter, the heat flowing radially inward during droplet 
evaporation has sufficient time to raise the droplet temperature, 
thereby promoting the formation of carbon and soot in the 
"heavy ends" located at the center of the droplet. 
The influence of fuel drop size on exhaust smoke has been 
investigated by Rink and Lefebvre (1989a, b) using the tubular 
combustor described above, supplied with a kerosine fuel. Their 
results for a combustion pressure of 1.27 MPa (12.5 atm) are 
shown in Fig. 26. This figure shows that particulates are dimin- 
ished by reductions in mean drop size. For example, at the 
highest equivalence ratios, reducing the mean drop size from 
110 to 30/zm effectively halves the particulate concentration. 
The importance of atomization quality to soot formation and 
smoke stems from the fact that, as the fuel spray approaches 
the flame front, heat transmitted from the flame starts to evapo- 
632 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 17 ---

70 
60 
50 
UJ 
a3 40- 
Z 
I..LI 
0 
30- 
20 7. 
Fig. 27 
flows 
P&W JT9D-70A 
TAKEOFF 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~ 'I" 
I v 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
FUEL INJECTOR + SWIRLER AIRFLOWS, % TOTAL 
Control of exhaust smoke through fuel injector and swirler air- 
rate the drops. The smallest droplets in the spray have time to 
evaporate completely ahead of the flame front, and the resulting 
fuel vapors then mix with the combustion air and burn in the 
manner of a premixed flame. The largest drops in the spray do 
not have time to evaporate fully and mix completely with air. 
Instead, they burn in the mode of fuel-rich diffusion flames. 
Clearly, any increase in mean drop size will increase the propor- 
tion of large drops in the spray. This, in turn, will raise the 
proportion of fuel burned in diffusion-type combustion, as op- 
posed to premixed combustion. 
It is important to bear in mind that soot formation is nearly 
always the result of local fuel-rich combustion. In general, ex- 
haust smoke decreases with mean drop size, but if improved 
atomization leads to a reduction in spray penetration, as occurs 
with all types of pressure atomizers, the smoke output may 
actually increase. In fact, reduced spray penetration is one of 
the main causes of smoke on high-pressure-ratio engines fitted 
with dual-orifice atomizers. 
Another adverse effect of an increase in pressure is to reduce 
the cone angle of the fuel spray. This encourages soot formation, 
partly by increasing the mean drop size, but mainly by raising 
the mixture strength in the soot-forming zone. 
The design of the fuel injector and, in particular, the degree 
of premixing of fuel and air prior to combustion, have a very 
large influence on whether or not a given combustor will pro- 
duce significant amounts of smoke. The relatively low smoke 
emissions from the vaporizer systems employed on some Rolls- 
Royce engines is not due to prevaporization of the fuel but 
rather to the premixing of fuel and air which occurs within the 
vaporizer tubes. 
Alleviating soot formation and smoke by fuel-air mixing is 
only fully effective if sufficient air is used. This is well illus- 
trated in Fig. 27 from Sturgess et al. (1993), which shows how 
smoke was drastically reduced in a P&W JT9D-70 combustor 
when operating at takeoff conditions by the addition of more 
air through the fuel injector and air swirler. The injection of air 
through these components is particularly effective in reducing 
smoke because it all flows into the primary combustion zone, 
which is usually deficient in oxygen and therefore has a high 
tendency toward soot formation. 
The advantage of airblast atomizers over dual-orifice pressure 
atomizers in regard to smoke emissions is well established. The 
reason for this is not just better atomization, although this is 
very significant at high combustion pressures where smoke lev- 
els attain their highest values, but because the airblast atomiza- 
tion process virtually guarantees good mixing of air and fuel 
drops prior to combustion. The marked reduction in exhaust 
smoke that can be achieved with airblast atomizers is illustrated 
in Fig. 28, in which smoke levels are plotted against overall 
combustor air/fuel ratio for a dual-orifice nozzle and a prefilm- 
ing airblast atomizer at the same operating conditions. The air- 
blast and dual-orifice atomizers exhibit opposite trends in regard 
to the variation in smoke output with air/fuel ratio. This is 
because the superior atomization and mixing performance of 
the airblast atomizer ensures that burning is virtually complete 
within the primary zone. Thus, any increase in overall air/fuel 
ratio leads automatically to improved aeration of the combustion 
process and hence to a decrease in smoke. In contrast, a decrease 
in fuel flow through the pressure atomizer reduces the atomiza- 
tion quality and raises the fuel concentration in the soot-forming 
region just downstream of the nozzle. 
From an emissions viewpoint, another important advantage 
of the airblast atomizer is that atomization quality is high over 
the entire operating range from idle to full power. With a duai- 
orifice injector, owing to the interaction of the pilot and main 
sprays, there is always a range of fuel flows, starting at the 
point where the main fuel is first admitted, over which atomiza- 
tion quality is poor. Since atomization quality has a direct bear- 
ing on CO and HC emissions, it follows that the use of dual- 
orifice atomizers must inevitably aggravate the emissions prob- 
lem over a significant range of engine operation. With the 
piloted-airblast injector, there is no physical interference be- 
tween the pilot and main sprays and, because no fuel is intro- 
duced into the airblast section until the air velocity through it 
has attained its normal operating level, atomization quality is 
high throughout the entire range of engine operation. 
Oxides of Nitrogen. 
In any attempt to reduce NOx, the 
prime goal must be to lower the reaction temperature. The sec- 
ond objective should be to eliminate hot spots from the reaction 
zone, as there is little point in achieving a satisfactorily low 
average temperature if the reaction zone contains local regions 
of high temperature in which the rate of NOx formation remains 
high. Finally, the time available for the formation of NOx should 
be kept to a minimum. 
Practical approaches to low NOx in conventional combustors 
include the addition of more air into the primary combustion 
zone to lower the flame temperature, increase in liner pressure 
drop to promote better mixing and thereby eliminate hot spots 
from the combustion zone, and reduction in combustor resi- 
dence time. Unfortunately, reductions in flame temperature and 
residence time lead to increased output of both CO and UHC. 
In fact, as a generalization, it can be stated that any change in 
operating conditions or combustor configuration that reduces 
25 
¢n20 
Z 
w 
15 
¢n I0 
0 
• 
DUAL 
ORIFICE 
' 
9--A'RBLAST, 
140 
160 
180 
OVERALL AIR/FUEL RATIO 
Fig. 28 
Influence of fuel injector type on exhaust smoke 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 
1995, Vol. 117 / 633 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 18 ---

CO/HC 
NOx 
COMBUSTION EFFICIENCY 
SMOKE 
LEAN BLOWOUT 
WALL TEMPERATURES 
IGNITION/RELIGHT 
PATTERN FACTOR 
\ 
/ 
\ 
I 
I 
LOW 
HIGH 
POWER 
POWER 
t 
, 
t 
INCREASE COMBUSTION VOLUME 
INCREASE RESIDENCE TIME 
DECREASE PRIMARY ZONE AIRFLOW 
DECREASE COMBUSTIONVOLUME 
DECREASE RESIDENCE TIME 
INCREASE PRIMARY ZONE AIRFLOW 
Fig. 29 Illustration of tradeoffs between various aspects of combustion 
performance 
NOx tends also to exacerbate the problems of CO and UHC, 
and vice versa. 
Design modifications for reducing pollutant emissions gener- 
ally have an adverse effect on other performance parameters 
such as ignition and altitude relight, lean blowout, and outlet 
temperature distribution (pattern factor), as illustrated in Fig. 
29 from Bayle-Labour6 ( 1991 ). Thus, in the design of conven- 
tional gas turbine combustors, the end result must inevitably be 
a compromise of some kind in regard to both emissions and 
other aspects of combustion performance. 
The manner and extent to which oxides of nitrogen are influ- 
enced by the sizes of the fuel droplets in the spray is very 
dependent on equivalence ratio. This aspect was addressed in 
the experimental studies carried out by Rink and Lefebvre 
(1989a, b) using the continuous flow combustor referred to 
above in which the mean drop size could be varied and con- 
trolled independently of other operating variables. The data pre- 
sented in Fig. 30 show that NO emissions increase with increase 
in mean drop size, especially at low equivalence ratios. At 
first sight this may seem surprising, because at high pressures 
evaporation rates are so fast that even for the larger drops the 
time required for their evaporation is small in comparison with 
the total residence time of the combustion zone. However, an 
increase in SMD means that a larger proportion of the total 
number of fuel drops in the spray are capable of supporting 
"envelope" flames. These envelope flames, which surround the 
larger drops, bum in a diffusion mode at near-stoichiometric 
fuel/air ratios, giving rise to many local regions of high temper- 
ature in which NOr is formed in appreciable quantities. Reduc- 
tion in mean drop size impedes the formation of envelope 
flames, so that a larger proportion of the total combustion pro- 
cess occurs in what is essentially a premixed mode, thereby 
generating less NOx. Even if no envelope flames are present, 
with increasing drop size a larger proportion of the fuel bums 
in the fuel-rich regions created in the wakes of the moving 
drops. Although in theory combustion can take place at any 
equivalence ratio within the flammability limits, it tends to occur 
preferentially at the stoichiometric value, i.e., at the maximum 
temperature, thereby producing high levels of NOx. This hy- 
pothesis serves to explain why NOx emissions increase with 
SMD for lean mixtures. However, as the overall equivalence 
ratio increases toward unity the local fuel/air ratio adjacent to 
the fuel drops approaches the premixed value. According to this 
hypothesis, mean drop size should have no influence on NOx 
emissions for stoichiometric mixtures, and this is generally con- 
firmed by the results shown in Fig. 30. This figure is important 
because it demonstrates that even at low equivalence ratios 
where the average combustion temperature is so low that only 
negligible amounts of NO should, in theory, be formed, the 
presence of fuel drops in the combustion zone must necessarily 
give rise to conditions in which combustion can and does pro- 
ceed at near-stoichiometric equivalence ratios regardless of the 
average equivalence ratio in the combustion zone. This, of 
course, is the rationale for the various types of lean, premix, 
prevaporize combustors whose success relies largely on the 
elimination of all fuel drops from the combustion zone. 
Water Injection. 
As NOx formation is exponentially de- 
pendent on temperature, an obvious way of reducing NOr emis- 
sions is by lowering the temperature of the combustion zone. 
Additional air is effective, but can only be used sparingly be- 
cause it raises the primary zone velocity, which has an adverse 
effect on both ignition and stability performance. An alternative 
approach is to introduce a heat sink, such as water or steam, 
into the combustion zone. This is clearly unsuitable for aero- 
engines but is a practical proposition for large stationary en- 
gines, especially if large amounts of water or steam are avail- 
able. In some cases the water or steam is injected directly into 
the flame, either through a number of separate nozzles located 
at the head end of the combustor or through holes that are 
integrated into the fuel nozzle (Hilt and Waslo, 1984). Alterna- 
tively, the water injection may take place upstream of the com- 
bustor liner, usually into the air stream, which subsequently 
flows into the combustion zone through the main air swirler. 
This method ensures good atomization, because the smaller 
droplets are carried by the air flow through the swirler into the 
combustion zone, while the larger drops impinge on the swirler 
vanes where they form a thin liquid film, which is airblast 
atomized as it flows over the downstream edge of the vane 
(McKnight, 1978). 
When steam is used to reduce NOx emissions, it may also be 
injected directly into the combustion zone or into air, which 
subsequently flows into the combustion zone. In some installa- 
tions the steam is injected into the compressor discharge air. 
This method is simple but inherently wasteful, because only 
about 40 percent of the steam actually flows into the combustion 
zone. This may be only a minor consideration if excess steam 
is available (Hilt and Waslo, 1984). 
The effectiveness of water and steam for reducing NOn has 
been demonstrated by many workers. According to Hung 
(1974) the relationship between NOx reduction and water/fuel 
mass ratio, X, can be expressed as 
wet NOJdry NOx = exp - (0.2X 2 + 1.41X) 
(8) 
This relationship was found to apply to both liquid and gaseous 
fuels. It shows, for example, that equal mass flow rates of water 
and fuel (for which X = 1) yield an 80 percent reduction in 
NOx. Very similar results were obtained for both gaseous and 
liquid fuels by Claeys et al. (1993) on the General Electric 
MS7001F gas turbine. 
Equation (8) should not be regarded as having universal 
application. For example, Wilkes (1980) has shown that water 
injection is much less effective with fuels containing fuel-bound 
nitrogen. The main effect of water addition is to reduce thermal 
18 
16 
14 
"~" 12 
ZOO" lif 
FUEL - DF 2 
~
~
_
 
T A - 573 K 
PA" 1.27 MPa 
SMD~ 
o 30-- 
A 70 
I ~" 
i 
l 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
EQUIVALENCE RATIO, 
Fig, 30 
Influence of mean drop size on NO emissions 
634 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 19 ---

120 
30 
NOx although it does also slightly reduce prompt NO. This 
implies that water injection is most effective when combustion 
takes place at high pressures and temperatures where thermal 
NOx production is high, and is less effective at low pressures 
and temperatures where a larger proportion of the total NOx is 
formed via the prompt mechanism. The key point is that water 
and/or steam injection always reduces NOx, but the extent of 
the reduction depends on combustor operating conditions and 
fuel type. 
As steam is a less effective diluent than water, the reductions 
in NOx achieved with steam injection tends to be less dramatic 
than when water is used. For example, Hilt and Waslo (1984) 
have reported NOx reductions of around 60 percent for a steam/ 
fuel mass ratio of unity on two GE industrial engines burning 
natural gas. 
Although both water and steam injection are very effective 
in reducing NOx emissions, and have been used on stationary 
engines that operate at near-constant load conditions since the 
early 1970s, they do have a number of drawbacks. White et al. 
(1982) have reported an increase in capital cost of 10 to 15 
U.S. dollars per kW and an increase in fuel consumption of 2 
to 3 percent. This additional fuel is needed to heat the water to 
combustion temperature, although power output is enhanced 
due to the additional mass flow through the turbine. The water 
must be of high purity to prevent deposits and corrosion in the 
hot sections downstream of the combustor. The treatment of 
this water is expensive and requires a separate plant based on 
reverse osmosis and de-ionization. Users' experience with water 
injection has shown a significant increase in inspection and 
hardware maintenance. There are, therefore, practical limits to 
the amount of water or steam that can be injected into the 
combustor. The deterioration in combustion performance aris- 
ing from water-steam injection is manifested as increases in the 
levels of CO and UHC emissions and by increases in combustor 
pressure oscillations. These oscillations can become amplified 
by coupling with the combustion process, and cause deteriora- 
tion of combustor hardware. 
The drawbacks associated with water and steam injection 
have encouraged the development of the so-called "dry low 
NOx" combustors, i.e., combustors that can meet the emission 
goals without having to resort to diluent injection. 
Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR). 
This is a method 
for converting NOx in a gas turbine exhaust stream into molecu- 
lar nitrogen and water vapor by injecting ammonia into the 
stream in the presence of a catalyst. Exhaust gases first pass 
through an oxidation catalyst and are then mixed with ammonia 
before entering the SCR catalyst. The oxidation catalyst re- 
moves the CO and UHC emissions by oxidizing them to CO2 
and H20. To reduce NOr emissions, ammonia is injected in a 
manner designed to achieve intimate mixing with the exhaust 
stream. After mixing, the exhaust gases pass over a base metal 
catalyst which results in the selective reduction of NOx to form 
N2 and H20. The principal reactions are 
6NO + 4NH3 ~ 5N2 + 6H20 
6NO2 + 8NH3 ~ 7N2 + 12H20 
SCR requires that the temperature of the exhaust stream be 
within a fairly narrow range from 560 to 670 K, and so is 
restricted to systems in which the exhaust gas flows into a heat 
recovery device, usually a steam generator (Davis and Washam, 
1989). A major problem with this method is the requirement 
for a control system that feeds the requisite amount of ammonia, 
and the need for a continuous monitoring system that can give 
the feedback to the ammonia supply mechanism under differing 
load conditions. Another problem is the size and weight of the 
equipment. According to Davis and Washam, for an 83 MW 
MS7000 gas turbine an SCR designed to remove 90 percent of 
the NOx from the exhaust stream has a volume of 175 m 3 and 
TEMPERATURE i 
_ 
_.p 
RANGE FOR 
L.._ . 
LOW 
F I 
~> 
EMISSIONS 
I 
/ 
i 
= 
50 
I 
PRIMARY TEMPERATURE, K 
25 
-20 
i 
uJ 
-15L- 
Z 
0 
-10~ 
- 
5 
21000 
1000 K ~ 
TEMPERATURE RANGE OF 
: 2500 K 
CONVENTIONAL COMBUSTORS 
Fig. 31 Influence of primary-zone temperature on CO and NOx emis- 
sions 
weighs 111 tons. Despite these drawbacks, the method is quite 
widely used. 
Exhaust Gas Recirculation. 
It has been known for many 
years that recirculation of cooled exhaust products into the inlet 
of a gas turbine combustor would reduce the emissions of NOx. 
The practical feasibility of this method of NOx reduction has 
been investigated by Wilkes and Gerhold (1980) who found 
that significant reductions (50 percent) could be achieved with 
recirculation rates of 20 percent or less at baseload conditions. 
The major thermal effect stems from the reduced concentration 
of oxygen in the inlet air, but there is also a secondary effect 
due to the higher heat capacity of this air with increased H20 
and CO2 content. 
The main advantage of the method is that little or no combus- 
tor development is required and standard production combustors 
can be used. Its main drawback lies in the need for an intercooler 
between the exhaust and inlet. This virtually rules it out for 
simple gas turbines, but application to combined cycle plants 
offers more promise due to the substantially lower exhaust gas 
temperatures. Another drawback is that only very clean fuels 
can be used to avoid problems of fouling and contamination. 
Pollutant Reduction by Control of Flame Tempera- 
ture 
From the foregoing discussion it is abundantly clear that the 
main parameter governing pollutant emissions is the tempera- 
ture of the combustion zone. With conventional combustors this 
can range from 1000 K at low power operation to 2500 K at 
high power operation, as indicated in Fig. 31. This figure also 
shows that too much CO is formed at temperatures below 
around 1670 K while excessive amounts of NOx are produced 
at temperatures higher than around 1900 K. Only in the fairly 
narrow band of temperatures between 1670 and 1900 K are the 
levels of CO and NOx below 25 and 15 ppm, respectively. 
The underlying principle of the various approaches toward low- 
emission combustors described below is that of maintaining the 
combustion zone (or zones) within a fairly narrow band of 
temperatures over the entire power range of the engine. 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 635 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 20 ---

Variable Geometry. 
The notion of variable-geometry 
combustors is by no means new. Long before the problems of 
pollutant emissions were recognized, many different schemes 
for incorporating variable geometry into gas turbine combustors 
were considered, usually as a means for improving the altitude 
relight performance of aircraft engines. These schemes seldom 
came to fruition because designers, while appreciating the ad- 
vantages to be gained, were reluctant to accept the mechanical 
complexities involved. However, the opportunities it offers for 
emissions reduction has resulted in a revival of interest in the 
use of variable geometry, especially for nonaeronautical appli- 
cations. 
Many practical forms of variable-geometry combustors have 
been designed. A fully variable system is one in which large 
quantities of air are admitted at the upstream end of the combus- 
tion liner at max power conditions to lower the primary-zone 
temperature and provide adequate film-cooling air. As engine 
power is reduced, an increasing proportion of this air is diverted 
to the dilution zone to maintain the primary-zone temperature 
within the low-emissions "window" shown in Fig. 31. Practical 
ways of achieving this variation in airflow distribution include 
the use of variable-area swMers to control the amount of air 
flowing into the combustion zone; see, for example, Bayle- 
Labour6 (1991) and Micklow et al. (1993), variable air open- 
ings into the dilution zone (Roberts et al., 1982; Sasaki et al., 
1991), or a combination of these. 
The drawbacks to all forms of variable geometry systems 
include complex control and feedback mechanisms, which tend 
to increase cost and weight and reduce reliability. Problems of 
achieving the desired temperature pattern in the combustor ef- 
flux gases could also be encountered, especially if the liner 
pressure drop is allowed to vary too much. The incentive for 
surmounting these practical problems is that variable geometry 
has the potential for reducing simultaneously all the main pollut- 
ant species without sacrificing other aspects of combustion per- 
formance. It also has several other advantages, for example, as 
the combustion temperature is always maintained above a cer- 
tain minimum value of around 1670 K, chemical reaction rates 
are always relatively high. This enables the combustion zone 
to be made smaller, with consequent advantages in terms of 
reductions in combustor size and weight. For aircraft applica- 
tions, variable geometry also has the potential for wide stability 
limits and improved altitude relight performance. 
To be fully effective, variable geometry combustors should 
ideally be used in conjunction with premix-prevaporize fuel 
injection systems. Only in this way is it possible to avoid the 
local high-temperature, high-NOx-forming regions, created by 
the presence of fuel droplets in the combustion zone. 
Although variable geometry has been used in some large 
industrial engines, there have been few successful applications 
of this technique in small-to-medium size gas turbines due to 
size and cost limitations and also because of concerns regarding 
operational reliability (Aoyama and Mandai, 1984). 
Staged Combustion. 
Variable-geometry combustors strive 
to maintain the combustion temperature within fairly narrow 
limits by switching air from one zone to another depending on 
the engine power setting. With staged combustors the air flow 
distribution does not change; instead the fuel flow is switched 
from one zone to another in order to maintain a fairly constant 
combustion temperature. One simple method of fuel staging is 
by "selective fuel injection" as described by Bahr (1987). 
With this technique, which is sometimes called "circumferen- 
tial staging," fuel is supplied only to selected combinations of 
fuel injectors at lightoff, relight, and engine idle conditions, as 
illustrated in Fig. 32. Only at power settings above idle is the 
full complement of fuel injectors employed. The objective of 
this modulation technique is to raise the equivalence ratio and 
hence also the temperature of the localized combustion zones 
at low power operation. This approach, which is now in com- 
~
-
~
 
~- UNFUELED 
FUELED 
Fig. 32 Illustration of the use of selective fuel injection 
mon use, not only reduces CO and UHC emissions but also has 
the added advantage of extending the lean blowout limit to 
lower equivalence ratios. 
A major drawback of circumferential staging is that "chill- 
ing" of chemical reactions occurs at the edges of the individual 
combustion zones. This chilling lowers the combustion effi- 
ciency and increases the formation of CO and UHC. Further- 
more, the circumferentially nonuniform exit temperature distri- 
bution results in loss of turbine efficiency. These limitations 
have led to the development of "staged" combustors in which 
no attempt is made to achieve all the performance objectives 
in a single combustion zone. Instead, two or more zones are 
employed, each of which is designed specifically to optimize 
certain aspects of combustion performance. 
The principle of staged combustion is illustrated in Fig. 33. 
Increase in overall combustor fuel/air ratio causes the combus- 
tion zone temperature to rise. As this temperature approaches 
a value above which NO, levels starts to become excessive, 
fuel is diverted to a separate combustion zone. This approach 
allows the combustor to operate over the entire power range 
while keeping the combustion zone temperatures within the 
low-emissions "window." A typical staged combustor has a 
lightly loaded primary zone, which, at low power settings, oper- 
ates at an equivalence ratio of around 0.8 to achieve high com- 
bustion efficiency, low CO and UHC, and also provide the 
636 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 21 ---

== 
THREE STAGE COMBUSTION 
.
.
.
.
 
STAGE 1 
I 
STAGE2 
I 
STAGE3 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
OVERALL COMBUSTOR FUEL/AIR RATIO 
INCREASING POWER 
Fig. 33 
Principle of staged combustion 
desired temperature rise. At high power settings, it acts as a 
pilot source of heat for the main combustion zone downstream 
which is supplied with a fully premixed fuel-air mixture. For 
full-load operation, both zones are supplied with fuel and the 
equivalence ratio in both zones is kept low, around 0.6, to 
minimize the emissions of nitric oxide and smoke. 
An important choice for the designer is whether the staged 
combustion should take place in "series" or in "parallel." The 
latter approach, often called "radial staging," features the use 
of a dual-annular combustor, as illustrated in Fig. 34. One of 
these combustors--usually the outer combustor--is designed 
to operate lightly loaded and provides all the temperature rise 
needed at startup, altitude relight, and engine idle conditions. 
At idle the equivalence ratio of the combustion zone is selected 
to minimize the emissions of CO and UHC. The other annular 
combustor is designed specifically to optimize the combustion 
process at high power settings. It features a small, highly loaded 
combustion zone of short residence time and low equivalence 
ratio to minimize the formation of NOx and smoke. 
The main advantage of radial staging is that it allows all the 
combustion performance goals to be achieved, including low 
emissions, within roughly the same overall length as a conven- 
tional combustor. Another advantage of the dual-annular con- 
cept employed in radial staging is that it provides a satisfactory 
liner length/height ratio in both annuli within a short overall 
length. This short-length feature is attractive from the stand- 
points of low engine weight and reduced rotor dynamics prob- 
lems (Bahr, 1987). 
\ 
Preollu=e £tomJ, ztull 
Fuel Nozzle ~lll~ly 
lngled Liner 
Cooscr~lcttoo 
Counl:errol:a ¢ttlS 
$vJ.rlerz 
Fig. 34 General Electric dual-annular combuetor 
Msln 
,o,., 
Pilot 
~ 
~1~ /" / 
/ 
/ 
Coo,n0 ~ I U l  R H 
~ ' ~ . L " - ' ~ -  
,,ow 
 [lilll[  
i 
Fig. 35 Fuel nozzle for G,E. dual-annular combustor (courtesy of the 
Parker Hannifin Corporation) 
If the combustor domes of the inner and outer stages are 
arranged to be radially in-line, this allows the fuel injector tips 
for both stages to be mounted on a common feed arm, as shown 
in Fig. 34. An important advantage of this arrangement is that 
the main stage fuel injectors are cooled by the continuously 
flowing pilot fuel, as illustrated in Fig. 35. This prevents coking 
of the main stage nozzles when they are unfueled but still ex- 
posed to the hot engine environment. 
There are a number of drawbacks to radial staging. One basic 
drawback is that all zones are supplied with air at the compres- 
sor outlet temperature, which means that all zones have the 
same relatively poor lean blowout limit. It is also clear that 
pollutant reduction is achieved at the expense of increased de- 
sign complexity and a marked increase in the number of fuel 
injectors. The larger liner wall surface area demands additional 
cooling air, which has an adverse effect on pattern factor. Fur- 
thermore, the peaks of the radial temperature profile could shift 
in radial position as a result of fuel staging, with potential 
adverse effects on the hot sections downstream of the combus- 
tor. Another basic problem with radial staging is that of achiev- 
ing the desired performance goals at intermediate power settings 
where both zones are operating well away from their optimum 
design points. 
The radially staged combustor shown in Fig. 34 was designed 
by the General Electric company. It achieved around 35 percent 
reductions in CO and UHC, and 45 percent reduction in NOn 
in comparison with the corresponding single-annular combus- 
tor. The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the 
French Direction Generale de l'Aviation (DGAC) have jointly 
certified the CFM56-5B engine with the dual-annular combus- 
tot, thereby paving the way for the first flight and certification 
on Airbus Industrie A320 and A321 aircraft in 1995. 
With "series" or "axial" fuel staging, a portion of the fuel 
is injected into a fairly conventional primary combustion zone. 
Additional fuel, usually premixed with air, is injected down- 
stream into a "secondary" or "main" combustion zone, which 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 637 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 22 ---

IGNITORS(2) 
CONVENTIONAL 
MAIN ZONE FUEL INJEOTORS 
MOUNTING SYSTEM L J_ 
/ 
NEW OUTER 
\ 
' 
/ 
_ D,F,U ER OAS  wAL  
 L;,LOT  OEL 
=~C--"-- 
1111i11~ = 
~;~ 
..... 
I 
\ 
CONVENTIONAL 
.JL 
II 
• 
'~ 
FLOATWALff~LiNE R 
EXISTING PRE-DIFFUSER AND 
INNER DIFFUSER OASE WALL 
Fig. 36 
Pratt and Whitney axially staged combustor 
operates at low equivalence ratios to minimize the formation 
of NOx and smoke. The primary combustion zone is used on 
engine startup and generates the temperature rise needed to raise 
the rotational speed up to engine idle conditions. At higher 
power settings, fuel is supplied to the secondary combustion 
zone and, as the engine power rises towards its maximum value, 
the function of the primary zone becomes increasingly one of 
providing the heat needed to initiate rapid combustion of the 
fuel supplied to the second stage. 
Axial staging does have certain advantages over radial stag- 
ing. Since the main stage is downstream of the pilot stage, 
ignition of the main stage directly from the pilot is both rapid 
and reliable. Also, the hot gas flow from the pilot into the main 
combustion zone ensures high combustion efficiency from the 
main stage, even at low equivalence ratios. According to Segal- 
man et al. (1993), the radial temperature profile at the combus- 
tor exit can be developed to a satisfactory level using conven- 
tional dilution hole trimming and, once developed, does not 
change significantly as a result of fuel staging. 
The main drawback to axial staging is that the in-line arrange- 
ment of stages tends to create additional length, which makes 
the problem of retrofit difficult for some engines. In comparison 
with conventional combustors, the liner surface area that needs 
to be cooled is higher. The fuel injectors for the two combustion 
stages require separate feed arms, which involve two separate 
penetrations of the combustor casing. Furthermore, the pilot 
fuel cannot be used to cool the main stage fuel as can be done 
quite conveniently with radial staging. 
Figure 36 shows a cross-sectional view of an axially staged 
combustor developed by the Pratt and Whitney company (Koff, 
1993). For clarity, the main stage fuel injectors are shown 
rotated half an injector pitch to be in line with the pilot stage 
injectors. The engine centerline is at the bottom of the figure. 
This combustor has the benefits of the axially in-line stage 
arrangement without any length penalty and is designed to fit 
into the existing P&W B2500-AS engine. 
The pilot combustion zone is designed specifically to provide 
wide stability limits and high combustion efficiency (low CO 
and UHC). With increase in engine power above idle, fuel is 
admitted to the main combustion zone where combustion is 
initiated and sustained by the hot gas emanating from the pilot 
zone. The relative amounts of fuel supplied to the pilot and 
main zones is such that no thrust lag is created when fuel is 
first introduced into the main zone. In combination, the pilot 
and main zones maintain a low equivalence ratio, which ensures 
low NO~ emissions at higher power settings. 
Of special interest in Fig. 36 is the inboard location of the 
pilot combustion zone. This greatly reduces the susceptibility 
to flame blowout in heavy rain since the compressor centrifuges 
the water to the outer portion of the air flow path. Another 
advantage of having the main zone outside of the pilot is that 
the radial temperature profile at the combustor outlet peaks 
toward the outer radius of the turbine flowpath, a situation that 
is conducive to long turbine blade life. 
In the longer term it is possible that staging of the air flow by 
variable geometry in conjunction with fuel staging may become 
more of a design option. 
Dry Low NOr Combustors 
The term "dry" is used to indicate that the combustor in 
question is capable of achieving low pollutant emissions, in 
particular low NOx, without having to resort to the injection of 
water or steam. Solar Turbines Inc. in San Diego has been 
among the pioneers in the development of dry low-emissions 
combustors for industrial gas turbines, and the results of their 
efforts have appeared in a number of publications, for example, 
White et al. (1982), Roberts et al. (1982), Smith et al. (1986, 
1991), Smith and Cowell (1989), and Etheridge (1994). 
Most of the low-NO~ combustors developed by Solar fall into 
the lean premix family of combustors. Figure 37 shows a cross- 
sectional view of a fuel injector designed for combustors sup- 
plied with natural gas. An 18-vane radial flow swirler is used 
to impart a high degree of rotation to the combustor primary 
air, which serves both to promote fuel-air mixing and to induce 
a recirculatory flow in the primary zone. The fuel injector/air 
swMer assembly permits three different modes of fuel injection, 
as indicated in Fig. 37. Best mixing is achieved by injecting 
the gaseous fuel through 18 spokes, each spoke being located 
between a pair of swirl vanes. As each spoke contains six holes 
of 0.89 mm diameter, the total number of injection points is 108. 
Combustion tests have been carried out with the fuel injector 
assembly attached to a cylindrical combustion liner, 200 mm 
in diameter and 450 mm long. According to Smith et al. (1986), 
these tests showed that the concept is capable of achieving 
NOr emissions below 10 ppm when burning natural gas, with 
simultaneous low values of CO and UHC emissions. 
The manner in which the fuel-injection system described 
above was adapted for liquid fuels by Smith and Cowell (1989) 
is shown in Fig. 38. The fuel injector/air swirler assembly was 
designed to permit three different modes of liquid fuel injection. 
The mode designated as "inner filming" in Fig. 38 involves 
filming of the fuel on the cylindrical swirler centerbody. Fuel 
is delivered to the outer surface of the centerbody through eight 
holes located around the centerbody circumference. This fuel 
is intended to form a film, which is carried downstream to the 
SWIRL 
VANES (18) 
CHANNEL 
PILOT 
FUEL 
FUEL 
INJECTION 
INJECTION h 
.... ~ITFI~.~'~/iRm'CE ¢~/" 
' 
' 
, 
I 
/ 
oo..o..o.Z",, 
CHANNEL 
/
"
-
"
~
 
DOME 
"
~
 
INJECTION 
/ 
FUEL 
/ 
| 
SWIRLER 
PRIMARY 
INJECTION 
AIR FLOW 
FUEL SPOKE (18) 
Fig. 37 
Solar Iow-NOx fuel injector for natural gas 
638 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 23 ---

Pressure 
Translating 
Atomizing 
Swlrler 
Air 
Injectors 
Inlet 
Row 
~, 
Platk~~:E~ 
t 
Methanol 
Supply 
Riming 
Premlxlng J 
[ 
Injector 
Gas 
L,._._._..,..i Orifices 
JPllot 
O" 
~jt Orifices 
C) 
C~ 
Q 
It 
ivi 
= 
Combu=o, 
/ 
I,/'%.1 
Ill 
~ 
, Liner 
/ 
I 
Swirler 
,-.~, 
'~ 
/ 
I 
J Swirler 
Air 
L-r-----I--I Centerbody 
Row 
Main 
o] 
I 
Fuel I"- 
Fig. 38 Solar Iow-NOx fuel injector for liquid fuels 
Torch Igniter 
Fer 
oine 
primary combustion zone by the swirling primary air flow. The 
fuel vaporizes and mixes with air as the film progresses along 
the centerbody. The inner air assist/airblast air exits through 
an annular gap just inside the centerbody lip. Its function is to 
break up any remaining fuel film as it flows off the centerbody 
and into the primary zone. 
The outer filming mode involves film formation on the outer 
cylindrical surface of the air swirler channel. Fuel is delivered 
to the filming surface in a manner identical to that used for 
inner filming. Provision is also made for air blasting the outer 
fuel film at the exit of the swirler channel. Flow visualization 
Fig. 39 
tests showed that a pressure drop of at least 3 percent is needed 
to achieve satisfactory filming of the fuel. At lower pressure 
drops, the liquid film is not sustained over the length of the 
injector, but tends to form rivulets that swirl to the bottom of 
the injector and travel as a thick stream to the end of the injector. 
Evaluation of the combustor performance demonstrated that 
the lowest NO~ emissions were obtained with either total inner 
fueling or combined inner and outer filming. The combustor 
yielded around 12 ppm NOx at 6 atm and 20 ppm at 9 atm. CO 
was always below 50 ppm. In common with most well-mixed 
systems, low concentrations of both CO and NOx were attain- 
able only over a fairly narrow range of operating conditions. 
Potential improvements for this fuel prefilming combustor 
include increasing the number of fuel injection holes used to 
deliver fuel to the filming surface to aid in the formation of a 
more uniform film, and lengthening the injector centerbody to 
allow a longer time for fuel evaporation and mixing. 
To produce a dry low-emissions combustor for an industrial 
version of the Rolls Royce RB 211 engine, the annular aero- 
combustor has been replaced by nine radially positioned reverse 
flow combustors, as shown in Figs. 39 and 40 (Willis et al., 
1993). This arrangement results in an 80 percent increase in 
combustion volume. The primary zone is fed by two radial air 
swirlers. Each swirl passageway has a number of gaseous fuel 
injection points. Contrarotating swirlers were selected to mini- 
mize the length of the recirculation zone and maximize mixing 
of fuel and air. The outlet of the primary zone is restricted to 
accelerate the flow and thereby limit the recirculation zone 
length and prevent the secondary efflux from becoming en- 
trained into the primary zone. The secondary mixing duct is 
wrapped around the primary combustor but is separated from 
it by another annular duct, which provides the wall-cooling 
air. Gaseous fuel is injected into the secondary duct from 36 
equispaced axial spray bars, each containing six injection holes. 
This fuel bar arrangement was determined by trajectory calcula- 
tions and an air velocity profile predicted by a CFD code. Fuel 
sampling and combustion tests showed that the resulting fuel- 
air mixture is uniform to within 4 percent. This mixture is 
discharged into the secondary zone at an angle that was selected 
Fig. 40 
Diffuser 
Discharge 
nozzle 
Rolls-Royce Industrial RB 211 DLE 04 module 
to achieve the required level of mixing between the primary 
efflux and the secondary fuel-air mixture. Combustion testing 
carried out over a range of pressures from 1 to 20 atm has 
demonstrated the ability of this axially staged combustor to 
achieve simultaneously low NOx and low CO over wide ranges 
of power and ambient temperature without resorting to either 
variable geometry or air bleeds. It was also demonstrated that 
a uniform fuel distribution prior to combustion is essential for 
achieving low emissions, especially at high pressures. Based on 
the test data obtained so far, at full baseload conditions the 
predicted engine emissions are 17.4 ppm NOx, 5 ppm CO, and 
zero UHC. 
An interesting feature of this combustor is that the level of 
NOx emitted when the primary only is burning is reduced by a 
half when the secondary is ignited, and only when the tempera- 
ture of the secondary zone approaches that of the primary does 
the total NOx exceed the primary-only value. 
Primary 
,u,, 
Central 
~. 1 2 
dlffuslon ~ 
Torch -_~ 
Prlmary 
rnlxlng ducts ~ 
Secondary fuel 
Q I Secondary 
_ 
Secondary 
rnlxlng duct 
Rolls-Royce dry low-emissions premix, lean-burn combustor 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 639 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 24 ---

Fig. 41 General Electric LM6000 dry Iow-NOx combustor 
Figure 41 gives a cross-sectional view of General Electric's 
new LM6000 dry low-emissions combustor, as described by 
Leonard and Stegmaier (1994). This premix combustor requires 
about twice the volume of the conventional annular combustor 
it replaces in order to reduce the emissions of CO and UHC. 
Part of the air used in combustion, which at maximum power 
is around 80 percent of the total combustor airflow, flows into 
the combustion zone through three annular rings of premixers, 
as shown in Fig. 41. The two outer rings each have 30 fuel- 
air premixers while the inner ring has 15. This arrangement of 
premixers facilitates fuel staging at part-load operation. The 
total of 75 fuel nozzles is formed by having 15 stems with 3 
premixers on each stem, as shown in Fig. 42. Each stem incorpo- 
rates three separate fuel circuits for independently fueling the 
three premixers. 
A short annular liner was selected to minimize the amount 
of air needed for wall cooling. Only backside cooling is used, 
so a thermal barrier coating is applied to both the liner and in 
OUTER 
INNER _ ~  
SWIRLER 
FUEL 
IN 
MIXING 
DUCT 
CENTERBODY 
. INJECTION HOLES 
(a) 
OUTER 
INNER , ~  
SWIRLER 
FUEL 
IN 
MIXING 
DUCT 
CENTERBODY 
(b) 
FUEL INJECTION SPOKES 
INNER 
~ 
MIXING 
...... 
DUCT 
FUEL MANIFOLD 
CENTERBODY 
(c) 
Fig. 43 Cross-sectional views of three mixer designs 
Fig. 42 Fuel nozzle assembly for LM6000 dry Iow-NOx combustor 
the dome area to keep the metal temperatures within acceptable 
limits. The use of a multipass diffuser also permits further re- 
duction in overall combustor length. Of special interest and 
importance to the attainment of low emissions is the design of 
the premixers. Figure 43 shows cross-sectional views of three 
different mixer designs that were subjected to combustion test- 
ing. The Double Annular Counter Rotating Swirler (DACRS) 
was conceived to satisfy the restraints of autoignition, flashback 
and size. Its exit velocity is determined by the need to greatly 
exceed the turbulent flame speed of gaseous fuel-air mixtures. 
The duct diameter is reduced at the exit in order to create an 
accelerating flow and thereby prevent flashback. The conical 
centerbody located along the centerline of the premixer can be 
used to supply liquid fuel to an atomizer at its tip, and gas 
passages for diffusion burning at low power conditions (Joshi 
et al., 1994). 
The design objective with this type of mixing device is to 
produce a completely homogeneous mixture of fuel and air at 
the premixer exit. As the total area of the fuel injection holes 
is fixed by the flow rate and the available fuel injection pressure, 
the design procedure is essentially one of finding the best com- 
promise between the desire for a large number of fuel injection 
points and the equally important requirement of large injection 
holes to allow the fuel jets to penetrate across the air stream. 
In the premixer design designated as DACRS I in Fig. 43 (a), 
the fuel is injected into the air stream radially outward from 
holes in the centerbody just downstream of the swirl vanes. 
This configuration gave low NOx at some test conditions but 
not at others. This was attributed to unsatisfactory fuel jet pene- 
640 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 25 ---

tration, so a modification was made by adding eight radial 
spokes in the location of the holes in the centerbody, as shown 
in Fig. 43 (b). Each spoke has three holes to inject gaseous fuel 
perpendicular to the flowing air stream. Combustion testing of 
this DACRS II mixer showed that single-digit NOx emissions 
are attainable with this concept. A further modification to the 
premixer designs described above was made by incorporating 
fuel injection holes into the swirl vanes of the outer swirler, as 
illustrated in Fig. 43(c). In this DACRS III configuration, the 
fuel is injected through three holes in the trailing edge of each 
outer swirl vane and one hole in the outer wall of the mixing 
duct in between each swirl vane. Fuel is fed to the hollow outer 
vanes through a manifold on the outside of the premixing duct. 
The NOx emissions obtained with the DACRS III mixer were 
very similar to the DACRS II design. 
A big advantage of this type of premixer module is that, 
once developed, it has broad applications in a wide range of 
combustor sizes. The basic module remains the same regardless 
of combustor size; only the number varies. According to Joshi 
et al., the DACRS II and DACRS III mixers could be applied 
to a range of GE engines, including the LM1600, LM2500, and 
LM6000, since single-digit NOx emissions have been attained 
with both these mixers at test conditions encompassing the op- 
erating regions of these engines. 
The ABB company has developed a Conical Premix Burner 
module, called the EV-burner, which also appears to have good 
potential for a wide range of dry low-emissions combustion 
applications. A cross-sectional view to illustrate the operating 
principles of the burner is given in Fig. 44 from Sattelmayer et 
al. (1992). A unique feature of this burner is the flame stabiliza- 
tion in free space near the burner outlet, which utilizes the 
sudden breakdown of a swirling flow. The swirler consists of 
two halves of a cone, which are shifted to form two air inlet 
slots of constant width. The device is claimed to be equally 
satisfactory for both gaseous and liquid fuels. Gaseous fuels are 
injected into the combustion air by means of two fuel distribu- 
tion tubes comprising two rows of small holes, which are lo- 
cated parallel to the inlet parts of the swirler. Fairly complete 
mixing of fuel and air is obtained shortly after injection. Liquid 
fuels are injected at the apex of the cone using a pressure or 
air-assist type of atomizer. Fuel evaporation and mixing of fuel 
vapor with air is accomplished within the burner and upstream 
of the recirculation zone. In contrast to most LPP designs, no 
diffusion or pilot stage is needed to improve the stability of the 
premix flame. Also, because the combustion zone is displaced 
from the burner walls, the heat transfer to the burner section is 
minimized. 
In February 1991 an ABB GT11N gas turbine was retrofitted 
with a new silo combustor of the type shown in Fig. 45. This 
silo combustor is equipped with 37 EV burners, all of which 
operate in a pure premix mode. For part-load operation, fuel is 
supplied to only a fraction of the total number of burners At 
Dilution A l r . ~  
Combustion Air 
~-A.-------'~-",-. w ,\ 
Spray Evaporation 
v~; 
Fu., 
,~ 
~ .*..*~ 
Atomization 
~""~'- "~'~ 
(Swirl Nozzle) 
Gas Injection 
~ ~ ~.,.. 
Flame 
Holes 
~ 
Front 
Fig. 44 
Operating principle of ABB conical premix burner 
~I lance 
to turbine 
from compressor 
Fig. 45 Silo combustor equipped with conical premix burner 
the baseload conditions of 12.5 bar and Ti,let = 643 K, NOx 
values of 13 ppm were measured (Aigner and Muller, 1993). 
The EV-burner technology has also been applied to the design 
of an annular combustor for the heavy duty ABB GT13E2 gas 
turbine (Senior et al., 1993). This is a single shaft industrial 
engine in the large size range (> 150 MW). The EV burners 
have a double offset row arrangement within the annular com- 
bustor. As the power setting is reduced, the overall equivalence 
ratio eventually becomes too low to allow lean premix operation 
in all burners. The technique used to overcome this problem is 
to maintain some burners at a stable equivalence ratio while 
others run leaner but are stabilized by the first burner group. 
Combustion tests carried out at atmospheric pressure on a 
scaled-down combustor have shown that the presence of these 
"cold" burners has no significant effect on combustor pattern 
factor. These tests also indicated very low values of CO, UHC, 
and NOx, in agreement with previous experience of EV burners. 
The strict NOx regulations in Japan have promoted several 
recent developments in dry low-NOx combustion. During the 
past 5 years, Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd., a manufacturer 
of small-to-medium size gas turbines, has been developing a 
dry low-NOx combustor burning natural gas for application to 
a 1.5 MW gas turbine. The tubular combustor employs a combi- 
nation of lean premixed combustion and fuel staging (multiple 
fuel injectors). The pilot nozzle is a conventional multi-orifice 
type, which supplies up to 5 percent of the total fuel. The eight 
main nozzles are subdivided into four groups, with two in each 
group. At full load all eight nozzles are flowing. With gradual 
reduction in load, successive groups of nozzles are shut off, 
until at idle only the pilot nozzle and one group of main nozzles 
are supplied with fuel. This combustor has demonstrated a maxi- 
mum NOx level of 42 ppm and work is in progress to reduce 
this to 20 ppm (Kajita et al., 1993). 
Nakata et al. (1992) have designed an RQL combustor to 
burn a coal-gasified fuel having a calorific value of only one 
tenth that of natural gas. Its main combustible component is 
carbon monoxide, but it also contains appreciable concentra- 
tions of ammonia, which is converted into NOx during the com- 
bustion process. Even so, this combustor achieved an NOx level 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 641 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 26 ---

Fig. 46 Schematic cross-section of venturi mixer for the ALEC combus- 
tor 
of 60 ppm when burning the standard fuel containing 1000 ppm 
of ammonia. 
The Japan Automobile Research Institute is collaborating 
with the Toyota Central Research and Development Laboratory 
in the development of a low-emissions combustor for a 100 
kW automotive ceramic gas turbine (Kumakura et al., 1994). 
Studies are being carried out in a premix-prevaporize tube op- 
erating both at atmospheric pressure and on the engine at high 
pressures to provide quantitative data on the influence of fuel 
drop size and fuel distribution on the degree of vaporization 
achieved (Ohkubo et al., 1994). 
Other dry low-NOx combustor concepts for small gas turbines 
include the Annular Low-Emission Combustor (ALEC), which 
is being developed in several forms by Gasunie Research in the 
Netherlands (Bahlmann and Visser, 1994). It is basically a 
lean-premix combustor in which mixing of gaseous fuel and air 
is accomplished using a venturi premixer, as illustrated in Fig. 
46. The venturi extends inwardly (tangentially) into the annular 
combustion liner and is double-walled and air-cooled. To avoid 
combustion within the venturi mixers, the diameter of the ven- 
turi outlet is such that the average flow velocity at exit is 30 
m/s. The diffuser angle of the venturi is set at 5.5 deg. Prelimi- 
nary tests with a 7 deg angled venturi resulted in flow separation 
and combustion inside the venturi. The ALEC concept has dem- 
onstrated very low NOx levels (< 10 ppm) along with satisfac- 
tory CO levels (<50 ppm). 
Lean Premix Prevaporize Combustion 
As the turbine inlet temperatures of many gas turbines are 
well below the temperatures needed to produce NOx in signifi- 
cant quantities, it should, in principle, be possible to achieve 
low levels of NOx without any sacrifice of cycle efficiency. In 
practice, the requirements of flame stability and high heat re- 
lease rates usually demand flame zones in which the gas temper- 
ature is appreciably higher than the turbine inlet temperature. 
Conventional combustors typically inject fuel directly into the 
primary combustion zone with little or no premixing with air. 
Consequently, combustion takes place in local regions at near- 
stoichiometric temperatures with consequent high rates of NOx 
formation. 
A common feature of all the dry low-NOx combustors de- 
scribed above is that positive efforts are made to eliminate these 
local regions of high temperature by mixing the fuel and air 
upstream of the combustion zone. The lean, premix, prevaporize 
(LPP) concept represents the ultimate in this regard. Its underly- 
ing principle is to supply the combustion zone with a completely 
homogeneous mixture of fuel and air, and then to operate the 
combustion zone at an equivalence ratio which is very close to 
the lean blowout limit. The smaller the margin between stable 
combustion and flame blowout, the lower will be the output 
of NOx. 
A typical LPP combustor can be divided into three main 
regions. The first region is for fuel injection, fuel vaporization, 
and fuel-air mixing. Its function is to achieve complete evapo- 
ration and complete mixing of fuel and air prior to combustion. 
By eliminating droplet combustion and supplying the combus- 
tion zone with a homogeneous mixture of low equivalence ratio, 
the combustion process proceeds at a uniformly low temperature 
and very little NOx is formed. In the second region the flame 
is stabilized by the creation of one or more recirculation zones. 
Combustion is completed in this region and the resulting prod- 
ucts then flow into region three, which may comprise a fairly 
conventional dilution zone. 
A useful byproduct of LPP combustion is that it is essentially 
free from carbon formation, especially when gaseous fuels are 
used, in which case the description "lean premixed combustor" 
is more appropriate. The absence of carbon not only eliminates 
soot emissions but also greatly reduces the amount of heat 
transferred to the liner walls by radiation, thereby reducing the 
amount of air needed for liner wall cooling. This is an important 
consideration because it means that more air is made available 
for lowering the temperature of the combustion zone and im- 
proving the combustor pattern factor. 
Another important advantage of LPP systems is that for 
flames in which the temperature nowhere exceeds 1900 K the 
amount of NOx formed does not increase with increase in resi- 
dence time (Anderson, 1975; Leonard and Stegmaier, 1994). 
This means that LPP systems can be designed with long resi- 
dence times to achieve low CO and UHC, while maintaining 
low NOx levels. This finding is especially significant for indus- 
trial engines, where size is less important than for aero-engines. 
According to Leonard and Stegmaier, this approach leads to an 
LPP combustor volume that is approximately twice that of a 
conventional combustor. 
The main drawback to the LPP concept is that the long time 
required for fuel evaporation and fuel-air premixing upstream 
of the combustion zone may result in the occurrence of autoigni- 
tion or flashback at the high inlet air temperatures associated 
with operation at high power settings. Another drawback is that 
some form of piloting device may be needed to facilitate ignition 
and sustain combustion at arduous operating conditions. Also, 
the airflow rate needed for lean combustion during high-power 
operation may result in flame blowout at low power conditions. 
To alleviate this problem, which is endemic to the LPP combus- 
tor due to its need to operate close to the lean blowout limit, 
some form of fuel staging or variable geometry is usually re- 
quired. 
Another problem associated with all well-mixed combustion 
systems is that of acoustic resonance, which occurs when the 
combustion process becomes coupled with the acoustics of the 
combustor. This phenomenon has been encountered many times 
in the past and is often manifested merely as noise, but in severe 
cases it creates mechanical vibrations, which may cause damage 
to engine components. Improvements in fuel-air mixing always 
encourage the onset of combustion noise. This problem is there- 
fore of great importance to the future development of lean pre- 
mixed combustors. 
In summary, lean premix prevaporize combustion has consid- 
erable potential for ultralow-NOx emissions. Several workers 
have reported NOn levels below 10 ppm, even with flame tem- 
peratures higher than 2000 K (Poeschl et al., 1994). However, 
many formidable problems remain, the principal being that of 
achieving complete evaporation of the fuel and thorough mixing 
of fuel and air within the autoignition delay time and without 
risk of acoustic resonance or flashback. 
Droplet and Spray Evaporation. The evaporation of 
drops in a spray involves simultaneous heat and mass transfer 
processes in which the heat for evaporation is transferred to the 
drop surface by conduction and convection from the sur- 
rounding air or gas, and vapor is transferred by convection and 
diffusion back into the gas stream. The overall rate of evapora- 
tion depends on the pressure, temperature, and transport proper- 
642 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 27 ---

ties of the gas; the temperature, volatility, and diameter of the 
1.6 
drops in the spray; and the velocity of the drops relative to that 
of the surrounding gas. 
If a single-component fuel drop is suddenly immersed in gas 
IA 
at high temperature, initially almost all of the heat supplied to 
the drop serves to raise its temperature. As the fuel temperature 
1.2 
rises, fuel vapor is formed at the drop surface and part of the 
heat transferred to the drop is used to furnish the heat of vapor- 
ization of the fuel. Eventually, a stage is reached where all of 
1.0 
the heat transferred to the drop is used as heat of vaporization 
and the drop stabilizes at its "wet-bulb" or "steady-state" 
0.8 
temperature. Thus the total drop evaporation time can be subdi- 
vided into two main components, one for the heat-up period 
0.6 
and another for the steady-state phase. 
During the steady-state phase, evaporation rates are relatively 
"' 
high, but during the initial heat-up period much of the heat 
1.0 
transferred to the drop is absorbed in heating it up, so the amount 
of heat available for fuel vaporization is correspondingly less. 
0.8 
This lower rate of vaporization, when considered in conj unction 
= 
with the significant proportion of the total drop lifetime occu- 
N" 
pied by the heat-up period, especially at high pressures, means 
~ 
0.6 
that overall evaporation rates can be appreciably lower than the 
~. 
experimental values quoted in the literature, most of which were 
'~ 
0.4 
measured during steady-state evaporation at normal atmo- 
spheric pressure, 
i 
In most continuous flow combustors, the fuel is sprayed into 
0.2 
air or gas flowing at high velocity. Where relative motion exists 
between the droplets and the surrounding gas, the rate of evapo- 
0.24 
ration is enhanced. The effect of convection on evaporation 
rates can be accommodated by applying a correction factor to 
the evaporation rate calculated for quiescent conditions. Where 
0.213 
heat transfer rates are controlling, the correction factor is 
0.1~ 
0.I~ 
O.Oe 
1 + 0.22 Re~ 5 
where ReD, the drop Reynolds number, is typically around 5. 
From a practical viewpoint it would be very convenient if 
the effect of the heat-up period could be combined with that of 
forced convection in a manner that would allow an "effective" 
value of evaporation constant to be assigned to any given fuel 
at any stipulated conditions of ambient pressure, temperature, 
velocity, and drop size. To accomplish this, Chin and Lefebvre 
(1982) defined an effective evaporation constant as 
horf = D2/te 
(9) 
0.04 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
P= IO0 kPa 
~m/UD°' 
S)(/.Lm] 
~ 5000 
100 
Too = 2000 K 
o 
200 
Too = 12OO K 
=o~ 
0 
I 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
420 
440 
460 
480 
500 
520 
540 
Tbn, K 
56O 
Fig. 47 
Variation of effective evaporation 
constant with normal boiling 
point for a pressure of 100 kPa 
where te is the total time required to evaporate the fuel drop, 
including both convective and transient heat-up effects, and Do 
is the initial drop diameter. 
Calculated values Of ~ff for an ambient air pressure of 100 
kPa are plotted in Fig. 47. Similar plots for higher levels of 
pressure may be found in Chin and Lefebvre (1982). Figure 
47 shows plots of Xofe versus Tbn, the normal boiling point, for 
various values of UDo at three levels of ambient temperature, 
namely, 500, 1200, and 2000 K. While recognizing that no 
single fuel property can fully describe the evaporation character- 
istics of any given fuel, the normal boiling point, Tbn, has much 
to commend it for this purpose, because it is directly related to 
fuel volatility and vapor pressure. ]t also has the virtue of being 
quoted in fuel specifications. Figure 47 shows that here increases 
with increases in ambient temperature, pressure, velocity, and 
drop size and diminishes with increase in normal boiling tem- 
perature. 
The concept of an effective value of evaporation constant 
considerably simplifies calculations of the evaporation charac- 
teristics of fuel drops. For example, for any given conditions 
of pressure, temperature, and relative velocity, the lifetime of 
a fuel drop of any given size is obtained from Eq. (9) as 
te = Do2/~ff 
(10) 
while the average rate of fuel evaporation is readily determined 
as 
my = (Tr/6)pF~ffDo 
(11) 
The velocity term U in Fig. 47 is the relative velocity between 
the drop and the surrounding gas. However, small droplets rap- 
idly attain the same velocity as the surrounding gas, after which 
they are susceptible only to the fluctuating component of veloc- 
ity, u'. Thus for gas turbine combustors, where the value of u' 
is usually high enough to affect evaporation rates, U in Fig. 47 
should be replaced with u'. 
For sprays, the average rate of fuel evaporation is obtained 
as 
mF = pm~.effVq/D2o 
(12) 
where PA is the air or gas density, V is the spray volume, q is 
the fuel/air ratio by mass, and Do is the Sauter mean diameter 
of the droplets in the spray. 
Equation (12) may be used to calculate average rates of 
fuel spray evaporation, while Eq. (10) gives the length of duct 
required for complete evaporation if the spray is injected into 
a ducted air stream. The drop diameter selected for insertion 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 643 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 28 ---

10 
5 
z 
¢3 
LU §2. 
1 
1650 
1950 
Fig. 48 
z 
++ 
S 
-- 
PREMiXE~..Ii-.F 
NEARLY PRERFECT 
l 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1700 
1750 
1800 
1850 
1900 
FLAME TEMPERATURE, K 
Effects of nonuniform fuel-air mixing on NO. formation 
into Eq. (10) should, of course, be that of the largest drop in 
the spray. 
In a number of recent publications, Chin (1994, 1995a, b) 
has developed and extended the h~ff concept to include several 
phenomena of practical importance, including the secondary 
breakup of droplets as well as real gases, near-critical tempera- 
ture, and multicomponent fuel effects. Recent advances in the 
modeling of droplet vaporization have been reviewed by Peng 
and Aggarwal (1995). Their review also includes the methodol- 
ogies currently available for representing droplet motion and 
vaporization history in two-phase flow computations. 
Mixing. 
The attainment of perfect mixture homogeneity 
prior to combustion is of paramount importance to the success 
of most types of low-emissions combustors. The influence of 
mixture inhomogeneity on NOx formation has been examined 
by several workers, both theoretically and experimentally. Ap- 
pleton and Heywood (1973) employed a burner in which kero- 
sine fuel was injected using an air-assist atomizer, which al- 
lowed the degree of fuel-air mixing to be varied by changing 
the atomizing air pressure. For low equivalence ratios, they 
found that NOx emissions decreased by a factor of ten as a 
result of better fuel-air mixing. In a similar study by Semerjian 
et al. (1979) it was found that poorer fuel-air mixing resulted 
in increased NOx emissions for overall fuel-lean flames. Lyons 
(1981) used a multipoint fuel injector spraying Jet A fuel to 
achieve different equivalence ratio profiles across the diameter 
of the flametube. The results showed that spatial nonuniformity 
in equivalence ratio resulted in increased NOx emissions for 
equivalence ratios below 0.7 and decreased NOx emissions for 
near-stoichiometric mixtures. 
Flanagan et al. (1992) used a simple mixing tube fitted with 
a bluff-body flameholder at its exit. By changing the location 
of the natural gas fuel injector along the length of the tube, the 
degree of fuel-air mixing in the mixture approaching the stabi- 
lizer could be varied. When the system was operating at an 
equivalence ratio of 0.66, a nearly fivefold increase in NO+ 
emissions was recorded when going from well-mixed to incom- 
pletely mixed conditions. 
Fric (1992) used an experimental apparatus very similar to 
that employed by Flanagan et al. to examine the NOx emissions 
produced when burning natural gas fuels at normal atmospheric 
pressure. He found that temporal fluctuations in equivalence 
ratio can also raise NOx emissions, in addition to spatial nonuni- 
formities. For example, temporal fluctuations of 10 percent re- 
suited in a doubling of NOn emissions. 
Leonard and Stegmaier (1994) used a gas-fired GE LM6000 
combustor to examine the effects of premixing on NO+ forma- 
tion. The results obtained are given in Fig. 48, which shows 
NO+ as a function of average flame temperature for various 
degrees of premixing. Nonuniformities are the result of fluctua- 
tions in time as well as variations in space. Figure 48 gives data 
for a nearly perfect premixer, a well-designed prernixer, and 
a nonoptimized premixer. It clearly illustrates the tremendous 
advantage to be gained from thorough mixing of air and fuel. 
These workers also noted that the amount of NOx formed in a 
nonoptimized premixer increased with increasing pressure. 
They attributed this result to the fact that reactions taking place 
in the hot spots (>2000 K) of poorly premixed flames are 
pressure dependent. 
The only exception to the general rule that better premixing 
yields less NOx are the results obtained by Santavicca et al. 
(1993). These workers examined the effects of incomplete 
fuel-air mixing on the lean blowout limits and emissions char- 
acteristics of an LPP coaxial mixing tube combustor. A fluores- 
cence technique was used to determine the degree of fuel vapor- 
ization and mixing at the combustor inlet. Contrary to what was 
expected, it was found that an improvement in fuel-air mixing 
resulted in comparable NOx emissions for the same conditions 
of inlet temperature and equivalence ratio. Although the better 
mixed device demonstrated lower NOx emissions, this was at- 
tributed to its ability to operate at lower equivalence ratios. 
The formidable problems involved in trying to attain com- 
plete homogeneity in the fuel-air mixture entering the combus- 
tion zone have prompted studies into the use of mechanical 
mixers as a means of achieving the desired degree of fuel-air 
mixing. Static mixers are well known and widely used in pro- 
cess engineering for mixing of both gases and liquids, but as 
yet they appear to have evoked little interest for combustion 
applications. Poeschl et al. (1994) examined the mixing capabil- 
ity of a commercially available static mixer after a series of 
tests using pressure, airblast, air-assist, and multipoint injectors 
had failed to provide the right degree of homogeneity. All these 
injection devices had either failed to mix fuel vapor with the 
air flowing near the duct wall or had deposited liquid fuel on 
the wall. Tests with the static mixer yielded excellent homoge- 
neity, with a standard deviation of lower than 5 percent for a 
2 percent pressure loss. This high degree of homogeneity in the 
combustible mixture is very desirable, not only from an emis- 
sions standpoint, but also because it greatly reduces the possibil- 
ity of spontaneous ignition. Fuel-lean mixtures tend to have 
long autoignition delays, but if imperfections in mixing result 
in local regions in which the equivalence ratio is higher than 
the average value, the ignition delay time could be greatly re- 
duced. Thus a high degree of mixture homogeneity is essential, 
not only for the attainment of low NOx emissions, but also to 
alleviate the problems of autoignition and flashback. Flashback 
is unlikely to occur with static mixers if the velocity through 
the mixer is kept high ( >20 m/s). Also, by flattening the veloc- 
ity profile, the mixer eliminates the boundary layer along which 
flashback is most prone to occur. 
According to Valk (1994) the static mixer system has good 
potential for engines of modest compression ratio, but more 
work is needed to reduce length, residence time, and pressure 
loss, while maintaining good mixing performance. 
Spontaneous Ignition. Spontaneous ignition, or autoigni- 
tion, is a process whereby a combustible mixture undergoes 
chemical reaction, leading to the rapid evolution of heat in the 
absence of any concentrated source of ignition such as a flame 
or spark. In the LPP combustor and other types of low-emission 
combustors in which fuel and air are premixed prior to combus- 
tion, spontaneous ignition must be avoided at all costs since it 
could damage combustor components and produce unacceptably 
high levels of pollutant emissions. 
Spontaneous ignition delay may be defined as the time inter- 
val between the creation of a combustible mixture, say by in- 
jecting fuel into a flowing air stream at high temperature, and 
the onset of flame. In view of their practical importance, mea- 
surements of spontaneous ignition delay time have been con- 
ducted for many fuels over wide ranges of ambient conditions 
and in a variety of test vehicles, including constant-volume 
644 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 29 ---

bombs, rapid-compression machines, shock tubes, and continu- 
ous-flow devices. The test methods employed and the results 
obtained are described in reviews by Mullins (1955), Spadac- 
cini and Te Velde (1980) and, more recently, by Goodger and 
Eissa (1987) and Lundberg (1994). 
Ignition delay times are frequently correlated using empirical 
equations of the form 
~- = A. P-".exp(B/T) 
13) 
where the values of A and B are determined by experiment. A is 
a proportionality constant that has dimensions, B is an effective 
activation energy, P is the pressure, and T is a characteristic 
temperature, usually the initial temperature of the gas (or vapor) 
fuel-air mixture. 
Wolfer (1938) first proposed this form of equation. His anal- 
ysis of experimental data showed that 
"7- = 0.43P -H9 exp(4650/T) 
(14) 
where 7- is the ignition delay time in ms, P is the pressure in 
atm, and T is the initial mixture temperature in degrees Kelvin. 
Despite its longevity, Eq. (14) is still in widespread use. To 
accommodate the effects of equivalence ratio on ignition delay 
times, it is sometimes modified to 
T = AP-"qh .... exp(B/T) 
(15) 
There is little agreement between different workers in regard 
to the influence of equivalence ratio on ignition delay time. For 
methane, propane, and aviation kerosine, Lefebvre et al. (1986) 
reported values for m of 0.19, 0.30, and 0.37, respectively. 
Mullins (1955) observed no effect of equivalence ratio on igni- 
tion delay time, while Ducourneau (1974) and Spadaccini and 
Te Velde (1980) both found strong effects. The explanation for 
these differences probably lies in the mode of fuel injection. 
As discussed above, with liquid fuels there is always the poten- 
tial for stoichiometric combustion in regions close to the evapo- 
rating spray. Thus, the ignition delay times will always tend to 
correspond to those for stoichiometric mixtures, even though 
the average equivalence ratio of the mixture may be appreciably 
below the stoichiometric value. Just how close will depend on 
the mean drop size of the spray, since this governs the rate of 
fuel evaporation and hence also the length of time that stoichio- 
metric "streaks" of fuel-air mixture can survive, and on the 
number of fuel injection points. In this context it is of interest 
to note that Tacina ( 1983 ) obtained much more consistent auto- 
ignition data with a single orifice injector than with a 41-hole 
injector, which ostensibly provided a more uniform fuel-air 
mixture. Presumably this was because with a single injector the 
rate of fuel-air mixing was so slow that the bulk of the prereac- 
tions leading up to the onset of ignition took place in near- 
stoichiometric mixtures regardless of the average equivalence 
ratio. With gaseous fuels, the inconsistencies associated with 
slow fuel evaporation are no longer present, but the measured 
ignition delay times are still very dependent on the time required 
for the fuel and air to combine in combustible proportions. As 
with liquid fuels, the longer the mixing time the closer will 
the measured ignition delay times approach the stoichiometric 
values. 
In summary, autoignition data are very apparatus dependent 
and, in particular, very fuel-injector dependent. Considerable 
caution should be exercised in comparing and selecting autoig- 
nition data and in no circumstances should experimentally de- 
rived equations be extrapolated to pressures and temperatures 
outside the range of experimental verification. This is because 
differences in reaction routes may occur over different levels 
of temperature and pressure. Only if the available experimental 
data or calculated values of ignition delay time exceed the resi- 
dence time by a factor of at least five can the designer feel 
confident that spontaneous ignition is unlikely to present prob- 
lems. 
1 
rn 10 "1 
F- 
a 
z 
~ 10.2 
r
~
 
800 
100o 
10"3102 
102 
T0, K 
600 
Fig. 49 
SMD = 50 ~um, u' = 0.25 m/s 
104 
PRESSURE, kPa 
Variation of ignition delay time with pressure and temperature; 
Most analyses and equations for ignition delay time ignore 
the effects of fuel vaporization, which is reasonable under con- 
ditions where the evaporation time is appreciably shorter than 
the mixing and reaction times. However, it is important to bear 
in mind that the spontaneous ignition delay time results from 
both physical and chemical processes. For liquid fuels, the phys- 
ical delay is the time required to heat and vaporize the fuel 
drops and to mix the fuel vapor in flammable proportions with 
the surrounding air. The chemical delay is the time interval 
between the formation of a flammable mixture and the appear- 
ance of flame. Thus, the physical processes dominate in the 
early stages of spontaneous ignition, while in the later stages 
the chemical processes become overriding. 
Rao and Lefebvre ( 1981 ) have proposed a model for sponta- 
neous ignition that takes full account of both chemical and 
physical effects and has general application to both homoge- 
neous and heterogeneous mixtures, including situations in 
which both fuel drops and fuel vapor are present at the outset 
of the preignition process. The spontaneous-ignition delay time 
t is obtained as the sum of the times required for evaporation 
and chemical reaction 
t = (D~/k~ff)[1 - (1 _ f)o.67] 
+ 4.66.10 -8 exp(9160/T,,)/pAf49 
(16) 
where ~b is the equivalence ratio, T,,, is the initial mixture temper- 
ature, and fis the fraction of the total fuel that must be converted 
to vapor to initiate the chemical reaction. As little or no chemical 
reaction takes place at equivalence ratios much below 0.5, a 
value of fis recommended for insertion into Eq. (16) such that 
the product of f and q5 is 0.5. 
Calculated values of t from Eq. (16) are shown plotted 
against pressure in Fig. 49 for three levels of temperature, 
namely 600, 800, and 1000 K. Typical values for u' and Do of 
0.25 m/s and 50 #m respectively, were used in calculating heft'. 
The results show that the influence of fuel evaporation on t is 
quite small at the lowest temperature considered (600 K) but 
becomes increasingly significant with increasing temperature. 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 645 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 30 ---

\ 
Fig. 50 Schematic diagram of Rich-burn, Quick-quench, Lean-burn 
(RQL) combustor 
This explains the reduced dependence of t on P with increase 
in temperature, as shown in Fig. 49. 
The model proposed by Rat and Lefebvre (1981) shows that 
fuel evaporation times are negligibly small in comparison with 
chemical reaction times for well atomized, highly volatile fuels, 
especially at conditions of low pressure and temperature. How- 
ever, it also shows that fuel evaporation times become increas- 
ingly significant with increase in pressure and temperature, and 
could be rate-limiting for the autoignition of some of the alterna- 
tive fuels that are now being considered, many of which have 
low evaporation rates due to their high viscosity (poor atomiza- 
tion) and low volatility. 
Flashback. An intrinsic feature of all premixed-fuel com- 
bustion systems is a tendency toward flashback. Flashback oc- 
curs when the flame travels upstream from the combustion zone 
into the premixing sections of the combustor. This upstream 
propagation of flame takes place whenever the flame speed 
exceeds the approach flow velocity. 
Two main types of flashback have been identified: ( 1 ) flash- 
back occurring in the free stream and (2) flashback occurring 
through the low-velocity flow in the boundary layer along the 
walls of the premixing section. Either mechanism may involve 
homogeneous and/or heterogeneous reactions. 
The most obvious free-stream mechanism would involve 
flashback due to a flow reversal in the bulk flow through the 
combustor. This flow reversal could be a result of compressor 
surge or combustion instability. Flashback can also occur in the 
absence of flow reversal if the turbulent flame speed through 
the gas in the premixing section is greater than the local bulk 
velocity. Lean combustion tends to reduce flame speeds, but 
other factors associated with the engine cycle, such as high 
temperatures, pressures, and turbulence levels, and preignition 
reactions in the gas due to appreciable residence times at high 
temperature levels, cause increased flame speed. Therefore, 
flame speeds may be sufficiently high to necessitate high flow 
velocities in the premix-prevaporize section. 
The boundary-layer mechanism involves flashback through 
retarded flow in a boundary layer. Important relevant parameters 
include the wall temperature and temperature distribution, and 
the boundary-layer structure, turbulence properties, and thick- 
ness. For more detailed information on flashback, reference 
should be made to Plee and Mellor (1978). 
Rich-Burn, Quick-Quench, Lean-Burn Combustor 
One combustor concept that has been identified as a leading 
candidate for low NOx emissions is the Rich-burn/Quick- 
quench/Lean-burn (RQL) combustor. Originally conceived for 
industrial engines (Mosier and Pierce, 1980; Pierce et al., 
1980), the RQL concept utilizes staged burning, as shown in 
Fig. 50. Combustion is initiated in a fuel-rich primary zone at 
equivalence ratios of between 1.2 and 1.6, thereby reducing 
NOx formation by lowering both the flame temperature and the 
available oxygen. Higher equivalence ratios would be even 
more beneficial from a NOr standpoint, but could lead to exces- 
sive soot formation and smoke. The hydrocarbon reactions pro- 
ceed rapidly, causing further depletion of oxygen and further 
inhibiting NOx formation. This initial fuel-rich combustion also 
discourages NOx formation from fuel-bound nitrogen (M~tin 
and Dederick, 1976). For RQL combustion to be fully effective, 
the fuel must be finely atomized and uniformly distributed 
throughout the rich combustion zone. Moreover, the primary- 
zone airflow pattern must be designed to prevent the occurrence 
of localized flow recirculation zones which can increase resi- 
dence times and thereby increase NOx production (Micklow et 
al., 1993). 
As the fuel-rich combustion products flow out of the primary 
zone, they encounter jets of air that rapidly reduce their tempera- 
ture to a level at which NOx formation is negligibly small. 
Transition from a rich zone to a lean zone must take place 
rapidly to prevent the formation of near-stoichiometric, high 
NOx-forming streaks. The ability to achieve near-instantaneous 
mixing in this "quick quench" region is the key to the success 
of the RQL concept. 
An important design consideration is the temperature of the 
lean-burn zone. If this temperature is too high, the production 
of thermal NOx becomes excessive. On the other hand, the 
temperature must be high enough to eliminate any remaining 
CO, UHC, and soot. Thus, the equivalence ratio for the lean- 
bum zone must be carefully selected to satisfy all emissions 
requirements. Typically, lean-burn combustion occurs at equiv- 
alence ratios between 0.5 and 0.7 (Talpallikar et al., 1992). 
After the requirements of combustion and liner wall cooling 
have been satisfied, any remaining air can be used as dilution 
air to tailor the exit temperature pattern for maximum turbine 
durability. 
In some designs the atomizing air is arranged to flow over 
the outside of the liner wall in the rich zone before entering the 
fuel nozzle. This regenerative backside convective cooling is 
an important design feature because conventional film cooling 
in the rich zone would create local near-stoichiometfc mixtures 
that would produce high levels of NOx. 
Most of the work carried out so far on the RQL concept has 
confirmed its potential for ultralow-NOx combustion. It also has 
an important practical asset in that it requires only one stage of 
fuel injection. However, in order to exploit this potential fully, 
significant improvements in the quench mixer design are 
needed. Other inherent problems include high soot formation 
in the rich primary zone, which gives rise to problems of high 
flame radiation and exhaust smoke. These problems are exacer- 
bated by long residence times, unstable recirculation patterns, 
and nonuniform mixing. 
Early experimental studies by Novick et al. (1982) suggested 
that NOx emissions appear to be controlled only by inlet temper- 
ature and rich zone equivalence ratio. Changes in the lean or 
dilution zone had no observable effect on NOx. On the other 
hand, carbon monoxide and smoke emissions were influenced 
markedly by both rich-zone and lean-zone equivalence ratios, 
as well as by combustor inlet temperature. A minimum lean- 
zone equivalence ratio of 0.6 was needed to achieve satisfactory 
smoke levels. In more recent studies, Rizk and Mongia (1991a, 
1993a, b) have applied three-dimensional emissions modeling, 
using well-established reaction mechanisms to RQL combus- 
tion. Their results generally confirm the previous findings of 
Novick et al. in regard to the importance of rich-zone equiva- 
lence ratio to NOx emissions, but they also stress the contribu- 
tion to NOx formation of residence time and combustion pres- 
sure. 
At the present time the RQL concept is being actively studied 
by the Pratt and Whitney Company and other laboratories as 
part of NASA's HSCT (High Speed Civil Transport) program. 
The aim of this program is to demonstrate the feasibility of 
attaining NOx levels of 3 to 8 g/kg fuel (approx. 40 to 100 
ppm) at supersonic cruise conditions with kerosine fuel. 
Catalytic Combustors 
The very strong dependence of NOx formation on flame tem- 
perature means that NOn emissions are lowest when the combus- 
646 / Vol 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 31 ---

i=i- 
Fuel-air 
Catalytic 
Thermal 
Dilution 
preparation 
reactor 
reactor 
Fig. 51 
Schematic representation of catalytic combustor 
tor is operating perilously close to the lean blowout limit. One 
method of extending the lean blowout limit down to lower 
equivalence ratios is by incorporating a combustion-enhancing 
catalyst within the combustor. Catalytic combustion is a 
"flameless" process, which allows fuel oxidation to take place 
at temperatures well below the normal lean flammability limits 
of the fuel-air mixture. For this reason, the use of catalysts in 
gas turbine combustion to replace part of the thermal reaction 
zone allows stable combustion to occur at peak temperatures 
that are around 1000 K lower than those of conventional com- 
bustors. Combustion at such reduced temperatures can be ex- 
pected to decrease the production of thermal NO~ dramatically. 
A schematic diagram to illustrate the principle of catalytic 
combustion is shown in Fig. 51, Fuel is injected upstream of 
the reactor to vaporize and mix with the inlet air. The fuel-air 
mixture then flows into a catalyst bed, or reactor. This reactor 
may consist of several sections, each made of a different kind 
of catalyst. It is desirable to use a catalyst that is active at low 
temperatures at the inlet, while subsequent sections need to 
be selected for good oxidation efficiency. Downstream of the 
catalytic bed, a thermal reaction zone may be provided to permit 
catalytically initiated reactions to continue. Such reactions can 
contribute as much as 20 percent of the total temperature rise 
achieved in the combustor. 
One problem with catalytic combustors is a tendency toward 
autoignition of the fuel upstream of the catalyst. Although the 
equivalence ratios of interest are well below the lean flammabil- 
ity limit and, in theory, should not be susceptible to autoignition, 
locally richer mixtures exist near the fuel injector before com- 
plete mixing has taken place. Thus, it is essential that mixing 
be achieved in less than the autoignition delay time. Optimum 
catalyst performance also requires the inlet fuel-air mixture to 
be completely uniform in regard to temperature, composition, 
and velocity profile, since this assures effective use of the entire 
catalyst area and prevents damage to the substrate due to local 
high gas temperatures. Thus the primary function of the fuel 
preparation process is to provide complete and uniform mixing 
of fuel and air before entry into the catalyst. Rudimentary tests 
carried out by Anderson et al. (1982) showed that approxi- 
mately 70 percent fuel vaporization is required for stable cata- 
lyst operation when burning liquid fuels. These workers used 
multiple air-assist atomizers to achieve good atomization and 
rapid fuel evaporation at turndown ratios in excess of ten to 
one. This multipoint fuel injection enabled complete fuel vapor- 
ization and mixing to occur in a mixing zone with a length/ 
diameter ratio of five. 
Cowell and Larkin (1994) have conducted subscale testing 
on several different designs of catalytic combustors. The most 
advanced concept is shown schematically in Fig. 52. It is de- 
signed to operate at lean conditions to suppress NOn emissions. 
CO and UHC emissions are of less concern because they are 
Preheat 
MultI-Polnt/Venturl 
Catal~t ]Bed 
Post-Catalyst 
Combustor 
Premlxer 
Combustar 
Fart Load 
Fuel Injection 
Fig. 52 Subscale catalytic combustor for industrial applications 
subsequently oxidized in the catalyst. The preheat burner is a 
conventional well-mixed combustor, which is used to preheat 
the premixed fuel-air mixture entering the catalyst. This pre- 
heat combustor is not required for inlet air temperatures above 
650 K. Main air is introduced immediately downstream of the 
preheat burner. The multipoint fuel injector is an arrangement 
of six venturis surrounding a seventh at the center. Gas tempera- 
tures entering the catalyst bed are in the range from 644 to 925 
K. The catalytic reactor is a multiple-piece bed design using a 
ceramic honeycomb substrate coated with catalytically active 
materials. Its function is to initiate reactions of the main fuel- 
air mixture. Downstream of the catalyst bed is a postcatalyst 
combustion zone, which is stabilized behind a bluff-body 
flameholder. This postcatalyst combustor demonstrated efficient 
CO and UHC burnout. Short duration rig testing at 9 atm pres- 
sure indicated NOn emissions below 5 ppm. The system now 
being developed at Solar for engine application includes fuel 
staging and variable geometry. 
The advantage of using a postcatalyst combustor to complete 
the combustion process is that it allows the catalytic bed to 
operate at temperatures lower than the combustor outlet temper- 
ature. This is a significant advantage because it improves the 
reliability and extends the life of the catalyst bed. Ozawa et al. 
(1994a, b) used this approach in designing a combined cata- 
lytic/premix combustor to operate at a combustor outlet temper- 
ature of 1570 K while keeping the catalyst bed temperature 
down to 1270 K. The system is shown schematically in Fig. 
53. It consists of an annular prebumer, six catalytic combustor 
segments, six premixing nozzles, a premixed combustion sec- 
tion downstream of the catalyst, and an air bypass valve. Inlet 
air is heated to 720 K by the preburner and is distributed to 
both catalytic segments and premixing nozzles. The premixed, 
gaseous fuel-air mixture that flows around the catalyst seg- 
ments is ignited by the hot combustion products emanating from 
the catalysts, and lean premix combustion then occurs to raise 
the combustor outlet temperature up to 1570 K. The function 
of the bypass valve is to add air to the combustor efflux gases 
at part-load operation. 
Measurements of NOx at atmospheric pressure when burning 
natural gas were obtained by varying the fuel flow rate and 
bypass valve opening to maintain the catalyst bed at a constant 
temperature. NO~ emissions were always below 10 ppm, of 
PRnURNER 
PREMIX FED 
C0MBtJ~IION ZONE 
[ unit =mm ] 
Fig. 53 Catalytic combustor for natural gas 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 647 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 32 ---

which a significant proportion came from the preburner. The 
total pressure loss of the combustor was around 3 percent, which 
is lower than the values normally associated with conventional 
combustors. 
The notion of completing the combustion process in the post- 
catalyst region to avoid exposure of the catalyst to the high 
temperatures responsible for deactivation and thermal shock 
fracture of the supporting substrate has been pursued by other 
workers, including Dalla Betta et al. (1994). In their combustor, 
natural gas mixed with air is supplied to the catalyst. Combus- 
tion is initiated by the catalyst and is completed by homoge- 
neous reactions downstream. The potential of this approach has 
been demonstrated in subscale rig tests at pressures up to 14 
atm and temperatures above 1500 K. Measured emissions were 
NOx < 1 ppm, CO < 2 ppm and UHC < 2 ppm, thus demon- 
strating the capability of achieving ultralow NOx along with 
low CO and UHC. 
The catalyst employed by these workers required an inlet air 
temperature of 720 K, which necessitated the use of a preburner. 
However, it is reported that recent catalyst designs have reduced 
the required inlet temperature to the point where the catalyst 
can be operated at the compressor discharge temperature for 
some machines. 
• The very low emissions levels achieved by Dalla Betta et al. 
may be due in part to the high degree of uniformity produced by 
the fuel-air mixing system used in the test rig, which featured a 
static mixer located between the fuel injector and the catalyst. 
Vortmeyer et al. (1994) also integrated static mixers into the 
premixing/prevaporizing section upstream of the catalyst to 
minimize imperfections in fuel-air mixing. Their combustor 
design also featured a thermal reactor downstream of the cata- 
lyst to allow it to operate at temperatures well below the maxi- 
mum flame temperature without the need for tertiary fuel injec- 
tion into the thermal reactor. This was achieved by employing 
very short catalyst segments and/or high flow velocities. The 
test combustor was supplied with three different groups of 
fuels--paraffins, alcohols, and commercial liquid fuels. The 
range of operation was limited by the requirements of at least 
99.9 percent combustion efficiency at the end of the thermal 
reactor to minimize the emissions of CO and UHC. Catalyst 
temperatures never exceeded 1300 K up to a maximum gas 
temperature at the combustor exit of 1670 K. The overall com- 
bustor pressure loss was 6 percent, which is just within the 
accepted range for conventional combustors. The catalyst of 40 
mm length was responsible for almost half of this loss (2.35 
percent). The test program was conducted at atmospheric pres- 
sure and was characterized by remarkably low NOx emissions 
levels. For propane and methanol no measurable NOx was 
formed. The combustion of Diesel oil yielded NOx emissions 
below 2 ppm. 
A main drawback to the application of catalytic combustors 
in modern gas turbines is the limited life expectancy of catalysts 
under typical high-temperature conditions. Most combustion rig 
testing to date has involved relatively short test periods of less 
than 100 hours. However, lifetimes of around 5000 hours are 
required for engine applications. It is feared that serious catalyst 
degradation could occur when operating at high pressures and 
temperatures for long durations. Another major drawback is 
that although they are capable of achieving levels of combustion 
efficiency very close to 100 percent, this occurs only over a 
fairly narrow range of operating temperatures. The lower tem- 
perature bound is set by lean blowout limits; the upper bound 
is determined by catalyst and substrate material limitations. 
Depending on the type of catalyst employed, stable combustion 
can be sustained over a temperature range of only a few hundred 
degrees Kelvin without serious loss of performance. This corre- 
sponds to a range of overall fuel/air ratios of around 1.4 to 1, 
as opposed to the 5 to 1 readily achieved with conventional 
combustors. It is essential therefore that catalytic combustion be 
combined with variable-geometry and/or fuel staging to sustain 
Fig. 54 
I 
Combination of catalytic and conventional staged combustor 
combustion over the broad range of conditions encountered in 
modern gas turbines. 
With variable geometry, as the fuel flow increases with load, 
proportionally larger amounts of air are diverted through the 
catalyst to keep its reaction temperature within the allowable 
limits. The remaining air bypasses the catalyst and dilutes the 
combustion gases downstream. Fuel staging can be accom- 
plished, for example, by combining a conventional combustor 
with a catalytic combustor, as illustrated in Fig. 54. The com- 
bustion requirements at low load conditions are met using a 
conventional burner. Then, at full-load conditions, where the 
overall equivalence ratio is compatible with catalytic combus- 
tion, most or all of the required temperature rise is achieved 
via catalytic combustion. This method of staging requires a 
careful control of air splits to provide the required catalyst 
pressure drop. This may necessitate the use of variable geometry 
in addition to fuel staging to control the air flows to the conven- 
tional and catalyst stages. 
Most of the work now in progress on catalytic combustion 
for gas turbines is directed toward stationary applications. For 
aircraft engines, the concerns expressed above regarding dam- 
age to the catalyst when operating for long periods at high 
pressures and temperatures would appear to put it out of con- 
tention at this time, especially as both LPP and RBQ concepts 
show almost equal promise with less risk. 
Correlation and Modeling of NOx and CO Emissions 
Empirical Models. 
Ever since the gas turbine became rec- 
ognized in the late 1960s as a significant contributor to atmo- 
spheric pollution, efforts have been made to develop simple 
models for correlating experimental data on exhaust emissions 
in terms of all the relevant parameters. These include combustor 
operating conditions, combustor design features, fuel type, and 
fuel spray characteristics. 
Empirical models can play an important role in the design 
and development of low-emissions combustors. They serve to 
reduce the complex problems associated with emissions to 
forms that are more meaningful and tractable to the combustion 
engineer. They also permit more accurate correlations of emis- 
sions for any one specific combustor than can be achieved by 
the far more comprehensive models discussed below. 
In attempting to derive an empirical model for emissions, 
emphasis is placed on NOx and CO. For both these species it 
may be assumed that their exhaust concentrations are dependent 
on three terms, which are selected to represent the following: 
( 1 ) mean residence time in the combustion zone, (2) chemical 
reaction rates, and (3) mixing rates. Expressions for these three 
parameters can be derived in terms of combustor size, liner 
pressure loss, airflow proportions, and operating conditions of 
inlet pressure, temperature, and air mass flow rate. We have 
Residence time = L/U ~ PVc/mAT 
(17) 
Reaction rate ~ P" exp aT 
(18) 
Mixing rate ~ (AP/P) x 
(19) 
where L = liner length, U = liner flow velocity (average), V, 
= combustion volume, P = pressure, T = gas temperature, ma 
648 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 33 ---

= air flow rate, ~xP = liner pressure drop, and a, n, and x are 
constants to be determined experimentally. By combining these 
terms we obtain for NO,, 
NO~ =f(residence time)(reaction rate)(mixing rate) 
(20) 
From analysis of experimental data for several different com- 
bustors (Lefebvre, 1984), values of a, n, and x were established 
and substituted into Eq. (20) to obtain 
NOx = 9 × 10-8plZsV~ exp(O.O1T, t)/maTp~ g/kg fuel 
(21) 
where P is the combustion pressure in kPa and Vc is the combus- 
tion volumne in m 3. The effect of variations in overall combus- 
tot fuel/air ratio is included via its influence on primary-zone 
temperature. Fuel type affects both flame temperature and mean 
drop size. For NOx, drop size is less important since, at the 
high pressure conditions where NOx emissions are most promi- 
nent, the fraction of the total combustion volume employed in 
fuel evaporation is so small that variations in fuel drop size 
have only a small effect on NO~ emissions. For this reason, 
most correlating parameters for NOr ignore the effects of mean 
drop size. 
Equation (21) takes account of the fact that, in the combus- 
tion of heterogeneous fuel-air mixtures, it is the stoichiometric 
flame temperature, T~,, that determines the formation of NOt. 
However, for the residence time in the combustion zone, which 
is also significant to NOn formation, the appropriate temperature 
term is the average value Tp~, as indicated in the denominator 
of Eq. (21). 
Equation (21) is suitable for conventional spray combustors 
only. For lean premix/prevaporize combustors in which the 
maximum attainable temperature is Try, it may still be used, 
provided that Tpz is substituted for T,. The excellent correlation 
of experimental data on NOw provided by Eq. (21) for GE J79- 
17A and F101 combustors is illustrated in Figs. 55 and 56, 
respectively. Many other semi-empirical models for predicting 
NO~ emissions have been derived. For a critical review of mod- 
els developed before 1980, reference should be made to Mellor 
( 1981 ). Some of the more recent expressions for NOx emissions 
include the following: 
Odgers and Kretschmer (1985) 
NOr = 29 exp - (21,670/T)P °'66 
X [1 - exp - (250t)] g/kg fuel 
(22) 
.50 
2C 
-3 
E 
o~ IC 
Fuel 
Symbol 
I 
o 
2 
zx 
5 
0 
4 
0 
5 
v 
6 
x 
x V 
° 
I0 
J79-17A 
P3 = 251-1374 kPa 
T5 = 413- 787 K 
rhA= 1.7-7.4 kg/e 
I 
I 
20 
~0 
NO x (predicted), g/kg 
Fig. 55 Comparison of measured and predicted values of NOw for a GE 
J79-17A combustor 
"~ 2o 
z 
Fuel 
Symbol 
I 
0 
3C 
2 
zx 
3 
Q 
4 
0 
5 
v 
6 
x 
,0 
/ 
/ 
0 
i 
I~3 
0 
/ 
s 
/ 
/ 
xx V 
oxv 
/ 
NOn 
FIOI 
P3 = 386-1266 kPo 
T 3 = 464- 850 K 
H~A= 8.5- 20.5 kg/s 
i 
i 
I 
I 
20 
30 
(predicted), 
g/kg 
Fig. 56 Comparison of measured and predicted values of NO,, for a GE 
F101 combustor 
where P is the combustion pressure in Pa, T is the combustion 
temperature in degrees Kelvin, and t is the NOx formation time 
in ms. For aircraft combustors, Odgers and Kretschmer quote 
formation times of 0.8 ms (airblast atomizers) and 1.0 ms (pres- 
sure atomizers). For industrial combustors burning liquid fuels, 
quoted formation times range from 1.5 to 2.0 ms. 
Lewis (1991). 
NOx = 3.3192 × 10 -6 exp(0.0079776T)P °5 ppmv 
(23) 
where P is the combustion pressure in atm. This equation is 
intended to show the amount of NOx formed in lean, homoge- 
neous combustion. It suggests that NO~ formation depends only 
on the postcombustion temperature and pressure and is com- 
pletely independent of the residence time of the gases in the 
combustor. According to Lewis (1991), "the time involved is 
not the normal residence time of the combustion products, but 
rather the relaxation time of the molecules involved, primarily 
the nitrogen molecule, and thus, is the same in all combustion 
systems using air." This finding appears to be at variance with 
published data on the effect of residence time on NOx formation 
(see, for example, Rizk and Mongia, 1990; Nicol et al., 1992; 
Zelina and Ballal, 1994), all of which indicate that NOx concen- 
trations increase with residence time. However, these workers 
also noted that the influence of residence time on NOx formation 
diminishes with reduction in equivalence ratio, the effect being 
relatively small for very lean mixtures, as studied by Lewis. 
Some expressions for NOx include time directly, as in Eq. (22), 
but in others it is embodied into the expression via a mass flow 
rate term, as in Eq. (21). However, even expressions for NOx 
that take no account of residence time whatsoever (Eq. (23), 
for example) can nevertheless provide an excellent prediction 
of experimental data because the residence time of all aero 
gas turbine combustors tends to be the same at around a few 
milliseconds. It is only when expressions derived for industrial 
gas turbine combustors having much longer residence times are 
applied to aero combustors, or vice versa, that the lack of a 
term for residence time becomes important. 
Rokke et al. (1993) 
NOx = 18.1pl42m°x3q °'72 ppm 
(24) 
where P is the combustion pressure in atm, ma is the combustor 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 
1995, Vol. 117 / 649 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 34 ---

air flow in kg/s, and q is the fuel/air ratio. This equation was 
found to correlate very satisfactorily measurements of NOx 
emissions from five different natural gas-fired machines op- 
erating in the power range from 1.5 to 34 MW. Although com- 
bustion temperature is conspicuous by its absence in Eq. (24), 
its influence on NO~ emissions is accounted for by the inclusion 
of a fuel/air ratio term. 
Rizk and Mongia (1994) 
NOn = 15.10J4(t - 0.5t,) °'5 exp 
- (71,100/7~,)P-°'°5(AP/P) -°'5 g/kg fuel 
(25) 
where t is the primary-zone residence time in seconds, te is the 
fuel evaporation time, and ~xP/P is the nondimensional liner 
pressure drop. An interesting feature of this equation is that it 
includes a term, t,, to account for the effects of fuel drop size 
on NO, emissions. According to Eq. (25), a reduction in mean 
drop size should increase NOx emissions by reducing the time 
required for fuel evaporation. However, if combustion takes 
place under conditions where evaporation times are negligibly 
small in comparison with the total combustor residence time, 
NO, emissions can actually go down with reduction in mean 
drop size, as observed by Rink and Lefebvre (1989). 
For more information on semi-analytical equations for the 
estimation of NOn emissions from gas turbines, reference should 
be made to Becker and Perkavec (1994) and Nicol et al. (1994). 
Comparisons between these different equations for predicting 
NO, emissions from conventional combustors is prohibited by 
the fact that in some cases the units for NOn are in parts per 
million and in others grams per kilogram of fuel. These units 
cannot be interchanged unless the equivalence ratio is also 
known. However, all of these expressions for NOx provide an 
excellent fit to the experimental data employed in their deriva- 
tion. This is perhaps hardly surprising since the formation of 
NOx is largely dominated by one parameter only--the maxi- 
mum temperature in the combustion zone. 
Similar correlations to those presented above for NO~ have 
been developed for CO. One important difference stems from 
the fact that the formation of CO in the primary combustion 
zone takes appreciably longer than the time required to produce 
NO~. In consequence, the relevant temperature is not the local 
peak value adjacent to the evaporating fuel drops, but the aver- 
age value throughout the primary zone, Tpz. Also, because CO 
emissions are most important at low pressure conditions, where 
evaporation rates are relatively slow, it is necessary to reduce 
the combustion volume V~ by the volume occupied in fuel evap- 
oration V~. 
According to Lefebvre (1984) we have 
CO = 86 m Tp~ exp - (0.00345Tpz)/ 
(V~ - V,)( AP/P)°'SP 1'5 g/kg fuel 
(26) 
where V~, the volume employed in fuel evaporation, is given 
by 
Ve = 0.55mpzD o~ / ppzh~ff 
(27) 
where m~,z is the primary-zone airflow rate, Do is the Sauter 
mean diameter of the fuel spray, pp~ is the density of the primary- 
zone gas, and hee~ is the effective evaporation constant (Chin 
and Lefebvre, 1982). In this equation it is of interest to note 
that Ve is proportional to the square of the initial mean drop 
size. This highlights the importance of good atomization to the 
attainment of low CO. The ability of Eq. (26) to predict CO 
emissions from a P&W F100 and a GE F101 combustor is 
illustrated in Figs. 57 and 58, respectively. 
A similar form of expression to Eq. (26) has been derived 
by Rizk and Mongia (1994) as 
FIO0 
All Fuels 
I0 
¢1 
8 
Fig. 57 
0 
P5=370 - 1520 kPa 
q-4 -864 K 
aliA=2.8- 73 kg/s 
1.0 
2 
5 
I0 
20 
50 
CO (predicted), g/kg 
Comparison of measured and predicted values of CO 
CO = 0.18 × 109 exp(7800/Tpz)/ 
PZ(t - 0.4t~)(AP/P) °'5 g/kg fuel 
(28) 
where t~ is the fuel evaporation time. This equation exhibits a 
slightly lower dependence on combustion temperature and a 
slightly higher dependence on pressure than Eq. (26). 
Correlating parameters have also been developed for UHC 
and smoke. The interested reader is referred to Rizk and Mongia 
(1994) for the latest work. 
Numerical Models, 
The application of numerical models 
to the design of gas turbine combustors owes its origin to the 
pioneering work of several workers, prominent among whom 
are Jones and Priddin (1978), Mongia (1987), and Serag-Eldin 
and Spalding (1979). 
In recent years, the detailed representation of combustor flow 
fields made available through numerical methods has been used 
to provide some insight into the interaction of swirling and 
recirculating flows with fuel sprays and the effect of this interac- 
tion on atomization, dispersion of fuel drops, evaporation, mix- 
ing, and turbulent combustion. Mongia and co-workers, in par- 
ticular, have made extensive use of numerical methods to obtain 
a better understanding of the formation of various pollutant 
species within the combustor, while the use of computational 
combustor dynamics (CCD) to provide guidance to the combus- 
tion engineer during the design and development process has 
become an accepted practice in many gas turbine companies 
(e.g., Correa and Shyy, 1987; McGuirk and Palma, 1993; Prid- 
din and Coupland, 1986; and Sturgess, 1986). 
At the present time much of the computer modeling in gas 
turbine combustors is accomplished using versions of the 
TEACH code and the k-e turbulence model. It seems likely 
that TEACH-based codes and their derivatives, along with the 
commercially available FLUENT code, will continue to play 
useful roles for some time to come, with updates to the codes 
being made in the light of new experimental data. However, it 
must be stated that the three-dimensional comprehensive models 
now in vogue are costly in computer time and the results ob- 
tained often fall short of expectations. As Rizk and Mongia 
(1993a) have pointed out, due to the incomplete understanding 
of the various combustion processes, analytical calculations on 
practical gas turbine combustors cannot yet be considered quan- 
650 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 35 ---

5O 
20 
!'°f 
F I01 
All Fuels 
0 
O0 
P3= 586-1266 kPo 
T 3 = 464-850 K 
= 8.5-20,5 kg/s 
I I 
2 
5 
I0 
20 
50 
I00 
co (predicted), g/kg 
Fig. 58 Comparison of meas'ured and predicted values of CO for a GE 
F101 combustor 
titatively accurate. Significant advances in physical submodels, 
numerics, and in the simulation of actual hardware are needed 
to improve the predictive capability of current models (Peters, 
1988; Mongia, 1993). 
Prompted by the limitations of current CCD models, and 
encouraged by the long history of success in routine applications 
of simple correlations to combustor design and development, 
Rizk and Mongia (1986) proposed a hybrid modeling approach 
that combines comprehensive modeling with physically realistic 
and well-established expressions for estimating various im- 
portant performance parameters such as combustion efficiency, 
lean blowout limits, pattern factor, liner wall temperatures and 
gaseous pollutant emissions. This empirical/analytical approach 
to combustor design has been successfully applied to 22 gas 
turbine combustors (Mongia, 1993). It represents a logical step 
forward that could prove of great value to combustion engineers 
in providing quantitative design guidance until such time as 
new knowledge on turbulent combustion models, numerics, grid 
resolution, and boundary conditions become available for im- 
proving the accuracy of current CCD models. Examples of the 
use and application of hybrid models can be found in Rizk and 
Mongia (1986, 1993b, c, 1994). 
Concluding Remarks 
It is fortunate that the gas turbine not only offers the highest 
thermal efficiency as a prime mover for aircraft propulsion and 
power generation for the foreseeable future, but also has the 
potential for the lowest possible levels of pollutant emissions. 
Most of the drive toward more strict control of pollutant emis- 
sions from gas turbines is being directed at oxides of nitrogen 
(NOx). Low NOx levels are readily achieved by lowering the 
peak flame temperature within the combustor. The challenge is 
to keep flame temperatures down at high-power conditions with- 
out incurring unacceptable penalties in combustion performance 
when operating at low power conditions. For the immediate 
future, the introduction into service of staged combustion ap- 
pears to be most promising, despite its attendant penalties for 
the engine in terms of more complex fuel scheduling and control 
strategy. In fact, a General Electric dual-annular staged combus- 
tor has just received FAA certification on Airbus Industrie A320 
and A321 aircraft. 
At the present time, lean premixed combustion appears to be 
the only technology available for achieving sub-10 ppm NOx 
emissions in practical combustors. However, such low NOx lev- 
els can only be attained if the fuel and air supplied to the 
combustion zone are almost perfectly premixed. At high power 
conditions, where combustor inlet air temperatures can ap- 
proach 1100 K, most hydrocarbon fuels readily ignite on contact 
with air. Thus the problems of spontaneous ignition and flash- 
back need to be fully addressed before lean premixed combus- 
tion can be applied with confidence to aircraft engines. Another 
problem associated with well-mixed combustion systems is that 
of acoustic resonance, which occurs when the combustion pro- 
cess becomes coupled with the acoustics of the combustor. This 
problem could be of great importance to the future development 
of lean prernixed combustors. 
Other main contenders as ultralow-NOx combustors are the 
rich-burn, quick-quench, lean bum (RQL) and catalytic com- 
bustion concepts. The work carried out so far on various RQL 
configurations has shown that this concept has considerable 
promise for very low NOx emissions. Its future prospects depend 
largely on whether the rich combustion products emanating 
from the primary zone can be mixed with the remaining com- 
bustion air quickly enough to avoid the creation of high-temper- 
ature, NOx-forming regions. Catalytic combustors allow very 
low combustion temperatures, which ensure exceptionally low 
levels of NOx. Their main drawback is the limited life expec- 
tancy of catalysts and substrates under typical high temperature 
conditions. The use of postcatalyst combustion allows the cata- 
lytic bed to operate at lower temperatures with consequent bene- 
fits in terms of reliability and longer life. Most of the work 
now in progress is directed toward catalytic combustors for 
stationary engines. Considerable advances in high-temperature 
materials will be needed to raise their reliability to the standard 
required for aircraft engines. 
The continuing pressure to conserve fuel resources can only 
be met by raising the engine cycle efficiency. This approach 
yields an important additional bonus in the form of less COz 
but it also results in higher combustion temperatures and higher 
levels of NOx. Thus, the need to burn less fuel and thereby 
generate less CO2 is in direct conflict with the equally important 
need to reduce NOx. For the forseeable future it seems likely 
that engine pressure ratios will rise up to a maximum value of 
around 50, beyond which any further increase will depend on 
the outcome of current research and development efforts in 
ultralow NOx combustion. 
We are now entering into an area of increasing competitive- 
ness between different engine manufacturers in regard to low- 
NOx combustors. For stationary gas turbines, the attainment of 
low-NOx has become the foremost marketing issue, thus offer- 
ing important opportunities to those engine manufacturers who 
are willing to commit large resources to pollutants reduction 
programs. 
Fuel reserves are notoriously difficult to predict but, for the 
next twenty years or thereabouts, kerosine-type fuels should be 
fairly readily available for aircraft engines, while natural gas 
will continue to be the favored fuel for baseload operations of 
stationary engines. With the ultimate depletion of conventional 
hydrocarbon fuels and natural gas, oils derived from coal, 
shales, and tar sands will assume increasing importances. Such 
fuels are known to be of higher viscosity and lower volatility 
than current light-distillate fuels, thus exacerbating the problems 
of atomization and fuel prevaporization. 
Fuel preparation is of vital importance in the attainment of 
low pollutant emissions. Future advances in low-emissions 
combustion technology will demand a detailed knowledge of 
the properties and structure of the sprays produced in airblast 
and pressure atomization. The properties of prime interest in- 
clude drop size distributions, droplet and gas velocities, droplet 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 
1995, Vol. 1 "17 / 651 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 36 ---

trajectories, and droplet mass flux. Such detailed information is 
essential for the successful modeling of sprays, but the extent 
to which predictions based on spray models can be utilized in 
combustor design depends largely upon the degree to which 
they can be validated or refuted by accurate experimental data. 
This situation calls for more collaborative efforts between the 
modeling and experimentation communities. 
Although considerable insight has been gained into the inter- 
nal flow patterns and external spray characteristics of both pres- 
sure-swirl and airblast atomizers, considerable work remains to 
be done. Except for atomization occurring at impractically low 
velocities, there is still no basic method for predicting the drop 
size distributions that will result from the disintegration under 
controlled conditions of a liquid jet or sheet. It has been known 
for more than thirty years that the geometry, size, shape, and 
surface finish of the flow passages within an atomizer have a 
strong influence on the internal flow patterns and the external 
spray characteristics, but these important effects are not yet 
sufficiently well understood to form an integral part of the de- 
sign process. The widespread use of laser diagnostic techniques 
in spray characterization has created a rapidly growing data 
base that provides theoreticians and modelers with new opportu- 
nities for establishing a scientific basis for a methodical ap- 
proach to the design of fuel injectors and fuel-air mixing sys- 
tems. 
A drawback to advanced laser diagnostics and comprehensive 
modeling is that because they are both challenging and intellec- 
tually rewarding in their own right it is easy to forget that they 
are only means to an end. This author is not aware of any 
significant advance in atomizer or combustor technology that 
can be attributed to laser diagnostics or comprehensive model- 
ing. All too often these activities are pursued to the detriment 
of innovation and creativity, which are the two essential ingredi- 
ents for progress in these areas. 
Acknowledgments 
Any paper that attempts to review a given topic must neces- 
sarily draw heavily on the work of others and this paper is no 
exception in this regard. If the author's name appears more 
often than is merited by his contribution to the subject, this is 
due in large measure to his desire to recognize the valuable 
contributions made by his various co-authors of many publica- 
tions in the areas of fuel injection and gas turbine combustion, 
most of whom were his students either at Cranfield University 
in the U.K. or at Purdue University in the U.S.A. 
I would like to express my gratitude to the IGTI Gas Turbine 
Scholar Program and to Professor John Denton, the Chairman 
of the IGTI Scholar Award Review Committee, for his encour- 
agement and support during the preparation of this paper. I 
would also like to thank my friends and colleagues in the gas 
turbine combustion community for their confidence in nomi- 
nating me for this award. 
References 
Aigner, M., and Muller, G, 1993, "Second Generation Low-Emission Combus- 
tots for ABB Gas Turbines: Field Measurements With GTllN-EV," ASME 
JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 115, pp. 533- 
536. 
Altemark, D., and Knauber, R., 1987, VDI Berichte No. 645, pp. 299-311. 
Anderson, D. N., 1975, "Effects of Equivalence Ratio and Dwell Time on 
Exhaust Emissions From an Experimental Premixing Prevapodzing Burner," 
ASME Paper No. 75-GT-69. 
Anderson, S. J., Friedman, M. A., Kdll, W. V., and Kesseldng, J. P., 1982, 
"Development of a Small-Scale Catalytic Gas Turbine Combustor," ASME JOUR- 
NAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 104, pp. 52-57. 
Angello, L., and Lowe, P., 1989, "Dry Low NOx Combustion Development 
for Electric Utility Gas Turbine Applications; A Status Report," ASME Paper 
No. 89-GT-254. 
Aoyama, K., and Mandai, S., 1984, "Development of a Dry Low NOx Combus- 
tor for a 120 MW Gas Turbine," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS 
TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 106, pp. 795-800. 
Appleton, J. P., and Heywood, J. B., 1973, "The Effects of Incomplete Fuel- 
Air Mixing in a Burner on NO Formation From Nitrogen in the Air and in the 
Fuel," Fourteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion 
Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 777-786. 
Bahlmann, F. C., and Visser, B. M., 1994, "Development of a Lean-Premixed 
Two-Stage Annular Combustor for Gas Turbine Engines," ASME Paper No. 94- 
GT-405. 
Bahr, D. W., 1982, "HC and CO Emission Abatement via Selective Fuel 
Injection," ASME Paper No. 82-GT-178. 
Bahr, D. W., 1987, "Technology for the Design of High Temperature Rise 
Combustors," AIAA Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 
179-186. 
Bahr, D. W., 1991, "Aircraft Engines NOx Emissions--Abatement Progress 
and Prospects," Proceedings of Tenth International Symposium on Air-Breathing 
Engines, Nottingham, England. 
Bahr, D. W., 1992, "Aircraft Turbine Engine NOx Emission Limits--Status 
and Trends," ASME Paper No. 92-GT-415. 
Bahr, D. W., 1995, Lecture notes for short course on gas turbine combustion; 
held at the University of California, Irvine, Mar. 13-17. 
Bauckhage, K., 1988, "The Phase-Doppler Difference Method. A New Laser- 
Doppler Technique for Simultaneous Size and Velocity Measurement," Particles 
and Particle System Characterization, Vol. 5, pp. 16-22. 
Bayle-Labour6, G., 1991, "Pollutant Emissions From Aircraft Engines: a Situa- 
tion Under Control," Revue Scientifique SNECMA, 2rid ed., 
Becker, T., and Perkavec, M. A., 1994, "The Capability of Different Semiana- 
lytical Equations for Estimation of NOx Emissions of Gas Turbines," ASME 
Paper No. 94-GT-282. 
Chert, S. K., Lefebvre, A. H., and Rollbuhler, J., 1992, "Factors Influencing 
the Spray Cone Angle of Pressure-Swirl Atomizers," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGI- 
NEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 114, pp. 97-103. 
Chen, S. K., Lefebvre, A. H., and Rollbuhler, J., 1993, "Factors Influencing 
the Circumferential Liquid Distribution From Pressure-Swirl Atomizers," ASME 
JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 115, pp. 
433-438. 
Chigier, N., 1983, "Drop Size and Velocity Instrumentation," Prog. Energy 
Combust. Sci., Vol. 9, pp. 155-177. 
Chigier, N., and Stewart, G., 1984, "Particle Sizing and Spray Analysis," 
Optical Engineering, Vol. 23, No. 5, pp. 554-640. 
Chin, J. S., and Lefebvre, A. H., 1982, "Effective Values of Evaporation 
Constant for Hydrocarbon Fuel Drops," Proceedings of the 20th Automotive 
Technology Development Contractor Coordination Meeting, pp. 325-331. 
Chin, J. S., Lefebvre, A. H., and Sun, F. T.-Y., 1992, "Temperature Effects 
on Fuel Thermal Stability," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES 
AND POWER, Vol. 114, pp. 353-358. 
Chin, J. S., and Lefebvre, A. H., 1993, "Influence of Flow Conditions on 
Deposits From Heated Hydrocarbon Fuels," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING 
FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 115, pp. 433-438. 
Chin, J. S., 1994, ',An Engineering Calculation Method for Multi-component 
Stagnant Droplet Evaporation With Finite Difthsivity," ASME Paper No. 94- 
GT-440. 
Chin, J. S., 1995a, "Advanced Droplet Evaporation Model for Turbine Fuels," 
AIAA Paper No. 95-0493. 
Chin, J. S., 1995b, "An Engineering Calculation Method for Turbine Fuel 
Droplet Evaporation at Critical Conditions With Finite Liquid Diffusivity," AIAA 
Paper No. 95-0494. 
Claeys, J. P., Elward, K. M., Mick, W. J., and Symonds, R. A., 1993, "Combus- 
tion System Performance and Field Test Results of the MS7001F Gas Turbine," 
ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 115, pp. 
537-546. 
Correa, S. M., and Shyy, W., 1987, "Computational Models and Methods for 
Continuous Gaseous Turbulent Combustion," Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., Vol. 
13, pp. 249-292. 
Correa, S. M., 1991, "Lean Premixed Combustion for Gas Turbines: Review 
and Required Research," Fossil Fuel Combustion, ASME PD-Vol. 33. 
Cowell, L. H., and Larkin, M. P., 1994, "Development of a Catalytic Combus- 
tor for Industrial Gas Turbines," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-254. 
Custer, J. R., and Rizk, N. K., 1988, "Influence of Design Concept and Liquid 
Properties on Fuel Injector Performance," AIAA Journal of Propulsion and 
Power, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 378-384. 
Dalla Betta, R. A., Schlatter, J. C., Nickolas; S. G., Yee, D. K., and Shoji, 
T., 1994, "New Catalytic Combustor Technology for Very Low Emissions Gas 
Turbines," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-260. 
Davis, L. B., and Washam, R. M., 1989, "Development of a Dry Low NOw 
Combustor," ASME Paper No. 89-GT-255. 
De Corso, S. M., and Kemeny, G. A., 1957, "Effect of Ambient and Fuel 
Pressure on Nozzle Spray Angle," Trans. ASME, Vol. 79, pp. 607-615. 
Delarosa, A. B., Sankar, S. V., Wang, G., and Bachalo, W. D., 1993, "Particle 
Diagnostics and Turbulence Measurements in a Confined Isothermal Liquid 
Spray," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Wol. 
115, pp. 499-506. 
Desaulty, M., 1991, "Turbine Engine Combustor Design at SNECMA," Pro- 
ceedings of International Symposium on Air-Breathing Engines, ISABE 91-7064, 
pp. 80-90. 
Dittman, R., Feld, H. J., Samenfink, W., and Wittig, S., 1992, "Multiple Wave- 
length Extinction Technique for Particle Characterization in Dense Particle 
Clouds," Nuremburg, Germany, Preprint 2, pp. 507-518. 
652 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 37 ---

Ducourneau, F., 1974, "Inflammation Spontanee de Melanges Riches Air- 
Kerosine," Entropie, No. 59. 
Durst, F., Melling, A., and Whitelaw, J., 1981, Principles and Practice of 
Laser-Doppler Anemometry. 
Etheridge, C. J., 1994, "Mars Solo NOx Lean Premix Combustion Technology 
in Production," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-255. 
Fennimore, C. P., 1971, "Formation of Nitric Oxide in Premixed Hydrocarbon 
Flames," Thirteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion 
Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 373-380. 
Flanagan, P., Gretsingir, K., Abbasi, H. A., and Cygan, D., 1992, "Factors 
Influencing Low Emissions Combustion," ASME PD-Vol. 89, Fossil Fuels Com- 
bustion. 
Fric, T. F., 1992, "Effects of Fuel-Air Unmixedness on NO, Emissions," 
AIAA Paper No. 92-3345. 
Goodger, E. M., and Eissa, A. F. M., 1987, "Spontaneous Ignition Research; 
Review of Experimental Data," Journal of the Institute of Energy, Vol. 84, pp. 
84-89. 
Heberling, P. V., 1976, "Prompt NO Measurements at High Pressures," Six- 
teenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, 
Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 159-168. 
Hebrard, P., Trichet, P., and Bardey, X., 1991, "Experimental Investigation of 
Two-Phase Flow in the Near Field of an Airblast Atomizer," Fifth International 
Conference on Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems, Gaithersberg, MD, pp. 
669-678. 
Hebrard, P., Laverge, G., Beard, P., Donnadille, P., and Trichet, P., 1993, 
"Modelisation de las Phase Liquide dans les Chambres de Combustion," AGARD 
Conference Proceedings 536, pp. 36/1-12. 
Hilt, M. B., and Waslo, J., 1984, "Evolution of NO~ Abatement Techniques 
Through Combustor Design for Heavy-Duty Gas Turbines," ASME JOURNAL OF 
ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 106, pp. 825-832. 
Hung, W. S. Y., 1974, "Accurate Method of Predicting the Effect of Humidity 
or Injected Water on NOx Emissions From Industrial Gas Turbines," ASME 
Paper No. 74-WA/GT-6. 
Hung, W. S. Y., and Agan, D. D., 1985, "The Control of NOn and CO Emissions 
From 7-MW Gas Turbines With Water Injection as Influenced by Ambient Condi- 
tions," ASME Paper No. 85-GT-50. 
Hung, W. S. Y., 1993, "Carbon Monoxide Emissions From Gas Turbines as 
Influenced by Ambient Temperature and Turbine Load," ASME JOURNAL OF 
ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 115, No. 3, pp. 588-593. 
Jasuja, A. K., and Lefebvre, A. H., 1994, "Influence of Ambient Pressure on 
Drop Size and Velocity Distributions in Dense Sprays," Twenty-Fifth Symposium 
(International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 
XX-00. 
Jones, W. P., and Priddin, C. H., 1978, "Predictions of the Flow Field and 
Local Gas Comosition in Gas Turbine Combustors," Proceedings of the 17th 
International Symposium on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburg, 
PA, pp. 399-409. 
Joshi, N. D., Epstein, M. J., Durlak, S., Marakovits, S., and Sabla, P. E., 1994, 
"Development of a Fuel-Air Premixer for Aero-Derivative Dry Low Emissions 
Combustors," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-253. 
Kajita, S., Ohga, S., Kitajima, J., Kimura, T., and Sasaki, T., 1993, "Develop- 
ment of a Dry Low NOn Combustor for 1.5 MW Gas Turbines," ASME Paper 
No. 93-GT-393. 
Koff, B. L., 1993, "Aircraft Gas Turbine Emissions Challenge," ASME Paper 
No. 93-GT-422. 
Kumakura, H., Sasaki, M., Suzuki, D., and Ichikawa, H., 1994, "Development 
of a Low-Emission Combustor for a 100-kW Automotive Ceramic Gas Turbine," 
ASME Paper No. 94-GT-33; accepted for publication in Trans. ASME. 
Lefebvre, A. H., 1984, "Fuel Effects on Gas Turbine Combustion--Liner 
Temperature, Pattern Factor, and Pollutant Emissions," AIAA Jom~al of Aircraft, 
Vol. 21, No. 11, pp. 887-898. 
Lefebvre, A. H., 1986, "Fuel Effects on Gas Turbine Combustion," Interna- 
tional Journal of Turbo and Jet Engines, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 231-243. 
Lefebvre, A. H., Freeman, W., and Cowell, L., 1986, "Spontaneous Ignition 
Delay Characteristics of Hydrocarbon Fuel/Air Mixtures," NASA Contractor 
Report 175064. 
Lefebvre, A. H., 1989, Atomization and Sprays, Hemisphere Publishing Corp., 
New York. 
Leonard, G. L., and Correa, S. M., 1990, "NOn Formation in Lean Premixed 
High-Pressure Methane Flames," Second ASME Fossil Fuel Combustion Sympo- 
sium, ASME PD-30, pp. 69-74. 
Leonard, G., and Stegmaier, J., 1994, "Development of an Aeroderivative Gas 
Turbine Dry Low Emissions Combustion System," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGI- 
NEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 116, pp. 542-546. 
Lewis, G. D., 1991, "A New Understanding of NO~ Formation," Proceedings 
of International Symposium on Air-Breathing Engines, ISABE 91-7064, pp. 
625-629. 
Lundberg, K., 1994, Ulstein Turbine Technical Report UTU94003. 
Lyons, V. J., 1981, "Fuel-Air Non-Uniformity Effect on Nitric Oxide Emis- 
sions," AIAA Paper No. 81-0327. 
Martin, F. J., and Dederick, P. K. J., 1976, "NOt From Fuel Nitrogen in Two- 
Stage Combustion," Sixteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The 
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 191-198. 
Maughan, J. R., Luts, A., and Bautista, P. J., 1994, ' 'A Dry Low NOx Combustor 
for the MS3002 Regenerative Gas Turbine," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-252. 
McCaldon, K., Prociw, L. A., and Sampath, P., 1993, "Design Aspects for 
Small Aircraft Gas Turbine Fuel Injectors," Fuels and Combustion Technology 
for Advanced Aircraft Engines, AGARD Conference Proceedings 536, pp. 
21-t-10. 
McDonell, V. G., Lee, S. W., and Samuelson, G. S., 1994a, "Spray Behavior 
in Reacting and Non-reacting Flow Fields Downstream of an Aero-engine Com- 
bustor Dome," Twenty-Fifth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The 
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA. 
McDonell, V. G., Seay, J. E., and Samuelson, G. S., 1994b, "Characterization 
of the Non-reacting Two-Phase Flow Downstream of an Aero-engine Combustor 
Dome Operating at Realistic Conditions," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-263. 
McGuirk, J. J., and Palma, J. M. L. M., 1993, "The Flow Inside a Model Gas 
Turbine Combustor: Calculations," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS 
TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 115, pp. 594-602. 
McKnight, D., 1978, "Development of a Compact Gas Turbine Combustor to 
Give Extended Life and Acceptable Exhaust Emissions," ASME JOURNAL OF 
ENGINEERING FOR POWER, Vol. 100, July. 
McVey, J. B., Russell, S., and Kennedy, J. B., 1987, "High-Resolution Pattema- 
tor for the Characterization of Fuel Sprays," AIAA Journal of Propulsion and 
Power, Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 202-209. 
McVey, J. B., Kennedy, J. B., and Russell, S., 1989, "Application of Advanced 
Diagnostics to Airblast Injector Flows," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR 
GAS TURBINES AND POWER, VOI. 111, No. 1, pp. 53-62. 
Mellor, A. M., 1981, "Semi-empirical Correlations for Gas Turbine Emissions, 
Ignition, and Flame Stabilization," Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., Vol. 6, pp. 
347-358. 
Merryman, E. L., and Levy, A., 1975, "Nitric Oxide Formation in Flames: 
The Role of NO2 and Fuel Nitrogen," Fifteenth Symposium (International) on 
Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 1073-1083. 
Micklow, G. J., Roychoudhury, S., Nguyen, H., and Cline, M. C., 1993, "Emis- 
sions Reduction by Varying the Swirler Airflow Split in Advanced Gas Turbine 
Combustors," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, 
Vol. 115, No. 3, pp. 563-569. 
Mongia, H. C., 1987, "A Status Report on Gas Turbine Modeling," Combus- 
tion and Fuels in Gas Tarbine Engines, AGARD CPP-422. 
Mongia, H. C., 1993, "Application of CFD in Combustor Design Technology," 
AGARD Conference Proceedings 536, pp. 12/1-18. 
Mosier, S. A., and Pierce, R. M., 1980, Advanced Combustion Systems for 
Stationa~ Gas Turbine Engines, Vol. 1, EPA Contract 68-02-2136. 
Mulhns, B. P., 1955, "Spontaneous Ignition of Liquid Fuels," AGARDograph 4. 
Myers, G. D., Armstrong, J. P., White, C. D., Clouser, S., and Harvey, 
R. J., 1992, "Development of an Innovative High-Temperature Gas Turbine Fuel 
Nozzle," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 
114, pp. 401-408. 
Nakata, T., Sato, M., Ninomiya, T., Yoshine, T., and Yamada, M., 1992, 
"Design and Test of a Low-NOv Advanced Rich-Lean Combustor for LBG Fueled 
1300°C-Class Gas Turbine," ASME Paper No. 92-GT-234. 
Naqwi, A., Durst, F., and Liu, X. Z., 1991, "Optical Methods for Simultaneous 
Measurements of Particle Size, Velocity, and Refractive Index," Applied Optics, 
Vol. 30, No. 33, pp. 4949-4959. 
Nickolaus, D., and Lefebvre, A. H., 1987, "Fuel Thermal Stability Effects on 
Spray Characteristics," AIAA Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 3, No. 6, 
pp. 502-507. 
Nicol, D. G., Malte, P. C., Lai, J., Marinov, N. N., and Pratt, D. T., 1992, 
"NOx Sensitivities for Gas Turbine Engines Operated on Lean-Premixed Combus- 
tion and Conventional Diffusion Flames," ASME Paper No. 92-GT-115. 
Nicol, D. G., Malte, P. C., and Steele, R. C., 1994, "Simplified Models for 
NOw Production Rates in Lean-Premixed Combustion," ASME Paper No. 94- 
GT-432; accepted for publication in Trans. ASME. 
Novick, A. S., Troth, D. L., and Yacobucci, H. G., 1982, "Design and Prelimi- 
nary Results of a Fuel Flexible Industrial Gas Turbine Combustor," ASME JOUR- 
NAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 104, pp. 368-376. 
Odgers, J., and Kretschmer, D., 1985, "The Prediction of Thermal NOx in Gas 
Turbines," ASME Paper No. 85-1GT-126. 
Ohkubo, Y., ldota, Y., and Nomura, Y., 1994, "Evaporation Characteristics of 
Spray in a Lean Premixed-Prevaporization Combustor for a 100 kW Automotive 
Ceramic Gas Turbine," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-401. 
Ortman, J., and Lefebvre, A. H., 1985, "Fuel Distributions from Pressure-Swirl 
Atomizers," AIAA Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 11-15. 
Ozawa, Y., Fujii, T., Kikumoto, S., Sato, M., Fukuzawa, H., Saiga, M., and 
Watanabe, S., 1994a, "Development of Low NOx Catalytic Combustor for Gas 
Turbine," Proceedings of International Workshop on Catalytic Combustion, 
Tokyo, Japan, Apr. 18-20, pp. 166-169. 
Ozawa, Y., Hirano, J., Sato, M., Saiga, M., and Watanabe, S., 1994b, "Test 
Results of Low NO~ Catalytic Combustors for Gas Turbines," ASME JOURNAL 
OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Wol, 116, pp. 511-516. 
Peng, F., and Aggarwal, S. K., 1995, "A Review of Droplet Dynamics and 
Vaporization Modeling for Engineering Calculations," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGI- 
NEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 117, July. 
Peters, J. E., 1988, "Current Gas Turbine Combustion and Fuels Research and 
Development," AIAA Journal of Propulsion and Powet; Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 
193-206. 
Pierce, R. M., Smith, C. E., and Hinton, B. S., 1980, "Advanced Combustion 
Systems for Stationary Gas Turbine Engines," Vol. III, EPA Contract 
68-02-2136. 
Plee, S. L., and Mellor, A. M., 1978, "Review of Flashback Reported in 
Prevaporizing Premixing Combustors," Combustion and Flame, Vol. 32, pp. 
193-203. 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 653 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 38 ---

Poeschl, G., Ruhkamp, W., and Pfost, H., 1994, "Combustion With Low Pollut- 
ant Emissions of Liquid Fuels in Gas Turbines by Premixing and Prevaporiza- 
tion," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-443. 
Priddin, C. H., and Coupland, J., 1986, "Impact of Numerical Methods on 
Gas Turbine Combustor Design and Development," in: Calculation of Turbulent 
Reacting Flows, R. M. C. So, J. H. Whitelaw, and H. C. Mongia, eds., ASME 
AMD-Vol. 81, pp. 335-348. 
Rao, K. V. L., and Lefebvre, A. H., 1981, "Spontaneous Ignition Delay Times 
of Hydrocarbon Fuel-Air Mixtures," First International Specialist Combustion 
Symposium, Bordeaux, France, pp. 325-330. 
Reeves, C. M., and Lefebvre, A. H., 1986, "Fuel Effects on Aircraft Combustor 
Emissions," ASME Paper No. 86-GT-212. 
Rink, K. K., and Lefebvre, A. H., 1989a, "Influence of Fuel Drop Size and 
Combustor Operating Conditions on Pollutant Emissions," International Journal 
of Turbo and Jet Engines, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp. 113-122. 
Rink, K. K., and I_.efebvre, A. H., 1989b, "The Influences of Fuel Composition 
and Spray Characteristics on Nitric Oxide Formation," Combust. Sci. and Tech., 
Vol. 68, pp. 1-14. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1986, "Gas Turbine Combustor Design Meth- 
odology," AIAA Paper No. 86-1531. 
Rizk, N. K., and Lefebvre, A. H., 1987, "Prediction of Velocity Coefficient 
and Spray Cone Angle for Simplex Swirl Atomizers," International Journal of 
Turbo and Jet Engines, Vol. 4, pp. 65-73. 
Rizk, N. K., Mostafa, A. A., and Mongia, H. C., 1987, "Modeling of Gas 
Turbine Fuel Nozzles," Atomization and Spray Technology, Vol. 3, pp. 
241-260. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1990, "Three-Dimensional Combustor Perfor- 
mance Validation With High-Density Fuels," AIAA Journal of Propulsion and 
Power, Vol. 6, No. 5, pp. 660-667. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1991a, "Low NOx Rich-Lean Combustion 
Concept Application," AIAA Paper No. 91-1962. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1991b, "A Three-Dimensional Analysis of 
Gas Turbine Combustors," AIAA Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 7, No. 
3, pp. 445-451. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1991c, "Gas Turbine Combustor Performance 
Evaluation," AIAA Paper No. 91-0640. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1992a, "Semi-analytical Fuel Injector Perfor- 
mance Correlation Approach," International Journal of Turbo and Jet Engines, 
Voh 9, pp. 205-213. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1992b, "Calculation Approach Validation for 
Airblast Atomizers," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND 
POWER, Vol. 114, pp. 386-393. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1993a, "Three-Dimensional NOv Model for 
Rich-Lean Combustor," AIAA Paper No. 93-0251. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1993b, "Three-Dimensional Emission Model- 
ing for Diffusion Flame, Rich-Lean, and Lean Gas Turbine Combustors," AIAA 
Paper No. 93-2338. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1993c, "Three-Dimensional Gas Turbine 
Combustor Emissions Modeling," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS 
TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 115, No. 3, pp. 603-611. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1993d, "Semianalytical Correlations for NOx, 
CO, and UHC Emissions," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES 
AND POWER, Vol. 115, No. 3, pp. 612-619. 
Rizk, N. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1994, "Emissions Predictions of Different 
Gas Turbine Combustors," AIAA Paper No. 94-0118. 
Roberts, P. B., Kubasco, A. J., and Sekas, N. J., 1982, "Development of a 
Low NOx Lean Premixed Annular Combustor," AS ME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING 
FOR POWER, Vol. 104, pp. 28-35. 
Rokke, N. A., Hustad, J. E., and Berg, S., 1993, "Pollutant Emissions From 
Gas Fired Turbine Engines in Offshore Practice--Measurements and Scaling," 
ASME Paper No. 93-GT-170. 
Rosin, P., and Rammler, E., 1933, "The Laws Governing the Fineness of 
Powdered Coal," J. Inst. Fuel, Vol. 7, No. 31, pp. 29-36. 
Santangello, P. J., and Sojka, P. E., 1994, "Focused-Image Holography as a 
Dense Spray Diagnostic," Applied Optics, Vol. 93, No. 19, pp. 4132-4136. 
Santavicca, D. A., Steinberger, D. L., Gibbons, K. A., Citeno, J. V., and Mills, 
S., 1993, "The Effect of Incomplete Fuel-Air Mixing on the Lean Limit and 
Emissions Characteristics of a Lean Prevaporized Premixed (LPP) Combustor," 
AGARD Conference Proceedings 536, pp. 22/1-12. 
Sasaki, M., Kumakura, H., and Suzuki, D., 1991, "Low NOt Combustor for 
Automotive Ceramic Gas Turbine--Conceptual Design," ASME Paper No. 91- 
GT-369. 
Sattelmayer, Th., Felchlin, M. P., Haumann, J., Hellat, J., and Styner, D., 1992, 
"Second Generation Low-Emissions Combustors for ABB Gas Turbines: Burner 
Development and Tests at Atmospheric Pressure," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGI- 
NEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 114, No. 1, pp. 118-125. 
Seaton, A., MacNee, W., Donaldson, K., and Godden, E., 1995, "Particulate 
Air Pollution and Acute Health Effects," Lancet, Vol. 345, pp. 176-178. 
Segalman, I., McKinney, R. G., Sturgess, G. J., and Huang, L. M., 1993, 
"Reduction of NOx by Fuel-Staging in Gas Turbine Engines--A Commitment 
to the Future," AGARD Conference Proceedings 536, pp. 29/1-17. 
Semerjian, H. G., Ball, I. C., and Vranos, A., 1979, "Pollutant Emissions From 
Partially Mixed Turbulent Flames," Seventeenth Symposium (International) on 
Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 679-687. 
Senior, P., Lutum, E., Polifke, W., and Sattelmayer, T., 1993, "Combustion 
Technology of the ABB GT13E2 Annular Combustor," 20th International Con- 
gress on Combustion Engines, CIMAC, London, Paper No. G22. 
Serag-Eldin, M. A., and Spalding, D. B., 1979, "Computation of Three-Dimen- 
sional Gas Turbine Combustion Chamber Flows," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGI- 
NEERING FOR POWER, Vol. 101, pp. 326-336. 
Shaw, R. J., Gilkey, S., and Hines, R., 1994, "Engine Technology Challenges 
for a 21st Century High Speed Civil Transport," IGT1 Global Gas Turbine News, 
Fall 1994, pp. 14-16. 
Singh, R., 1994, "An Overview: Gas Turbine Generated Pollutants and the 
Emerging Technology Solutions," Keynote paper presented at The Gas Turbine 
Users Association 39th Annual Conference, Caracas, Venezuala, July. 
Smith, K. O., Angello, L. C., and Kurzynske, F. R., 1986, "Design and Testing 
of an Ultra-low NOx Gas Turbine Combustor," ASME Paper 86-GT-263. 
Smith, K. O., and Cowell, L. H., 1989, "Experimental Evaluation of a Liquid- 
Fueled, Lean-Premixed Gas Turbine Combustor," ASME Paper No. 89-GT-264. 
Smith, K. O., Holsapple, A. C., Mak, H. H., and Watkins, L., 1991, "Develop- 
ment of a Natural Gas-Fired, Ultra-Low NO~ Can Combustor for an 800 kW Gas 
Turbine," ASME Paper No. 91-GT-303. 
Snyder, T. S., Rosfjord, T. J., McVey, J. B., and Chiappetta, L. M., 1994, 
"Comparison of Liquid Fuel/Air Mixing and NOr Emissions for a Tangential 
Entry Nozzle," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-283. 
Spadaccini, L. J., and Te Velde, J. A., 1980, "Autoignition Characteristics of 
Aircraft-Type Fuels," NASA Contractor Report 159886. 
Steele, R. C., Jarrett, A. C., Malte, P. C., Tonouchi, J. H., and Nicol, 
D. G., 1995, "Variables Affecting NO~ Formation in Lean-Premixed Combus- 
tion," ASME Paper No. 95-GT-107; accepted for publication in Trans. ASME. 
Stickles, R. W., Dodds, W. J., Koblish, T. R., Sager, J., and Clouser, S., 1993, 
"Innovative High-Temperature Aircraft Engine Fuel Nozzle Design," ASME 
JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 115, pp. 
439-446. 
Sturgess, G. J., 1986, "Calculations of Aerospace Propulsion Combustors: A 
View From Industry," Calculation of Turbulent Reactive Flows, R. M. C. So, 
J. H. Whitelaw, and H. C. Mongia, eds., ASME AMD-Vol. 81, pp. 185-231. 
Sturgess, G. J., McKinney, R., and Morford, S. A., 1993, "Modification of 
Combustor Stoichiometry Distribution for Reduced NOx Emission From Aircraft 
Engines," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 
115, pp. 570-580. 
Sultanian, B. K., and Mongia, H. C., 1986, "Fuel Nozzle Air Flow Modeling," 
AIAA Paper No. 86-1667. 
Tacina, R. R., 1983, "Autoignition in a Premixing-Prevaporizing Fuel Duct 
Using Three Different Fuel Injection Systems at Inlet Air Temperatures to 
1250K," NASA TM-83938. 
Talpallikar, M. V., Smith, C. E., Lai, M. C., and Holdeman, J. D., 1992, "CFD 
Analysis of Jet Mixing in Low NOx Flametube Combustors," ASME JOURNAL 
OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Vol. 114, pp. 416-424. 
Tate, R. W., 1960, "Spray Patternation," Ind. Eng. Chem., Vol. 52, No. 10, 
pp. 49-52. 
Valk, M., 1994, Private Communication. 
Vortmeyer, N., Valk, M., and Kappler, G., 1994, "A Catalytic Combustor for 
High-Temperature Gas Turbines," ASME Paper No. 94-GT-211; accepted for 
publication in Trans. ASME. 
Wang, H. Y., McDonell, V. G., and Samuelson, G. S., 1992a, "The Two-Phase 
Flow Downstream of a Production Engine Combustor Swirl Cup," Twenty-Fourth 
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 
PA, pp. 1457-1463. 
Wang, H. Y., McDonell, V. G., Sowa, W. A., and Samuelson, G. S., 1992b, 
"Scaling of the Two-Phase Flow Downstream of a Gas Turbine Combustor Swirl 
Cup," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, Wol. 
115, pp. 453-460. 
Wang, H. Y., McDonell, V. G., Sowa, W. A., and Samuelson, G. S., 1994, 
"Experimental Study of a Model Gas Turbine Combustor Swirl Cup, Part II: 
Droplet Dynamics," AIAA Journal of Propulsion and Power. 
Wang, H. Y., McDonell, V. G., and Samuelson, G. S., 1995, "Influence of 
Hardware Design on the Flow Field Structures and the Patterns of Droplet Disper- 
sion: Part I--Mean Quantities," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TUR- 
BINES AND POWER, Vol. 117, pp. 282-289. 
White, D. J., Batakis, A, Le Cren, R. T., and Yacabucci, H. G., 1982, "Low 
NO~ Combustion Systems for Burning Heavy Residual Fuels and High Fuel- 
Bound Nitrogen Fuels," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES 
AND POWER, Vol. 104, pp. 377-385. 
Wilkes, C., 1980, "Residual Fuel Combustion in Industrial Gas Turbines," 
in: A. H. Lefebvre, ed., Gas Turbine Combustor Design Problems, Hemisphere 
Publications, New York. 
Wilkes, C., and Gerhold, B., 1980. "NOx Reduction From a Gas Turbine Using 
Exhaust Gas Recirculation," ASME Paper No. 80-JPGC/GT-5. 
Willis, J. D., Teen, I. J., Schweiger, T., and Owen, D. A., 1993, "Industrial 
RB211 Dry Low Emission Combustion System," ASME Paper No. 93-GT-391. 
Wolfer, H. H., 1938, "Der Zundverzug im Dieselmotor," V.D.L Forschungsh, 
Vol. 392, pp. 15-24. 
Wynne, A., and Jasuja, A., 1991, "Visualization of Airblast Atomizer Spray 
Structure Under Varying Air Pressure Conditions," AIAA Paper No. 91-2199. 
Zelina, J., and Ballal, D. R., 1994, "Combustion Studies in a Well-Stirred 
Reactor," AIAA Paper No. 94-0114. 
654 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded 22 Dec 2009 to 129.137.98.110. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
