
--- Page 1 ---

Simon G€overt1
Combustor Department,
Institute of Propulsion Technology,
German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Cologne 51147, Germany
e-mail: simon.goevert@dlr.de
Johannes Berger
Combustor Department,
Institute of Propulsion Technology,
German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Cologne 51147, Germany
Jonathan Timo Lipkowicz
Combustor Department,
Institute of Propulsion Technology,
German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Cologne 51147, Germany
Thomas Soworka
Combustor Department,
Institute of Propulsion Technology,
German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Cologne 51147, Germany
Christoph Hassa
Combustor Department,
Institute of Propulsion Technology,
German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Cologne 51147, Germany
Thomas Behrendt
Combustor Department,
Institute of Propulsion Technology,
German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Cologne 51147, Germany
Bertram Janus
Combustor Department,
Institute of Propulsion Technology,
German Aerospace Center (DLR),
Cologne 51147, Germany
Experimental and Numerical
Investigation of Hydrogen
Combustion in a Dual-Swirl
Burner for Aero-Engine
Applications
Green hydrogen produced by electrolysis offers a high potential for reducing CO2 emissions
and thus represents a promising approach for the decarbonization of aviation. However,
propulsion systems based on direct hydrogen combustion require modiﬁed fuel injectors and
combustion chambers to account for the particular combustion characteristics of hydrogen.
Engineering those modiﬁcations requires the acquisition of experimental and numerical
tools especially suited for this task and in the end validating them in a suitable environment.
In this context, hydrogen combustion and its numerical simulation are presented with a dual-
swirl burner in an optically accessible atmospheric combustor as an intermediate step. To
ensure safe operation and to reduce the risk of ﬂashback, fuel and air are injected
nonpremixed. Good ﬂame stability and mixing, which leads to potentially low NOx values, is
achieved by introducing a swirling motion into the ﬂows. In this study, the combustor is
operated under atmospheric pressure at a globally lean equivalence ratio. Measurements of
OH* radical chemiluminescence as well as infrared (IR) radiation as marker of the hot water
vapor distribution have been carried out to identify the ﬂame location and shape. The
conﬁguration is further analyzed by means of reacting large-eddy-simulations (LES). The
comparison of the simulation results with the experimental reference data shows that the
ﬂame lift of height and global ﬂame spread are correctly predicted by the simulation for both
operating conditions. However, the combustion model does not precisely capture the ﬂame
stabilization mechanism, leading to a radial offset of the ﬂame front.
[DOI: 10.1115/1.4065925]
Keywords: hydrogen combustion, swirl stabilized ﬂames, optical measurements, numerical
modeling
1
Introduction
In the face of the climate crisis, greenhouse gas emissions must be
reduced across all sectors. Reducing emissions from aviation is
particularly challenging because solutions which add weight or
volume directly reduce system efﬁciency. In this context, direct
combustion of hydrogen is one of the promising concepts to
decarbonize aircraft engine propulsion systems. The use of green
hydrogen produced by electrolysis using renewable energy
completely eliminates direct carbon dioxide emissions. Although
hydrogen has a high gravimetric energy density, its volumetric
energy density is low. This poses signiﬁcant challenges for the
technical infrastructure and, in particular, the storage of hydrogen on
board of an aircraft [1]. Despite these unresolved challenges,
hydrogen offers the potential to replace hydrocarbon fuels,
particularly for short- and medium-range applications.
In addition to fuel handling challenges, fundamental combustion
system adjustments are expected due to the unique properties of
hydrogen. The combustion characteristics of hydrogen, such as
stoichiometric ﬂame temperature, ﬂammability limits, and ﬂame
Turbo Expo June 24–28, 2024. GT2024.
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received June 20, 2024; ﬁnal manuscript received July 3, 2024;
published online August 16, 2024. Editor: Jerzy T. Sawicki.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2024, Vol. 146 / 111013-1
Copyright V
C 2024 by ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 2 ---

speed, differ signiﬁcantly from those of commonly used hydro-
carbon fuels [2]. The higher stoichiometric ﬂame temperature of
hydrogen may result in higher peak temperatures and therefore
higher nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions and higher thermal loads,
although the exit temperature would be similar for the same thermal
output. Hydrogen’s high reactivity, and therefore higher ﬂame
speed, results in compact ﬂames and increases the risk of ﬂashback.
On the other hand, hydrogen has the potential to even reduce NOx
emissions compared to hydrocarbon fuels [3]. The very wide
ﬂammability range reduces the risk of ﬂame extinction and allows
safe operation at conditions far away from stoichiometry. Fur-
thermore, the compact ﬂames offer the potential to reduce the size of
the combustion chamber and the residence time in the hot primary
zone. A side effect of smaller combustion chambers is a reduced
demand of cooling air due to less heat loaded surfaces.
Thus, the performance of future hydrogen propulsion systems is
highly dependent on the speciﬁc design of the combustion system.
Therefore, the exploration of a limited variety of approaches might
be needed to arrive at the best solutions. Furthermore, a better
understanding of the speciﬁc characteristics of hydrogen combus-
tion and its impact on aero combustor design is needed. In this
context, hydrogen combustion and its numerical simulation are
investigated in this work with a dual-swirl burner in an optically
accessible atmospheric combustor.
Several decades ago, the use of hydrogen in aircraft engines led to
a series of investigations [4,5]. These early explorations were
primarily motivated by the threatened depletion of fossil fuels. With
the need for decarbonization of the aviation industry, this topic is
more relevant now than ever. Despite these early works, the use of
hydrogen in aircraft engines is still a relatively new area of research.
In comparison, considerable work has been carried out on the use of
hydrogen and fuel blends (e.g., with natural gas)in ground-based gas
turbines [6]. The limiting factors for combustion of pure hydrogen in
typically premixed dry low-NOx combustors are ﬂashback and
thermoacoustic instabilities. Diffusion burners of industrial gas
turbines have been operated with pure hydrogen, but typically
require water injection to keep the NOx emissions within limits. A
widely investigated approach are so-called micromix combustors
[7,8]. A multitude of small channels containing jet-in-crossﬂow
hydrogen injectors are clustered to achieve distributed diffusion
ﬂames, reducing NOx emissions by limiting residence time in high-
temperature regions. While this concept has recently been brought
into a commercial burnerinthe contextof stationary gasturbines [9],
the feasibility for aircraft engines and the thermoacoustic risks are
currently under investigation [10,11].
Considering the various challenges of such new developments,
adapting existing concepts seems most promising for a rapid
transition to pure hydrogen combustion in aviation. Conventional
aero-engine combustion systems rely on swirling ﬂow for ﬂame
stabilization and separate injection of fuel and air to prevent
ﬂashback. While previous studies have operated several swirl burner
conﬁgurations with hydrogen-enriched fuels in the context of
stationary gas turbines [12,13], a large volume fraction of hydrogen
is required to signiﬁcantly alter the combustion characteristics.
However, the available literature on swirl burners running on pure
hydrogen is still very limited. A premixed conﬁguration has been
studied experimentally by Reichel et al. [14] and by means of
numerical simulation [15,16]. To the best of the authors’ knowledge,
the HYLON conﬁguration, which has been investigated both
experimentally [17,18] and numerically [19], is the only test case
in the open literature that combines swirl stabilized combustion of
pure hydrogen with separate injection of fuel and air.
The conﬁguration studied in this paper was developed in the
context of the rich–quench–lean concept. The fuel injector was
originally designed to simulate kerosene combustion with natural
gas at atmospheric conditions by producing a gas ﬁlm with mixing
properties similar to a kerosene ﬁlm. For this study, it was operated
with pure hydrogen at lean equivalence ratios.
The investigated test case operates in a partially premixed mode,
where both premixed and nonpremixed type regimes occur. The
simulation of such conﬁgurations is particularly challenging for
numerical tools. Within the framework of tabulated chemistry
combustion models, hybrid approaches based on both premixed and
nonpremixed ﬂamelets have been proposed [20,21]. For the
HYLON burner simulations, Aniello et al. [19] use a ﬁnite rate
chemistry approach with the dynamic thickened ﬂame (DTF) model
and disable ﬂame thickening in nonpremixed regions identiﬁed by
the Takeno ﬂame index [22]. In this paper, the introduced
conﬁguration is further analyzed using reacting large-eddy-
simulations (LES) with a standard ﬂamelet-generated manifolds
(FGM) combustion model based on premixed ﬂamelets in
combination with the DTF model. This modeling approach has
been successfully applied to the prediction of a swirling natural gas
ﬂame [23]. It should be noted that the nonpremixed regime is not
explicitly considered by either the FGM model or the DTF model,
which was developed for premixed ﬂames only. However, this work
aims to test the suitability of this standard combustion modeling
approach for predicting the combustion mode and ﬂame character-
istics in a multiregime hydrogen combustion system.
The paper is organized as follows: The experimental setup is
presented in Sec. 2, including the combustor test rig, the operating
conditions, and the optical measurement techniques. The numerical
modeling approach is described in Sec. 3. Numerical and
experimental results are presented and analyzed in Sec. 4, followed
by concluding remarks in Sec. 5.
2
Experimental Setup
This section presents the experimental setup. The burner test rig
and the operating conditions are described ﬁrst, followed by a
summary of the measurement techniques used.
2.1
Burner Test Rig. The experimental campaign was con-
ducted in the atmospheric primary zone [24,25] facility of the DLR
Institute of Propulsion Technology in Cologne, Germany. The
facility has recently been upgraded for the study of hydrogen
combustion and can be continuously supplied with up to 1.2 g/s of
hydrogen. In this test bed, a dual-swirl burner in an optically
accessible atmospheric combustion chamber is investigated. A
detailed view of the burner conﬁguration is presented in Fig. 1. The
combustion chamber cross section is hexagonal with interchange-
able wall segments. Each wall segment is 55 mm wide and 85 mm
high. The injector was originally operated with natural gas and is
used in this study for the combustion of pure hydrogen.
A sketch of the fuel and air ﬂow paths is shown in Fig. 1(a). The
preheated primary air enters the test section at the bottom. Most of
the primary air then passes through a corotating dual-swirler
conﬁguration. A smaller amount which is by-passing the burner
through small metering holes is used for convective cooling of the
heat shield and providing a thin air ﬁlm on the combustor windows.
The ﬂow path along the inner heat shield wall is equipped with small
pin ﬁns to enhance the heat transfer from heat shield to cooling air.
A rotating velocity component is imposed on the burner air by the
corotating inner and outer radial swirlers. The outer swirler diameter
is do ¼ 23.7 mm, and the inner swirler diameter is di ¼ 13.7 mm. The
air swirlers and the burner exit diffusor can be exchanged due to the
modular design of the burner. A high swirl for the outer and a low
swirl for the inner air stream combined with a cylindrical diffusor
were chosen to keep the ﬂame compact. For this ﬁrst hydrogen
campaign, a design that limits the temperature load on the walls
seemed advisable. The measured effective area of the installed
burner is 251.8 mm2.
Hydrogen at ambient temperature is supplied to the burner via a
central supply line. It then passes through a series of eight distributed
channels to a circumferential fuel plenum. From here, the hydrogen
is directed into the fuel swirler through 16 radial holes of 1 mm
diameter to ensure circumferential homogeneity. Finally, the
hydrogen is axially injected into the circumferential shear layer
between the inner and outer burner air with a corotating velocity
111013-2 / Vol. 146, NOVEMBER 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 3 ---

component. The inner and outer diameters of the annular fuel gap are
di ¼ 14.9 mm and do ¼ 17.9 mm, respectively.
Additional supply lines provide ambient air to cool the walls and
windows of the hexagonal combustion chamber. For the four metal
wall segments, the air is supplied surrounding the burner base plate
and provides convective cooling from outside the combustion
chamber. It is partially injected into the secondary zone through
dilution holes of 9 mm in diameter and partially enters the
combustion chamber just upstream of the outlet. The two
combustion windows for measurement access are supplied with
cooling air through two separate channels: An upstream supply line
injects air at the bottom of the combustion chamber where it mixes
with the heat shield cooling air to form a cooling ﬁlm along the
windows within the combustion chamber. The second channel
provides additional air to cool the downstream metal wall segment.
This air is injected into the combustion chamber through the dilution
holes as well as downstream near the outlet.
A converging section is attached to the combustion chamber
outlet to prevent any backﬂow at the outlet.
2.2
Operating Conditions. The burner is operated at atmos-
pheric pressure with a lean equivalence ratio. Two operating
conditions with different fuel mass ﬂow rates are considered in this
study, as summarized in Table 1. Keeping all other parameters
identical between the two operating conditions results in different
heat outputs and equivalence ratios. The equivalence ratios UPZ
presented in Table 1 are for the primary zone and consider only the
burner air.
The Reynolds number for both operating conditions is similar due
to the same air mass ﬂow. The Reynolds number based on the air
mass ﬂow and the outer diameter of the injector is about 55,000.
The hydrogen and the downstream cooling air are injected at an
ambient temperature of 291.65 K, while the primary air is preheated
to 376.2 K. The primary air mass ﬂow rate is 22.17 g/s, and the
combined cooling air mass ﬂow rate for the four metal wall
segments is 10.08 g/s. The cooling air mass ﬂow for the two
windows is 3.96 g/s for the cooling ﬁlm and 2.28 g/s for the
convective cooling of the downstream metal section.
2.3
Measurement Techniques. The two window segments of
the atmospheric primary zone provide optical access to the primary
zone. OH* radical chemiluminescence as well as infrared (IR)
radiation as a marker of the hot water vapor distribution have been
measured using an ultraviolet (UV) and IR camera, respectively.
The camera positions and orientations are sketched in Fig. 1(b), with
the cameras generally oriented perpendicular to the ﬂame. The UV
camera (PCO Dicam Pro, 1280  1024 pixel with 2  2 binning,
100 mm UV lens, f/2.8), which records OH* chemiluminescence in
the spectrum from 305 to 325 nm, is oriented parallel to the heat
shield and angled slightly inward to capture the burner centerline.
The infrared camera (Xenics Xeva vSWIR, 320  256 pixel InGaAs
detector with spectral range 500–1700 nm, f/2) records the spectrum
through a spectral bandpass ﬁlter with a central wavelength of
1425 nm and a full width at half maximum of 190 nm, which covers
relevant water vapor radiation bands. The optical path with windows
on both combustor sides is chosen to minimize thermal background
radiation from hot combustor walls. With this setup, approximately
half the width of the combustion chamber is covered by both
measurements. Both cameras record 400 individual line-of-sight
images, which are normalized by exposure time and averaged into a
single mean image for the presented analysis. The images are
additionally deconvoluted using the PYABEL package and the basex
method [26] to obtain center cut views. Rotational symmetry of the
ﬂame, a prerequisite forthe application of deconvolutionmethods,is
assumed to be sufﬁciently given due to the hexagonal cross section
of the combustion chamber.
The optical line-of-sight measurements are nonintrusive and
relatively simple. Spontaneous OH* emissions from ﬂames, which
are caused by excited OH* radicals returning back to a lower energy
state, are widely used as a marker of the ﬂame shape and position
[27,28]. The radiation of water vapor, as the main product of
hydrogen combustion, is expected to increase along the ﬂame.
However, as shown by Rivie`re and Souﬁani [29], the emitted
radiation not only depends on the water vapor concentration but also
Fig. 1
Burner test rig: (a) longitudinal section with illustration of the different ﬂow paths and
(b) horizontal cut with illustration of the respective camera angles (the dashed line shows the analysis
plane used in the results section for OH*)
Table 1
Operating conditions
_mH2 (g/s)
Pth (kW)
UPZ
Dp (%)
Flame A
0.498
59.8
0.895
2.991
Flame B
0.301
36.1
0.543
2.932
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2024, Vol. 146 / 111013-3
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 4 ---

temperature and pressure. Hence, the recorded intensity in the
experiment increases with concentration and temperature. The
individual effects on the emissivity are very different, and the
images recorded during the experiment must be interpreted
accordingly.
3
Simulation Setup
The burner test rig described in Sec. 2.1 is further analyzed by
means of numerical simulations. In this section, the numerical
model is summarized, followed by a description of the computa-
tional domain and boundary conditions.
3.1
Numerical Model. Large-eddy-simulations are performed
with DLR’s in-house computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) solver
TRACE. The simulations are based on the FGM combustion model
[30]. The chemistry tabulation is performed in a preprocessing step
based on adiabatic one-dimensional premixed freely propagating
ﬂames using CANTERA [31]. The hydrogen branch of the San Diego
chemical mechanism [32] has been used, which consists of 9 species
and 21 reactions. For direct comparison with the OH* radical
chemiluminescence measurements, the mechanism has been
extended with the OH* submechanism of Kathrotia et al. [33].
The coupling strategy of the isobaric FGM tabulation with the fully
compressible ﬂow solver is presented in Ref. [23].
The DTF model [34] is used to resolve the ﬂame front on the LES
mesh. The modiﬁed [35] power-law ﬂame wrinkling model of
Charlette et al. [36] is used as efﬁciency function. The intensity of
the subgrid velocity ﬂuctuations is computed as proposed in Ref.
[37]. A ﬂame sensor based on the normalized reaction progress
variable is used to limit the thickening to the ﬂame region [37]. The
number of grid points to resolve the ﬂame is set to np ¼ 5.
A unity Lewis number assumption has been made to simplify the
numerical model. Due to the high Reynolds number, turbulent
transport is expected to dominate over molecular diffusion, limiting
the inﬂuence of the Lewis number assumption on the simulation
results.
The wall-adapting local eddy-viscosity model [38] is used as the
turbulent closure for the subgrid Reynolds stresses. The numerical
discretization is based on a central kinetic energy and entropy
preserving scheme using the split form of Shima et al. [39] for the
convective ﬂuxes in combination with Burg’s unstructured
monotonic upstream-centered scheme for conservation laws
reconstruction [40] and the limiter function of Venkatakrishnan
[41]. Upwind ﬂuxes are used for the convection of reactive scalars
and the internal energy to limit total variation. The
Jameson–Schmidt–Turkel matrix-valued artiﬁcial dissipation
model [42,43] is applied to stabilize the solution. Further details
on the numerical discretization can be found in Ref. [44]. The least-
squares fully augmented approach described in Ref. [45] is used to
calculate cell centered gradients, while the derivatives for the
viscous ﬂuxes are computed based on the face neighboring cell
gradients with the face-tangent augmentation outlined in Ref. [46].
A third-order accurate explicit Runge–Kutta method is used for time
integration.
3.2
Simulation Setup. The geometric complexity of the burner
test rig presented in Sec. 2.1 has been slightly reduced to perform the
numerical simulations. The derived computational domain with the
different boundary patches is presented in Fig. 2(a). While the air
and fuel plenum are included in the computational domain, the
secondary ﬂow paths of the cooling air are not explicitly resolved by
the simulation, but are replaced by equivalent boundary conditions.
Speciﬁcally, the boundary conditions for the simulation are deﬁned
as follows: The air mass ﬂow throughthe burner (injected at the main
air inlet in Fig. 2(a)) is calculated from the measured primary air
mass ﬂow and the burner effective area determined in a preceding
measurement. The remaining primary air is used for convective
cooling of the heat shield in the measurements. The ﬂow path along
the inner heat shield walls is not included in the computational
domain but the respective mass ﬂow is injected through horizontal
boundary patches at the side walls of the combustor (heat shield and
window cooling air inlet patches in Fig. 2(a)). At the window
segments, additional cooling air is injected upstream of the glass
windows, and the additional mass ﬂow is added to the respective
heat shield air boundary patches. The cooling air that is used to cool
the outer chamber walls is introduced through additional boundary
patches (dilution air inlet and downstream cooling air inlet patches
in Fig. 2(a)). The mass ﬂow split between the dilution ports and the
cooling inlets at the combustion chamber exit is approximated based
on their area ratio. In general, downstream air injection has little
effect on the primary zone. The combined mass ﬂows for all four
metal and two window segments have been recorded during the
experiments. The mass ﬂow is evenly distributed among the
different wall segments and prescribed as boundary conditions in
the simulations. The direction vector at the dilution ports is assumed
to be 45 deg with respect to the horizontal plane and prescribed at the
boundary accordingly.
The mass ﬂow rates and temperatures prescribed at the different
boundaries are summarized in Table 2. Atmospheric static pressure
is prescribed at the outlet. While mass ﬂow rate boundary conditions
are used for cooling air and fuel inlet, nonreﬂecting boundary
conditions [23,47] are used at the air inlet and the outlet. All solid
walls are modeled as adiabatic boundaries in combination with the
wall functions of Reichardt [48].
The computational domain is discretized using an unstructured
tetrahedral mesh with about 19.1  106 cells. The mesh is reﬁned in
the swirler, fuel supply, and ﬂame region as shown in Fig. 2(b). The
cell size in this region based on the cells’ edge length is 0.5 mm.
A constant time-step of 1:5  108 s is used. To ensure a
converged solution, the simulations were run for about 30 ms before
the statistics were collected, corresponding to four ﬂow times of the
combustionchamber.Statisticswerethencollectedforanother30 ms.
4
Results
In this section, the ability of the numerical model to predict the
ﬂame position and shape is ﬁrst evaluated by comparison with the
measurements. Then, the two operating conditions are further
analyzed based on the simulation results. Finally, the ﬂame index is
used to determine the different ﬂame regimes predicted by the
simulations.
4.1
Comparison of Experiments and Simulations. The dis-
tributions of OH* radicals and hot water vapor radiation in the ﬂame
are available from the experiments. These measurements are used
below to validate the numerical simulations.
4.1.1
OH* Radical Chemiluminescence. The OH* radical
distribution can be used as a marker of the ﬂame. It is therefore
often compared with the heat release rate (HRR), which is easily
obtained from CFD simulations. In this work, an OH* submechan-
ism was additionally used to allow a direct comparison with the
experiments. The mean distribution of normalized HRR and OH*
obtained from the simulation is shown in Fig. 3 for ﬂame A. To avoid
any asymmetry inﬂuence, the simulation results are mirrored at the
burner axis. The distributions for the two variables are almost
identical, which indicates that both of them can be used as a ﬂame
marker under the current conditions.
The primary zone of ﬂames A and B is shown in Fig. 4. The mean
normalized OH* mass fractions from the simulation results are
compared to the mean normalized OH* distribution from measure-
ments to analyze the ﬂame shape and position predicted by the
simulation. In the top ﬁgures, the Abel deconvoluted OH* are
compared with the OH* mass fractions extracted on the analysis
plane shown in Fig. 1(b). To assess the inﬂuence of the Abel
deconvolution, the unprocessed measurement results are compared
to line-of-sight integrated simulation results in the bottom ﬁgures.
Additionally, corresponding proﬁles at different axial heights above
the burner exit plane are shown in Fig. 5 to allow for a more detailed
111013-4 / Vol. 146, NOVEMBER 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 5 ---

comparison. In addition to the normalized OH* mass fractions, the
simulated normalized HRR proﬁles are also included.
A lifted ﬂame is observed for both operating conditions and
correctly predicted by the simulations. In agreement with the
experiments, the lift off height is slightly larger for the richer ﬂame
A. The global ﬂame spread is reasonably well predicted by the
simulations for both operating conditions.
Two reaction fronts can be identiﬁed for ﬂame A: an inner front at
the height of the burner exit plane and a lateral ﬂame front further
downstream. Both ﬂame fronts are also predicted by the simulation,
although the simulation does not predict an OH* maximum in the
lateral ﬂame front. The most signiﬁcant difference between
simulation and experiment is the different radial position of the
inner ﬂame front. While the ﬂame front in the experiments is radially
aligned with the inner wall of the fuel injector, the maximum OH* is
predicted on the central burner axis in the simulation, indicating the
ﬂame stabilization at this location. In contrast, the experiments show
no signiﬁcant values on the centerline.
In agreement with the experimental data, the simulation of ﬂame
B stabilizes further upstream, and the ﬂame front is located slightly
inside the diffusor. The lateral ﬂame front observed for ﬂame A
almost entirely vanished for ﬂame B. While it is also signiﬁcantly
reduced in the simulation, it is still more pronounced compared to
the measurements. Similar to ﬂame A, the radial position of the
ﬂame front differs between simulation and experiments. As already
observed for ﬂame A, the ﬂame is radially aligned withthe inner wall
of the fuel injector in the experiments, while it anchors on the central
burner axis in the simulation.
The differences in the ﬂame location between simulation and
experiments indicate that the exact ﬂame stabilization is difﬁcult to
predict with the combustion model used in this work. The ﬂame front
in the experiments is radially aligned with the mixing layer between
inner air swirler and the fuel supply, which indicates a diffusion
ﬂame regime, that has not been captured by the simulation.
4.1.2
Hot Water Vapor Distribution. Infrared radiation as a
marker of the hot water vapor distribution has been recorded using
an IR camera. Since no corresponding quantity is directly available
from the LES, the statistical band model parameters described in
Ref. [29] are used to compute a lookup table for water vapor
radiation in the spectral range of the ﬁlter, depending on temperature
and water vapor mole fraction. The radiation intensity is then
postprocessed from the simulation results using the lookup table.
The normalized radiation values of simulation and measurement are
compared in Fig. 6. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the water vapor radiation
is measured and analyzed on a different plane compared to the OH*
radical chemiluminescence.
For both operating conditions, the maximum hot water vapor
radiation is observed on the centerline. In general, hot water vapor
radiation occurs in regions where high H2O concentrations coincide
with high temperatures and can therefore be used as a marker of the
postﬂame region. In this respect, the hot water vapor distributions
conﬁrm the observations from the OH* radical chemiluminescence
presented in Sec. 4.1.1. While the general agreement between
Fig. 2
Computational domain: (a) longitudinal section of the computational domain with highlighted boundary condition
locations and (b) cell sizes of the computational mesh
Table 2
CFD boundary conditions
Boundary
_m (g/s)
T (K)
Air inlet
20.87
376.2
Fuel inlet
0.498/0.301
291.6
Metal segments
Heat shield air
0.217
376.2
Dilution air
1.034
291.6
Exit air
1.486
291.6
Window segments
Heat shield air
2.198
320.4
Dilution air
0.467
291.6
Exit air
0.671
291.6
Fig. 3
Comparison of mean normalized heat release rate (left)
and OH* (right) from the CFD simulation for ﬂame A
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2024, Vol. 146 / 111013-5
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 6 ---

simulations and experiments is fairly good at downstream locations,
differences can be found close to the burner exit plane due to the
different radial position of the ﬂame front. Since the ﬂame is radially
aligned with the fuel injector in the experiments, hot water vapor
radiation occurs on the central axis already at the burner exit plane.
In contrast, the simulations predict the ﬂame front at the centerline,
and consequently the hot water vapor radiation as an indicator of the
postﬂame region occurs further downstream.
4.1.3
Pressure Loss. The pressure loss over the burner has been
measured in the experiments using a pressure sensor in the plenum
and in the combustion chamber at a wall downstream of the dilution
ports. The pressure loss represents the relative differential pressure
between these two measurement locations. In Table 3, the pressure
losses from the mean LES ﬁelds are compared to the experimental
data. The simulation overestimates the pressure losses for both
operating conditions by 15.9%. Capturing the pressure loss with
numerical simulations is generally nontrivial and would require
signiﬁcant mesh reﬁnement in the swirler. However, Aniello et al.
[19] observed a similar overestimation for a hydrogen swirl burner,
even with a signiﬁcantly ﬁner mesh. Additional to the uncertainties
associated with the numerical modeling itself, the pressure loss is
directly linked to the air mass ﬂow at the inlet boundary condition.
This mass ﬂow has been derived based on the effective area, which
has been measured separately under cold conditions. Deviations of
the selective laser melting manufactured burner and the computer
aided design model used for the simulation represent an additional
uncertainty. However, the small difference between the two
operating conditions (the pressure losses between the two ﬂames
differ by about 2%) has been correctly reproduced by the simulation.
Considering the good prediction of the ﬂame lift of height and ﬂame
spread, the deviations in pressure loss are considered tolerable.
4.2
Comparison of Operating Conditions. In this section, the
simulation results are further analyzed by comparison of the two
operating conditions. Different mean ﬁelds are presented in Fig. 7
using the same plane as for the OH* comparison in Sec. 4.1.1. In
each ﬁgure, ﬂame A is on the left, while ﬂame B is on the right-hand
side. The plane has been mirrored at the burner axis for ﬂame A to
avoid any asymmetry inﬂuence.
In Fig. 7(a), the normalized heat release rate is presented. Zero
axial velocity isocontours (Ux ¼ 0) indicate the recirculation zones.
Isocontours of mixture fraction mark stoichiometry (Ust) as well as
lean (Ulean) and rich (Urich) ﬂammability limits according to the
chemistry tabulation. Both ﬂames are lifted above the burner due to
an aerodynamic stabilization. The ﬂame lift off results in an axial
distance between the hydrogen injector lip and the ﬂame front and
Fig. 4
Comparison of mean normalized OH* from simulations (left) and measurements (right): (a) ﬂame A and (b) ﬂame B. Top:
Abel deconvoluted OH* measurement versus OH* on simulation plane, bottom: unprocessed OH* measurement versus line-of-
sight integrated OH* from simulation. The dashed lines in the top left ﬁgure indicate the positions for the proﬁles in Fig. 5.
111013-6 / Vol. 146, NOVEMBER 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 7 ---

thereby enables some mixing of hydrogen and air prior to
combustion. Mixing between fuel and air is further enhanced by a
large difference in axial and radial (not shown) velocities and
density between fuel and air streams. The mean heat release for the
globally leaner ﬂame B is almost entirely within the lean branch. For
ﬂame A, the locally rich region extends signiﬁcantly further
downstream and covers a substantial part of the heat release region.
The reduction of the lateral ﬂame front for ﬂame B can be associated
with the lower equivalence ratio in this region. While it is close to
stoichiometry for ﬂame A, it is close to the lean ﬂammability limit
for ﬂame B.
Despite the higher global equivalence ratio, ﬂame A anchors
slightly further downstream than ﬂame B. This appears to be related
to the different relative velocity between the fuel and the inner air
stream. This can be further analyzed using the axial velocity
presented in Fig. 7(b). Due to the same air mass ﬂow, the overall ﬂow
ﬁeld is similar in both conﬁgurations. However, the lower hydrogen
mass ﬂow rate for ﬂame B leads to a lower fuel velocity and
consequently a larger velocity difference between fuel and air
stream. This difference enhances the turbulent transport of the
hydrogen into the central swirling air jet. Consequently, the lean
mixture fraction limit in Fig. 7(a) is located further upstream for
ﬂame B. This is also conﬁrmed by the hydrogen mass fraction
distribution presented in Fig. 7(d).
The ﬂow slightly opens up at the combustion chamber entrance
due to the induced swirl. Thereby, a narrow central recirculation
Fig. 5
Proﬁles of mean normalized OH* and HRR from simulations and mean normalized OH* from measurements: (a) ﬂame A
and(b) ﬂameB. Leftcolumns:Abeldeconvoluted OH* measurement versusOH* on simulationplane, rightcolumns:unprocessed
OH* measurement versus line-of-sight integrated OH* from simulation.
Fig. 6
Comparison of mean normalized water vapor radiation intensity from simulations and experiments: (a) ﬂame A and
(b) ﬂame B
Table 3
Pressure loss Dp (%)
Experiments
Simulation
Flame A
2.991
3.467
Flame B
2.932
3.398
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2024, Vol. 146 / 111013-7
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 8 ---

zone is formed in the diffusor. A less pronounced outer recirculation
zone is observed in the combustion chamber. While the axial
velocity is similar in the air swirlers, signiﬁcantly larger values
occur in the fuel supply of ﬂame A due to the larger hydrogen mass
ﬂow rate. Further differences can be identiﬁed for the central
recirculation zone. While the axial extension of the central
recirculation zone is very similar for both conditions, the radial
spread is slightly larger for ﬂame B, combined with higher negative
values. A larger spread, and consequently enhanced central
recirculation, might be suppressed for ﬂame A by the higher axial
momentum of the fuel stream.
The mean temperature is presented in Fig. 7(c). The highest
temperatures are observed on the burner axis downstream of the
central recirculation zone. The temperatures are overall lower for
ﬂame B due to the leaner equivalence ratio and consequently lower
thermal power. The temperature increase on the burner axis is
located further upstream for ﬂame B due to the different axial ﬂame
location as described above. At the upstream corner of the
Fig. 7
Comparison of mean ﬁelds for ﬂame A (left) and ﬂame B (right): (a) normalized heat release rate with
isocontours of zero axial velocity and lean, rich, stoichiometric mixture fraction, (b) axial velocity with
isocontour of zero axial velocity, (c) temperature, and (d) H2 mass fraction
111013-8 / Vol. 146, NOVEMBER 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 9 ---

combustion chamber and the downstream dilution ports, the reduced
temperature due to the cooling air injection is clearly visible.
Although not strictly transferable due to the different ﬂame
stabilization, the velocity ﬁelds predicted by the simulation can be
used to further analyze the ﬂame stabilization of the experiments.
When the OH* radical chemiluminescence results are mapped onto
the velocity ﬁelds from the simulation, the ﬂame stabilizes in the
shear layer between fuel and air at an axial location where the
velocity difference between the two ﬂows is sufﬁciently reduced to
match the turbulent ﬂame speeds reported in Ref. [49]. This again
indicates the shear layer ﬂame stabilization of aturbulent swirling jet
diffusion ﬂame.
4.3
Flame Regime. The ﬂame regime is further analyzed based
on the simulation results. The simulations in this paper have been
performed using a combustion model for partially premixed
combustion. However, hydrogen and air are injected separately in
the current conﬁguration. Even though the ﬂame lift off allows for a
certain mixing between fuel and air prior to combustion, multi-
regime combustion characteristics are expected.
The following analysis is based on the Takeno ﬂame index [22],
which indicates premixed or nonpremixed regimes based on the
gradients of fuel and air. As the ﬂame regime is only relevant in the
ﬂame region, the following approach is adopted: The HRR is
conditioned by the local ﬂame index. It is thereby split into a
contribution from premixed and nonpremixed combustion regime.
The time-averaged conditioned HRR ﬁelds are presented in Fig. 8
along with the total HRR in Fig. 7(a). All ﬁelds are normalized with
the maximum total HRR. A signiﬁcant contribution of the total HRR
in the primary zone of the conﬁguration is associated with the
premixed combustion regime. On the other hand, the HRR
associated with the nonpremixed regime is about an order of
magnitude lower. Furthermore, the nonpremixed regime tends to
occur slightly further downstream. While the general occurrence is
similar for the two operating conditions, the contribution of the
nonpremixed regime is further reduced for ﬂame B. This can be
related to the leaner operating conditions. This indicates an
increasing importance of the nonpremixed regime with a further
increase in fuel mass ﬂow and, in particular, rich operation.
As discussed above, the comparison of the OH* distribution in
Fig. 4 indicates that the local ﬂame stabilization is not accurately
captured by the simulation. The different radial position of the ﬂame
stabilization may indicate difﬁculties of the modeling approach to
correctly predict the local combustion regime. Since the ﬂame index
depends directly on the gradients predicted by the combustion
model, the ﬂame regime prediction should be interpreted carefully.
5
Conclusion
The combustion of pure hydrogen in a dual-swirl burner for aero-
engine applications has been investigated by experiments and LES.
Two lean operating conditions with different equivalence ratios and
thermal power but constant air mass ﬂow are considered.
First, the capability of the simulation to predict the ﬂame position
and shape is investigated by comparison of OH* radical chem-
iluminescence measurements and the LES ﬁelds. Two distinct
reaction fronts are observed for ﬂame A: an upstream inner front and
a lateral ﬂame front further downstream, which are both predicted by
the simulation. For ﬂame B, the intensity of the lateral ﬂame front is
signiﬁcantly reduced but is slightly more pronounced in the LES
results. Despite the leaner equivalence ratio, ﬂame B stabilizes
further upstream in both simulation and experiment. This can be
explained by the different relative velocities between fuel and air
stream which enhance the turbulent transport of fuel into the central
air stream. Due to the low density of hydrogen, changes in the fuel
mass ﬂow result in signiﬁcant aerodynamic effects.
While the lift of heights of both ﬂames and the global ﬂame spread
are reasonably predicted by the simulations, the ﬂame stabilization
mechanism appears to be different between simulation and experi-
ment. The combustion model used in this work is designed for the
partially premixed combustion regime and has been successfully
used in previous work for technically premixed conﬁgurations.
Since fuel and air are injected separately in the current conﬁguration,
multiregime combustion is expected to play a more important role.
In the experiments, the ﬂame stabilizes in the shear layer between
the fuel and air stream, resembling the ﬂame stabilization
mechanism of a turbulent swirling jet diffusion ﬂame. The
combustion model does not capture this ﬂame stabilization
mechanism and instead predicts the ﬂame front on the burner
centerline.
The analysis of the premixed and nonpremixed regime based on
the ﬂame index conditioned heat release rate indicates that the
importance of the nonpremixed regime tends to increase with
increased fuel mass ﬂow. The ability of the combustion model to
correctly predict the nonpremixed ﬂame stabilization mechanism
needs to be improved in order to use CFD as a reliable design tool
and predict the correct ﬂame behavior for a wide range of operating
conditions. In addition, as preferential diffusion effects become
more important inhydrogen ﬂames,a model extensiontoaccount for
Fig. 8
Comparison of normalized mean heat release rate for ﬂame A (left) and B (right): (a) premixed regime and
(b) nonpremixed regime
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2024, Vol. 146 / 111013-9
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 10 ---

nonunity Lewis number effects could further improve the predictive
capabilities of the simulation.
Acknowledgment
We acknowledge the funding by the DLR’s aeronautics
directorate through the project ADAPT (“Assessment and Digital-
ization of Forthcoming Propulsion Technologies”) and the German
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action
(BMWK) through the project WotAn (FKZ 20M2104B).
Funding Data
 DLR’s aeronautics directorate through the project ADAPT
(“Assessment and Digitalization of Forthcoming Propulsion
Technologies”) (Funder ID: 10.13039/501100002946).
 German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate
Action (BMWK) through the project WotAn (FKZ
20M2104B; Funder ID: 10.13039/501100006360).
Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated and supporting the ﬁndings of this article
are obtainable from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.
Nomenclature
Roman Letters
_m ¼ mass ﬂow (g/s)
Pth ¼ thermal power (kW)
T ¼ temperature (K)
Greek Symbols
Dp ¼ relative pressure loss (%)
UPZ ¼ primary zone equivalence ratio
Abbreviations
CFD ¼ computational ﬂuid dynamics
DTF ¼ dynamic thickened ﬂame
FGM ¼ ﬂamelet-generated manifolds
HRR ¼ heat release rate
IR ¼ infrared
LES ¼ large-eddy-simulations
UV ¼ ultraviolet
References
[1] Brewer, G. D., 1991, Hydrogen Aircraft Technology, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
[2] France, D., 1980, “Combustion Characteristics of Hydrogen,” Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy, 5(4), pp. 369–374.
[3] Haglind, F., and Singh, R., 2004, “Design of Aero Gas Turbines Using Hydrogen,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 128(4), pp. 754–764.
[4] Brewer, G. D., 1980, “Prospects for Hydrogen Aircraft,” SAE Paper No. 800756.
[5] Sosounov, V., and Orlov, V., 1990, “Experimental Turbofan Using Liquid
Hydrogen and Liquid Natural Gas as Fuel,” AIAA Paper No. 90-2421.
[6] Noble, D., Wu, D., Emerson, B., Sheppard, S., Lieuwen, T., and Angello, L., 2021,
“Assessment of Current Capabilities and Near-Term Availability of Hydrogen-
Fired Gas Turbines Considering a Low-Carbon Future,” ASME J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power, 143(4), p. 041002.
[7] Agarwal, P., Sun, X., Gauthier, P. Q., and Sethi, V., 2019, “Injector Design Space
Exploration for an Ultra-Low NOx Hydrogen Micromix Combustion System,”
ASME Paper No. GT2019-90833.
[8] Funke, H. H.-W., Beckman, N., Keinz, J., and Horikawa, A., 2021, “30 Years of
Dry Low NOx Micromix Combustor Research for Hydrogen-Rich Fuels: An
Overview of Past and Present Activities,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power,
143(7), p. 071002.
[9] Horikawa, A., Okada, K., Yamaguchi, M., Aoki, S., Wirsum, M., Funke, H. H.-W.,
and Kusterer, K., 2021, “Combustor Development and Engine Demonstration of
Micro-Mix Hydrogen Combustion Applied to M1A-17 Gas Turbine,” ASME
Paper No. GT2021-59666.
[10] Abbot, D., Giannotta, A., Sun, X., Gauthier, P., and Sethi, V., 2021,
“Thermoacoustic Behaviour of a Hydrogen Micromix Aviation Gas Turbine
Combustor Under Typical Flight Conditions,” ASME Paper No. GT2021-59844.
[11] Sun, X., Abbott, D., Vir Singh, A., Gauthier, P., and Sethi, B., 2021, “Numerical
Investigation of Potential Cause of Instabilities in a Hydrogen Micromix Injector
Array,” ASME Paper No. GT2021-59842.
[12] Chterev, I., and Boxx, I., 2021, “Effect of Hydrogen Enrichment on the Dynamics
of a Lean Technically Premixed Elevated Pressure Flame,” Combust. Flame, 225,
pp. 149–159.
[13] Lam, K.-K., Geipel, P., and Larfeldt, J., 2014, “Hydrogen Enriched Combustion
Testing of Siemens Industrial SGT-400 at Atmospheric Conditions,” ASME J.
Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 137(2), p. 021502.
[14] Reichel, T. G., Goeckeler, K., and Paschereit, O., 2015, “Investigation of Lean
Premixed Swirl-Stabilized Hydrogen Burner With Axial Air Injection Using OH-
PLIF Imaging,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 137(11), p. 111513.
[15] Mira, D., Lehmkuhl, O., Both, A., Stathopoulos, P., Tanneberger, T., Reichel, T.
G., Paschereit, C. O., Vazquez, M., and Houzeaux, G., 2020, “Numerical
Characterization of a Premixed Hydrogen Flame Under Conditions Close to
Flashback,” Flow, Turbul. Combust., 104(2–3), pp. 479–507.
[16] Capurso, T., Laera, D., Riber, E., and Cuenot, B., 2023, “NOx Pathways in Lean
Partially Premixed Swirling H2–Air Turbulent Flame,” Combust. Flame, 248,
p. 112581.
[17] Marragou, S., Magnes, H., Poinsot, T., Selle, L., and Schuller, T., 2022,
“Stabilization Regimes and Pollutant Emissions From a Dual Fuel CH4/H2 and
Dual Swirl Low NOx Burner,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 47(44), pp. 19275–19288.
[18] Leroy, M., Mirat, C., Renaud, A., and Vicquelin, R., 2022, “Stabilization of Low-
NOx Hydrogen Flames on a Dual-Swirl Coaxial Injector,” ASME J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power, 145(2), p. 021021.
[19] Aniello, A., Laera, D., Marragou, S., Magnes, H., Selle, L., Schuller, T., and
Poinsot, T., 2023, “Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Two Flame
Stabilization Regimes Observed in a Dual Swirl H2-Air Coaxial Injector,”
Combust. Flame, 249, p. 112595.
[20] Knudsen, E., and Pitsch, H., 2009, “A General Flamelet Transformation Useful for
Distinguishing Between Premixed and Non-Premixed Modes of Combustion,”
Combust. Flame, 156(3), pp. 678–696.
[21] Illana, E., Mira, D., and Mura, A., 2021, “An Extended Flame Index Partitioning
for Partially Premixed Combustion,” Combust. Theory Modell., 25(1),
pp. 121–157.
[22] Yamashita, H., Shimada, M., and Takeno, T., 1996, “A Numerical Study on Flame
Stability at the Transition Point of Jet Diffusion Flames,” Symp. (Int.) Combust.,
26(1), pp. 27–34.
[23] G€overt, S., Lipkowicz, J. T., and Janus, B., 2023, “Compressible Large Eddy
Simulation of Thermoacoustic Instabilities in the PRECCINSTA Combustor
Using Flamelet Generated Manifolds With Dynamic Thickened Flame Model,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 146(1), p. 011011.
[24] Behrendt, T., 2003, “Str€omung und Verbrennung in einem neuen D€usenkonzept
f€ur die magere Vormischverbrennung in Fluggasturbinen,” Ph.D. thesis, Ruhr
University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
[25] Behrendt, T., Hassa, C., Mohamed, A., and Faleni, J.-P., 2008, “In Situ
Measurement and Validation of Gaseous Species Concentrations of a Gas Turbine
Model Combustor by Tunable Diode Laser Absorption Spectroscopy (TDLAS),”
ASME Paper No. GT2008-51258.
[26] Gibson, S., Hickstein, D. D., Yurchak, R., Ryazanov, M., Das, D., and Shih, G.,
2022, “PyAbel/PyAbel: v0.8.5,” European Organization for Nuclear Research,
Geneva, Switzerland, accessed Dec. 19, 2023, https://zenodo.org/records/5888391
[27] Hardalupas, Y., and Orain, M., 2004, “Local Measurements of the Time-
Dependent Heat Release Rate and Equivalence Ratio Using Chemiluminescent
Emission From a Flame,” Combust. Flame, 139(3), pp. 188–207.
[28] Koomen, J., Dammers,T.,Demougeot, N., Stuttaford, P.,Heinze,J.,Stockhausen,G.,
and Fleing, C.,2022, “HighPressure Testing WithOptical Diagnostics of a Hydrogen
Retroﬁt Solution to Eliminate Carbon Emissions,” ASME Paper No. GT2022-82652.
[29] Rivie`re, P., and Souﬁani, A., 2012, “Updated Band Model Parameters for H2O,
CO2, CH4 and CO Radiation at High Temperature,” Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer,
55(13–14), pp. 3349–3358.
[30] van Oijen, J., and de Goey, L., 2000, “Modelling of Premixed Laminar Flames
Using Flamelet-Generated Manifolds,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 161(1), pp. 113–137.
[31] Goodwin, D. G., Moffat, H. K., Schoegl, I., Speth, R. L., and Weber, B. W., 2021,
“Cantera: An Object-Oriented Software Toolkit for Chemical Kinetics,
Thermodynamics, and Transport Processes,” Version 2.5.1, European Organiza-
tion for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland.
[32] San Diego Mechanism, 2024, “Chemical-Kinetic Mechanisms for Combustion
Applications,” San Diego Mechanism, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
(Combustion Research), University of California at San Diego, San Diego, CA,
accessed July 2, 2023, https://web.eng.ucsd.edu/mae/groups/combustion/mecha-
nism.html
[33] Kathrotia, T., Fikri, M., Bozkurt, M., Hartmann, M., Riedel, U., and Schulz, C.,
2010, “Study of the HþOþM Reaction Forming OH*: Kinetics of OH*
Chemiluminescence in Hydrogen Combustion Systems,” Combust. Flame,
157(7), pp. 1261–1273.
[34] Legier, J. P., Poinsot, T., and Veynante, D., 2000, “Dynamically Thickened Flame
LES Model for Premixed and Non-Premixed Turbulent Combustion,” Proceed-
ings of the Summer Program 2000, Stanford, CA, Center for Turbulence Research,
pp. 157–168.
[35] Wang, G., Boileau, M., and Veynante, D., 2011, “Implementation of a Dynamic
Thickened Flame Model for Large Eddy Simulations of Turbulent Premixed
Combustion,” Combust. Flame, 158(11), pp. 2199–2213.
[36] Charlette, F., Meneveau, C., and Veynante, D., 2002, “A Power-Law
Flame Wrinkling Model for LES of Premixed Turbulent Combustion—Part I:
Non-Dynamic Formulation and Initial Tests,” Combust. Flame, 131(1–2),
pp. 159–180.
111013-10 / Vol. 146, NOVEMBER 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 11 ---

[37] Durand, L., and Polifke, W., 2007, “Implementation of the Thickened Flame
Model for Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Premixed Combustion in a
Commercial Solver,” ASME Paper No. GT2007-28188.
[38] Nicoud, F., and Ducros, F., 1999, “Subgrid-Scale Stress Modelling Based on the
Square of the Velocity Gradient Tensor,” Flow, Turbul. Combust., 62(3), pp.
183–200.
[39] Shima, N., Kuya, Y., Tamaki, Y., and Kawai, S., 2021, “Preventing Spurious
Pressure Oscillations in Split Convective Form Discretization for Compressible
Flows,” J. Comput. Phys., 427, p. 110060.
[40] Burg, C., 2005, “Higher Order Variable Extrapolation for Unstructured Finite
Volume RANS Flow Solvers,” AIAA Paper No. 2005-4999.
[41] Venkatakrishnan, V., 1993, “On the Accuracy of Limiters and Convergence to
Steady State Solutions,” AIAA Paper No. 93-880.
[42] Swanson, R. C., and Turkel, E., 1992, “On Central-Difference and Upwind
Schemes,” J. Comput. Phys., 101(2), pp. 292–306.
[43] Jameson, A., 2017, “Origins and Further Development of the
Jameson–Schmidt–Turkel Scheme,” AIAA J., 55(5), pp. 1487–1510.
[44] Lipkowicz, J. T., G€overt, S., and Janus, B., 2024, “Adaptation of the
Low Dissipation Low Dispersion Scheme for Reactive Multi Component
Flows on Unstructured Grids Using Density-Based Solvers,” ASME Paper
No. GT2024-127496.
[45] Becker, K. C., and Ashcroft, G., 2014, “A Comparative Study of Gradient
Reconstruction Methods for Unstructured Meshes With Application to Turbo-
machinery Flows,” AIAA Paper No. 2014-0069.
[46] Thomas, J. L., Diskin, B., and Nishikawa, H., 2011, “A Critical Study of
Agglomerated Multigrid Methods for Diffusion on Highly-Stretched Grids,”
Comput. Fluids, 41(1), pp. 82–93.
[47] Kersken, H.-P., Ashcroft, G., Frey, C., Wolfrum, N., and Korte, D.,
2014,
“Nonreﬂecting
Boundary
Conditions
for
Aeroelastic
Analysis
in
Time
and Frequency Domain 3D RANS Solvers,” ASME Paper
No.
GT2014-25499.
[48] Reichardt, H., 1951, “Vollst€andige Darstellung der turbulenten Geschwindig-
keitsverteilung in glatten Leitungen,” ZAMM - J. Appl. Math. Mech./Z. Angew.
Math. Mech., 31(7), pp. 208–219.
[49] Beerer, D., McDonell, V., Therkelsen, P., and Cheng, R. K., 2013, “Flashback and
Turbulent Flame Speed Measurements in Hydrogen/Methane Flames Stabilized
by a Low-Swirl Injector at Elevated Pressures and Temperatures,” ASME J. Eng.
Gas Turbines Power, 136(3), p. 031502.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2024, Vol. 146 / 111013-11
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/11/111013/7363128/gtp_146_11_111013.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025
