
--- Page 1 ---

Massimo Masi
e-mail: massimo.masi@unipd.it
Paolo Gobbato
Andrea Toffolo
Andrea Lazzaretto
Department of Mechanical Engineering,
University of Padova,
via Venezia, 1-35131 Padova, Italy
Stefano Cocchi
GE Oil & Gas—Nuovo Pignone SpA,
via Felice Matteucci, 2-50127 Firenze, Italy
e-mail: stefano.cocchi@ge.com
Numerical and Experimental
Analysis of the Temperature
Distribution in a Hydrogen
Fuelled Combustor for a 10 MW
Gas Turbine
Proper cooling of the hot components and an optimal temperature distribution at the
turbine inlet are fundamental targets for gas turbine combustors. In particular, the tem-
perature distribution at the combustor discharge is a critical issue for the durability of
the turbine blades and the high performance of the engine. At present, CFD is a widely
used tool to simulate the reacting ﬂow inside gas turbine combustors. This paper presents
a numerical analysis of a single can type combustor designed to be fed both with hydro-
gen and natural gas. The combustor also features a steam injection system to restrain the
NOx pollutants. The simulations were carried out to quantify the effect of fuel type and
steam injection on the temperature ﬁeld. The CFD model employs a computationally low
cost approach, thus the physical domain is meshed with a coarse grid. A full-scale test
campaign was performed on the combustor: temperatures at the liner wall and the com-
bustor outlet were acquired at different operating conditions. These experimental data,
which are discussed, were used to evaluate the capability of the present CFD model to
predict temperature values for combustor operation with different fuels and steam to fuel
ratios. DOI: 10.1115/1.4002017
1
Introduction
A gas turbine combustor must satisfy a wide range of require-
ments such as high combustion efﬁciency, freedom from ﬂame
extinction, blowout, and pressure oscillations, low pressure losses
and proper temperature distribution. In particular, the latter is a
critical item for the durability of the hot gas turbine components.
Combustion chamber wall overheating and hot spots at the com-
bustor discharge must be avoided in order to maximize the opera-
tional life of the combustor, nozzle vanes, and turbine blades 1.
Usually, the temperature distribution at the combustor outlet is
measured directly in experimental tests. The characterization of
the thermal load on the liner walls is a bit complex due to the
difﬁculties in carrying out measurements within the combustor
2. References on liner wall temperatures are reported in Ref. 3.
The development of computational ﬂuid dynamics CFD codes
over the past few decades has provided a useful tool for estimat-
ing the temperature ﬁeld within the combustor including the tem-
perature distribution on the combustion chamber walls and at the
turbine inlet as well 4–13. Thus, CFD analyses, validated by
reliable experimental data, have been used to investigate the liner
wall thermal load 14,15 and to optimize the combustor outlet
temperature ﬁeld 16–18. This approach can result in a signiﬁ-
cant reduction in the amount of experimental testing required
since design modiﬁcations or new design solutions can be evalu-
ated in the early stages of combustor development.
Many combustion models have been implemented into ﬁnite
volume codes due to the complexity of the reacting ﬂow physics.
In particular, it is well-known that the temperature ﬁeld within the
combustion chamber is determined by the interaction between tur-
bulence, chemistry, and heat transfer. Even though large eddy
simulation LES has become an affordable tool for modeling
ﬂame/turbulence interactions 9,10, the traditional Reynolds av-
eraged Navier–Stokes RANS approach is still the most wide-
spread tool for gas turbine combustor modeling because it is an
optimal compromise between accuracy and computational cost
19.
This paper presents a computationally low cost CFD analysis of
the reacting ﬂow inside a single can combustor. The calculations
are aimed to compute the thermal ﬁeld at different operating con-
ditions and are carried out with the ﬁnite volume commercial code
FLUENT® ver.6.2. The numerical model is speciﬁcally conceived
for a future investigation of the thermoacoustic behavior of the
combustor, which requires time-dependent analyses. Thus, a
coarse grid and simpliﬁed numerical models i.e., a hybrid global
reaction mechanism and a simple two-equation turbulence model
4,8,11 are adopted in order to reduce the computational time.
The 3D geometrical model extends from the compressor discharge
to the gas turbine inlet, coupling the reacting region of the com-
bustor with the annulus “cold” ﬂow domain. The advantages of
this type of “coupled” analysis are reported in Ref. 16. Some
minor geometrical features are neglected so that a rough grid ap-
proach can be employed 20.
In the numerical simulations presented in this paper both natu-
ral gas and hydrogen full load operation are considered with or
without steam injection “wet” or “dry” operation. Thus the in-
ﬂuence of the fuel type and steam dilution on the temperature ﬁeld
can be investigated. The computed temperature distribution along
the liner wall and at the combustor outlet is compared with the
experimental values measured during a full-scale test campaign.
The testing activities were performed at ENEL’s Sesta facility as
part of a ministerial project coordinated by ENEL Ricerca ENEL
is the former national power company. The goal of the project
was the design of a 10 MW class combined cycle gas turbine
CCGT pilot plant to be fuelled with 100% hydrogen. The project
was promoted by Hydrogen Park and was partly funded by Re-
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute IGTI of ASME for pub-
lication in the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript
received April 15, 2010; ﬁnal manuscript received April 27, 2010; published online
October 28, 2010. Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 021506-1
Copyright © 2011 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

gione Veneto; it was developed from 2006 to 2009 and involved
six academic research partners 21–23. A major research effort
was focused on the development of the combustor to reduce NOx
emissions. In particular, two sets of combustor prototypes were
designed over a 3 years period. All the prototypes were studied by
means of full-scale test campaigns and CFD analyses. The ﬁrst set
of prototypes the “base” prototypes was obtained by coupling
three different burners and two different liners. These prototypes,
developed by GE Oil & Gas for the diffusive combustion of hy-
drogen, were tested and analyzed from 2007 to 2008. The results
of these activities are reported in Refs. 20–22,24,25. At the end
of this ﬁrst stage of the project, the prototype that showed the best
performance was selected for installation in the new 10 MW class
CCGT pilot plant at Fusina near Venice 21,23. This combined
cycle power plant is built within an existing ENEL coal ﬁred
power plant and can be fed with fuel blends ranging from pure
natural gas to pure hydrogen.
In order to reduce the emission of NOx, a second set of “en-
hanced” prototypes were conceived during the second stage of the
project. The partnership between GE Oil & Gas, ENEL Ricerca
and the other academic institutions resulted in combustor proto-
types optimized for the injection of fuel and steam, which were
tested in the summer of 2009 23.
The combustor layout discussed in the following refers to one
of the base prototypes, which was tested once again during the
2009 test campaign. This paper presents a comparison between
the calculated proﬁles and measured values of temperature along
the liner wall and the combustor outlet. Despite the usual practice
in literature 15, the measured liner wall thermal loads are explic-
itly shown and discussed. All the measured temperatures are ob-
tained from full load, full-pressure tests performed in operation
with both pure natural gas and pure hydrogen.
2
The GE10 Combustor
The modeled combustor Fig. 1 is the diffusive ﬂame GE10-1
gas turbine combustor. It is a reverse ﬂow single can combustor
designed for diffusive ﬂame, dual gas operation, and features
steam injection for NOx reduction. The compressor air stream is
collected into a plenum not represented in the ﬁgure before en-
tering the “annulus” i.e., the annular enclosure between the liner
and the casing. Then the air ﬂows into the combustion chamber
by means of the burner axial swirler, the primary and dilution
holes and the liner cooling holes grouped in several rows located
along the entire length of the combustor. Natural gas and hydro-
gen are separately injected into the swirler slots without signiﬁ-
cant air premixing. The hot burnt stream reaches the ﬁrst gas
turbine stage trough a “transition piece” TP placed inside the air
plenum.
Dilution steam ﬂow is injected into the outer zone of the com-
bustor head by a constant pitch series of azimuthal manifolds
connected to a toroidal rail that surrounds the top of the casing.
3
Test Rig Conﬁguration and Instrumentation
The combustion test rig is located at the ENEL experimental
facility in Sesta Tuscany, Italy. This facility is suitable for full-
scale, full-pressure testing of a wide variety of combustion sys-
tems thanks to its very ﬂexible multifuel supply systems. A train
of two compressors assures a maximum air ﬂow rate of up to 40
kg/s, which is employed both for combustion and rig cooling.
Variable combustion air temperatures are achievable by means of
electric heaters. During the GE10 combustor testing, the rig oper-
ates at its full capacity 1100 kg/h for hydrogen and 2500 kg/h for
natural gas. The combustion air supply system is integrated with
a special GE10 rig-adapter assembly, designed to reproduce on-
engine compressor discharge and turbine inlet operating condi-
tions. The GE10 gas turbine conﬁguration is such that the com-
bustor axis is perpendicular to the engine axis: hot gases exiting
the annular section of the combustor are directed to the ﬁrst stage
turbine nozzles arranged in a proxy conﬁguration having the same
ﬂow area of the on-engine component. Hot gases exiting the ﬁrst
stage proxy nozzle are then discharged directly into the exhaust
duct.
The combustion test rig is equipped with resident instrumenta-
tion dedicated to the control of the air and fuel systems and which
are necessary to ensure proper test rig operation. The mass ﬂow
rates are measured by standard oriﬁces for compressed air and
steam and ﬂow meters for natural gas and hydrogen. Pressure
and temperature transmitters provide continuous monitoring of the
air and fuel supply conditions. The liner is instrumented with sev-
eral thermocouples, which give a discrete map of the metal tem-
perature proﬁle along four different rows parallel to the combustor
axis Fig. 2a. To measure the hot stream temperature, another
three circular rows of thermocouples are installed at three differ-
ent radii on the transition piece outlet. The azimuthal pitch of the
thermocouples in each row is 30 deg Fig. 2b.
The instrumentation also includes six dynamic pressure probes,
a commercial ﬂame detector and a video acquisition system. Pol-
lutant emissions are measured by gas sampling at two different
sections along the exhaust path by means of both chemilumines-
cence and infrared analysers. More rig features are available in
Ref. 23.
Fig. 1
Sectional view of the GE10 gas turbine combustor
Fig. 2
„a… Rendering showing the rows of thermocouples in-
stalled to measure the liner wall temperatures. „b… Detail of the
thermocouples installed in a 30 deg sector of the combustor
outlet section.
021506-2 / Vol. 133, FEBRUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

4
Experimental Results
The results presented deal with the full speed full load opera-
tion of the engine since this is the condition associated with the
highest thermal power and temperatures. The test conditions of
the four experimental tests considered in this paper pure natural
gas feed and pure hydrogen feed both with and without steam
injection were derived from the GE10 gas turbine cycle simula-
tor, a GE Oil & Gas proprietary tool. The simulator gives the test
condition parameters mass ﬂow rates and physical properties of
the inlet ﬂuxes for dry combustion of pure methane. This test
condition is assumed as the reference for all other engine opera-
tions using different fuels pure natural gas, pure hydrogen or
blends of the two and/or steam to fuel SF mass ratio, the op-
eration parameters of which are derived by keeping the total ther-
mal input unchanged. Thus, the SF ratio always refers to pure
methane combustion, and for hydrogen or natural gas or blends
operation the SF value is related to the amount of steam that
would have been used to obtain the same heat release as that of
the reference test condition. In the wet cases, only the SF=1 op-
erating condition is considered.
Figure 3 shows the liner metal temperatures against the axial
coordinate. The markers refer to the data about row D. The values
of the other rows are presented as error bars each bar ranges
between the maximum and the minimum temperature measured in
the four rows for the same axial position.
All the curves exhibit a temperature peak in the primary zone
and a further temperature increasing downstream of the dilution
holes. The temperature spread at the same axial position denotes
that the reacting ﬂow is not perfectly axisymmetric. This is mainly
due to the irregular pattern of the primary holes, which causes a
different interaction between the swirler spot jets and the primary
air jets. However, the values never reach warning limits. It is not
Fig. 3
Temperatures measured along the liner wall
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 021506-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

assured that the spread in liner temperatures observed in the pri-
mary zone about 200°C depends on the malfunction of a ther-
mocouple.
The temperatures for 100% natural gas and 100% hydrogen are
similar Fig. 3a. The small differences are probably due to the
different ﬂame shapes combined effect of fuel jet’s penetration
and reactivity and/or slightly different operating conditions. The
inﬂuence of steam on the metal temperature is low and it is re-
stricted mainly to the primary zone Figs. 3b and 3c.
Figure 4 shows the measured temperatures at the combustor
outlet against the angular coordinate. The data are made nondi-
mensional using the average value of the measurements in order
to emphasize both the radial and the azimuthal nonuniformities in
the temperature distribution. Since half of the thermocouples in
the inner row red triangular markers were out of order during the
test, one additional test is included in the graphs to provide the
missing values red circular markers. This test identiﬁed by an
asterisk was performed under very similar combustor operating
conditions some weeks before the tests considered in this paper.
Both diagrams show a slightly nonuniform temperature distri-
bution. In particular, a temperature peak appears at the top side of
the discharge at about 180 deg and two local minima occur near
90 deg and 270 deg. Moreover, the data show a temperature in-
crease going from the outer row to the inner row of thermo-
couples.
By comparison with Figs. 4a and 4b, it appears that shifting
from natural gas to hydrogen operation does not change the data
layout signiﬁcantly. Furthermore, the temperature distribution at
the combustor outlet is not inﬂuenced substantially by steam in-
jection, as previously stated for the liner Fig. 3.
5
Computational Model
The geometrical model employed in the simulations is repre-
sented in Fig. 5a. The model includes the annulus, the burner,
the liner, the air plenum, and the TP. The overall length of the
computational domain is about 2700 mm.
In order to use a rough grid approach, some minor geometrical
features were simpliﬁed or neglected. In particular the liner cool-
ing holes and the steam manifolds were not included in the geo-
metrical model. However, their function is preserved by means of
a porous wall model, which assures the ﬂow of the cooling air
stream through the liner. A similar approach is used in Refs.
18,24. The remaining geometrical details liner wall thickness,
Fig. 4
Nondimensional temperatures along the three circular rows indi-
cated in Fig. 2„b…
Fig. 5
„a… Section of the geometrical model. „b… Section of the
computational grid
021506-4 / Vol. 133, FEBRUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

axial swirler slots, fuel injection channels, plenum and transition
piece shape are modeled without simpliﬁcations.
An almost fully hexahedral coarse grid of about 55,000 cells
was set up Fig. 5b. Tetrahedral, pyramidal, and triangular
prism cell types were employed at the burner outlet and in the
zone that links the liner to the transition piece. In addition to the
already mentioned geometrical modeling constraints, the rough
grid approach forces the near wall reﬁnement to be neglected.
Despite the inaccuracies expected in the ﬂow ﬁeld the boundary
layer viscous stresses are not accurately computed, the air split-
ting percentages between the several liner and burner passages are
guaranteed by the proper setup of the porous media inertial resis-
tance coefﬁcients see the discussion in the following sections.
Furthermore, the coarseness of the grid does not allow the detailed
thermal ﬂow ﬁeld inside the combustor to be captured. In fact, the
grid size might describe only the main effects of turbulence and
chemistry especially in the primary combustion zone. This re-
sults in a temperature ﬁeld roughly equivalent to that of the real
one. However, in the opinion of the authors, the approximation
level due to this low cost computational approach is consistent
with the aim of the nonstationary analyses planned for this model.
The ﬂuid ﬂow is modeled as a compressible ideal gas mixture,
thus the physical properties are calculated as a weighted sum of
the mass fraction of the mixture components. The speciﬁc heat of
each gas is computed using a fourth order polynomial law 26.
The combustion is modeled by means of the hybrid ﬁnite-rate/
eddy-dissipation model considering a one-step reaction both for
the methane1 and the hydrogen.
CH4 + 2O2 →CO2 + 2H2O
2H2 + O2 →2H2O
In this hybrid model both the Arrhenius and eddy-dissipation
reaction rates are calculated and the net reaction rate is the lower
of these two rates. Therefore, the Arrhenius model controls the
ignition and the kinetics of the reaction and the ﬂame is controlled
by the turbulent mixing through the eddy-dissipation model 27.
In the Arrhenius model the values of the pre-exponential factor,
the rate exponents and the activation energy are speciﬁed as sug-
gested in Refs. 28,29. The temperature exponent is assumed to
be zero both for the methane and the hydrogen. The eddy-
dissipation coefﬁcients are set equal to the standard values 4 and
0.5 30. The combustion model requires the solution of three
other transport equations for the mass fraction of hydrogen or
methane, oxygen, carbon dioxide, and water the nitrogen mass
fraction is derived algebraically. The molecular diffusivity re-
quired by each of these transport equations is calculated using a
simpliﬁed model based on the gas kinetic theory 31.
The turbulence is modeled by means of the k- SST model
32, also successfully employed in Ref. 11, and the standard
wall functions for momentum and energy are used. The computa-
tionally low cost P-1 model 33 is chosen for radiation heat trans-
fer. The absorption coefﬁcient of the mixture is computed by the
weighted sum of the gray gases approach 34.
The four experimental tests already discussed provide the set of
boundary conditions for the simulations. A mass ﬂow rate condi-
tion is speciﬁed at the plenum inlet section, at the inlet of the fuel
channels and at the steam inlet ports, respectively. The tempera-
ture, the pressure and the composition of all the ﬂuxes are known
from measurements. A constant pressure condition is imposed at
the combustor outlet. The outer boundaries of the model casing,
plenum, fuel channels, and swirler walls are considered to be
adiabatic this assumption is justiﬁed by the experimental experi-
ence. Instead, heat transfer occurs through the transition piece
wall, so the air ﬂowing into the plenum is warmed by the inner hot
gas stream.
Both the liner and cap louvered walls are modeled by means of
an isotropic porous media to take into account the metal cooling.
In order to correctly estimate the heat exchange between the inner
hot stream and the annulus air ﬂow, a uniform porosity is speciﬁed
in the media, which is calculated according to liner design speci-
ﬁcations. In the solid fraction of the media the conduction heat
transfer is modeled. The inertial resistance coefﬁcients of the vari-
ous surface patches are tuned to ﬁt the airﬂow distribution data
supplied by ENEL along the liner derived by an experimental
campaign on an isothermal ﬂow test rig.
The unsteady RANS segregated solver with the SIMPLE algo-
rithm 35 is used. Convergence is reached by means of a time-
marching approach with a second order implicit time discretiza-
tion scheme time step equal to 100 s. For each simulation, the
solution is judged to be converged when the mass ﬂow rate and
the temperature at the combustor outlet do not show any appre-
ciable variation in time. On the average, convergence is reached
after 10,000 time steps 1 s. The CPU time needed to perform 0.1
s of simulation is about 6 h with an AMD Athlon® 4600+ Dual
Core 2.4 GHz processor. For more details on the physical mod-
els and numerical simulation setup, see Ref. 25.
6
Numerical Results
Figure 6 shows the calculated temperature scalar ﬁeld around
the liner. The contour plot section plane encloses thermocouple
rows C and D see Fig. 2a. The temperature ﬁelds help in
understanding how the development of the reacting ﬂow inﬂu-
ences the liner wall temperatures. Starting from the top of the
liner, the wall temperature increases abruptly before the primary
air holes due to the ignition of the swirling mixture that licks the
liner inner surface. In the primary zone, the air jets drive the hot
reacting stream around the combustor axis and the wall tempera-
tures decrease. The hot axial ﬂow is then partially scattered by the
deep penetration of the dilution jets. The temperature increase
downstream of the dilution holes is caused by the spreading of the
hot axial stream and the lower amount of cooling air delivered to
this portion of the liner compared with the primary combustion
section. The temperature maxima are reached with hydrogen op-
eration due to the higher ﬂame temperature compared with that of
natural gas. Steam injection Figs. 6b and 6d does not signiﬁ-
cantly modify the shape of the reacting ﬂow within the ﬁelds.
However, the reduction in the temperatures both in the ignition
zone and in the axial stream leaving the primary combustion zone
is clear.
1The simpliﬁed global reaction mechanism requires the natural gas to be consid-
ered as pure methane. The difference in LHV is taken into account in the simulations
to keep the thermal input unchanged.
Fig. 6
Temperature ﬁelds around the liner †K‡
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 021506-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

Fig. 7
Comparison between the experimental data and temperature pro-
ﬁles along the liner wall „see Fig. 2„a… for the arrangement of the rows… †K‡
021506-6 / Vol. 133, FEBRUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

Figure 7 compares the temperature distribution along the four
thermocouple rows A–D obtained from the CFD calculation
lines and the measurements markers. The experimental values
are quite well ﬁt by the numerical proﬁles in natural gas operation
see diagrams 7a and 7b. Instead, the calculated proﬁles are
on the average lower than the measured data when hydrogen is
used diagrams 7c and 7d. The comparison also shows a dif-
ference in the axial coordinate of the temperature peaks, which is
mainly due to the grid coarseness. Moreover, the measured maxi-
mum in row A is not completely captured by the calculated results
Fig. 8
Natural gas: comparison between the experimental data and tem-
perature proﬁles along the circular rows shown in Fig. 2„b…
Fig. 9
Hydrogen: comparison between the experimental data and tempera-
ture proﬁles along the circular rows shown in Fig. 2„b…
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 021506-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

for proﬁle B. Further analysis must be performed to better under-
stand the causes of this peak value of the liner wall temperature.
Figures 8 and 9 present the CFD temperatures at the combustor
outlet. The computed values are made nondimensional using the
same procedure already employed in Fig. 4. The graphs show
good agreement between the measured data and numerical proﬁles
both for natural gas Figs. 8a and 8b and hydrogen Figs. 9a
and 9b operation. The difference between the average of the
experimental and the calculated temperatures is 10°C for natural
gas dry operation. The inspection of the temperature ﬁeld inside
the TP suggests that the hot zone in the upper part of the combus-
tor discharge is due to the high temperature axial stream leaving
the core of the liner.
7
Conclusions
This paper deals with the numerical and experimental analysis
of the temperature distribution in a hydrogen fuelled combustor
for a 10 MW gas turbine. Both natural gas and hydrogen full load
operating conditions with and without steam injection wet or dry
operation were studied. The computational domain was a 3D
geometrical model extending from the compressor discharge to
the gas turbine inlet. A computationally low cost approach was
employed in view of using the model in time-dependent calcula-
tions.
A full-scale test campaign was performed on the combustor:
temperatures at the liner wall and the combustor outlet were ac-
quired at many operating conditions. Four sets of experimental
data were employed for comparison with the CFD results.
The experimental values measured by four rows of thermo-
couples along the liner wall showed that the distribution of the
metal thermal load was not perfectly axisymmetric. At the com-
bustor outlet, a slightly nonuniform distribution of temperatures
also occurred.
The thermal ﬁelds obtained from the simulations clariﬁed the
inﬂuence of the fuel type and steam injection on the temperature
distribution. Despite the low accuracy expected from a coarse grid
calculation, the computed temperature proﬁles showed acceptable
matching with measurements in the liner wall. Moreover, good
agreement was found between the CFD proﬁles and experimental
data at the combustor discharge at all the operating conditions
considered.
The agreement with the measured data suggests that the com-
putationally low cost CFD model presented is able to capture the
mean temperature ﬁeld within the combustor, which is the funda-
mental requirement for the planned thermoacoustic characteriza-
tion of the analyzed combustor.
Nomenclature
CCGT  combined cycle gas turbine
dry  without steam injection
NG  natural gas
Ri,Rm,Re  inner, medium and outer radius of the outlet
thermocouple rows
SF  steam to fuel mass ratio
SST  shear stress transport
TP  transition piece
wet  with steam injection
References
1 Lefebvre, A. H., 1998, Gas Turbine Combustion, 2nd ed., Taylor & Francis,
Philadelphia.
2 Jiang, L.-Y., and Campbell, I., 2008, “Radiation Bench-Marking in a Model
Combustor,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-50179.
3 Shehata, M., 2009, “Emission and Wall Temperatures for Lean Prevaporized
Premixed Gas Turbine Combustor,” Fuel, 88, pp. 446–455.
4 Eggels, R. L. G. M., 2000, “Modelling of the Combustion Process of a Pre-
mixed DLE Gas Turbine,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-0130.
5 Birkby, P., Cant, R. S., Dawes, W. N., Demargne, A. A. J., Dhanasekaran, P.
C., Kellar, W. P., Rycroft, N. C., Savill, A. M., Eggels, R. L. G. M., and
Jennions, I. K., 2000, “CFD Analysis of a Complete Industrial Lean Premixed
Gas Turbine Combustor,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-0131.
6 Sivaramakrishna, G., Muthuveerappan, N., Venkataraman, S., and Sampathku-
maran, T. K., 2001, “CFD Modelling of The Aero Gas Turbine Combustor,”
ASME Paper No. 2001-GT-0063.
7 Eggels, R. L. G. M., and Brown, C. T., 2001, “Comparison of Numerical and
Experimental Results of a Premixed DLE Gas Turbine Combustor,” ASME
Paper No. 2001-GT-0065.
8 Li, L., Peng, X. F., and Liu, T., 2006, “Combustion and Cooling Performance
in an Aero-Engine Annular Combustor,” Appl. Therm. Eng., 26, pp. 1771–
1779.
9 Boudier, G., Gicquel, L. Y. M., Poinsot, T., Bissières, D., and Bérat, C., 2007,
“Comparison of LES, RANS and Experiments in an Aeronautical Gas Turbine
Combustion Chamber,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 3075–3082.
10 Fureby, C., Grinstein, F. F., Li, G., and Gutmark, E. J., 2007, “An Experimen-
tal and Computational Study of a Multi-Swirl Gas Turbine Combustor,” Proc.
Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 3107–3114.
11 Le Clercq, P., Schlieper, M., Noll, B., and Aigner, M., 2008, “Liquid Fuel
Flameless Combustion RANS Simulation,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-50552.
12 Chrigui, M., Sadiki, A., and Janicka, J., 2008, “Numerical Analysis of Spray
Dispersion, Evaporation and Combustion in a Single Gas Turbine Combustor,”
ASME Paper No. GT2008-51253.
13 De Oliveira Rodriguez, L., and Do Nascimento, M. A. R., 2009, “Different
Fuels Assessment in Gas Turbine Combustion Chamber for Pre-Mixed and
Diffusive Flame,” Proceedings of 22nd ECOS, Foz do Iguaçu, Paranà, Brazil,
pp. 1959–1968.
14 Sierra, F. Z., Kubiak, J., Gonzalez, G., and Urquiza, G., 2005, “Prediction of
Temperature Front in a Gas Turbine Combustion Chamber,” Appl. Therm.
Eng., 25, pp. 1127–1140.
15 Dudebout, R., Reynolds, B., and Molla-Hosseini, K., 2004, “Integrated Pro-
cess for CFD Modelling and Optimization of Gas Turbine Combustors,”
ASME Paper No. GT2004-54011.
16 Malecki, R. E., Rhie, C. M., McKinney, R. G., Ouyang, H., Syed, S. A.,
Colket, M. B., and Madabhushi, R. K., 2001, “Application of an Advanced
CFD-Based Analysis System to the PW6000 Combustor to Optimize Exit
Temperature Distribution—Part I: Description and Validation of The Analysis
Tool,” ASME Paper No. 2001-GT-0062.
17 Snyder, T. S., Stewart, J. F., Stoner, M. D., and McKinney, R. G., 2001,
“Application of an Advanced CFD-Based Analysis System to the PW6000
Combustor to Optimize Exit Temperature Distribution—Part II: Comparison
of Predictions to Full Annular Rig Test Data,” ASME Paper No. 2001-GT-
0064.
18 Koutsenko, I. G., On egin, S. F., and Sipatov, A. M., 2004, “Application of
CFD-Based Analysis Technique for Design and Optimization of Gas Turbine
Combustors,” ASME Paper No. GT2004-53398.
19 Andreini, A., Cerutti, M., Facchini, B., and Mangani, L., 2008, “Modelling of
Turbulent Combustion and Radiative Heat Transfer in a Object-Oriented CFD
Code for Gas Turbine Application,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-51117.
20 Tiribuzi, S., 2008, “CFD Simulation of Noise in Gas Turbine Combustors by
Means of Turbulence Reﬂuctuation Method,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-
50241.
21 Balestri, M., Sigali, S., Cocchi, S., and Provenzale, M., 2008, “Low-NOx
Hydrogen Fuelled GT Features and Environmental Performances,” Proceed-
ings of POWER-GEN Europe, Paper No. ID 112.
22 Cocchi, S., Provenzale, M., Cinti, V., Carrai, L., Sigali, S., and Cappetti, D.,
2008, “Experimental Characterization of a Hydrogen Fuelled Combustor With
Reduced NOx Emissions for a 10 MW Class Gas Turbine,” ASME Paper No.
GT2008-51271.
23 Cocchi, S., and Sigali, S., 2010, “Development of a Low-NOx Hydrogen Fu-
elled Combustor for 10 MW Class Gas Turbines,” ASME Paper No. GT2010-
23348.
24 Benovsky, P., Brunetti, I., Sigali, S., Leroy, C., Gheri, P., and Cocchi, S., 2008,
“NOx Reduction Strategy in GE10 Hydrogen-Fuelled Heavy Duty Gas Tur-
bine,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-51270.
25 Gobbato, P., Masi, M., Toffolo, A., and Lazzaretto, A., 2009, “Numerical
Simulation of a Hydrogen Fuelled Gas Turbine Combustor,” Proceedings of
HYSYDAYS, Torino, Italy.
26 McBride, B. J., Gordon, S., and Reno, M. A., 1993, “Coefﬁcients for Calcu-
lating Thermodynamic and Transport Properties of Individual Species,” NASA
Report No. TM-4513.
27 Magnussen, B. F., and Hjertager, B. H., 1976, “On Mathematical Models of
Turbulent Combustion With Special Emphasis on Soot Formation and Com-
bustion,” Proceedings of the 16th Symposium on Combustion, the Combustion
Institute.
28 Turns, S. R., 2000, An Introduction to Combustion, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill,
Singapore.
29 Marathe, A. G., Mukunda, H. S., and Jain, V. K., 1977, “Some Studies on
Hydrogen-Oxygen Diffusion Flame,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 15, pp. 49–64.
30 Obieglo, A., Gass, J., and Poulikakos, D., 2000, “Comparative Study of Mod-
elling a Hydrogen Nonpremixed Turbulent Flame,” Combust. Flame, 122, pp.
176–194.
31 Hirschfelder, J. O., Curtiss, C. F., and Bird, R. B., 1954, Molecular Theory of
Gases and Liquids, Wiley, New York.
021506-8 / Vol. 133, FEBRUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

32 Menter, F. R., 1994, “Two-Equation Eddy-Viscosity Turbulence Models for
Engineering Applications,” AIAA J., 32, pp. 1598–1605.
33 Sazhin, S. S., Sazhina, E. M., Faltsi-Saravelou, O., and Wild, P., 1996, “The
P-1 Model for Thermal Radiation Transfer: Advantages and Limitations,”
Fuel, 75, pp. 289–294.
34 Denison, M. K., and Webb, B. W., 1993, “A Spectral Line-Based Weighted-
Sum-of-Gray-Gases Model for Arbitrary RTE Solvers,” ASME J. Heat Trans-
fer, 115, pp. 1004–1012.
35 Patankar, S. V., and Spalding, D. B., 1972, “A Calculation Procedure for Heat,
Mass and Momentum Transfer in Three-Dimensional Parabolic Flows,” Int. J.
Heat Mass Transfer, 15, pp. 1787–1806.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 021506-9
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
