
--- Page 1 ---

 
GE Global Research 
 ______________________________________________________________  
 
Technical Information Series
 
 
 
 
Effect of Mode of Operation on Gas 
Turbine Combustor Performance 
 
 
 
 
 
Bassam Abd El-Nabi, Keith Mcmanus and Richard Symonds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2012GRC948, November 2012 
 Public (Class 1) 


--- Page 2 ---

ii 
 
Copyright © 2012 to ASME, Used with permission 
 


--- Page 3 ---

iii 
 
GE Global Research 
Technical Report Abstract Page 
 
Title         Effect of Mode of Operation on Gas Turbine Combustor Performance 
 
Author(s)  
Bassam Abd El-Nabi  
 
 
Phone    1 518-387-5472 
 
 
Keith Mcmanus 
Richard Symonds 
 
Component 
Emissions & Fuel Flexibility Laboratory, Niskayuna 
 
 Report 
Number 
2012GRC948 
Date 
November 2012 
 
Number  
of Pages 
12 
Class 
Public (Class 1) 
  
Key Words: gas turbine, natural gas, dry liquid, combustor performance 
 
Abstract: The primary goal of this study is to quantify the differences in the Combustor 
Performance under different modes of operation as a function of the combustor exit temperature. 
The main focus is the impact on liner heat loading since liner durability is strongly dependent on 
the metal peak temperature as well as temperature gradients. The study also includes impact on 
emissions and acoustics. Three modes of operation are discussed: non premixed natural gas 
operation, Dry Liquid Fuel operation and Wet liquid Fuel. Limited premixed natural gas data are 
also discussed when appropriate. Experiments are conducted on a Single Nozzle Rig (SNR) at 
conditions representative of different power levels of F class Gas Turbines. The results are 
analyzed to show the natural gas vs. dry liquid fuel performance, followed by the effect of water 
injection and effect of load variation. The results show that heat loading impact is amplified in 
the head end region since this is where the flame stabilizes. The combustor head end average 
temperature is 100 degree higher for Dry Fuel Oil when compared to natural gas. However, the 
tail section of the liner is 50 degree lower for Fuel Oil. The difference is mainly attributed to the 
change in flame shape and flame radiation. CO emissions were roughly 80 ppm lower for 
Natural Gas. NOx is higher for Liquid Fuel (35-80% depending on flame temperature). 
Emissions profiles at the combustor exit are similar for both fuels with a variability of 40% 
indicating it is controlled by flow-flame interaction. Acoustics are lower in amplitude for non-
premixed natural gas, but peak frequency is similar. Liquid fuel wet mode of operation results in 
significant reduction in the head end temperature due to the water impingement on the liner 
(~300F). However, the maximum temperature over the tail section is 50F higher than dry 
operation. Yet, the average tail temperature is similar under both modes of operation with higher 
variability under wet operation (70%). This strong temperature variability can influence the liner 
life. More than 80% reduction in NOx emissions is achieved with water injection. Water 
injection impact on CO is dictated by CO generation mode (quenching vs. dissociation). More 
important is the significant improvement in emissions profile at the combustor exit with water 
injection (60% reduction in variability). At higher load, the maximum liner temperature is 80-
150 degree higher than part load. This is mainly attributed to the increase in air inlet temperature 
and increase in radiation heat flux which is dependent on both flame temperature and pressure. 


--- Page 4 ---

iv 
 
More investigations are required to determine the impact on complicated engine configurations 
as well as to isolate the effect of flame shape. 
 
 
Manuscript received November 27, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 5 ---

 EFFECT OF MODE OF OPERATION ON GAS TURBINE COMBUSTOR 
PERFORMANCE 
 
Bassam S. Mohammad, Keith McManus, Christian 
Vandervort 
GE Global Research Center 
Niskayuna, NY, USA 
 
Jeffrey Goldmeer 
GE Power & Water 
Schenectady, NY, USA 
 
 
Richard Symonds 
GE Power & Water 
Greenville, SC, USA 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The primary goal of this study is to quantify the differences 
in the Combustor Performance under different modes of 
operation as a function of the combustor exit temperature. The 
main focus is the impact on liner heat loading since liner 
durability is strongly dependent on the metal peak temperature 
as well as temperature gradients. The study also includes 
impact on emissions and acoustics.  Three modes of operation 
are discussed: non premixed natural gas operation, Dry Liquid 
Fuel operation and Wet liquid Fuel. Limited premixed natural 
gas data are also discussed when appropriate. Experiments are 
conducted on a Single Nozzle Rig (SNR) at conditions 
representative of different power levels of F class Gas Turbines. 
The results are analyzed to show the natural gas vs. dry liquid 
fuel performance, followed by the effect of water injection and 
effect of load variation. The results show that heat loading 
impact is amplified in the head end region since this is where 
the flame stabilizes. The combustor head end average 
temperature is 100 degree higher for Dry Fuel Oil when 
compared to natural gas. However, the tail section of the liner is 
50 degree lower for Fuel Oil. The difference is mainly 
attributed to the change in flame shape and flame radiation. CO 
emissions were roughly 80 ppm lower for Natural Gas. NOx is 
higher for Liquid Fuel (35-80% depending on flame 
temperature). Emissions profiles at the combustor exit are 
similar for both fuels with a variability of 40% indicating it is 
controlled by flow-flame interaction. Acoustics are lower in 
amplitude for non-premixed natural gas, but peak frequency is 
similar. Liquid fuel wet mode of operation results in significant 
reduction in the head end temperature due to the water 
impingement on the liner (~300F). However, the maximum 
temperature over the tail section is 50F higher than dry 
operation.  Yet, the average tail temperature is similar under 
both modes of operation with higher variability under wet 
operation (70%). This strong temperature variability can 
influence the liner life. More than 80% reduction in NOx 
emissions is achieved with water injection. Water injection 
impact on CO is dictated by CO generation mode (quenching 
vs. 
dissociation). 
More 
important 
is 
the 
significant 
improvement in emissions profile at the combustor exit with 
water injection (60% reduction in variability). At higher load, 
the maximum liner temperature is 80-150 degree higher than 
part load. This is mainly attributed to the increase in air inlet 
temperature and increase in radiation heat flux which is 
dependent on both flame temperature and pressure. More 
investigations are required to determine the impact on 
complicated engine configurations as well as to isolate the 
effect of flame shape. 
 
1    INTRODUCTION 
Gas Turbine Combustor life is strongly dependent on liner 
durability. Liner durability is a function of two main 
parameters: maximum temperature and temperature gradients. 
In fact, temperature gradient is getting more focus with the 
current advancement in material properties. Liner temperature 
variability was shown to be strongly influenced by flow field 
1


--- Page 6 ---

 
2 
variation (for example: cup to cup variation) and TBC (Thermal 
Barrier Coating) thickness variation [1]. Bradshaw and Waitz 
showed that the life expectancy can be reduced by 20% because 
of such variations [1].  
Another 
parameter 
that 
derives 
liner 
temperature 
variability is the mode of operation. Gas turbines are typically 
designed to have dual fuel capabilities (Gas and Liquid).  The 
favorable mode of operation depends on customer needs which 
may be related to available resources and site environmental 
restrictions. The important question is how does the mode of 
operation influence the liner heat loading in terms of both the 
maximum metal temperature and liner temperature gradients?  
Mode of operation doesnot only influence the liner heat 
loading, but also the combustion emissions and combustor 
operability (combustion dynamics). They all come in one 
package: “Combustor performance”. Effect of wet vs. dry mode 
of operation on emissions is very well documented. Reduction 
of NOx concentration with up to 80% was reported [2, 3] and 
the concept was even demonstrated on aircraft engines (during 
takeoff only) [4]. Usually the water to fuel ratio by mass is 
around 1 for stable operation [5]. Water injection may 
significantly impact the combustor exit emissions profile [6]. 
Water injection is associated with several problems including: 
generation of instabilities, hardware deterioration, the need of 
water treatment system and increased system maintenance. 
However, to the best of the authors knowledge limited/ no 
published data is available to quantify the impact on heat 
loading.   
 
This paper presents a study on the impact of mode of 
operation on liner heat loading, combustion emissions and 
combustion dynamics. Liner heat loading is studied with over 
30 Thermocouples distributed over the liner backside. 
Combustion emissions are reported in terms of an average at 
the combustor exit as well as detailed profile via a traversable 
emissions probe. Three modes of operation are discussed: non-
premixed natural gas operation, dry liquid fuel and wet liquid 
fuel. Non-premixed natural gas is selected as it offers a better 
baseline for comparison with dry liquid fuel (both operate in 
diffusion mode). Then, wet operation is chosen to study the 
impact of water injection.  Also, the results are compared at 
higher P and T to study the effect of combustor loading on 
performance. Premixed natural gas data is also discussed when 
appropriate. 
 
2    NOMENCLATURE 
Avg 
= Average 
CO 
= Carbon Monoxide 
CO2 
= Carbon dioxide 
CRZ 
= Central Recirculation Zone 
DistII 
= Number 2 heating oil (Distillate) 
DLN 
= Dry Low NOx 
F/A 
= Fuel to Air ration by mass 
ft/s 
= Velocity in feet’s/second 
H2 
= Hydrogen  
Lb/s 
= mass flow in lb/s 
ms 
= millisecond 
Norm 
= Normalized 
NOx 
= Nitric Oxides 
NO 
= Nitric Oxide 
NO2 
= Nitrogen Dioxide 
O2 
= Oxygen 
P3 
= Combustor inlet pressure 
ppmvd 
= Particle per million volume dry 
∆P/P 
= Percentage pressure drop across Combustor 
R 
= Cylindrical liner radius 
RQL 
= Rich Burn Quick Quench Lean Burn 
SNR 
= Single Nozzle Rig 
T3 
= Combustor air/Fuel mixture inlet temperature 
TC 
= Thermocouple 
TCombustor Exit  = Equilibrium flame temperature based on F/A 
Wt 
= Wet mode of operation on Liquid Fuel 
X 
= represents species concentration 
3     EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND TEST CONDITIONS: 
3.1 Experimental facility 
The test setup is shown in Figure 1. Four fluid circuits are 
illustrated on the diagram. Air circuit is shown in red, water in 
black, natural gas in green and liquid fuel in blue.  
Air circuit (red) comprises main air and secondary air. 
Main air provides both combustion and cooling air at a 
temperature of 700-875F and pressure of 135-225 Psia based on 
corresponding load and is fed through a four inch line to the 
16inch vessel where the combustor is mounted. The 
corresponding main air flow rate ranges from ~ 6.5-12 lb/s. The 
main air is metered by an orifice flow meter with a typical 
accuracy of ~ 0.6%. Secondary air comprises atomization and 
purge air. Secondary air is fed from a dedicated high pressure 
compressor at a temperature of roughly 300 F through a 1 inch 
line. Atomization air and purge air are metered separately using 
an orifice and venturi meters respectively. Atomization air is 
required to generate a liquid fuel spray and improve liquid fuel 
combustion characteristics at part load operating conditions. 
Atomization air is delivered at a pressure ratio of ~ 1.3. The 
corresponding flow is ~ 0.07-0.1 lb/s based on operating 
conditions. Purge air feeds set of holes located on the nozzle tip 
for cooling and purging requirements as well as to protect the 
tip from coke build up under liquid fuel operation. The flow 
rate is 0.05-0.1 lb/s based on operating conditions. The figure 
also shows that atomization air is used for purging the liquid 
fuel cartridge and water circuit (only the circuit used for 
emissions control). The solenoids operate based on required 
operation scheme. 
Water circuit (black) is fed from a high pressure pump and 
it is plumped such that water is used for exhaust quenching, 
emissions control and liquid fuel cartridge flush. Basically, 
liquid fuel cartridge flush can be done using water or air as 
mentioned in the previous paragraph.  
Natural Gas circuit (green) is fed from a separate 
compressor. It is a typical pipeline natural gas having a methane 
content of approximately 96%. Gas composition in provided in 
Table 1. Gas is metered using a Coriolis type mass flow meter 
2


--- Page 7 ---

 
3 
with an accuracy of 0.5%. It is plumped to offer supply to the 
premixed as well as non-premixed circuits. The non-premixed 
natural gas circuit feeds the purge holes on the tip of the nozzle. 
In non- premixed operation mode, the purge air is isolated and 
only natural gas is flowing. Natural gas is then used both for tip 
cooling and as a fuel. Liquid Fuel Circuit (blue) is fed from a 
pumping skid which can provide up to 0.35 lb/s at 3000 pisa. 
Distillate number 2 is used as a typical gas turbine liquid fuel. 
The fuel composition is provided in Table 2. Liquid fuel is 
metered using a Coriolis mass flow meter. Again, the water line 
T’s to the liquid fuel line to enable water flush capability. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 P&ID showing test setup. 
. 
Table 1 Natural Gas composition 
 
Composition 
Mole Fraction (%) 
Methane 
96.331 
Ethane 
1.543 
Propane 
0.215 
Nitrogen 
1.016 
Carbon Dioxide 
0.771 
 
3.2 COMBUSTOR AND NOZZLE DESIGN 
The combustor assembly is mounted on ASME stamped 
pressure vessels with diameter of 16’’ with pressure and 
temperature ratings of 370 psia and 1200°F respectively. The 
combustor assembly is illustrated in Figure 2. The air flow 
splits are illustrated in Figure 3. The overall air splits into three 
main portions. The main combustion air is roughly 79% of the 
total. The cooling air is roughly 21% of the total (backside 
cooling). Ninety four percent of the combustion air flows 
through the swirler or the nozzle and 6% is used for cap 
cooling. The atomization and purge air are separate circuits 
connected directly to the nozzle and not illustrated in the figure. 
The combustion liner is shown in Figure 4. It is divided 
into two main zones. The primary zone has a 6.5’’ x 6.5’’ square 
cross section and is roughly ~10’’ long. The square cross 
section was selected to enable convenient optical access. The 
four corners of the square cross section have effusion holes to 
assist in cooling. The secondary zone (also referred to as Liner 
zone) has a circular cross section with a diameter of 6.5’’ and is 
~ 25 inches long. It is chosen to be cylindrical for a more 
convenient cooling design. The reader shouldnot take the 
impression that any dilution or primary jets are involved. This 
is a DLN combustor and not an RQL type. 
The nozzle is illustrated in Figure 5. It comprises a swirler, 
center body and a burner tube. The swirler spins the air to 
stabilize the flame via a CRZ as illustrated. The center body 
also aids in the process of flame stabilization because of the 
wake region that develops as the flow expands. Also, typically, 
corner recirculation zones exist and they also aid in flame 
stability. However, the flame stabilization is dependent on the 
combustion mode which dictates, based on fuel air mixing and 
flame velocity, where the flame will “sit”. More discussion on 
aerodynamics and mode of operation will be presented in the 
results section. The burner tube just provides a space for air and 
fuel to mix in premixed mode of operation. 
 
Table 2 Distillate No2. Composition 
 
Properties 
Distillate 
No.2 
Sp. Gravity @ 60⁰F 
0.8576 
API Gravity 
33.5 
Viscosity @ 100⁰F (cSt) 
2.690 
Sulfur (% wt.) 
0.111 
Nitrogen (ppm weight) 
290 
Vanadium (ppm) 
< 1 
Carbon (% wt) 
86.98 
Hydrogen (% wt) 
12.97 
Wax Content (% wt) 
< 5 
LHV (BTU/lb) 
18,225 
 
3.3 Emissions Sampling 
Combustion products are sampled using a water-cooled gas 
sampling probe placed on an axial traverse. The sample is then 
transferred to the sample-conditioning unit via heated line 
passing through a heated filter. A stream of the sample is then 
cooled, dried, and sent to a gas sampling system for CO2, O2, 
and CO measurement. The other stream remains heated before 
entering the NOx analyzer to eliminate loss of NO2. The gas 
sampling unit is calibrated using standard calibration gases. The 
3


--- Page 8 ---

 
4 
analyzers are spanned prior to every test.  In this report, NOx 
and CO emissions are corrected and reported to 15% O2 level 
by volume. 
The emissions probe is mounted on a 1D traverse that 
enables scanning the emissions profile at the combustor exit, 
along the diameter, as illustrated in Figure 6. Assuming that any 
measured species is expressed as X, X is a function in the 
radius and can by averaged as given by Equation 1 where: Xavg 
is the average species concentration at the liner exit, R is the 
liner radius and r is a variable cylindrical coordinates. If the 
concentration is to be normalized then XNorm can be estimated 
as given by Equation 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Combustor assembly in the Single Nozzle Rig. 
 
 
Figure 3 Combustor Air flow splits. 
 
Figure 4 Combustion Liner 
 
 
Figure 5 Nozzle illustration. 
 
 
 
Figure 6 1D traverse capability illustration. 
3.4 Test conditions and data acquisition 
Experiments are conducted at P3 of 140 (load 1) and 225 
(load 2) psia and a corresponding T3 of 715 and 865F. The 
combustor residence time is roughly 18 ms. The combustor 
pressure drop (∆P/P3) varied from 2.5 to 4 % depending on 
operating conditions. 
Real-time data is acquired at a frequency of 1Hz. Reported 
data points represent an average of 8 consecutive data samples. 
Maximum NOx standard deviation is roughly ±1ppm. The 
reported average P3 and T3 has a typical standard deviation of 
±1.2 psi (0.08 bar) and ±4°F (2.2 K) respectively.  Flame 
temperatures are calculated using fuel-air ratios (F/A) based on 
Xavg=
 Xr2π rdr
R
0
πR2
                   Equation 1               
XNorm= X(r)
Xavg
                                      Equation 2               
4


--- Page 9 ---

 
5 
 
metered air and fuel flows  or the O2 and/or CO2 percentages in 
the sampled combustor products.  The latter technique is valid 
when complete combustion occurs; i.e., at flame temperature 
above the LBO limits.  In this study, the flame temperature 
based on O2 and CO2 typically match to within 30 degrees.  In 
addition, the flame temperature based on metered air and fuel 
matches with the temperature based on O2 emissions within 
1%. In this paper, reported flame temperatures are calculated 
based on F/A (equilibrium temperature).  The uncertainty in 
flame temperatures is estimated to be ±40°F (22.2 K). 
Figure 7 shows an illustration of the camera setup used to 
capture the flame shape. The camera is a regular surveillance 
camera that views the flame at a 90 degree angle through a 5.5’’ 
x 3’’ rectangular Quartz window. 
4     RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
4.1 Natural Gas vs. Dry Liquid Fuel at part load operating 
conditions 
 
4.1.1 Liner Heat loading  
Figure 8 shows a plot of the maximum metal skin 
temperature vs. the combustor exit temperature for non-
premixed natural gas (squares) and dry DistII (stars). The blue 
and the black lines represent the liner zone and primary zone 
respectively. Typically, the maximum metal temperature is the 
first concern to combustor designers when it comes to heat 
loading.  
The first observation is the straight line relationship 
between the equilibrium flame temperature (combustor exit 
temperature) and the metal temperature. The overall heat 
transfer is dictated by the flame temperature, for a fixed cooling 
flow rate. The slope of that straight line is a function in the 
flame shape, the fuel properties and cooling flow rate. 
Figure 8 shows that the behavior in the primary zone is 
very interesting. At flame temperatures up to 2300 F, maximum 
metal temperature is very similar for both fuels. However, as 
the flame temperature increases, the liner runs hotter with 
DistII and the difference reaches around 100 F at a flame 
temperature of ~2650F. At higher flame temperatures, both 
modes become similar again. This behavior in the primary zone 
is attributed to the flame shape. 
Figure 9 shows the average temperature in the primary 
zone for both natural gas (dashed line) and dry liquid fuel (solid 
line). The average temperature is the average of 8 TC’s located 
at two axial locations (4 TC’s at each axial station). The error 
bars represent the standard deviation for all 8 readings. 
Basically, the standard deviation here reflects the variability in 
liner metal temperature in the primary zone. The results show 
that the primary zone runs roughly 100F higher, on average, 
under dry liquid fuel mode of operation. This is attributed both 
to the increase in radiation heat transfer (luminosity is higher 
for liquid fuel) and flame shape. The high variability in metal 
skin temperature for natural gas is aligned with difference in 
flame shape and stabilization for both fuels. Flame luminosity 
images support this conclusion.    
 
 
 
Figure 7 Camera setup 
 
 
Figure 8 Maximum metal skin temperature vs. combustor exit 
temperature for non-premixed natural gas and dry Dist II at part 
load conditions.  
 
Figure 10 and Figure 11 show the flame shape for both 
non-premixed natural gas and dry liquid fuel modes 
respectively. The pictures show that the corner recirculation is 
more involved in flame stabilization with liquid fuel than in 
natural gas operation. This is why the metal temperature is 
higher for DistII. More on the relation between flow structure 
and flame location is given in [7]. Though premixed natural gas 
operation is not discussed in this paper,  Figure 12 shows the 
flame shape under premixed mode of operation. It is clear that 
the Corner recirculation zone is significantly contributing to 
flame stabilization. Under this mode of operation the liner 
temperature in the primary zone is even higher than the 
reported values. Flame shape strongly influences the metal 
temperature in the combustor head end region which is the 
volume where flame stabilization takes place. It is worth 
mentioning that TC’s in this area may be used to indicate that 
LBO is approached [8].  
The black lines on Figure 8 show the maximum metal 
temperature in the liner zone for both fuels. The liner zone, 
illustrated in Figure 4, only sees a mixture of hot swirling gases 
generated from the primary zone with no much difference in 
shape. This is why the trends are liner trends for both fuels in 
this region. However, the maximum liner temperature is 50F 
higher for natural gas. It appears that this is primarily due to 
5


--- Page 10 ---

 
6 
rotating hot streaks since the average temperature over the liner 
is similar for both fuels as will be discussed shortly. 
Figure 13 shows the average metal skin temperature in the 
liner region for both modes as a function of flame equilibrium 
temperature. There is a perfect match in the average, but more 
variability is apparent with natural gas operation. Again, this is 
mainly attributed to the non-homogenous flame structure as 
shown in Figure 10. The swirling hot streaks affect individual 
TC’s, yet the average behavior is very similar.  
 
4.1.2 Combustion Emissions  
Figure 14 presents a plot of the averaged combustion 
emissions (NOx and CO both corrected to 15% O2 in ppm 
volume dry) vs. flame temperature for both modes. The NOx 
emissions follow the well-known exponential trend because of 
the domination of the thermal mechanism. The CO generation 
mechanism is quenching at low temperatures and dissociation 
on the high side. 
NOx and CO are higher for dry liquid fuel operation than 
natural gas operation as depicted in Figure 14. Carbon 
Monoxide (CO) emissions from natural gas is roughly 85 ppm 
lower over the temperature range of interest. NOx emissions 
are 35-80% lower for natural gas over the range of interest with 
more reduction at higher flame temperatures. Though both fuels 
are running in a diffusion mode, yet there is a considerable 
reduction in emissions as we go from liquid to gas. This 
behavior is attributed to the vaporization of the liquid fuel spray 
as it burns (droplet burning mode). This mechanism dominates 
and dictates the emissions generated from the dry liquid fuel 
mode of operation. Though the premixed natural gas emissions 
are not discussed here, but under premixed natural gas mode of 
operation the NOx emissions is reduced by ~ 95% when 
compared to the non-premixed natural gas mode of operation. 
 
Figure 9 Average metal skin temperature in the primary zone 
vs. combustor exit temperature for non-premixed natural gas 
and dry Dist II at part load conditions.  
 
 
Figure 10 Non-Premixed Natural as Flame Shape  
 
 
Figure 11 DistII (dry) flame shape  
 
 
 
Figure 12 Premixed flame shape  
 
 
Figure 13 Average metal skin temperature in the liner zone vs. 
combustor exit temperature for non-premixed natural gas and 
dry Dist II at part load conditions.  
 
Corner Recirculation zone 
Burner Tube 
Burner Tube 
Corner Recirculation zone 
6


--- Page 11 ---

 
7 
More important is the emissions profile at the combustor 
exit since it dictates the thermal loading on the first stage 
nozzle. Figure 15 shows the normalized O2 emissions over the 
combustor exit cross section for non-premixed natural gas 
mode. The values are normalized by the cross section average 
as given by Eq. (2) (the y-axis represents a percentage from the 
average). The variability is ~ 40% from the walls to the center 
point. The importance of O2 profile is that it translates into a 
temperature profile as shown in Figure 16. Operation on dry 
liquid fuel results in similar variability as shown in Figure 17. 
This indicates that the variability is mainly due to the flow-
flame interaction (this is a diffusion flame mode). However, as 
the combustor exit temperature exceeds 2700F, the variability 
increases to 70%.  
Figure 18 and Figure 19 present the normalized NOx 
emissions profiles for non-premixed natural gas and dry liquid 
fuel respectively.  Variability is around 170% for both modes 
though from an absolute perspective the NOx emissions are 
much lower for non-premixed natural gas (see Figure 14). This 
indicates that generation zones in both modes are very similar 
(for example CRZ as shown in Ref. [9, 10]). It is really 
interesting that this is the case though the combustor doesnot 
run with any primary or dilution jets (DLN design). A similar 
variability in an RQL type of combustor running on natural gas 
was reported in Ref. [6]. This indicates the importance of 
determination of emissions profiles or area weighted average 
emissions for nay combustor arrangement even if it is a DLN 
design. It is also note-worthy that the O2 profile goes hand in 
hand with the NOx profile (NOx increases as O2 decreases). 
Figure 20 shows the CO emissions profiles for non-
premixed mode of operation. At low temperatures CO 
originates from the wall due to a quenching mechanism. At 
higher temperatures CO is generated due to dissociation 
because of the high temperature of the center stream. Figure 16 
shows that though the average exit temperature is 2700F, the 
stream at the center has a temperature that is close to 3200F. 
Dry liquid fuel shows similar CO trends and results are not 
shown here for reasons of brevity. 
 
 
4.1.3 Combustor Operability 
Combustor operability here refers to the combustion 
dynamics or pressure oscillations generated due to the coupling 
between heat release fluctuations and chamber acoustics.  
Figure 21 shows a plot of the peak frequencies and peak to 
peak (pk-pk) amplitudes vs. flame temperature for both modes 
of operation. Non-premixed natural gas amplitude of oscillation 
is within 1-2 psi pk-pk while the dry liquid fuel amplitude is 
within 5-7 psi pk-pk. The peak frequency for dry liquid fuel 
operation is ~ 220 Hz, but for natural gas varies between 150-
220 Hz depending on flame temperature. As discussed 
previously, there is evidence that the corner recirculation zone 
involvement in heat release in the non- premixed natural gas 
mode is marginal when compared to Dry Liquid Fuel. This is 
mainly the reason the amplitudes of oscillations are 
significantly lower for the non-premixed natural gas mode. 
Interestingly, premixed natural gas mode shows low amplitude 
of oscillations when the flame stabilization mainly occurs in the 
CRZ. However, once the corner recirculation zone is more 
involved in the flame stabilization process, the amplitude of 
oscillations increase exponentially. More discussion on the 
regions of high velocity oscillations and their role in generation 
of thermo-acoustic instabilities is given in Refs. [11, 12]. 
Typically, combustion dynamics is suppressed in the engine by 
either staging or pilot operation.  
 
 
Figure 14 Average NOx15 and CO15 vs.  combustor exit 
temperature for non-premixed natural gas and dry Dist II at part 
load conditions.  
 
 
Figure 15 Normalized O2 emissions profiles over the 
combustor exit for non-premixed natural gas operation.  
 
 
Figure 16 Temperature profile over the combustor exit for non-
premixed natural gas operation at an average exit temperature 
of 2700F. 
 
7


--- Page 12 ---

 
8 
 
Figure 17 Normalized O2 emissions profiles over the 
combustor exit for Dry Liquid Fuel operation.  
 
 
Figure 18 Normalized NOx emissions profiles over the 
combustor exit for non-premixed natural gas operation  
 
 
Figure 19 Normalized NOx emissions profiles over the 
combustor exit for Dry Liquid Fuel operation.  
4.2 Dry vs. wet liquid fuel mode of operation 
 
4.2.1 Liner Heat loading  
Figure 22 shows a plot of the maximum metal 
temperature in the primary and liner zones under wet and dry 
liquid fuel modes of operation. The primary zone maximum 
temperature is 350 F lower with water injection, on average, 
due to the water impingement on the metal. The maximum liner 
zone temperature is roughly 50F higher with water injection. 
This is probably due to the increase in flame length that 
typically associates water injection. The rate of increase of 
metal temperature with increase combustor exit temperature is 
similar for both modes in the liner zone. However, it is much 
different in the primary zone. This is where the water injection 
has the strongest effect of flame stabilization and flame shape 
and therefore the response is totally different.  
From an average perspective, the liner zone temperature 
is similar with and without water injection as depicted in Figure 
23. However, the temperature variability with water injection is 
on average 70% higher. These variations results in higher 
temperature gradients under wet operation. Added to this is the 
effect of water on deterioration of hardware. This is why wet 
mode of operation is typically associated with more 
maintenance requirements. But again, the preferred mode of 
operation is mainly driven by emissions requirements as well as 
required pattern factor as will be discussed shortly. 
 
 
Figure 20 Normalized CO emissions profiles over the 
combustor exit for non-premixed natural gas operation.  
 
 
Figure 21 peak frequencies and corresponding amplitudes for 
non-premixed natural gas and dry DistII modes vs. combustor 
exit temperature.  
4.2.2 Combustion Emissions  
Figure 24 presents the average NOx and CO emissions 
(both corrected to 15% O2) under wet and dry liquid fuel modes 
of operation. The merit of water injection is apparent with more 
that 80% reduction in NOx over a very wide range of 
combustor exit temperature. This behavior is mainly because 
water reduces the peak flame temperature and results in a more 
homogenous flame and thermal NOx are mainly a function of 
the peak temperatures. 
Impact of water injection on CO depends mainly on the 
CO generation mode. At combustor exit temperatures less than 
2600F, the generation mode is mainly quenching at the walls as 
discussed previously. Therefore, water injection at low 
8


--- Page 13 ---

 
9 
temperatures results in increased CO emissions. On the 
contrary, at higher temperatures CO is generated due to 
dissociation from the central stream (center peaked profile). 
Consequently, water injection at combustor exit temperatures 
higher than 2650F results in decreased CO emissions. This 
agrees well with the results reported from an RQL system [6].  
More of the water injection merits is manifested in the 
homogenization of the emissions profile at the combustor exit. 
The variability over the exit cross section drops from 40 to 20% 
as shown in Figure 25 (50% improvement). NOx emissions 
variability drops from 170% to 70% as shown in Figure 26 (60 
percent reduction). CO profiles are not shown for reasons of 
brevity. 
 
Figure 22 Maximum metal skin temperature vs. combustor exit 
temperature (dry & wet liquid fuel operation at part load). 
 
 
Figure 23 Average metal skin temperature in the liner zone vs. 
combustor exit temperature for dry and wet liquid fuel  
operation at part load conditions.  
 
Figure 24 Average NOx15 and CO15 vs.  combustor exit 
temperature for dry and wet liquid fuel operation at part load 
conditions.  
 
Figure 25 Normalized O2 emissions profiles over the 
combustor exit for wet liquid fuel mode of operation.  
 
Figure 26 Normalized NOx emissions profiles over the 
combustor exit for wet liquid fuel mode of operation.  
 
4.2.3 Combustor Operability 
Figure 27 presents the effect of water injection on 
combustion dynamics. The amplitude of oscillations is roughly 
2 psi lower with water injection, on average. The peak 
frequency is ~ 225 Hz for both modes. The impact observed 
here is not a universal impact. In fact, water injection may 
result in amplification of the amplitude of oscillations. For 
example, operation of the same combustor arrangement with 
higher pressure drop resulted in 5X increase in acoustics levels 
9


--- Page 14 ---

 
10 
with water injection, not shown here. As the pressure drop 
increases, the turbulence activities increase while the flow 
maintain the same structure [7, 13]. However, the increase in 
turbulence activities results in propagation of the heat release 
into a larger portion of corner recirculation zone [14] or any 
new zone where the flame was not initially anchored. Once the 
water is turned on, such regions become the main source of 
instabilities. This is just a possible explanation to the observed 
phenomenon but more investigations are required to confirm 
the relationship between pressure drop and sensitivity to water 
injection as well as the combustion mode.  
 
 
Figure 27 peak frequencies and corresponding amplitudes for 
dry and wet Liquid fuel modes vs. combustor exit temperature.  
4.3 Full load vs. part load 
 
4.3.1 Liner Heat loading  
Figure 28 shows a plot of the maximum metal temperature 
in the primary zone (blue curves) and liner zone (black curves) 
at part (solid lines) and full load (dotted lines) operating 
conditions.  
The primary zone maximum metal temperature is 280 F to 
360 F higher at full load operating conditions. In other words, 
the lines fitting the data are not parallel but diverge as 
temperature increases. The higher heat loading is attributed to 
two factors. First, the change in flame shape due to the density 
differences and effect of T3. Second, the radiation heat transfer 
which is a function in luminosity which is a function in 
combustor pressure. It is well known that as the pressure 
increases flame radiation becomes more important [5, 15] so 
basically more heat is delivered to the liner via radiation 
mechanism. As more fuel is burned, more carbon particles are 
available to radiate heat and this derives the divergence of the 
lines with increased temperature. 
The liner zone maximum metal temperature increases by 
80F to 150F depending on the flame temperature. It is very 
interesting that the major impact on the liner at high power 
conditions occurs in the primary zone where flame shape 
strongly influences the heat transfer process. The metal 
temperature in the liner zone is ~130F higher at high power 
conditions when compared to part load from an average 
perspective (Figure 29). It is interesting that T3 increased by ~ 
130F from part load to higher load operating conditions. This 
reflects the important impact of T3 which appears clearly when 
you look from an average perspective. Variability of 
temperature along the liner is very similar for both loads as 
depicted in Figure 29. 
 
Figure 28 Maximum metal skin temperature vs. combustor exit 
temperature for dry mode of operation at low power and high 
power operating conditions.  
 
Figure 29 Average metal skin temperature in the liner zone vs. 
combustor exit temperature for low power and high power 
operating conditions.  
 
4.3.2 Combustion Emissions  
Figure 30 presents the average NOx and CO emissions 
(both corrected to 15% O2) under low power and high power 
operating conditions versus combustor exit temperature. The 
high power conditions increases NOx by 55-70% depending on 
flame temperature. The effect is more pronounced as the flame 
temperature increases. The industrial standard for pressure 
effect is a 0.5 pressure exponent (or n) where NOx is 
proportional to Pn (P is the operating pressure). However, it has 
been shown that the pressure effect is a function in the flame 
temperature as well as pressure [5, 16, 17]. A plot of the 
pressure exponent derived from this data is given in Figure 31. 
The exponent varies from 0.9-1.05. This is not a pure pressure 
effect, but also includes a T3 effect and is based on a diffusion 
flame mode.  
10


--- Page 15 ---

 
11 
CO is reduced by 84-66% depending on flame 
temperature. CO suppression is mainly due to the reduction in 
dissociation reactions as the pressure increases. Also, the wall 
quenching mechanism is reduced since the liner runs hotter as 
discussed previously.   
 
4.3.3 Combustor Operability 
 
 
Figure 32 shows peak frequencies and amplitudes of 
oscillations at low power and high power. The behavior is a 
typical behavior in single nozzle rigs where the amplitude of 
oscillations is amplified as the operating pressure increases 
[18]. Peak frequencies are still close under both conditions (~ 
200Hz). Dynamics is provoked by the presence of heat release 
oscillations. As the operating pressure increases more fine 
structures are present in the flow and turbulence intensifies. 
This is the suitable environment for oscillations to amplify. It 
appears that this is why as the temperature (or fuel flow) is 
increased the amplitude of oscillations increases at high power 
conditions. From an engine perspective, the choked first stage 
nozzle typically reduces reflectivity and the dynamics level are 
much lower than SNR’s. 
 
Figure 30 Average NOx15 and CO15 vs.  combustor exit 
temperature for dry liquid fuel operation at low power and high 
power operating conditions.  
 
Figure 31 pressure exponent n as function of flame 
temperature.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 32 peak frequencies and corresponding amplitudes for 
low power and high power operating conditions vs. combustor 
exit temperature.  
 
5     CONCLUSIONS 
Mode of operation strongly influences liner heat loading. 
The impact of mode of operation is amplified at the head end 
region or the primary region where flame stabilization takes 
place. This is true for the combustor even if it is configured 
with backside cooling and with no primary or dilution holes 
(DLN design). The impact of mode and/or fuel on the tail 
section of the liner is relatively lower than the head end region. 
Switching from natural gas to dry liquid fuel resulted in 
100F increase in the average head end temperature but with 
50% decrease in temperature variability due to a more 
homogenous flame structure.  The tail section was 50F lower 
for dry liquid fuel. 
Turning the water on, for liquid fuel, resulted in 300F 
reduction in the head end temperature with 50% increase in 
temperature variability mainly due to water impingement on the 
metal. The tail section of the liner was running 100F higher 
with water injection, mainly due to the increase in flame length 
that associates water injection. 
Increasing the power level resulted in the head end running 
280-360F higher than part load. The tails section average 
11


--- Page 16 ---

 
12 
temperature was roughly 130F higher which confirms to the 
increase in T3.  
Emissions on natural gas are lower than dry liquid fuel 
though both run in diffusion flame mode. NOx is 35%-80% 
lower and CO is 80 ppm lower. Difference is mainly due to the 
droplet burning mode in liquid fuel. Interestingly, emissions 
profiles are similar for both with 40% variability in the radial 
direction. This indicates that the profile it is dictated by flow-
flame interaction. Turning the water on results in 50% 
improvement in the profile variability along the radius. NOx is 
reduced by more than 80%. Increase in power level results in 
NOx increase by a pressure exponent of ~0.95 and 75% 
reduction in CO. 
Pressure oscillations amplitude (combustion dynamics) are 
lowest for non-premixed natural gas followed by wet liquid 
fuel, dry liquid fuel and worst at higher load conditions.  
6     REFRENCES 
 
[1] 
S. Bradshaw and I. Waitz, "Impact of Manufacturing 
Variability on Combustor Liner Durability," Journal of 
Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, vol. 131, p. 
12, 2009. 
[2] 
J. P. Claeys, et al., "Combustion System Performance 
and Field Test Results of the MS7001F Gas Turbine," 
Journal of  Engineering Gas Turbines Power, vol. 115, 
pp. 537-546, 1993. 
[3] 
W. S. Y. Hung, "Accurate Method of Predicting the 
Effect of Humidity or Injected Water on NOx 
Emissions From Industrial Gas Turbines," ASME 
Paper No. 74-WA/GT-6, 1974. 
[4] 
D. Daggett, L., et al., "Water Injection-Could it 
Reduce Airplane Maintenance Costs and Airport 
Emissions?," NASA Glenn, Cleveland, Ohio2007. 
[5] 
A. H. Lefebvre, Gas turbine combustion, 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis, 1999. 
[6] 
B. Mohammad, et al., "Combustion Dynamics and 
Emissions Characterization for a Gas Turbine 
Combustor burning Methane and Propane," in 47th 
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference 
& Exhibit, San Diego, California, 2010. 
[7] 
B. S. Mohammad and S. M. Jeng, "Gas Turbine 
Combustor Sector Flow Structure," Journal of 
Propulsion and Power, vol. 27, pp. 710-717, 
2011/05/01 2011. 
[8] 
J. Farber, et al., "Effects of Pilot Fuel and Liner 
Cooling on the Flame Structure in a Full Scale Swirl-
Stabilized Combustion Setup," ASME Conference 
Proceedings, vol. 2009, pp. 277-286, 2009. 
[9] 
P. SCHMITTEL, et al., "Turbulent Swirling Flames: 
Experimental Investigation Of The Flow Field And 
Formation Of Nitrogen Oxide," Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute, vol. 28, pp. 303-309, 2000. 
[10] 
A. M. El-kady, et al., "Experimental Investigation of 
Temperature 
and 
Species 
Concentrations 
Characteristics of Swirling Spray Combustion," 
presented at the 43rd Aerospace science Meeting and 
Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 2005. 
[11] 
Y. Huang and V. Yang, "Dynamics and stability of 
lean-premixed swirl-stabilized combustion," Progress 
in Energy and Combustion Science, vol. 35, pp. 293-
364, 2009. 
[12] 
J. Cai, et al., "Gas Turbine Single Annular Combustor 
Sector: Combustion Dynamics," presented at the 48th 
AIAA Aerospace Science Meeting, Orlando, Florida, 
2010. 
[13] 
Y. Fu, et al., "Characteristics of the Swirling Flow 
Generated by a Counter-rotating Swirler," in 43rd 
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference 
& Exhibit, Cincinnati, OH, 2007. 
[14] 
U. Stopper, et al., "Flow Field and Combustion 
Characterization of Premixed Gas Turbine Flames by 
Planar Laser Techniques," Journal of Engineering for 
Gas Turbines and Power, vol. 131, pp. 419-429, 2009. 
[15] 
A. K. Odgers, Gas Turbine Fuels and Their Influence 
on Combustion: Taylor & Francis, 1986. 
[16] 
S. M. Correa, "A review of NOx formation under gas-
turbine combustion conditions," Combustion Science 
and Technology, vol. 87, pp. 329-362, 1992. 
[17] 
F. Biagioli and F. Guthe, "Effect of pressure and fuel–
air unmixedness on NOx emissions from industrial gas 
turbine burners," Combustion and Flame, vol. 151, pp. 
274-288, 2007. 
[18] 
B. S. Mohammad, et al., "Combustion Dynamics 
Diagnostics and Mitigation On A Prototype Gas 
Turbine 
Combustor," 
in 
TurboExpo 
2012, 
Copenhagen, Denmark, 2012. 
 
 
12
