
--- Page 1 ---

Geo. A. Richards
Jimmy D. Thornton
U.S. Department of Energy,
National Energy Technology Laboratory,
Morgantown, WV 26505
Edward H. Robey
U.S. Department of Energy,
Parsons Project Services,
Morgantown, WV 26505
Leonell Arellano
Solar Turbines, Inc.,
2200 Paciﬁc Highway,
San Diego, CA 92101
Open-Loop Active Control of
Combustion Dynamics on a Gas
Turbine Engine
Combustion dynamics is a prominent problem in the design and operation of low-
emission gas turbine engines. Even modest changes in fuel composition or operating
conditions can lead to damaging vibrations in a combustor that was otherwise stable.
For this reason, active control has been sought to stabilize combustors that must accom-
modate fuel variability, new operating conditions, etc. Active control of combustion dy-
namics has been demonstrated in a number of laboratories, single-nozzle test combus-
tors, and even on a ﬁelded engine. In most of these tests, active control was implemented
with closed-loop feedback between the observed pressure signal and the phase and gain
of imposed fuel perturbations. In contrast, a number of recent papers have shown that
open-loop fuel perturbations can disrupt the feedback between acoustics and heat release
that drives the oscillation. Compared to the closed-loop case, this approach has some
advantages because it may not require high-ﬁdelity fuel actuators, and could be easier to
implement. This paper reports experimental tests of open-loop fuel perturbations to con-
trol combustion dynamics in a complete gas turbine engine. Results demonstrate the
technique was very successful on the test engine and had minimal effect on pollutant
emissions. DOI: 10.1115/1.2204978
1
Introduction
Combustion instability has become a signiﬁcant issue in the
development and operation of low-emission stationary gas tur-
bines. Compared to earlier diffusion ﬂame combustors, stationary
gas turbines now use premix combustion to reduce ﬂame tempera-
tures, thereby avoiding signiﬁcant production of thermal NOx.
This approach to NOx reduction is very effective, but the pre-
mixed ﬂame is very prone to dynamic oscillations. Furthermore,
the absence of combustion dilution holes in premixed systems
provides little opportunity to dampen acoustic waves generated by
the combustion. For these reasons, dynamics often hinder both the
development and operation of premixed systems. Although pre-
mixed combustors have now been successfully commercialized in
many instances, changes in fuel type, ambient conditions, or even
engine wear can require adjustments to ﬂow splits, power output,
etc., to avoid dynamics. Thus, the operating margins for premixed
systems are sometimes restrictive, and new techniques to stabilize
premix combustion are needed. A recent review by Mongia et al.
1 provides more background.
Active control is a promising method to stabilize premixed
combustion. As typically proposed, active control uses fuel modu-
lation to adjust the dynamic response of the ﬂame so that the
feedback loop between heat release and acoustics is dynamically
stable. The most common approach is to modulate the fuel at the
frequency of any observed oscillations and control the phase to
produce stability. This approach has been tested in various com-
bustion test rigs 2–5. This closed-loop approach has the advan-
tage that the feedback can be adjusted to variable dynamic re-
sponse with changes in operating conditions, fuel type, etc. A
potential drawback is that the fuel needs to be modulated at the
oscillating frequency and with adequate control of the modulation
phase. Where oscillation frequency approaches 1 kHz, modulation
places a signiﬁcant mechanical demand on the fuel modulation
valve and this has been the motive to develop subharmonic actua-
tion 5. Because stationary turbines will operate thousands of
hours between maintenance, valve life is an issue for high-
frequency control strategies. This issue is complicated by the re-
quirement that valve modulation must produce fuel modulation at
the point of premixing with desired phase and gain. This means
that the fuel modulation valve should be located in the fuel injec-
tor, a hostile environment. Alternatively, the modulating valve can
be located in a cooler location 6, but the connecting piping must
have a speciﬁed acoustic impedance. This latter approach limits
the actuating response at other frequencies. The tests in Sueme
et al. 6 are the only prior tests carried out on a complete gas
turbine engine.
Open-loop fuel modulation is an alternate approach to active
control. By repeatedly modulating the fuel ﬂow, oscillations can
be dampened because the feedback loop is disrupted by the im-
posed modulation. Because the fuel modulation is not phased with
the observed pressure oscillations, the fuel control valve require-
ments are simpliﬁed. Likewise, if modulation is successful at low
frequencies, the cyclic life requirements of the valve are compa-
rable to those in reciprocating gas engine fuel injectors. As an
alternative to modulating the fuel ﬂow, McManus et al. 7
showed that open-loop modulation of the shear layer in a step-
stabilized ﬂame could be used to control combustion dynamics. In
a similar manner, Uhm and Acharya 8 investigated open-loop
modulation of an air-jet aimed at the ﬂame base in a laboratory
swirl-combustor. The intermittent disruption at the base of ﬂame
controlled oscillations without compromising the ﬂame-holding.
Richards et al. 9 demonstrate that it is possible to control
oscillations with a low-frequency modulation of a pilot ﬂame. The
approach used a commercial valve to modulate the ﬂow of fuel to
a pilot ﬂame and showed that natural oscillations could be signiﬁ-
cantly reduced by open-loop fuel modulation. A theoretical inves-
tigation by Prasanth et al. 10 and CFD analysis by Smith and
Cannon 11 explained some of these results. Pashcereit et al. 12
showed that open-loop modulation of either the pilot or main
fuel ﬂow could suppress combustion dynamics in a premixed
combustor.
Recently, researchers at Georgia Tech 13 have investigated
open-loop fuel modulation as a method to control large amplitude
combustion oscillations. Again, the idea for control was based on
Contributed by the Combustion and Fuels Division of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received by
March 11, 2005; ﬁnal manuscript received March 16, 2006. Review conducted by P.
C. Malte.
38 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Copyright © 2007 by ASME
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

the understanding that fuel modulation disrupts the feedback loop
that drives oscillations. McManus et al. 14 report successful at-
tenuation of premixed combustion oscillations using open-loop
fuel modulation in a turbine combustor rig. As a side beneﬁt, these
authors showed that open-loop fuel modulation can extend the
lean-blowout limit when compared to steady fuel injection.
Richards et al. 15 demonstrated oscillation control using
open-loop modulation of the premix fuel ﬂow. These authors
showed that equivalence ratio modulation can successfully control
oscillations when the stability map includes isolated islands of
oscillations. The concept is shown in Fig. 1a. The combustor
behavior is plotted as a function of equivalence ratio and average
air ﬂow. As shown, oscillations may be conﬁned to a speciﬁc
region on this plot shaded. If the desired operating point is inside
this region, the combustor will oscillate. It is demonstrated 15
that fuel modulation can be used to alternate the combustor
equivalence ratio between stable operating points which span the
oscillating region. In this manner, the time average equivalence
ratio is the desired operating point, but the instantaneous value is
one of the stable operating conditions. Assuming that the imposed
heat release modulations can be tolerated by downstream hard-
ware, this technique can be used to stabilize combustion oscilla-
tions. Tests on a 30 kW laboratory combustor showed that a
300 Hz instability could be stabilized by modulating the fuel at
frequencies of 20 Hz. The success of this technique depends on
the time required for oscillations to develop during the transition
between the left and right stable points, so that the results are
speciﬁc to the combustor studied.
The instability shown in Fig. 1a is referred to in this paper as
“double sided” because the oscillating region is bounded on both
sides by stable conditions. For practical purposes, many instabili-
ties are “single sided,” meaning that the stability boundary divides
stable from oscillating conditions, with no stable region on the
opposite side of the stability boundary. In this case, modulating
the equivalence ratio simply moves the combustor from stable to
oscillating conditions; this has been demonstrated 15. Thus, suc-
cessful control using the fuel modulation concept would appear to
be limited to double-sided instabilities. This limits the potential
application to a small number of situations, since many practical
dynamics problems are single sided.
To address this limitation, it is useful to recognize that turbine
engine combustors usually use multiple fuel injectors. In these
applications, it is conceivable that pairs of injectors can be modu-
lated out of phase. The concept is shown in Fig. 2. Lean blowout
is indicated by the dashed line on the left of the shaded oscillation
region. The desired, time-average equivalence ratio 0 is shown
inside the oscillation region. Referring to the time history of the
equivalence ratio for injector A, the fuel is modulated to produce
a square-wave history with an average value 0. Fuel modulation
is also occurring on injector B, but the square wave is 180 deg
out-of-phase with injector A. Thus, although injector A is operat-
ing with a stable equivalence ratio, injector B is operating at an
unstable condition. The two injectors switch conditions at the
modulation frequency, making B stable, while A is unstable. Us-
ing this approach to fuel modulation, at least one-half of the en-
gine injectors are operating at stable conditions compared to the
uncontrolled situation. Although this does not guarantee stability,
it provides an excellent option for reducing the magnitude of com-
bustion driving, and may warrant consideration on engine appli-
cations known to have single-sided instabilities. As will be shown,
the frequency of fuel modulation can be relatively low for suc-
cessful control, meaning that commercial fuel modulation valves
can be used and located in the existing fuel piping. These concepts
are explained further elsewhere 16 where the concept of periodic
equivalence ratio modulation is given the acronym PERM.
To demonstrate the success of the PERM concept, it is neces-
sary to test a combustor with multiple fuel injectors. For practical
use, it is also necessary to evaluate the effect of PERM on pollut-
ant emissions, and consider any collateral effects on the engine
systems. This paper demonstrates the successful use of PERM on
a gas turbine engine using 12 fuel injectors. The tests were carried
out in a Cooperative Research and Development Agreement be-
tween Solar Turbines Inc. and the United States Department of
Energy’s National Energy Technology Laboratory. Results show
Fig. 1
Schematic of instability regions showing how fuel
modulation can affect instability: „a… double-sided instability
and „b… single-sided instability
Fig. 2
Schematic of fuel modulation on two injectors, nozzles
A and B
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2007, Vol. 129 / 39
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

that PERM was relatively easy to implement on a commercial
engine platform, and demonstrated good control of combustion
oscillations.
2
Single Fuel Injector Modulation Development
Before conducting complete engine tests, signiﬁcant effort was
made to develop and test the fuel modulation on a single fuel
injector. Figure 3 shows a schematic of the fuel injector ﬂow path
with a solenoid and accumulator added to the baseline conﬁgura-
tion. Note that when the solenoid is opened, there are two paths
for fuel ﬂow. Fuel ﬂows from the accumulator into the premixer,
momentarily increasing the fuel ﬂow while the accumulator and
supply pressure bleed down to new steady-state values. The two
ﬂow paths are set up with internal oriﬁces so that the ﬂow rate
down each leg is established by the pressure drop along each path.
If the solenoid is modulated, the pressure in the accumulator rises
and falls with the fuel ﬂow. As in Richards et al. 15, the varia-
tion in fuel ﬂow can be calculated by measuring the accumulator
pressure as follows. A control volume equation for mass conser-
vation in the accumulator volume V is written as
d
dtV = m˙ in −m˙ out
1
where the mass ﬂow in and out of the accumulator are identiﬁed
by the respective subscripts on the right, and the density is .
Assuming that the pressure P in the accumulator can be described
by isentropic compression and expansion of the fuel with speciﬁc
heat ratio , then P−=constant, and Eq. 1 can be rewritten
V
c0
2
dP
dt = m˙ in −m˙ out
2
where c0 is the speed of sound in the fuel at the operating tem-
perature. Ignoring the small volume of fuel stored in the connect-
ing lines, Eq. 2 can be used to measure the variation in fuel ﬂow
by simply measuring the pressure in the accumulator. The terms
on the right do not need to be individually determined. The dif-
ference between what is going in and out of the accumulator rep-
resents the fuel that is stored in the accumulator, and therefore not
sent to the fuel injector. In this manner, Eq. 2 was used to cal-
culate the size of fuel modulation from the slope of the accumu-
lator pressure signal.
As shown in Fig. 3, an additional pressure transducer was
added to the plenum that supplies the individual fuel jets that
supply fuel to the premix air. Pressure measurements at this point
can be used to further verify the size of pulses delivered to the
premixing passage and provides a direct check on the pulse gen-
eration hardware. It was also possible to estimate the size of the
fuel pulses by measuring the steady ﬂow coefﬁcients of the vari-
ous ﬂow paths with the solenoid open or closed, and then treat the
problem as quasi-steady ﬂow for the solenoid open, or closed.
This approach compared within 10% of the measured accumulator
pressure and showed that a quasi-steady model could be used to
describe the ﬂow modulation. This result is important for the ac-
tual engine installation Sec. 4, where it was desired to avoid
using an accumulator. The pulse hardware was designed to modu-
late the fuel ﬂow by approximately ±12% of the average equiva-
lence ratio. This value of modulation was selected based on initial
testing not described here where the quantity of modulated fuel
was studied, and it was shown that the target 12% produced ad-
equate modulation of the ﬂame for this fuel injector. Higher or
lower modulation values could be studied and, in some instances,
were effective by simply adjusting the oriﬁces in the ﬂow pas-
sages of Fig. 3.
The fuel solenoid was a commercial valve manufactured for
natural gas injection in stationary reciprocating engines. The valve
was rated to operate at modulation frequencies as high as 125 Hz,
with a lifetime of several years in natural gas engine applications.
The frequency response of the valve was tested by recording the
pressure signals described in the preceding paragraph. It was
found that the frequency response was essentially ﬂat over the
operating range. As noted above, the predicted and measured ac-
cumulator pressures agreed within 10% using a quasi-steady
model for fuel ﬂow, afﬁrming the ﬂat frequency response.
3
Experimental
Combustion
Tests
Modulating
a
Single Fuel Injector
The fuel injector in Fig. 3 was installed in a single nozzle,
can-type combustor at the National Energy Technology Labora-
tory. The combustor has been described elsewhere 17 and is
shown in Fig. 4. Facilities at the National Energy Technology
Laboratory can supply 1.4 kg/s, unvitiated air at temperatures up
to 800 K, with maximum test pressures up to 30 atm. These
capabilities allowed single fuel injector testing at temperatures,
pressures, and ﬂow rates which existed on the actual engine
installation.
Referring to Fig. 4, air enters the inlet plenum at the left, and
passes though the fuel nozzle where natural gas is premixed.
Combustion is stabilized in the 19.8 cm 7.80 in cylindrical com-
bustion zone. The combustion zone walls are water cooled, and
there are no dilution ports or cooling holes. The combustion prod-
ucts ﬂow through a refractory plug that forms an exhaust neck
10.5 cm i.d., 22.9 cm length. This neck provides acoustic and
ﬂow boundaries that are representative of the actual engine instal-
lation. Baseline testing demonstrated that the combustor exhibited
oscillations with frequencies comparable to those observed on the
engine. An exact correspondence between oscillating conditions
on the engine, and the test rig was not achieved, but the similari-
ties were close enough to allow development. Cohen et al. 18
explain the complication of reproducing observed engine oscilla-
tions on a corresponding single-nozzle test rig. For these tests,
there was no need to precisely duplicate oscillating behavior on
the single-nozzle rig because subsequent testing was carried out in
the complete engine Sec. 4.
After leaving the exhaust neck, combustion products were
quenched with a water spray to 475 K to minimize any
postquenching reactions. The resulting products were sent to a
Fig. 3
Schematic of the fuel injector and hardware used to
generate and quantify pulses in the single-injector combustion
rig
40 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

stack where a back-pressure control valve was used to establish
the operating pressure. Pollutant emissions were measured in the
exhaust stack downstream of the water spray.
The following instrumentation was used to record the test re-
sults. Dynamic pressures were recorded in the combustion zone
using a Kistler model 206 dynamic pressure transducer, mounted
outside the vessel on an inﬁnite coil transmission line. Pressure in
the fuel accumulator Fig. 3 was also recorded with a Kistler
model 206, mounted directly into the wall of the accumulator
vessel. The combustion heat release perturbations were recorded
with a ﬁberoptic probe, located 2.54 cm downstream of the com-
bustion zone dump plane, viewing across the combustor center-
line. The ultraviolet light generated by OH* chemiluminescence
310 nm can be used to monitor the variation in combustion heat
release 19. The light collected by the probe was passed through
an optical interference ﬁlter, and focused on a photomultiplier to
produce the heat release signal. The probe position did not provide
a complete view of all the ﬂame, but gave a qualitative picture of
variations in the heat release as shown next.
The bulk air ﬂow rate is deﬁned by a reference velocity Vr,
which is the mass ﬂow divided by the inlet density and fuel nozzle
cross-sectional area. Combustor testing was carried out at 7.8 atm
pressure, two inlet air temperatures 533 K and 588 K, two ref-
erence velocities Vr=59 m/s and 69 m/s, and a range of equiva-
lence ratios . Results presented here are chosen as representative
of the behavior observed during these tests. For reference, the
operating conditions for the following ﬁgures are presented in
Table 1, along with the NOx and CO ratios discussed later.
Figure 5 presents the time history of various parameters at the
test conditions indicated in Table 1. This is a baseline condition,
without fuel modulation. The combustor pressure is shown on the
top graph and indicates a strong oscillation at 240 Hz. The fuel
manifold spoke plenum, Fig. 3 pressure also oscillates, demon-
strating the acoustics oscillations penetrate into the fuel delivery
system, but are attenuated compared to the combustor pressure.
Without fuel pulsing, the accumulator pressure is characterized by
very low amplitude oscillations. The heat release signal from OH*
shows the oscillation in combustion that is driving the combustion
dynamics. Finally, the lower graph shows the signal to the modu-
lating solenoid, which is closed in this baseline condition.
When the fuel pulsing is activated, the oscillating history
changes dramatically. Figure 6 shows the result of open-loop fuel
pulsing at the same conditions as Fig. 5. Fuel pulsing was carried
out at 10 Hz. At these conditions, the oscillating combustor pres-
sure is dramatically modulated by the fuel pulsing. Noting the
discussion concerning Eq. 2, the slope of the accumulator pres-
sure indicates the fuel ﬂow rate such that the equivalence ratio is
higher when the accumulator empties and the pressure slope is
negative. Thus, oscillations decline as the fuel ﬂow from the ac-
cumulator increases the equivalence ratio, and the oscillations
grow again as the solenoid closes. The OH* signal shows that the
oscillation in heat release is almost eliminated during a portion of
the modulation cycle. These results are consistent with the de-
scription of single-sided combustion instability provided in Fig. 1,
and demonstrate that this type of instability can only be turned on
and off, but not eliminated by fuel modulation on a single fuel
nozzle. However, actuation of multiple injectors in an engine may
still produce control as shown in Sec. 4.
It is emphasized that the effect of fuel modulation on oscilla-
tions was very dependent on the operating conditions. In some
instances, fuel modulation had very little effect on the observed
oscillation. For example, Fig. 7 shows the effect of fuel modula-
tion at different conditions than in Fig. 6. The fuel modulation
produced little effect on the baseline oscillation. The baseline os-
cillation without control is not shown because it is very similar to
that with control. Note that the lower limit of the OH* signal rises
and falls slightly with the fuel modulation, but the oscillation is
almost unaffected. In this case, the fuel modulation is unsuccess-
ful in moving the operating condition to a stable point as de-
scribed in Fig. 1. As another example, Fig. 8 shows the effect of
fuel pulsing at a lower average equivalence ratio than Fig. 7. At
this condition, the oscillation is clearly interrupted by the control
action. Note that the OH* signal indicates that the ﬂame is mo-
mentarily absent from the probe ﬁeld of view—the ﬂame is lifted
Fig. 4
Schematic of combustor used for single-injector test of fuel
modulation
Table 1
Test Conditions and Observed Emissions Ratios for
Figs. 5–8.
Fig
Vr

control
action
CO
ratio
NOx
ratio
5
69
0.55
baseline
1
1
6
69
0.55
10 Hz
1
1.4
7
59
0.63
5 Hz
1
1.16
8
59
0.56
5 Hz
42
2.15
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2007, Vol. 129 / 41
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

as the equivalence ratio drops. Depending on the operating con-
ditions, these results demonstrate that the PERM technique can
signiﬁcantly disrupt the ﬂame anchoring. This may be a disadvan-
tage because it could promote ﬂame blowout, yet the ﬂame was
easily maintained in the present tests.
Pollutant emissions were recorded during the control cases de-
scribed above. Table 1 reports the ratio of NOx and CO emissions
between the baseline and the modulated cases. In most cases, the
effect of fuel modulation was an increase in the NOx. The CO
emissions were almost unaffected by the fuel modulation, except
at the leanest operating condition, where the CO was dramatically
increased. Noting the discussion of ﬂame anchoring above, fuel
modulation near the lean blowout may not be practical due to CO
emissions and ﬂame anchoring. These results are readily under-
standable. At higher equivalence ratios, the fuel modulation pro-
duces momentarily richer fuel pockets, which can produce hot
transients that contribute to NOx. As will be seen later, the emis-
sions response in the engine application was quite different.
In summary, tests of the single fuel nozzle demonstrated that
PERM could disrupt single-sided instabilities as described in Fig.
1. The effect on emissions was modest, except near the lean ex-
tinction, where problems in ﬂame anchoring and high CO emis-
sions may limit the application of this control technique.
4
Experimental Tests on a Gas Turbine Engine
Engine testing was carried out on an experimental test engine
located at Solar Turbines. The combustor was an annular geom-
etry, using 12 premix fuel nozzles. Figure 9 shows a cross-section
of the combustor, identifying the fuel injectors and eight dynamic
pressure transducers PT-1 through PT-8. The open circles repre-
sent the position of the premixing passages supplying the combus-
tor annulus. Two of the pressure transducers were mounted on the
fuel supply lines to monitor the dynamic affects of the control
pulses on the fuel manifold and the ﬂow passage downstream of
the modulating solenoid valve. These signals could be used to
afﬁrm the magnitude of the ﬂow modulation. The remaining six
pressure transducers PT 1,2,4,5,7 were distributed around the
perimeter of the combustor so that an root-mean-square rms
pressure could be determined as an average of the six transducers.
It was important to consider measurement of multiple transducers
because tests without control showed that ﬁxed acoustic nodes
could be established in the annular geometry. Thus, a single-
pressure measurement might provide a false picture of the ampli-
tude of the oscillation.
As in the single-nozzle testing, a ﬁberoptic probe was used to
record the OH chemiluminescence signal from a position 2.5 cm
Fig. 5
History of various signals at conditions indicated in Table 1. This is the
baseline, without fuel modulation „pressures in pounds per square inch….
42 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

downstream of the injector face on fuel injector 2 Fig. 9. This
signal was used to verify the imposed heat release variations.
The fuel pulsing hardware was similar to that in Fig. 3, except
that the fuel accumulator was absent. As explained in Sec. 3,
testing with the fuel accumulator was used to quantify the un-
steady ﬂow rates produced by modulating one ﬂow path but was
not needed in the engine tests. All 12 injectors were outﬁtted with
a solenoid and ﬂow path similar to Fig. 3.
When PERM is activated, the open solenoids present added
ﬂow area for the gaseous fuel. If the throttle position were un-
changed, this larger ﬂow area would increase engine fuel ﬂow.
However, the engine control system still retains control of the fuel
ﬂow, so that the added ﬂow area is readily compensated by a
slight reduction in engine throttle position, so as to maintain the
same engine power level before and after control is activated.
During the transition between uncontrolled and controlled status,
no problems were encountered with engine operation, ﬂame out,
or high turbine inlet temperatures.
Figure 10 is a schematic of the test cell instrumentation and
control
wiring.
The
solenoid
valves
were
powered
by
a
12 V/48 amp power supply. Control signals activated the sole-
noid coils via a powered integrated circuit switch supplied by the
solenoid. Control signals TTL were generated by the control
computer software developed for this application. The control
software was designed to allow rapid transition between various
control modes and control parameters described below. The con-
trol computer also took an average of the six dynamic pressure
transducers to calculate the rms pressures reported here. Also
shown on Fig. 10, time-series data were recorded on a TEAC
RD-145T digital audio tape recorder, using 16 channels with a
sampling frequency of 6 kHz per channel. Pollutant emissions
were recorded using standard infrared or chemiluminescent
analyzers, following standard practices for engine emission
measurements.
4.1
Control Modes. With 12 injectors, many different sce-
narios for fuel modulation exist. For example, referring to the
numbering scheme on Fig. 9, modulation can increase the fuel
ﬂow on the even-numbered injectors, and then alternate with the
odd-numbered injectors. Alternatively, one can increase the fuel
ﬂow on injectors 1–6, and then alternate with injectors 2–7, then
3–8, and so on. This latter scenario would produce a higher
equivalence ratio in half of the combustor annulus, rotating at the
modulation frequency. Compared to modulating odd-even, this
would minimize the interaction between adjacent injectors, insur-
ing that the high equivalence ratio on one injector was not im-
pacted by leaner conditions from adjacent injectors.
In addition, scenarios are possible where a reduced number of
Fig. 6
History of various signals at conditions with fuel modulation. Same oper-
ating conditions as in Fig. 5, „pressures in pounds per square inch….
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2007, Vol. 129 / 43
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

injectors are modulated. For reference, the term “overlap” will be
used to describe the number of injectors where the solenoids are
simultaneously open. The odd-even modulation describe above is
therefore six-overlap because at any point in time, six solenoids
are open.
As an example of four-overlap, one can modulate the fuel ﬂow
in just four injectors 1,4,7,10 and then switch to four more
2,5,8,11, and ﬁnally to the remaining 3,6,9,12. If control is
successful modulating a reduced number of injectors, the impact
on emissions may be reduced.
Thus, a case can be made for considering many different modu-
lation scenarios. Testing on the engine was carried out with ﬁve
different modulation scenarios, and overlap values of 1, 2, 4, and
6. Rather than describe all these different situations, this paper
presents just a single-control scenario odd-even. Testing other
scenarios revealed that the control effects were qualitatively simi-
lar as long as they used six-overlap modulation. In other words, it
was found that control of the baseline oscillation was only suc-
cessful when six injectors were modulated together. Any arrange-
ment of modulating the injectors with less than six-overlap was
not able to produce control of the baseline oscillation.
4.2
Results of Engine Testing. The solenoids were modu-
lated over a range of frequencies, using the odd-even scheme
described above. Testing was conducted near full-load engine con-
ditions, where dynamic oscillations were observed. Unlike the
single-injector tests Sec. 3 the engine testing was conducted with
a small premixed pilot ﬂame 2% of the fuel used to maintain
ﬂame anchoring. Figure 11 shows a graph of the RMS pressure,
and the CO and NOx emissions. As explained above, the rms was
an average of the six combustor pressure transducers and was
expressed as a percentage of the combustor operating pressure.
The CO and NOx emissions were normalized by the baseline
value measured before the control action was activated. Figure 11
shows results at modulation frequencies ranging from 10 to
96 Hz. The 24 Hz, 48 Hz, and 96 Hz cases were tested because
these frequencies were integral divisors of the main oscillation
288 Hz. It was desired to insure that the fuel modulation did not
provide subharmonic driving of the combustor acoustic modes
which it did not.
Inspecting the graph, the effect of fuel modulation at any fre-
quency is almost a threefold reduction in the rms pressure. The
effect on NOx is also very encouraging, demonstrating a modest
reduction as control is actuated. However, the CO emissions rise
unacceptably for modulation frequencies of 80 Hz, increasing
by more than a factor of 4. At higher modulation frequencies, the
CO is increased over the baseline by approximately a factor of 2,
Fig. 7
History of signals at conditions „Table 1… where fuel modulation had little
effect on the oscillation „pressures in pounds per square inch…
44 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

while both the rms pressure and the NOx levels remain lower than
the baseline. The emissions behavior is discussed in more detail
later, but it should be noted that both NOx and CO emissions can
depend on the presence or absence of oscillations. Thus, there is a
compound effect on emissions from both the fuel modulation, and
the control of the oscillation.
Tests with different modulation patterns discussed in Sec 4.1
showed comparable behavior. As long as the test used six-overlap
i.e., six solenoids open at any time, the combustor oscillation
was controlled. During the controlled condition, the NOx was
comparable or less than the baseline, but the CO was always
higher than the baseline. The CO level dropped with increasing
modulation frequency, but was still at least a factor of two larger
than the baseline. In addition, tests with duty cycles of 50%
were also conducted, i.e., where the solenoids were opened for
50% of the period of modulation. As in lab scale tests described
in 15, the reduced duty cycle was less effective at controlling the
rms amplitude and is not reported here.
It is helpful to consider that time history of the oscillation.
Figures 12a and 12b compare i the baseline condition in Fig.
11 with ii the fuel modulation at 40 Hz. Refer to Fig. 9 for the
location of the various signals. In Fig. 12a the combustor pres-
sure recorded from PT-1 and PT-2 show the baseline oscillation.
Note that these pressures are located 60 deg apart on the liner
Fig. 9 and have different amplitudes because a ﬁxed standing
Fig. 8
History of signals at conditions „Table 1… where the ﬂame anchoring was
disrupted by the control action
Fig. 9
Cross section of the engine combustor annulus. The
fuel injector and pressure transducer „PT… numbering scheme
is shown.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2007, Vol. 129 / 45
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

wave in the annulus of the combustor. The OH* signal reﬂects the
well-organized variation in heat release that drives the oscillating
pressure. Considering Fig. 12b the solenoids are activated. For
reference, the lower two traces show the odd-even actuation be-
tween injectors 2 and 3. Compared to Fig. 12a the oscillating
pressure amplitudes are dramatically reduced, and the well-
organized OH* oscillation is appreciably disrupted. The large am-
plitude variation in heat release measured at injector 1 is syn-
chronized with the odd solenoid opening injector 3 shown here.
It should be noted that some organized oscillations persist in the
combustor, but at much reduced amplitude. Compared to tests
conducted in the single-nozzle experiments Sec. 3, the OH* sig-
nal does not indicate any problems with ﬂame liftoff during the
control event, but as noted, the CO emissions were undesirably
high.
To further explore how control is achieved in this system, a
separate test was conducted to evaluate what happens if the indi-
vidual injectors were operating at constant, but different, equiva-
lence ratios. This could be accomplished by simply opening the
solenoids on the odd-numbered injectors i.e., not modulating. In
this manner, the odd-injectors would operate at the higher equiva-
lence ratio, and the even-injectors would operate at the lower
equivalence ratio. Referring again to Fig. 2, this could place
nozzle A in a stable region, and nozzle B in an oscillating region.
Figure 13 shows the result of this test. The baseline rms and
emissions are compared to what happens as the odd-numbered
injector solenoids are progressively opened. Both the rms pressure
and the CO emissions rise as the injectors are activated. As noted
in Richards et al. 15, the PERM concept relies on modulating
fast enough to avoid development of oscillations at any one oper-
ating condition. These data support the hypothesis that modulation
is necessary to produce control, i.e., it is not adequate to simply
operate the different fuel injectors at different values of . Figure
13 also shows the remarkable sensitivity of CO to changes in the
fueling distribution. Activating even one solenoid produced a
fourfold increase in CO, suggesting that some partial combustion
products are being quenched downstream of the richer fuel injec-
tor. The drop, then rise, in CO as injectors 3 and 5 were activated
was not spurious. Similar trends were observed when a compa-
rable test was conducted activating injectors 1–6 in a sequential
manner. In practical turbine combustion liners, it is widely recog-
nized that CO emissions can be complicated by quenching in un-
controlled dilution air jets. Because this liner used a number of
additional drilled holes for the optical OH probe, and pressure
probes, air leaking around these ports may increase the CO levels.
It is important to note that the CO levels themselves depend on
the presence of the oscillation. Thus, comparing the CO levels
with and without modulation also compares the CO levels with
and without the presence of strong oscillations. To show that the
CO was not completely determined by the fuel modulation, a test
was conducted with fuel modulation on an otherwise stable com-
bustion condition. Figure 14 shows the result of fuel modulation
at an engine condition where the baseline combustion is stable.
Note that the rms pressure is not affected by the fuel modulation
so that the increased CO is not attributed to the control of the
oscillation. The fuel modulation at lower frequencies again pro-
duces an increase in CO emissions, but it is not as dramatic as in
the cases where oscillations were eliminated by the control action.
At the highest modulation frequency, the normalized CO was just
1.3 compared to the baseline. As in the control cases, the NOx
emissions actually decrease with the fuel modulation. This inter-
esting effect on NOx differs from studies in the lab combustor
Sec. 4, where fuel modulation almost always produced a modest
increase in NOx emissions. There are differences between the
single-nozzle testing and the engine testing. The engine conﬁgu-
ration has adjacent ﬂames, liner cooling ﬂows, and a stabilizing
Fig. 10
Schematic of test cell and instrumentation layout
Fig. 11
Rms pressure „% of combustor pressure… and normal-
ized emissions at the baseline condition, and with fuel modu-
lation at various frequencies
46 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 10 ---

pilot ﬂame. However, these differences do not provide a clear
explanation for the reduced NOx observed during engine fuel
modulation. As in the single-nozzle testing, it seems likely that
momentary excursions to higherequivalence ratio should produce
slightly more NOx not less. More investigation is needed to un-
derstand this effect.
The promising control results presented here must be tempered
by the recognition that PERM control cannot work at conditions
where the baseline oscillation is not disrupted by an equivalence
ratio shift. This was clear from single-nozzle testing presented in
Fig. 7, where PERM had virtually no effect on oscillations. Just as
Fig. 14 showed that PERM did not move the combustor to un-
stable conditions, other engine operating conditions demonstrated
that PERM would not disrupt a stubborn oscillation and could
even lead to oscillations. Additional testing of the PERM concept
was conducted on a second engine application that did not have
well deﬁned stability boundaries. In that case, PERM modulation
had little effect on the oscillation. These results can all be justiﬁed
from the presence or lack of stability boundaries shown in Figs. 1
and 2. However, lacking detailed knowledge of the stability
boundaries, no deﬁnitive prediction can be made about the success
of PERM without testing. Fortunately, the hardware changes
needed to conduct a test are modest and do not require any
changes to the internal components of the engine. Development of
both reduced and detailed models are planned to further explore
the control effect, and the emissions data. The encouraging results
presented here justify additional theoretical and experimental in-
vestigation of this approach.
5
Summary
A concept for open-loop active control of combustion dynamics
was proposed, developed, and tested on a single fuel injector test
rig and on a gas turbine engine. The control concept uses periodic
Fig. 12
„a… Baseline dynamics at conditions of Fig. 11. Note
the solenoid trigger signals are not active. „b… Observed dy-
namics with odd-even fuel modulation activated at 40 Hz. Note
the odd-even activation of solenoid triggers 2 versus 3.
Fig. 13
Rms pressure and emissions for steady solenoid
valve opening on odd-numbered injectors. The labels are inclu-
sive „i.e.; injectors 1–7=1, 3, 5, 7, etc.….
Fig. 14
Effect of fuel modulation on pollutant emissions when
the
engine
conditions
produce
stable
„nonoscillating…
combustion
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2007, Vol. 129 / 47
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 11 ---

equivalence ratio modulation PERM to modulate the equiva-
lence ratio on different fuel injectors so that at least one-half of
the engine injectors are operating at stable conditions. Tests of this
concept were developed on a single-injector test rig and showed
that PERM could disrupt oscillations at many test conditions. De-
pending on test conditions, fuel modulation produced a modest
increase in NOx, and a widely variable effect on CO emissions, in
the single-injector tests.
Tests on a gas turbine engine showed that PERM was relatively
easy to install and operate using commercial fuel solenoids in-
serted in the fuel piping outside of the engine pressure casing. The
fuel solenoids are designed for continuous cyclic service in recip-
rocating NG engines and are expected to have a lifetime of several
years. No changes were made to the existing engine throttle con-
trol system. Tests demonstrated that control of oscillations re-
quired that the baseline oscillation exist near a stability boundary,
such that equivalence ratio modulation could disrupt the oscilla-
tion. Engine testing showed that PERM could reduce oscillation
amplitude by one-third, but with an increase in CO emissions, and
a modest decrease in NOx emissions. The reasons for the emis-
sions response are not clear at this time, since single-injector test-
ing showed that NOx generally increased with fuel modulation.
Additional modeling studies are suggested to fully explain both
the control mechanism and the pollutant response.
Acknowledgment
Financial support from the U.S. Department of Energy is grate-
fully recognized. The technical staff at both NETL and Solar Tur-
bines is acknowledged for helping plan and conduct this research.
There are too many individual contributions to list here, but the
authors wish to recognize the support of our co-workers.
References
1 Mongia, H. C., Held, T. J., Hsiao, G. C., and Pandalai, R. P., 2003, “Chal-
lenges and Progress in Controlling Dynamics in Gas Turbine Combustors,” J.
Propul. Power, 195, pp. 822–829.
2 Cohen, J. H., Rey, N. M., Jacobson, C. A., and Anderson, T. J., 1999, “Active
Control of Combustion Instabilities in a Liquid-Fueled Low-NOx Combustor,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 1212, pp. 281–284.
3 Sattinger, S. S., Neumeier, Y., Nabi, A., Zinn, B. T., Amos, D. J., and Darling,
D. D., 1998, “Subscale Demonstration of the Active Feedback Control of Gas
Turbine Combustion Instabilities,” ASME Paper No. 98-GT-258.
4 Johnson, C. E., Neumeier, Y., Zinn, B. T., Darling, D. D., and Sattinger, S. S.,
2001, “Demonstration of Active Control of Combustion Instabilities on a Full-
Scale Gas Turbine Combustor,” ASME Paper No. 2001-GT-0519.
5 Jones, C. M., Lee, J. G., and Santavicca, D. A., 1999, “Closed-Loop Active
Control of Combustion Instabilities Using Subharmonic Secondary Fuel Injec-
tion,” J. Propul. Power, 152, pp. 1–7.
6 Seume, J. R., Vortmeyer, N., Krause, W., Hermann, J., Hantschk, C.-C., Zangl,
P., Gleis, S., Vortmeyer, D., and Orthmann, A., 1998, “Application of Active
Combustion Instability Control to a Heavy Duty Gas Turbine,” ASME J. Eng.
Gas Turbines Power, 1204, pp. 721–726.
7 McManus, K. R., Vandsburger, U., and Bowman, C. T., 1990, “Combustor
Performance Enhancement Through Direct Shear Layer Excitation,” Combust.
Flame, 82, pp. 75–92.
8 Uhm, J. H., and Acharya, S., 2004, “Open Loop Control of Combustion In-
stability with a High-Momentum Air Jet,” ASME Paper No. GT2004-53989.
9 Richards, G. A., Yip, M. J., Robey, E., Cowell, L., and Rawlins, D., 1997,
“Combustion Oscillation Control by Cyclic Fuel Injection,” ASME J. Eng.
Gas Turbines Power, 1192, pp. 340–343.
10 Prasanth, R. K., Annaswamy, A. M., Hathout, J. P., and Ghoniem, A. F., 2002,
“When Do Open Loop Strategies for Combustion Control Work?” J. Propul.
Power, 183, pp. 658–668.
11 Smith, C. E., and Cannon, S. M., 1999, “CFD Assessment of Passive and
Active Control Strategies for Lean, Premixed Combustors,” AIAA Paper No.
99-0714.
12 Pashcereit, C. O., Gutmark, E., and Weisenstein, W., 1999, “Control of Com-
bustion Instabilities in a Premixed Combustor by Fuel Modulation,” AIAA
Paper No. 99-0711.
13 Shcherbik, D., Neumeier, Y., Lubarsky, E., Zinn, B. T., McManus, K., Fric, T.
F., and Srinivasan, W., 2003, “Suppression of Instabilities in Gaseous Fuel
High-Pressure Combustor Using Non-Coherent Oscillatory Fuel Injection,”
ASME Paper No. GT2003-38103.
14 McManus, K., Han, F., Dunstan, W., Barbu, C., and Shah, M., 2004, “Model-
ing and Control of Combustion Dynamics in Industrial Gas Turbines,” ASME
Paper No. GT2004-53872.
15 Richards, G. A., Janus, M. C., and Robey, E. H., 1999, “Control of Flame
Oscillations with Equivalence Ratio Modulations,” J. Propul. Power, 152,
pp. 232–240.
16 Richards, G. A., Janus, M. C., and Grifﬁth, R. A., 2000, “Periodic Equivalence
Ratio Modulation Method and Apparatus for Controlling Combustion Instabil-
ity,” U.S. Patent No. 6,059,560.
17 Richards, G. A., and Janus, M. C., 1998, “Characterization of Oscillations
During Premix Gas Turbine Combustion,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power,
1202, pp. 294–302.
18 Cohen, J. M., Hibshman, J. R., Proscia, W., Rosjford, T. J., Wake, B. E.,
McVey, J. B., Lovett, J., Ondas, M., DeLaat, J., and Breisacher, K., 2000,
“Experimental Replication of an Aeroengine Combustion Instability,” ASME
Paper No. 2000-GT-0093.
19 Lee, J. G., and Santavicca, D. A., 2003, “Experimental Diagnostics for the
Study of Combustion Dynamics in Lean Premixed Combustors,” J. Propul.
Power, 195, pp. 735–750.
48 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 23 Jan 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
