
--- Page 1 ---

VOL. 5, NO. 5, SEPT.-OCT. 1989
J. PROPULSION
555
Combustion Enhancement by Axial Vortices
E. Gutmark,* K. C. Schadow,| T. P. Parr,J D. M. Parr,* and K. J. Wilson§
U.S. Naval Weapons Center, China Lake, California
A tapered slot jet was studied experimentally in nonreacting and reacting tests using hot-wire anemometry, water-
tunnel flow visualization, and planar laser-induced fluorescence imaging. The tapered slot jet is a modified elliptic jet
with a conical contraction leading to its elliptic outlet. The added contraction changed the entire flowfield relative to a
regular elliptic jet. The jet spread in the major axis plane was larger than in the minor axis plane, which is the opposite
behavior of an elliptic jet. The elliptic jet spreads much faster at the minor axis plane relative to the major axis plane,
leading to axis switching downstream of the nozzle. In the tapered slot jet, no axis switching was observed. The turbu-
lence amplification in the jet core was higher than in circular and elliptic jets. The different behavior was attributed to
the change in flow direction, inside the nozzle, from the conical section to the slot outlet. During this transition, the
flow acquired angular momentum, thereby generating axial vorticity. The contraction angle and the outlet aspect ratio
were found to affect the spreading rate of the jet at both axis planes and to vary the turbulence augmentation. The ef-
fect of the increased turbulence on reactive flow was tested in a premixed flame. The combustion rate was augmented in
both the core and edges of the flame relative to a circular burner.
Nomenclature
a 
= major axis of the nozzle
AH 
= aspect ratio
b 
= minor axis of the nozzle
De 
- equivalent diameter (circular nozzle area equal to
the elliptic nozzle area)
L 
- nozzle length
R 
= radial coordinate
R0 5 
= half-width of the jet (radial distance where
U=Ut/2)
Re 
= Reynolds number
U 
= mean axial velocity
u' 
— rms of fluctuating axial velocity
x 
= axial coordinate
a 
= contraction angle inside the nozzle
Subscripts
o 
= conditions at the exit
$, 
= centerline
SL 
= shear layer
Introduction
T
HE combustion process requires adequate mixing
between fuel and oxidizer and proper flameholding con-
ditions to initiate and sustain the reaction between them.
Efficient combustion can be achieved by optimizing the mix-
ing and the reaction processes. When the fuel and oxidizer are
initially separate, it is of special importance to produce suffi-
cient large-scale mixing. After the reactants are brought to-
gether to the same volume on a gross scale, enhanced mixing
on the molecular level is needed to accelerate the reaction rate.
Both large-scale mixing and molecular mixing are governed by
the flow dynamics. In reacting systems that contain mixing
layers, large-scale mixing is governed by large-scale coherent
structures. These structures dominate the mixing layer evolu-
Received Feb. 26, 1988; revision received Sept. 20, 1988. This paper
is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States.
* Research Scientist, Research Department. Member AIAA.
tSupervisory General Engineer, Research Department.
^Research Chemist, Research Department.
§ Aerospace Engineer, Research Department.
tion in both low and high Reynolds number flows.1'3 Mole-
cular mixing is related to the fine-scale turbulence produced
during the development of the mixing layer.
Much research has been done to develop different active
and passive methods of augmenting large- and small-scale
mixing. Recent reviews have summarized these efforts.2'4 One
of the passive methods investigated was the use of small-
aspect-ratio elliptic nozzles.5 The large-scale mixing of this jet
was substantially increased, relative to a circular jet, as a result
of self-induction of the elliptic vortices. The small-scale mix-
ing was also enhanced using this jet, a result of high azimuthal
instability modes amplified in this noncircular configuration.
The small-aspect-ratio elliptic nozzle was also shown to have
good mixing characteristics in high Reynolds number reacting
flows.6 A modified configuration of the elliptic nozzle was de-
veloped later to improve small-scale mixing in the cir-
cumference and core region of the jet. The modified nozzle,
called the tapered slot nozzle, consists of a conical contraction
region that leads into the elliptic outlet. The basic flow charac-
teristics of the jet from this nozzle have been described by Gut-
mark and Schadow.7 The tapered lost jet's growth pattern was
very different from that of the elliptic jet. The tapered slot jet
spreads more to the major axis side than to the minor axis
side, which is the opposite growth characteristic to the elliptic
jet.5'8 Consequently, the axis switching typical of an elliptic jet
was not observed in this jet. The growth rate of the turbulence
level in the core region, as well as in the jet's circumference,
was higher than in the circular and elliptic jets. The increased
turbulence production was attributed to the axial vorticity
component generated by the nozzle's design.
In the present study, the effect of the nozzle design parame-
ters on the tapered slot jet's flowfield are reported in nonreact-
ing flows, and the combustion characteristics of a tapered el-
liptic flame are visualized using planar laser-induced
fluorescence (PLIF).
Experimental Setup
Three different experimental methods were used in this
work to study the tapered slot jet.
1) Nonreacting freejet tests were performed to study the
shear-flow dynamics with hot-wire anemometry.
2) Flow visualization tests were concluded in water-tunnel
tests.
3) The combustion dynamics were visualized using PLIF im-
aging in a laboratory burner.


--- Page 2 ---

556
E. GUTMARK ET AL.
J. PROPULSION
FLOW
DIRECTION
Fig. 1 Tapered elliptical nozzle design.
Fig. 2 Experimental setup for PLIF OH-imaging of a burner.
Table 1 Tapered slot nozzle geometrical configurations
Geometrical parameters
Method
Air tests
Water test
Burner
Nozzle
no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Aspect
ratio,
a/b
3:1
3:1
3:1
2:1
5:1
3:1
3:1
Length,
cm
3.67
7.87
16.13
5.99
9.53
8.20
2.54
Contraction
angle
a, deg
30
15
7.5
15
15
23
22
Equivalent
diameter,
cm
3.95
3.95
3.95
4.76
3.28
4.80
1.96
The freejet tests were conducted using a tapered nozzle that
had a conical contraction leading to the elongated outlet slot.
The outlet slot replaced an elliptic shape to simplify the design
and manufacturing. The slot consisted of a rectangular middle
section with half-circles, the diameters of which were equal to
the slot's width, attached to each end of the rectangle (Fig. 1).
Five different tapered nozzles were tested in the air jet tests
and compared to a circular nozzle. Their geometrical parame-
ters are summarized in Table 1. The contraction angle a is in
the radial direction only. The air was supplied by a blowdown
facility. The jet exit velocity U0 was typically 50 m/s, corre-
sponding to a Reynolds number of 1.6x 105.
Hot-wire anemometers were used for probing the flowfield;
the measurements included mean velocity contours and the
distribution of turbulent intensities. A computer-controlled,
three-axis traverse mechanism was used to scan the flowfield
at 400 measurement points. The hot-wire calibration, data
acquistion, and analysis were done on a VAX 750 minicom-
puter.
The flow visualization test were conducted in a water tunnel
using dye injection and air bubbles and also nozzle 6 in Table
1. The flow was illuminated with a slot lamp. Flow excitation
was achieved using a butterfly valve in the inlet duct. The exit
velocity was 0.5 m/s, yielding .Re = 20,000.
The flow characteristics of the propane/air burner were vi-
sualized by PLIF imaging of in situ OH radicals. In this tech-
nique, which is shown schematically in Fig. 2 and described in
detail in Ref. 9, an excimer laser beam was expaned into a thin
sheet to excite OH molecules in the premixed flame of the
burner. The fluorescence was imaged with an intensified diode
array camera. The burner can be acoustically excited with
varying phase shifts with respect to the laser. Changing the
phase angle can serve as a means of stroboscopically mapping
out the time dependence of the flame structure. The burner
(nozzle 7) had an aspect ratio of 3:1 and a contraction angle of
22 deg. The air velocity was 5 m/s, corresponding to a
Reynolds number of 6500.
Fig. 3 Visualization of the flow pattern inside the tapered elliptic
nozzle (water-tunnel test). The generation of axial vortices occurs at
the intersection between the conical section and the slot surfaces
(marked in the photograph).
Fig. 4 Water flow visualization of the jet issuing from the tapered el-
liptic nozzle. The generation of a pair of axial vortices is visualized.
Results and Discussion
Flow Visualization
Water-tunnel tests were conducted to visualize the flow pat-
tern of the tapered slot jet inside the nozzle and in the down-
stream jet flow. Previous air test results showed that the
tapered slot jet has a higher turbulence intensity in the jet
center relative to a circular jet.7 The flow characteristics
varied considerably around the jet's circumference. These fea-
tures were attributed to the effect of the tapered nozzle on the


--- Page 3 ---

SEPT.-OCT. 1989
COMBUSTION ENHANCEMENT BY AXIAL VORTICES
557
Fig. 5 Water flow visualization demonstrating the deformation of
the initial vortices of the tapered elliptic jet.
CIRCULAR JET
U/U0
-5
20
Fig. 6 Mean axial velocity contours.
CIRCULAR JET
u'/U0
Fig. 7 Axial tubulence intensity contours.
outgoing flow. The flow streamlines inside the nozzle change
from the conical contraction section to the slot outlet. During
this transition, the flow acquires a vorticity component in the
axial direction. On the intersection region inside the nozzle,
between the conical contraction and the slot, axial vortices are
formed as shown in Fig. 3. Two pairs of intense axial vortices
are generated in the jet. One such pair, which is shown in Fig.
4, was visualized by illuminating the jet along its longer di-
mension and off its axis. The axial vortices deform the outgo-
ing circumferential vortices (Fig. 5), which then obtain com-
plex azimuthal structure. The jet evolves into secondary jets
located at the two sides of the major axis.
RO.S
RO.SJO
Fig. 8 Variation of jet spreading rate with contraction angle and
aspect ratio (major axis).
Fig. 9 Variation of jet spreading rate with contraction angle and
aspect ratio (minor axis).
Flowfield
The mean and turbulent flowfields of the tapered slot jet are
compared to a circular jet in Figs. 6 and 7. In the tapered slot,
the centerline mean velocity decays faster relative to a circular
jet. At the same time, higher mean velocity extensions are de-
veloped in the tapered slot jet's circumference, while the circu-
lar jet has a Gaussian-shaped mean velocity in the radial direc-
tion, decreasing monotonically to zero at the jet's edge. The
axial turbulence intensity contours, given in Fig. 7, show the
rapid amplification of the turbulence level along the centerline
of the tapered slot jet relative to the low rate of the circular jet,
such that a much larger turbulence intensity exists in this jet
for x/A?^4- The circular jet centerline turbulence intensity
becomes larger than that of the tapered slot jet for x/De>4.
Both jets have similar turbulence growth along their shear
layers.
Two geometrical parameters of the nozzle design determine
the jet characteristics: 1) the conical contraction angle a, and
2) the aspect ratio ^ of the outlet slot. In the following sec-
tion, the effect of these parameters is discussed.
Effect of Conical Contraction Angle
The change of jet spreading rate in the major and minor axis
planes for different contraction angles is shown in Figs. 8 and
9, respectively. The spreading rate in the major axis plane in-
creases with increased contraction angle. The jet with the
smallest contraction angle (a = 7.5 deg) has the same spreading
rate as a circular jet. The rate is doubled for a = 30 deg. In the
minor axis plane (Fig. 9), the three tapered slot jets spread
faster than the circular jet. The same trend of increased spread
with larger a is also obtained in this plane. The initial reduc-
tion of the jet width at the minor axis plane for x/De < 2 is due
to the development of two secondary jets at the outer sections
of the major axis.


--- Page 4 ---

558
E. GUTMARK ET AL.
J. PROPULSION
X/De
Fig. 10 Centerline velocity decay for different contraction angles
and aspect ratios.
0- o.io,
Fig. 11 Centerline turbulence intensity of different contraction
angles and aspect ratios.
U0
X/D.
Fig. 12 Turbulence intensity variation along the jet shear layer for
different contraction angles and aspect ratios (major axis).
"07
Fig. 13 Turbulence intensity variation along the jet shear layer for
different contraction angles and aspect ratios (minor axis).
The variation of the spreading rate with the contraction an-
gle affects the mean velocity decay along the jet center line
(Fig. 10). The highest decay rate correlates with the largest
contraction angle, a = 30 deg. The jet with the smallest angle,
a = 1.5 deg, is closest to the circular jet mean velocity change.
The potential core length, as determined by the distance from
the jet exit to the location where the velocity drops below the
exit velocity, is shorter for all three tapered slot jets,
x= \.3De, relative to 3.5De for the circular jet. The increased
velocity of the jets with a = 15 and 7.5 deg in this section is a
result of the initial reduction of the jet's width at the minor
axis side.
One of the important features of the tapered slot jet is the
higher augmentation of turbulence in the core region. The
contraction angle affects this behavior also (Fig. 11). The
maximum amplification is obtained for the steepest contrac-
tion angle, a = 30 deg. The turbulence level is increased from
an initial value of u'/U0<0.05 at the exit, to u'/U0 at
x/De = 1.9. The circular jet retains its initial level of 10% in
this range, and it reaches its highest level of 15% at 6.2De. The
jet with the intermediate angle, ex =15 deg, reaches the same
peak level as the circular jet at l.9De, and the jet with the
smallest angle has a maximum turbulence level of less than
that of the circular jet. Similar results were obtained for the
other two components of the turbulent fluctuations, vf and
w' (not shown here).
The turbulence intensity variation along the shear layer re-
gion at the major axis side (Fig. 12) is nearly equal for all three
tapered slot jets and similar to the circular jet. The highest
level, 18%, is obtained at 2.6De for the tapered jets and at
l.5De for the circular jet. At the minor axis shear layer (Fig.
13), the contraction angle changes the amplification rate. The
jet with the largest angle, a = 30 deg, has the same behavior as
the circular jet, while the other two reach a level 15% lower
than the circular jet.
Effect of Aspect Ratio
Three tapered slot jets with aspect ratios of 2, 3, and 5 were
tested and compared to a circular jet. All jets had a contrac-
tion angle of 15 deg. This jet spread at the major axis plane did
not change with the aspect ratio, and it is slightly higher than
the circular jet. The spread in the minor axis plane (Fig. 9) in-
creases with the jet aspect ratio. This result is similar to rectan-
gular jets.10 The high-aspect-ratio jet (^ = 5) spreads almost
twice as much as the low-aspect-ratio jet (yR = 2). All tapered
jets grow in the minor axis plane more than the circular jet.
The high-aspect-ratio jet also has a higher mean velocity
decay rate along the centerline (Fig. 10). The potential core
length is reduced from 1.6De for the & = 2 jet to 0.6De for the
& = 5 jet.
The highest amplification of turbulence intensity along the
centerline is for the ^ = 5 jet (Fig. 11). Its rate is even higher
than that of the jet with the steepest contraction angle (a = 30
deg, & = 3). The jet reaches a turbulence level of nearly 19%
at a distance of l.6De from the nozzle. The amplification rate
is reduced with decreasing aspect ratio but is still higher than
the circular jet, even for the & = 2 jet.
The amplification of the turbulent fluctuations in the shear
layer are given in Figs. 12 and 13 for the major and minor axes
of the tapered jet with different aspect ratios. The tapered jet
with yR = 2 has the highest amplification rate at the major axis
shear layer, which is also equal to that of the circular jet. The
jets with aspect ratios of 2 and 3 have similar behavior and
reach a maximum level that is lower than the circular jet. The
same features are also observed at the minor axis plane (Fig.
13).
Reacting Flow
The tapered slot jet was tested in a premixed flame. Nozzle
7, with an aspect ratio of 3 and a contraction angle of a = 22
deg, was used for the burner. Figure 14 shows the hydroxyl
concentration in three axial cross sections of the flame.


--- Page 5 ---

SEPT.-OCT. 1989
COMBUSTION ENHANCEMENT BY AXIAL VORTICES
559
Fig. 14 PLIF imaging of the tapered elliptic flame in a plane parallel
to the flame's axis.
20 
40 
60 
80
"major
 m">
Fig. 15 PLIF imaging of the tapered elliptic flame in a plane perpen-
dicular to the flame's axis.
Frames 1 and 2 are obtained by passing the laser sheet along
the major axis in the flame's axis direction. In frames 3 and 4,
the beam passes through the minor axis plane and, in frames 5
and 6, the beam plane is parallel to the minor axis plane at a
distance equal to one-fourth the major axis length from the
center. Frames 1, 3 and 5 differ from frames 2, 4, and 6 by the
time delay between the laser pulse and the forcing signal; thus,
the flow is visualized in the two groups at different phases rel-
ative to the forcing. The OH concentration is higher in this
flame relative to a circular burner. The reaction occurs both in
the flame circumference and in the flame core. This differs
from a circular premixed flame in which the combustion is
concentrated in the outer edge of the air jet.9 The reaction in
the flame's core is sustained as a result of improved small-
scale mixing obtained by the axial vortices that are gener-
ated in this region. The structures in the jet's core are sur-
rounded by shear layer vortices, which can be seen in frames 1,
4, and 6.
The special character of the tapered slot jet core is visualized
in a different cross-sectional plane in Fig. 15. The laser sheet is
"slicing" the flame perpendicular to the flame's axis. Figure
15a shows an averaged picture of 100 single realizations, and
Fig. 15b shows an instantaneous picture of 18-ns duration.
The three-dimensional structures in the middle of the flame
are cross sections in the axial vortices emanating from the noz-
zle. The outer closed surface is a cross section of the flame's
edge. These pictures show the increased OH concentration ob-
tained by the additional turbulence generation gained by using
this burner.
Summary and Conclusions
A novel design of an injector nozzle aimed at reducing flow
coherence and enhancing turbulence and small-scale mixing in
the entire reactor is described in this paper. An elliptical jet,
which was shown to have special mixing characterisitics rela-
tive to a circular jet, was modified by adding a conical con-
traction leading to the elongated slot outlet. The combination
of this contraction with the noncircular outlet has a substan-
tial effect on the outgoing jet flow. The elliptical jet5 is
characterized by the switching of its axes in the downstream
direction. The initial elliptic jet changes shape very rapidly in
response to the high spreading rate at the minor axis section.
The initial minor axis becomes the jet's new major axis, and
vice versa at the other side. The flow of the tapered slot jet is
very different. The spreading rate on the side of the minor axis
is reduced, while the growth along the major axis is increased
considerably. At the same time, the flow accelerates at the ma-
jor axis plane, resulting in the formation of a dobule-jet flow.
The center line turbulence level of the tapered slot jet is up to
five times higher than in the circular jet. In addition to the
highly turbulent flow in the vicinity of the jet center, the high
turbulence activity in the jet's shear layer, i.e., at the jet pe-
riphery, is maintained.
These flow characteristics are related to several different
causes. The introduction of the nonsymmetric azimuthal dis-
turbances into the initial shear layer of the jet results in a very
complicated flowfield. The flow is unstable to numerous azi-
muthal modes, leading to an eventual breakdown of the flow
into small-scale turbulence, thus enhancing the mixing at the
fine scales. The double shear layer generated inside the flow by
the two jets that are formed in the major axis plane contrib-
utes to the additional production of turbulence in the shear
layer, as well as in the core region. The third cause, probably
the dominant one, is related to the inside structure of the noz-
zle. The intersection between the conical contraction and the
slot introduces axial rotation into the outcoming flow. The jet
flow injected from the nozzle has, in addition to the span wise
vorticity, an axial component. The angular momentum of the
axial vortices is determined by the transition surface between
the conical contraction and the slot outlet. It is shown that by
increasing either the conical contraction angle or the slot
aspect ratio, the intensity of the axial vortices is increased and
the ensuing effect on the mean flowfield is higher. These two
geometrical changes have similar effects on the above-
mentioned transition surface. The two parameters can be used
to control and vary the mean and turbulent flow of the tapered
slot jet as desired. The spreading rate of the jet at the two axis
planes can be altered, as well as the turbulence level in the jet's
core and shear layers.


--- Page 6 ---

560
E. GUTMARK ET AL.
J. PROPULSION
The structure of the tapered slot burner flame is influenced
by this special flowfield. Intense combustion is observed in
both the shear layer and core regions, as is expected from the
cold flow results. Because of the enhanced small-scale mixing
of this jet, the flame burns the fuel efficiently without soot
formation, even at high equivalence ratios.
References
1 Brown, G. L. and Roshko, A., "On Density Effects and Large
Structure in Turbulent Mixing Layers," Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
Vol. 64, 1974, pp. 775-816.
2Ho, C. M. and Huerre, P., "Perturbed Free Shear Layers," An-
nual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 16, 1986, pp. 365-424.
3Schadow, K. C., Wilson, K. J., and Gutmark, E., "Characteriza-
tion of Large-Scale Structures in a Forced Ducted Flow with Dump,"
AIAA Journal, Vol. 25, Sept, 1987, pp. 1164-1170.
4Wygnanski, I. and Petersen, R. A., "Coherent Motion in Excited
Free Shear Flows," AIAA Journal, Vol. 25, 1987, pp. 210-213.
5Ho, C. M. and Gutmark, E., "Vortex Induction and Mass En-
trainment in a Small Aspect Ratio Elliptic Jet," Journal of fluid
Mechanics, Vol. 179, July 1987, pp. 383-405.
6Schadow, K. C., Wilson, K. J., Lee, M. J., and Gutmark, E.,
"Enhancement of Mixing in Ducted Rockets With Elliptic Gas-
Generator Nozzles," AIAA Paper 84-1260, June 1984.
7Gutmark, E. and Schadow, K. C., "Azimuthal Instabilities and
Mixing Characteristics of a Small Aspect Ratio Orifice Jet," AIAA
Paper 87-0846, Jan. 1987.
8Trentacoste, N. and Sforza, P., "Further Experimental Results
for Three-Demensional Free Jets," AIAA Journal, Vol. 5, 1967, pp.
885-891.
9Gutmark, E., Parr, T. P., Hanson-Parr, D. M., and Schadow, K.
C., "Azimuthal Structure of an Annular Diffusion Flame," Proceed-
ings of the Western States Section of the Combustion Institute, The
Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, PA, 1987.
10KrothapalH, A., Baganoff, D., and Karamcheti, K., "On the
Mixing of a Rectangular Jet," Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 107,
June 1981, pp. 201, 220.
Space Stations and
Space Platforms-
Concepts, Design,
Infrastructure,
and Uses
Ivan Bekey and Daniel Herman, editors
1 his book outlines the history of the quest for a permanent habitat in space; describes present
thinking of the relationship between the Space Stations, space platforms, and the overall space
program; and treats a number of resultant possibilities about the future of the space program. It
covers design concepts as a means of stimulating innovative thinking about space stations and
their utilization on the part of scientists, engineers, and students.
To Order, Write, Phone, or FAX:
l^ Order Department
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W. • Washington, DC 20024-2518
Phone: (202) 646-7448 • FAX: (202) 646-7508
1986 392 pp., illus. Hardback
ISBN 0-930403-01-0 
Nonmembers $69.95
Order Number: V-99 
AIAA Members $39.95
Postage and handling fee $4.50. Sales tax: CA residents add
7%, DC residents add 6%. Orders under $50 must be prepaid.
Foreign orders must be prepaid. Please allow 4-6 weeks for de-
livery. Prices are subject to change without notice.
945
