
--- Page 1 ---

Peter Therkelsen
Tavis Werts
Vincent McDonell
Scott Samuelsen
UCI Combustion Laboratory,
University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697-3550
Analysis of NOx Formation in a
Hydrogen-Fueled Gas Turbine
Engine
A commercially available natural gas fueled gas turbine engine was operated on hydro-
gen. Three sets of fuel injectors were developed to facilitate stable operation while gen-
erating differing levels of fuel/air premixing. One set was designed to produce near
uniform mixing while the others have differing degrees of nonuniformity. The emission
performance of the engine over its full range of loads is characterized for each of the
injector sets. In addition, the performance is also assessed for the set with near uniform
mixing as operated on natural gas. The results show that improved mixing and lower
equivalence ratio decrease NO emission levels as expected. However, even with nearly
perfect premixing, it is found that the engine, when operated on hydrogen, produces a
higher amount of NO than when operated with natural gas. Much of this attributed to the
higher equivalence ratios that the engine operates on when ﬁring hydrogen. However,
even the lowest equivalence ratios run at low power conditions, higher NO was observed.
Analysis of the potential NO formation effects of residence time, kinetic pathways of NO
production via NNH, and the kinetics of the dilute combustion strategy used are evalu-
ated. While no one mechanism appears to explain the reasons for the higher NO, it is
concluded that each may be contributing to the higher NO emissions observed with
hydrogen. In the present conﬁguration with the commercial control system operating
normally, it is evident that system level effects are also contributing to the observed NO
emission differences between hydrogen and natural gas. DOI: 10.1115/1.3028232
Introduction
Gas turbine engines designed to operate on various fuel stocks
are available commercially. Most commonly natural gas and liq-
uid kerosene are used to fuel gas turbine engines 1. Opportunity
fuels such as gases produced from landﬁlls and anaerobic digest-
ers have become popular recently due to both increased criteria
pollutant control that restricts the ability to simply vent these
gases to the atmosphere and the economic beneﬁts of their con-
version to useful electricity and waste heat 2. Often, the quanti-
ties of these fuels available warrant relatively small engines. As a
result,
engines
producing
30 to 250 kW
“microturbines”
MTGs are of interest for many of these applications. These
fuels typically contain large quantities of carbon dioxide and ni-
trogen compared to natural gas. Studies of MTGs operated with
these low energy-containing fuels have shown that emission levels
of criteria pollutants including carbon monoxide and oxides of
nitrogen are inﬂuenced by the same control techniques developed
for engines fueled with natural gas.
With economic and political drivers in place, hydrogen has seen
an increase in applications to a wide range of power generation
devices. These include both large-scale gasiﬁcation/power genera-
tion plants and distributed generation devices. Historically hydro-
gen has seen limited use in gas turbine engines though research
has been documented.
The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics conducted
tests of a kerosene-fueled engine with hydrogen 3. These tests
were conducted with an aero-engine onboard an aircraft at alti-
tude. These tests focused on engine efﬁciency and relight abilities
with regard to altitude. The hydrogen engines were better able to
maintain a reaction and restart after blowout at high altitudes. The
superior combustion properties of hydrogen were exploited to re-
duce the combustor length by 40% compared to the kerosene
combustor.
Nomura et al. 4 conducted atmospheric testing of a liquid
ﬁred can combustor with hydrogen. These tests utilized a 202 kW
gas turbine combustor. The kerosene fuel supply system was re-
moved, and a hydrogen ﬂow metering system was installed. Data
were obtained on pressure losses of the fuel system, ignition per-
formance, temperature distributions, combustion efﬁciency, liner
wall temperature distributions, NOx emission levels, noise levels,
and operating performance. The conversion from liquid fuel sys-
tem to hydrogen was not found to be complicated. A swirler type
injector, as well as an angled cone injector with small holes, was
used. The cone type injector was found to degrade quickly due to
its protrusion into the combustion chamber. Combustor efﬁciency
was not reduced with hydrogen operation. While noise levels did
not increase with hydrogen, emissions of NOx were found to be
greater than those produced with kerosene combustion. To reduce
NOx emission levels new fuel nozzles were recommended.
Pratt and Whitney Canada tested two liquid ﬁred can combus-
tors in laboratory bench tests with hydrogen 5. This work ex-
tended that done by Nomura et al. by elevating the pressure of the
combustors up to 1.0 MPa. For each combustor liner two different
types of injectors were used. The research showed that a liquid
ﬁred can combustor could be retroﬁtted with a different injector to
operate with hydrogen. Issues of uneven liner temperatures and
increased NOx levels compared to liquid Jet-A operation were
noted. The beneﬁts of increased combustion efﬁciency and ease of
ignition were also seen. Liner geometry modiﬁcations to reduce
reaction zone temperatures and residence times were suggested as
next steps to reduce NOx emissions.
The utilization of pure hydrogen in a gas turbine poses certain
challenges that have been outlined 6,7. The nature of hydrogen
to react easily and quickly has led to concern of ﬂashback and
autoignition for premixed systems. In addition hydrogen reacts on
average 126 K hotter than natural gas for an equal equivalence
Manuscript received April 25, 2008; ﬁnal manuscript received April 28, 2008;
published online February 19, 2009. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper
presented at the ASME Turbo Expo 2008: Land, Sea and Air GT2008, June 9–13,
2008, Berlin, Germany.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031507-1
Copyright © 2009 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

ratio 7. Emissions of NOx from a stoichiometric hydrogen reac-
tion have been shown to exceed current regulatory limits 6.
Measurements of NO have been reported for a retroﬁtted natu-
ral gas MTG operated on hydrogen 7. The emission levels were
found to be 10–100 times greater than those produced by the
commercial MTG operating on natural gas. Equivalence ratio and
fuel/air mixing were both shown to play a role in the generation of
relatively high NO levels. This study went on to conclude that
further improved mixing should result in further NO emission
reductions. The present work extends this earlier work by achiev-
ing the reﬁned mixing, characterizing the subsequent emissions,
and also discusses in detail the NO emission characteristics ob-
served.
Approach
To accomplish this, the following steps are taken:
•
characterize three unique injection systems for fuel/air mix-
ing at various power loads
•
operate the MTG with each of the injection systems over the
full load range measuring performance characteristics and
stack emission levels
•
operate the MTG on natural gas using the injector set result-
ing in the lowest emissions when operated on hydrogen
•
evaluate the effect of residence time, chemistry, and overall
combustor conﬁguration on the relative levels of NOx for-
mation observed.
•
operate the MTG on a varying mixture of natural gas and
hydrogen at full load to measure the effects on stack emis-
sion levels.
Experiment
A brief overview of the experimental apparatus and numerical
methods used in this study is provided below.
Capstone C60 Microturbine. The Capstone C60 is a commer-
cially available natural gas fueled recuperated Brayton cycle en-
gine. It has been extensively studied when operating with natural
gas as well as other fuels such as digester gas and landﬁll gas
2,7,8.
Air enters the C60 and is passed through a recuperator. It is
then compressed via a radial compressor to a pressure of approxi-
mately 4 atm. The air enters the engine in one of three ways—as
primary zone combustion air and as part of two dilution zones.
The manufacturer quantiﬁed this ﬂow split, allowing calculation
of combustor primary zone equivalence ratio. The quantiﬁed ﬂow
split information is proprietary. The combustor, diagramed in Fig.
1, contains six injectors tangentially inserted on two planes. The
six injectors are fuel staged throughout the operational load of the
engine. All injectors ﬂow air regardless of fuel ﬂow. The ﬁrst
plane contains two injectors. These injectors are always fueled
during engine operation. The remaining four injectors are located
on the second plane. These injectors are fueled based on engine
power demand. This fuel staging creates a quench effect when
some injectors are not fueled. Previous work 8 showed that this
effect will aid in the formation of carbon monoxide when the
engine is fueled with natural gas. Relatively cool air enters the
combustion chamber through these injectors such that the injec-
tors act as large-scale dilution ports.
Carbon monoxide formation was not a problem with hydrogen
operation in this experiment due to the lack of carbon in the sys-
tem. Control of the primary zone fueling was necessary, however,
to ensure that all six injectors were equal in their contribution to
the combustion reaction. Having six equal injectors over the full
power load of the engine allowed for better comparisons of
equivalence ratio and emissions.
It is noted that the engine control system is working from set
points on turbine exhaust temperature and shaft speed. The engine
varies shaft speed to meet the power demand and it adds fuel
accordingly. The exhaust temperature limit point precludes over-
heating of the engine and will limit fuel ﬂow and therefore power
if necessary.
Simultaneous onboard and external data acquisition systems
provided engine operational data during testing. As part of the
C60 fuel staging, engine shaft speed and airﬂow data were re-
corded. Fuel ﬂow rate was measured externally to the engine us-
ing a positive displacement gas meter Roots. Delivered power
from the engine as well as fuel pressure and temperature were also
measured external to the engine. Ambient conditions were re-
corded as well.
Emission Console. A gas analyzer Horiba PG 250 was used
to measure emission levels. A continuous gas sample was drawn
from the MTG exhaust stack with a vacuum pump connected to a
stainless steel probe. The analyzer draws from this gas line and
measures the stream for levels of NO, CO, CO2, SO2, and O2. At
30 s intervals these data were electronically logged. The analyzer
was zeroed and spanned before each test. Drift checks showed
less than 1% variation for all channels.
Injector Test Rig. An atmospheric test rig was used to simulate
airﬂow distribution to a single injector. The C60 utilizes tangential
injection that produces unique ﬂow ﬁelds that are inherently
asymmetric. By using the actual C60 injector bellows assembly
the complex series of airﬂow turns in an actual engine is properly
simulated. A more detailed description of the injector test rig op-
eration is documented in previous work 7.
Gas Chromatograph. A SRI gas chromatograph GC was
used to measure mixing proﬁles generated by the hydrogen injec-
tors. The GC was calibrated using a certiﬁed sample gas mixture
to ensure its accuracy. The GC was calibrated and checked before
each test with drift remaining under 1% during all testing. Further
details about the operation of the GC are found in previous work
7.
Chemical Kinetics Code. CHEMKIN 9 was used to model ki-
netics behavior using the GRI 3.0 mechanism 10 as well as that of
Konnov et al. 11. While other mechanisms 12 are available
that are more directed at modeling the hydrogen/air reaction, for
the present work it was helpful to use a common mechanism that
can simulate both hydrogen and methane air reactions. Both
mechanisms used have low temperature NO formation reactions
that are investigated as part of the study.
Modiﬁed Injector Design
Several modiﬁcations were made to the commercial C60 injec-
tor Fig. 2 to ensure safe, stable operation of the engine when
operated on hydrogen 7.
Fig. 1
C60 combustor outline with injector plane cross section
031507-2 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

Designs to generate differing fuel/air proﬁles for a given
equivalence ratio were developed. To help mitigate ﬂashback con-
cerns 7, the fuel injection point within the mixing tube was
moved closer to the injector exit plane, downstream of where air
enters the injector. The commercial C60 injectors utilize a fuel
distributor located approximately halfway down the mixing tube.
Moving the fuel entry point forward nearly 90% of the injector
length, the total volume of the injector exposed to a combustible
mixture was signiﬁcantly reduced. By introducing the fuel to the
injector downstream of where air enters the injector, the possibil-
ity of a combustible mixture located in a wake or other aerody-
namic feature associated with air entry into the injector was also
reduced.
An insert was placed into the injector exit plane to further re-
duce the likelihood of ﬂashback. The insert extends inside the
injector from the exit plane to the point of fuel injection. This
insert contains one 1.78 cm diameter center hole in which all of
the fuel and most of the air are mixed and released to the com-
bustion chamber. The remainder of the injector air is distributed to
six cooling slots that run along the inner wall of the injector.
These slots comprise about 17% of the total injector airﬂow area.
The hydrogen injectors are designed to operate fuel lean to
reduce reaction temperature and minimize pollutant emissions.
For a given equivalence ratio, hydrogen reacts at a temperature
approximately 126 K higher than methane. However, the wide
hydrogen stability limits allow the reaction to be sustained at
much lower equivalence ratios and correspondingly lower tem-
peratures than natural gas as low as 0.09 versus 0.48 for natural
gas 7. To take advantage of this attribute, the airﬂow into the
injectors was increased, resulting in equivalence ratios ranging
from 0.21 to 0.7 across the 0–60 kW power load range.
Three injector sets were fabricated, each designed to ﬂow the
same amount of air and fuel across the power load range, but
providing differing degrees of fuel/air mixing to allow the inﬂu-
ence of mixing on emissions to be studied. Each design releases
fuel to a mixing length via a 6.35 mm tube. In one case the fuel
enters the air stream coﬂowing with the air. This injector type is
denoted as an “axial injector” Fig. 3.
Two injectors feature two rows of six 1 mm holes on the side of
the capped tube, which provide radial fuel injection. The two ra-
dial injectors differ in the mixing length afforded to the fuel/air
mixture prior to injection into the combustor. The ﬁrst has a mix-
ing length of 19 mm the same length as the axial injector and is
labeled the “radial injector.” The third injector is called the “early
radial injector” due to its 63.5 mm mixing length. The two radial
injectors are shown in Figs. 4 and 5.
Modiﬁed Injector Mixing Results
The fuel distribution across the exit plane was measured for
each injector type. Engine conditions were approximated at 1 atm
and 300 K by matching momentum. Three power settings, 5 kW,
30 kW, and 60 kW, were tested. Measurements were taken as a
single line across the diameter of the injectors.
Measurements of hydrogen concentration were taken by GC
and reported as volumetric percentages. These volumetric concen-
trations for all three injector types can be seen in Fig. 6. These
volumetric concentration values were then equated to equivalence
ratio, as shown in Fig. 7. In both graphs the x-axis indicates loca-
tion along the injector exit diameter with 0.0 being the middle of
the injector. All three injector exit planes are 17.78 mm in diam-
eter. Lines indicating upper and lower ﬂammability limits are in-
cluded in Fig. 7 for Ref. 13.
Integration of the measured proﬁles shows less than 3% varia-
tion in total hydrogen between radial and axial hydrogen injectors
for each power load tested, indicating consistent fuel ﬂows for
each conﬁguration. The asymmetry of the concentration peaks has
been observed in other tests 8 of OEM Capstone injectors and is
due to the complex airﬂow that develops in the injector feed
annulus.
Each injector type creates a unique mixing proﬁle, as seen in
Figs. 6 and 7. The axial injector produces peaks between 55% and
39% for the different power loads. The radial injector produces a
maximum concentration of 25% at 60 kW and 22% at 5 kW. In
addition, differences as a function of load are reduced with the
radial injector. The early radial injector produced the most uni-
Fig. 2
Fuel injector, OEM natural gas C60 injector
Fig. 3
Fuel injector, axial hydrogen injector
Fig. 4
Fuel injector, radial hydrogen injector
Fig. 5
Fuel injector, early radial hydrogen injector
Fig. 6
Radial, axial, and early radial hydrogen injector mixing
proﬁles for multiple power loads, volumetric concentration
comparison
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031507-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

form concentration proﬁle of the three. The proﬁle still exhibits
the modest asymmetry but approaches uniform mixing Fig. 6.
The early radial injector also exhibits smaller differences as a
function of load.
When examined as a function of equivalence ratio the axial
injector creates a mixture at 60 kW that exceeds the upper ﬂam-
mability limit. This indicates that a diffusion ﬂame will be pro-
duced, resulting in high reaction temperatures and high NOx for-
mation rates. The radial or early radial injector does not exceed
the upper ﬂammability limit. Both the axial and radial injectors do
not have a combustible mixture present at the injector walls by
design. The early radial injector does have a combustible mixture
present at the walls, which could be a concern from a ﬂashback
viewpoint.
Engine Operation and Emission Results
The MTG was started and operated on pure hydrogen for all
tests. Previous work conducted accounts for startup procedures
and experiences 7. Four tests each were conducted for the axial,
radial, and early radial hydrogen injectors. These tests were done
at slightly different ambient temperatures, as summarized in
Tables 1–3.
Calculation of equivalence ratio requires knowledge of the en-
gine airﬂow. Capstone provided an equation relating engine shaft
speed and turbine exit temperature to total airﬂow. This equation
was developed with the commercially available natural gas en-
gine. Tests conducted with hydrogen demonstrated that, for all
power loads, shaft speed and turbine exit temperature values were
the same as those with natural gas fueled engine 7, conﬁrming
applicability of the expression for the current work. Primary zone
airﬂow was determined from this total airﬂow. Engine airﬂow
splits for the natural gas engine were provided. By creating ratios
of effective area measurements for natural gas injectors to hydro-
gen injectors, new primary zone air splits were calculated.
Emissions were measured from the engine operated using each
injector set run over the full operational load range with hydrogen.
For each injector four separate tests were conducted to ensure
repeatability. NO and O2 emission levels were measured. Emis-
sion values of NO were corrected to 15% O2. A correlation of NO
to NOx can be found in other work 7.
Figure 8 shows the NO emission levels as a function of load for
each injector type. Each injector type produces a near linear rela-
tion between NO emission and power load. For all power settings
the axial injector produces the most NO with the radial and early
radial producing less each. The slope of the emissions versus load
line differs for each injector, ordered by axial, radial, and early
radial. At a power level of 5 kW both the axial and radial injectors
produce just below 70 ppm NO. The early radial injectors produce
just over 25 ppm NO at 5 kW. At the full load point of 60 kW the
axial injectors produce between 313 ppm and 360 ppm of NO
depending on ambient temperature. The radial injectors produce
243–269 ppm NO at 60 kW. The early radial injectors produce
between 92 ppm and 110 ppm NO at 60 kW.
The effect of ambient temperature has been discussed in earlier
experiments with hydrogen MTGs 7. The effects of ambient
conditions are most noticeable when the engine is operated with
the axial injectors. Ambient temperature effects are noted with the
radial and early radial injectors but to a lesser degree.
A relation between emissions and equivalence ratio is shown in
Fig. 9. For all injector types equivalence ratio varies between 0.2
and 0.7 for hydrogen. A vertical line has been inserted in Fig. 9 to
indicate the lean ﬂammability limit of hydrogen. As equivalence
ratio decreases NO emission decreases for all injector types. Simi-
lar trends between NO emissions and power load are seen be-
tween NO emissions and equivalence ratio.
Axial 1, Radial 1, and Early Radial Test 1 can be directly com-
pared for their levels of NO. The three sets of data have been
taken with an ambient temperature difference of less than 0.4%. A
distinct correlation between injector type i.e., fuel mixing and
NO emission level can be seen. At an equivalence ratio of 0.7 a
NO emission jump of 39% is seen between the axial and radial
Fig. 7
Radial, axial, and early radial hydrogen injector mixing
proﬁles for multiple power loads, equivalence ratio comparison
Table 1
Test numbers and ambient temperatures „K… for axial
hydrogen injectors
Axial 1
Axial 2
Axial 3
Axial 4
Ambient
temperature
292.6
297.3
293.7
293.2
Table 2
Test numbers and ambient temperatures „K… for radial
hydrogen injectors
Radial 1
Radial 2
Radial 3
Radial 4
Ambient
temperature
292.6
291.7
291.3
290.7
Table 3
Test numbers and ambient temperatures „K… for early
radial hydrogen injectors
Early
radial 1
Early
radial 2
Early
radial 3
Early
radial 4
Ambient
temperature
292.4
291.1
291.7
292.2
Fig. 8
Axial, radial, and early radial injection NO emissions
versus power load „full load range…
031507-4 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

injectors. A 169.5% variation is seen between the early radial and
radial injectons. This extreme jump in emission level indicates a
strong relation of NO emission level to fuel/air mixing.
The early radial injectors were fueled with natural gas and
emission levels of NO taken in order to conﬁrm that differences
between the mixing for the OEM injector and the early radial
injectors were not giving rise to signiﬁcantly different NOx emis-
sions. This injector was chosen because it produced a near uni-
form mixing proﬁle see Fig. 6. In order to maintain stability with
natural gas operation, the engine must be fuel staged. As power
load increased, the number of injectors that were fueled increased.
Hydrogen operation does not require fuel staging. The natural gas
operation produced emissions of NO between 3.5 ppm and
31 ppm. The results are seen in Fig. 10. Note that the staging
occurs at different power loads for the two fuels. This is attributed
to differences in the ﬂame temperatures and inlet temperatures
during the tests.
Overall the geometry changes made to the fuel injection system
did not affect the engine’s performance when fueled with natural
gas. For all power settings the engine fueled with hydrogen pro-
duced signiﬁcantly higher NO than it does when ﬁred on natural
gas.
To help further understand the behavior of the engine as fuel
type is changed, additional tests that were run at full load using a
varying mixture of natural gas and hydrogen demonstrate an ex-
ponential increase in NO emission as the percentage of hydrogen
increases. Shown in Fig. 11 the results show that there is a sub-
stantial jump in NO production from 60% hydrogen to 100% hy-
drogen.
Discussion
Though the increase in NO emission from a retroﬁtted gas tur-
bine is consistent with historical work 3,5 an understanding of
why an increase is seen is desired. In the present case, two differ-
ent issues are noted. First, at full power, the engine primary zone
equivalence ratio when operated on hydrogen is much higher than
it is for natural gas. This leads to signiﬁcant thermal NO forma-
tion. However, because of the turbine exit temperature limit point,
this presents a paradox regarding heat transfer within the system
because the exhaust must reach the relatively cool turbine exit
temperature regardless of the temperature it starts from in the
primary zone. Apparently, for hydrogen, a much higher primary
zone temperature results than it does for natural gas. Second, even
at the very low equivalence ratios found at low power, the NO
levels are still higher than they are for natural gas. Four potential
effects leading to higher NO emissions in these two cases are
explored in this section.
MTG Control Strategy. The MTG used in this experiment
controls the amount of fuel added to the reaction based on the
turbine exit temperature. At full load on hydrogen, running at an
equivalence ratio of 0.70 based on metered air and fuel ﬂows,
the ﬂame temperature in the combustor primary zone will be sev-
eral hundred degrees higher than the equivalent full load condition
running on natural gas at an equivalence ratio of 0.49. This higher
ﬂame temperature explains the much higher overall NO emission
at full load as a result of the thermal formation of NO in the
combustor. What is perplexing is how the exhaust gases for hy-
drogen can be so hot in the primary zone compared to natural gas
yet still reach the same turbine exit temperature set point. Several
experiments were done to try to explain how the temperature be-
tween the combustor and the turbine exit could vary so greatly for
the two fuels. At this point, additional information regarding rela-
tive heat transfer to the liner is needed to fully explain what is
going on.
At the low power end of the spectrum, the equivalence ratio is
relatively low and the apparent reaction temperatures are also low.
As a result, other factors may be contributing to the differences in
NO emission.
Effect of Residence Time. The MTG used in this study was
designed to operate on natural gas. It is surmised that the combus-
tion chamber of the original engine has been optimized to mini-
mize pollutant formation when operated on natural gas. This op-
timized conﬁguration may lead to higher NO emission levels
when the engine is run with hydrogen. Previous work has indi-
Fig. 9
Axial, radial, and early radial injector NO emissions ver-
sus equivalence ratio „full load range…
Fig. 10
NO emissions for early radial injector operated on hy-
drogen and natural gas
Fig. 11
NO emissions for early radial injectors operated on a
mixture of hydrogen and natural gas
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031507-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

cated that gas turbines operated on hydrogen could use a shorter
combustor compared to those used for conventional fuels due to
the relative fast reaction rate of hydrogen 3. Use of an oversized
geometry creates an unnecessarily long residence time. To further
explore this, NO formation rates were modeled at engine inlet
conditions of 832.75 K and 3.599 atm in a simplistic single per-
fectly stirred reactor model. An equivalence ratio of 0.49 for
methane was used to represent the 60 kW point of engine opera-
tion. Hydrogen was modeled with 0.70 and 0.14 equivalence ra-
tios. The 0.70 point represents the 60 kW operation point mea-
sured
in
the
operational
engine
with
the
current
injector
modiﬁcations while the 0.14 point represents the lowest possible
equivalence ratio the engine could theoretically achieve with a
complete reconﬁguration of the airﬂow splits. Initial reactor tem-
peratures were set to the adiabatic ﬂame temperature levels of the
corresponding fuel and equivalence ratio levels. Both the GRI 3.0
and Konnov mechanisms were used. This was done in part to help
understand the sensitivity of the conclusions regarding low tem-
perature NO formation to the mechanism used.
The results of this modeling are shown in Fig. 12. Though the
exact residence time of the primary zone of the combustor is not
known it is estimated based on combustor geometry to be between
7.8 ms and 8.8 ms over the load range of the engine. At compa-
rable 60 kW points the hydrogen reaction with an equivalence
ratio of 0.70 has a greater NO formation rate for a shorter amount
of time. Unless a combustor could be made that would terminate
a reaction in under a millisecond at this equivalence ratio, large
amounts of NO will be formed. The hydrogen reaction with an
equivalence ratio of 0.14, however, shows that, at a reduced
equivalence ratio, the magnitude of the NO formation rate can be
reduced. The length of time during which NO is being formed,
however, is signiﬁcantly larger. A short yet realistic combustor
could take advantage of this longer reaction time and prematurely
quench NO formation. By shortening the combustor length and
lowering equivalence ratio the formation of NO in a hydrogen-
fueled MTG can be reduced.
NO is formed considerably faster with hydrogen at operational
engine condition equivalence ratio of 0.70 than when operating on
methane at an equivalence ratio of 0.49. In addition, the equilib-
rium amount of NO produced in the hydrogen engine is 2.3 times
higher than that of methane at an equivalence ratio of 0.49. By
dropping the equivalence ratio of hydrogen to 0.14 the initial for-
mation rate of NO drops well below that for methane at 0.49. The
equilibrium value of NO from hydrogen at an equivalence ratio of
0.14 is 15 times less than that from methane at 0.49.
From this analysis, two possible NO reduction methods are
apparent. Clearly, lowering the equivalence ratio reduces both the
formation rate and the total amount of NO formed. In addition if
the residence time during which species exist at elevated tempera-
tures is reduced the formation of NO could be extinguished before
reaching equilibrium. However, the high NO levels measured
from the engine operated on hydrogen at an equivalence ratio of
0.14 observed in engine measurements Figs. 9 and 10 are in
contrast to this simpliﬁed reactor analysis. Hence further investi-
gation into possible NO formation paths is warranted.
NO Formation Analysis
Traditional NO formation routes including thermal, prompt, and
N2O may not fully account for all NO produced in hydrogen ﬁred
systems. In addition to these pathways, as ﬁrst suggested by
Miller et al. 14, NNH is another intermediate species contributor
to NO formation and may be important in the current system.
NNH has been shown to explain discrepancies between NO con-
centrations from hydrogen reactions measured by laser induced
ﬂuorescence and modeling of traditional thermal, N2O, and
prompt NO formation mechanisms 11.
Bozzelli and Dean 15 used this idea when introducing the O
+NNH=NO+NH pathway as an important part of NO production
models. This pathway is shown to be an important contributor to
NOx production including cases where large concentrations of H
and O molecules are present. Combustion of hydrogen and air in
a gas turbine engine provides large amounts of dissociated H2 and
O2. NNH dissociation to H and N2 is shown to be expected under
all conditions; yet due to the nearly thermoneutral nature of
NNH=H+N2 at high temperatures, NNH formation from H and
N2 is also rapid. Bozzelli and Dean also suggested that of the
several bimolecular reactions associated with NNH the most im-
portant is that with O atoms. Additionally by appropriately adding
the NNH formation reactions to a kinetics model predicted con-
centrations of NO may be increased by an order of magnitude.
The formation of NO via the NNH pathway occurs in both
hydrogen and methane ﬂames for all equivalence ratios 16. The
amount of NO produced that is attributed to the NNH pathway,
however, depends greatly on temperature, equivalence ratio, and
pressure. Hayhurst and Hutchinson 17 are also supportive of the
importance the NNH pathway plays in NO formation. Their work
also shows that the NNH pathway will form NO in both hydrogen
and methane ﬂames.
NNH is also shown to be the dominant route of NO formation
in systems with short residence times in the order of 1–25 ms for
all temperatures 11. For systems exceeding this residence time
window NNH still plays a role in the formation of NO yet prima-
rily at low temperatures. At higher temperatures the Zel’dovich
mechanism is dominant 17. For hydrogen/air systems Konnov et
al. 16 stated that the ﬂames above 2100 K are dominated by
thermal NO and below that value by NNH.
Low temperature shows greater sensitivity to NNH for lean
ﬂames 16. Under fuel-rich conditions, however, a large discrep-
ancy between the Arrhenius plot of the third equation in the
Zel’dovich mechanism N+O2→NO+O and experimental mea-
surements of NO was found. This discrepancy is attributed to the
formation of NO via the NNH pathway that is not described by
Zel’dovich 16. In fuel-rich systems an abundance of free H at-
oms accelerates the formation of NNH via the reaction H+N2
=NNH 17. Others also found that while NNH is present for all
situations that during fuel-rich conditions thermal NO dominates
NO formation 16,18,19.
In addition to the arguments by Bozzelli and Dean 15 other
work has shown discrepancies in the modeling of NNH NO with
kinetics codes. The GRI 2.11 mechanism was shown to overpredict
NO levels formed due to NNH in methane ﬂames at high pres-
sures 20. Simultaneously Konnov et al. 11 stated that the GRI
2.11 mechanism shows that NNH is a viable explanation for ppm
levels of NO found in hydrogen/air ﬂames. Hughes et al. showed
an improvement in the NNH portion of the GRI code since ver-
sions 2.11 with the release of version 3.0. More experimental
work is needed to accurately model the formation of NO via NNH
21. Even with discrepancies it is noted that the GRI 3.0 mecha-
Fig. 12
NO formation rate for methane and hydrogen at given
equivalence ratios
031507-6 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

nism is improved in its ability to show the formation of NO from
NNH. Using the GRI 3.0 mechanism to show relative reaction ac-
tivity in a hydrogen-fueled MTG compared to a natural gas fueled
MTG would not quantitatively prove the level of NO being pro-
duced by NNH but give a strong qualitative comparison.
The GRI 3.0 mechanism was used to determine if the NNH re-
action pathways were more sensitive during a hydrogen reaction
than with a methane reaction. For each fuel type engine condition
of pressure 3.559 atm, inlet temperature 832.75 K and equiva-
lence ratio 0.20 for hydrogen and 0.49 for methane were used.
Initial reactor temperatures of 1000 K, 1200 K, 1400 K, and
1600 K were investigated. Sensitivity values were taken at the
point when 5–80% of the fuel was consumed 22. After executing
the code all reactions involving NNH or NO were extracted. The
ten most sensitive reactions from each fuel were collected and
plotted. The sensitivity results for methane can be seen in Fig. 13
and for hydrogen in Fig. 14. Table 4 lists the reactions found in
Figs 13 and 14. Reactions listed in italic and bold are common to
both methane and hydrogen reactions. Those reactions underlined
are only found in the hydrogen reactions.
Initial reactor temperatures of 1400 K and 1600 K only appear
when methane is used as the fuel. At temperatures of 1000 K and
1200 K no methane reaction occurs. At an initial reactor tempera-
ture of 1400 K methane shows great sensitivity to reactions 204,
211, and 246. Reaction 204 is driven in the forward reaction while
reactions 211 and 246 in the reverse. The reverse of reaction 211
leads to the formation of NNH while the forward 204 consumes
the produced NNH forming monatomic hydrogen and diatomic
nitrogen. Reaction 246 in the reverse direction directly forms NO
from the intermediate HCN and O in no way participating in NO
formation from NNH. Changing the initial temperature of the re-
actor to 1600 K results in the same reactions being the most sen-
sitive though less so in magnitude.
The response of hydrogen was more varied than that of meth-
ane. When the reactor had an initial temperature of 1000 K reac-
tions 207, 208, 209, and 210 are found to be very sensitive in the
reverse direction. These four reactions all lead to the formation of
NNH when in the reverse direction. Reactions 204, 205, and 206
that consume NNH but at low initial reactor temperature are con-
siderably less sensitive than the four reactions mentioned before
that are producing NNH. When initial reactor temperature in-
creases to 1400 K the same reactions still show sensitivity and
form NNH yet as with methane to a much lesser degree. As the
temperature is increased further to 1400 K and 1600 K the NNH
forming reactions reverse and start consuming NNH.
Both methane and hydrogen show an afﬁnity to produce NNH
at lower initial reactor temperatures. This follows with the discus-
sion in the introduction that NO produced via NNH is more viable
at lower temperatures. Hydrogen does not require a large amount
of energy to react and can maintain a reaction at very low tem-
peratures due to its large ﬂammability limit. This allows for a
greater potential of NO formation from NNH with hydrogen at
low equivalence ratios than fuels that cannot sustain such low
reaction temperatures.
In addition to GRI 3.0 a speciﬁc hydrogen mechanism was used
to investigate the potential effect of NNH on NO formation with
hydrogen. The mechanism is a combination of work done by Li et
al. 23 and Mueller et al. 22. It combines the hydrogen air
reaction with all forms of NOx formation pathways. The NOx
formation predictions the code generates have not been compared
against any NOx ﬂame production data. The code is used none-
theless due to a lack of alternatives combined with the desire to
have a counterpart to the GRI 3.0 tests.
The hydrogen speciﬁc code showed nearly no NO formation
via NNH. The most active reactions were four to six orders of
magnitude less active than what GRI 3.0 predicted. While this di-
rectly contradicts the idea that NO is being formed via NNH the
lack of validation in the hydrogen speciﬁc code points to the need
for a strong mechanism if modeling is to be used to predict NO
emissions from hydrogen gas turbines.
Though not proven, the formation of NO via NNH may explain
why all three injectors produced approximately 50 ppm NO at a
lean equivalence ratio of 0.20. The adiabatic ﬂame temperature of
hydrogen at an equivalence ratio of 0.20 is approximately 1400 K,
which effectively eliminates any thermal NO. At higher power
loads the higher adiabatic ﬂame temperature indicates that NO
formation via the Zel’dovich pathway should be dominant.
Dilute Combustion Analysis
The Capstone C60 operated on natural gas produces very little
criteria pollutant emissions. Past studies of the engine show that,
at full load, emissions of CO and NO corrected to 15% O2 do not
Fig. 13
Normalized sensitivity coefﬁcients for methane; run at
engine inlet conditions and various reactor temperatures
Fig. 14
Normalized sensitivity coefﬁcients for hydrogen; run
at engine inlet conditions and various reactor temperatures
Table 4
Reaction numbers and statements taken from GRI 3.0
†10‡
No.
Reaction
No.
Reaction
181
N2O+O↔N2+O2
208
NNH+O^NH+NO
184
N2O+OH^N2+HO2
209
NNH+H↔H2+N2
185
N2O(+M)^N2+O(+M)
210
NNH+OH↔H2O+N2
186
HO2+NO↔NO2+OH
211
NNH+CH3↔CH4+N2
204
NNH^N2+H
212
H+NO+M↔HNO+M
205
NNH+M↔N2+H+M
246
CH+NO↔HCN+O
206
NNH+O2^HO2+N2
258
HCNN+O↔HCN+NO
207
NNH+O↔OH+N2
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031507-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

exceed 5.7 ppm and 4.9 ppm, respectively 8. These low emis-
sions have been attributed to near perfect premixing of fuel and
air along with ultrafuel lean equivalence ratios. Additionally the
geometry of the engine and the ﬂow conditions entering the com-
bustion chamber may be leading to the low emission values.
A technique used to lower NO emissions from a combustor
involves injecting partially combusted products that would con-
tain NO into a fresh stream of fuel and oxidant. This paper will
refer generally to this idea as dilute combustion though other
unique names for the various conﬁgurations of combustors that
use this principle exist.
This technique has been presented historically for different
combustion technologies. The ﬁrst application of this idea has
been to furnaces. The ﬁrst such furnace combustor was named a
low NOx regenerative burner 24. This dilute combustion device
used a diffusion pilot ﬂame to create partially combusted gases.
These gases were then fed directly into the reaction zone of a
larger secondary diffusion reaction. The heat from the pilot ﬂame
preheated the incoming main air, which in turn increased ﬂame
stability. By introducing the combusted gases to the main reaction
NOx levels were reduced by 50% compared to traditional furnace
burners.
Another furnace application 25 of dilute combustion focused
on the air preheat gains of exhaust gas recirculation. This study
showed that burner conﬁgurations that directly interacted product
gas with reaction zones reduced emission levels of both CO and
NOx. Additionally noncombustion product diluents N2 and CO2
were injected with the oxidant stream. While both diluents caused
a reduction in reaction temperature the use of CO2 created a larger
reduction in criteria pollutants. This suggested that not only does
the diluent effect lower emission levels through reaction tempera-
ture changes but the chemistry of the added diluent impacts emis-
sion levels.
The idea of using partially oxidized gases to stabilize a reaction
and reduce NOx emissions has been outlined for other combustors
26. One type dubbed a “ﬂameless oxidation combustor” due to
the “invisible ﬂame” it generates utilizes partially combusted
products to reduce NOx levels and stabilize the reaction. A dis-
tinction is made with exhaust gas recirculation, which utilizes
combusted products from the exhaust stack that are brought into
the oxidant stream before combustion occurs. Instead, the ﬂame-
less combustor recycles combustion products internally to the
combustion chamber. In order to obtain a ﬂameless oxidation re-
action a “loop reactor” is necessary. The three loop reactors dia-
gramed and reproduced in Fig. 15 all incorporate a geometry that
returns combustion product to the combustion zone.
The leftmost loop reactor diagram in Fig. 15 uses nearly the
same tangential injection and annular conﬁguration as the Cap-
stone C60. The concept of a burner that would utilize exhaust gas
as a way to stabilize a reaction and reduce emissions has been
proposed for a similar combustor geometry 27, which is also
similar to the leftmost loop reactor of Fig. 15. As the reactants
from one injector enter the combustor and begin the oxidation
process traditionally modeled in plug ﬂow reactors, they are pre-
maturely interrupted and encounter the relatively cool reactants
from the second reactor. The combined partially combusted prod-
ucts from the ﬁrst injector and fresh reactants from the second
injector combine and react on their path to the ﬁrst injector where
fresh reactants wait to continue the process. This process is dia-
gramed in Fig. 16. A fraction of the combusted products enter a
burnout zone and exit the combustor axially. There are two im-
portant requirements for this process to take place: A certain frac-
tion of the combustion products must enter the fresh reactant
stream and they must enter at the right time during the kinetic
process.
The momentum of the ﬂow ﬁeld will dictate the transit of spe-
cies from the injector to their ignition through the kinetic process
and into the next injector’s path. If the magnitude of momentum is
not great enough the reacting fuel and air will not reach the sec-
ond injector and simply be transported from the combustion
chamber. Low momentum will result in the dilute combustion
strategy not occurring.
Atmospheric testing of a dilute combustion system with similar
geometry to the Capstone C60 has been reported 28. The experi-
mentation showed that the addition of partially oxidized gases
could help stabilize a reaction of fresh reactants and decrease the
lean blowout limit of a fuel. The combustor contained two injec-
tors that could be adjusted to allow for different angles of injec-
tion into the combustor. As this angle was changed emissions of
CO and NOx changed as well. By changing this angle the resi-
dence time of the path from injector exit to the second injector can
be manipulated. As this residence time increased and decreased
with the injector angle, the kinetic reaction taking place had a
longer or shorter period of time to be driven toward equilibrium.
Optimization of the time a reaction is allowed to exist before
introduction to the new reactant stream can maximize the NO
mitigation potential. This optimization led to sub-ppm levels of
NOx and CO in the combustor tested when operated on natural
gas.
This strategy of a dilute combustion engine using partially com-
busted products combining with fresh reactants to produce low
emissions has been proven through experimentation 29,30. The
stagnation point reverse ﬂow type combustor injects fuel and air
from an open end of a tube toward a closed end. This combustor
geometry is analogous to the rightmost diagramed loop reactor
described for ﬂameless oxidation reprinted in Fig. 15. The react-
ing fuel and air entering the chamber are sheared by the partially
combusted products returning from the stagnation plane at the
other end of the tube. This shearing effect and combination of
partially combusted products along with fresh reactants resulted in
low emissions of CO and NOx.
The chemistry behind dilute combustion has been investigated
31. A counterﬂow laminar ﬂat ﬂame burner was used to deter-
Fig. 15
Diagram of “loop reactors” presented for ﬂameless
oxidation †26‡
Fig. 16
Recreated NOx reburn engine pathway diagram †27‡
031507-8 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

mine the effect of different diluents on emission levels of NO.
Varying amounts of CO2, N2, and burned gas containing NO were
injected to the oxidant inlet stream. Reductions in the output lev-
els of NO were seen when diluents CO2 and N2 were added to the
oxidant stream. The effect of adding these species lowered the
reaction temperature and reduced thermal NOx production. When
NO laden burned gas was introduced to the oxidant stream the
initial concentration of NO increased but postcombustion the
amount of NO was lower than precombustion. The introduction of
NO to the combustion region was shown to reduce the amount of
NO that would have been produced without diluent. Kinetic mod-
eling of the reaction showed a considerable increase in N2 pro-
duction from N and as well as NO destruction when burned gas
was used for dilution. NO destruction reactions are listed that are
of primary importance when burned gas is added to the reaction.
The Capstone C60 contains a geometry that may be promoting
dilute combustion when operated with natural gas. Modiﬁcation to
the injector hardware did not affect the effectiveness of this strat-
egy when fueled with natural gas, as seen in Fig. 10. Changing
fuel stocks from natural gas to hydrogen does not affect the mo-
mentum in the engine. This constant momentum coupled with the
greatly differing reaction rates may be giving rise to mismatched
time scales associated with the mixing, ignition, and reaction
zones. Additionally the time necessary to drive a hydrogen reac-
tion to equilibrium is considerably less than that of natural gas.
This time difference is shown in Fig. 12. With the preclusion of
NOx reburn due to the change from natural gas to hydrogen, NO
emissions generated in the engine could increase.
Conclusions
Multiple modiﬁcations to the fuel injectors of a commercial
natural gas ﬁred MTG have been made to allow the engine to
operate on pure hydrogen. These modiﬁcations created three
unique fuel/air mixing proﬁles while maintaining similar equiva-
lence operational ranges. The injectors were characterized in an
atmospheric test rig for their mixing proﬁles. Emission perfor-
mance of each injector type was tested in a MTG over its full
range. Each injector type was tested four times. The data gathered
from the engine were compared to power load, equivalence ratio,
and mixing level. Emission levels dropped as the mixing proﬁle of
the injector became more uniform. Lower equivalence ratios uni-
formly produced less NO.
Compared to natural gas operation the engine run on hydrogen
produced larger volumes of NO. This follows the precedent set by
previous work when engines are retroﬁtted to operate with hydro-
gen. Four potential effects that would lead to higher NO emissions
from the engine when fueled with hydrogen are presented.
•
The control strategy of the MTG is not optimized for hydro-
gen and is causing a large volume of thermal NO production
in the combustor at full load.
•
Residence time analysis was conducted for hydrogen at
multiple equivalence ratios. By utilizing lower equivalence
ratios along with early termination of the reaction emissions
of NO could be reduced.
•
Kinetics modeling of NO formation was conducted. Speciﬁ-
cally the residence time of combustible species at engine
conditions was examined to see the rate of formation of NO.
NO formation is much slower when methane is used as a
fuel stock compared to hydrogen. By lowering the equiva-
lence ratio of hydrogen a similar NO formation rate to that
of methane can be obtained. Sensitivity studies were con-
ducted to examine the role of NNH in the production of NO.
Hydrogen showed a greater afﬁnity to produce NO via the
NNH formation route when modeled with the GRI 3.0 mecha-
nism. NO is more likely to be produced at lower tempera-
tures via NNH than at higher temperatures. Hydrogen at low
equivalence ratios has a low adiabatic ﬂame temperature
conducive to NO being formed by NNH.
•
The concept of dilute combustion in the commercial natural
gas Capstone C60 may be leading to the engine’s low emis-
sion values when operating with natural gas. When the fuel
type is changed to hydrogen without changing the combus-
tor, geometry dilution may not be occurring. This could lead
to the increase in NO observed.
Acknowledgment
The support of the California Energy Commission Contract
No. 500-00-020 is gratefully acknowledged. The support of Ri-
chard Hack and discussions with Mark Mitchell of Capstone Tur-
bine Corporation are appreciated.
References
1 Lefebvre, A. H., 1999, Gas Turbine Combustion, 2nd ed., Taylor & Francis,
Philadelphia, PA.
2 Efﬁnger, M. W., Mauzey, J. L., and McDonell, V. G., 2005, “Characterization
and Reduction of Pollutant Emissions from a Landﬁll and Digester Gas Fired
Microturbine Generator,” ASME Paper No. GT2005–68520.
3 Conrad, W. E., and Corrington, L. C., 1957, “NACA Research Memorandum:
Hydrogen for Turbojet and Ramjet Powered Flight,” Report No. NACA RM
E57D23.
4 Nomura, M., Tamaki, H., Morishita, T., Ikeda, H., and Hatori, K., 1981, “Hy-
drogen Combustion Test in a Small Gas Turbine,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy,
64, pp. 397–412.
5 Sampath, P., and Shum, F., 1985, “Combustion Performance of Hydrogen in a
Small Gas Turbine Combustor,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 102, pp. 829–837.
6 Chiesa, P., Lozza, G., and Mazzocchi, L., 2005, “Using Hydrogen as Gas
Turbine Fuel,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 127, pp. 73–80.
7 Therkelsen, P. L., Mauzey, J. L., McDonell, V. G., and Samuelsen, S., 2006,
“Evaluation of a Low Emission Gas Turbine Operated on Hydrogen,” ASME
Paper No. GT2006–90725.
8 Phi, V. M., Mauzey, J. L., McDonell, V. G., and Samuelsen, G. S., 2004, “Fuel
Injection and Emissions Characteristics of a Commercial Microturbine Gen-
erator,” ASME Paper No. GT2004–54039.
9 Reaction Design, 2006, CHEMKIN, Version 4.0.2.
10 GRI-MECH 3.0, http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri_mech/.
11 Konnov, A. A., Dyakov, I. V., and De Ruyck, J., 2002, “Nitric Oxide Forma-
tion in Premixed Flames of H2+CO+CO2 and Air,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 29,
pp. 2171–2177.
12 Mueller, M. A., Kim, T. J., Yetter, R. A., and Dryer, F. L., 1999, “Flow
Reactor Studies and Kinetic Modeling of the H2/O2 Reaction,” Int. J. Chem.
Kinet., 312, pp. 113–125.
13 Reed, R. J., 1985, North American Combustion Handbook, Vol. 1, 3rd ed.,
North American Mfg. Co., Cleveland, OH.
14 Miller, J. A., Branch, M. C., and Kee, R. J., 1981, “A Chemical Kinetic Model
for the Selective Reduction of Nitric Oxide by Ammonia,” Combust. Flame,
43, pp. 81–98.
15 Bozzelli, J. W., and Dean, A. M., 1995, “O+NNH: A Possible New Route for
NOx Formation in Flames,” Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 27, pp. 1097–1109.
16 Konnov, A. A., Colson, G., and De Ruyck, J., 2001, “NO Formation Rates for
Hydrogen Combustion in Stirred Reactors,” Fuel, 80, pp. 49–65.
17 Hayhurst, A. N., and Hutchinson, E. M., 1998, “Evidence for a New Way of
Producing NO via NNH in Fuel-Rich Flames as Atmospheric Pressure,” Com-
bust. Flame, 114, pp. 274–279.
18 Baulch, D. L., Cobos, C. J., Cox, R. A., Esser, C., Frank, P., Just, Th., Kerr, J.
A., Pilling, M. J., Troe, J., Walker, R. W., and Warnatz, J. J., 1992, “Evaluated
Kinetic Data for Combustion Modeling,” J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 213, pp.
411–734.
19 Michael, J. V., and Lim, K. P., 1992, “Rate Constants for the N2O Reaction
System: Thermal Decomposition of N2O; N+NO→N2+O; and Implications
for O+N2→NO+N,” J. Chem. Phys., 975, pp. 3228–8234.
20 Charlston-Goch, D., Chadwick, B. L., Morrison, R. J. S., Campisi, A., Th-
omesn, D. D., and Laurendeau, N. M., 2001, “Laser-Induced Fluorescence
Measurements and Modeling of Nitric Oxide Premixed Flames of CO+H2
+CH4 and Air at High Pressures,” Combust. Flame, 125, pp. 729–743.
21 Hughes, K. J., Tomlin, A. S., Hampartsoumain, E., Nimmo, W., Zsely, I. G.,
Ujvari, M., Turanyi, T., Glague, A. R., and Pilling, M. J., 2001, “An Investi-
gation of Important Gas-Phase Reactions of Nitrogenous Species from the
Simulation of Experimental Measurements in Combustion Systems,” Com-
bust. Flame, 124, pp. 573–589.
22 Mueller, M. A., Yetter, R. A., and Dryer, F. L., 2000, “Kinetic Modeling of the
CO/H2O/O2/NO/SO2 System: Implications for High-Pressure Fall-Off in the
SO2+O+M=SO3+M Reaction,” Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 326, pp. 317–339.
23 Li, J., Zhao, Z., Kazakov, A., and Dryer, F. L., 2004, “An Updated Compre-
hensive Kinetic Model of Hydrogen Combustion,” Int. J. Chem. Kinet.,
3610, pp. 566–575.
24 Suzukawa, Y., Sugiyama, S., Hino, Y., Ishioka, M., and Mori, I., 1997, “Heat
Transfer Improvement and NOx Reduction by Highly Preheated Air Combus-
tion,” Energy Convers. Manage., 3810–13, pp. 1061–1071.
25 Hasegawa, T., Tanaka, R., and Niloka, T., 1997, “High Temperature Air Com-
bustion Contributing to Energy Saving and Pollutant Reduction in Industrial
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031507-9
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 10 ---

Furnace,” International Joint Power Generation Conference, Vol. 1, pp. 259–
266.
26 Wünning, J. A., and Wünning, J. G., 1997, “Flameless Oxidation to Reduce
Thermal NO-Formation,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 23, pp. 81–94.
27 Kalb, J. R., and Sattelmayer, T., 2004, “Lean Blowout Limit and NOx Produc-
tion of a Premixed Sub-ppm NOx Burner With Periodic Flue Gas Recircula-
tion,” ASME Paper No. GT2004–53410.
28 Brückner-Kalb, J. R., Hirsch, C., and Sattelmayer, T., 2006, “Operation Char-
acteristics of a Premixed Sub-ppm NOx Burner With Periodical Recirculation
of Combustion Products,” ASME Paper No. GT2006–90072.
29 Neumerier, Y., Weksler, Y., Zinn, B., Seitzman, J., Jagoda, J., and Kenny, J.,
2005, “Ultra Low Emissions Combustor With Non-Premixed Reactants Injec-
tion,” 41st AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, Tuscon,
AZ, Jul., Paper No. AIAA-2005–3775.
30 Bobba, M. K., Gopalakrishna, P., Seitzman, J. M., and Zinn, B. T., 2006,
“Characteristics of Combustion Processes in a Stagnation Point Reverse Flow
Combustor,” ASME Paper No. GT2006–91217.
31 Choi, G.-M., and Katsuki, M., 2002, “Chemical Kinetic Study on the Reduc-
tion of Nitric Oxide in Highly Preheated Air Combustion,” Proc. Combust.
Inst., 29, pp. 1165–1171.
031507-10 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
