
--- Page 1 ---

K.-U. Schildmacher
R. Koch
Institute of Thermal Turbomachinery,
University of Karlsruhe,
Kaiserstrasse 12,
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
Experimental Investigation of the
Interaction of Unsteady Flow With
Combustion
In order to reduce the dimensions of the combustor, swirl stabilized ﬂames are used in
heavy duty gas turbines. In our recent investigation of the swirling ﬂow at a single heavy
duty gas turbine burner under nonreacting conditions typical instabilities like precessing
vortex cores and vortex shedding have been found (Schildmacher et al., Proceedings of
the 6th European Conference on Industrial Furnaces and Boilers). In the present paper
the experimental investigations will be discussed. Combustion instabilities have been
analyzed by phase-locked laser doppler anemometer measurements. For the reacting ﬂow,
also combustion instabilities could be detected. The amplitude increases strongly with the
equivalence ratio. The frequency of the oscillations for reacting conditions has been found
to be slightly shifted towards lower frequencies compared to those of the corresponding
nonreacting ﬂow. In addition, for the reacting ﬂow a linear and nonlinear range of
oscillations could be discriminated. @DOI: 10.1115/1.1789512#
Introduction
Strong limitations of NOx emissions imposed by legislation
forced the gas turbine industry in recent years to adopt premixed
lean combustors which lead to a signiﬁcant decrease of emissions
@1#. However, premixing burners of present gas turbines exceed
the emission level of an ideal premixed ﬂame by a factor of about
2 which is mainly to be attributed to nonperfect air-fuel mixing.
As pointed out by Kraemer et al. @2#, spatial mixing is quite per-
fect in most cases, but temporal ﬂuctuations degrade the mixing
quality. These temporal ﬂuctuations of the mixing can be caused
by vortex shedding or Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities @3#.
Although precessing vortex cores and vortex shedding have
been investigated in a lot of publications of nonreacting swirling
ﬂows @4# not very much is known about the impact of these ﬂow
instabilities on combustion @5#. In order to analyze instability
mechanisms of the reacting ﬂow in detail, a spatially and time-
and phase-resolved ﬂow ﬁeld analysis using LDA has been per-
formed. The oscillating reacting ﬂow was analyzed at different
sound levels. The LDA investigations were supported by pressure
ﬂuctuation measurements which where also used to synchronize
the laser doppler anemometer. In the paper, ﬁrst the transparent
test rig will be described and a short outline of the measurement
technique will be given. In the main part, the cold ﬂow instabili-
ties will be reviewed brieﬂy and then the instabilities of the react-
ing ﬂow will be discussed.
Burner
In this study, a single test burner of industrial size was investi-
gated within an atmospheric test rig ~Fig. 1!. It is ﬁred by natural
gas. The burner ~Fig. 2! is operated in a combustor casing which
provides excellent optical access for velocity measurements by
LDA. The combustion chamber has a square cross section with a
truncated pyramid shape at the exit.
The burner air passage consists of two concentric annular swirl-
ers. The inner axial swirler has nozzles for pilot and nonpremixed
gas. At the outer diagonal swirler, the gas is injected through holes
in the swirler blades in order to enhance premixing with the air.
Burner Operation Conditions
The burner can be operated either in nonpremixed or premixed
mode @6#. In case of nonpremixed operation, the natural gas is
injected solely through the nonpremixing nozzles. In premixed
mode, the premixing gas nozzles and to a minor extent the pilot
nozzles are used. In both modes, the air is fed through the axial as
well as through the diagonal swirler passages with the same ﬂow
split.
In the gas turbine at nominal operation conditions, the burner is
operated in premixed mode with pilot gas injection for better
ﬂame stabilization. Under test rig conditions, the pilot gas injec-
tion is not necessary for stable combustion. In order to prevent
any disturbance of the premixed ﬂame by the pilot burner, no pilot
gas was used. In this study, the investigations have been per-
formed in premixed mode with a constant air volume ﬂow at
atmospheric pressure. The air was pre-heated to 673 K. The Rey-
nolds number at the burner mouth was 105 and the thermal power
varied between 420 kW ~f50.5! and 810 kW ~f50.83!.
Experimental Techniques
The velocity ﬁeld was investigated by a two-dimensional ~2D!
laser doppler anemometer ~LDA! ~Fig. 3! in back-scattering
mode. The axial and tangential velocities have been recorded in
the x-r plane ~Fig. 2!. The air stream was seeded by Al2O3 par-
ticles of an average diameter of 1 mm. The data rate was 4–20
kHz in the main ﬂow and the validation rate was 60–90% for a
duration of 20 s per measurement position. Close to the center
where the recirculation zone of the ﬂame is located, the data rate
dropped sometimes to less than 1 kHz.
In addition, the LDA investigations were accompanied by pres-
sure ﬂuctuation measurements. Due to the high temperatures in
the combustion chamber, the quartz pressure sensor was imple-
mented into the air plenum of the burner where the air tempera-
ture is 673 K. The pressure signal was conditioned by a bandpass
ﬁlter of 62.5 Hz half width around the pronounced peak fre-
quency at 254 Hz. This ﬁlter signal was also used to synchronize
the burst spectrum analyzers of the LDA ~Fig. 3!. In contrast to
the nonoscillating ﬂow, the LDA-particle distribution over time is
not uniform. The instantaneous records exhibit a much higher par-
ticle rate at moments of high velocities @7#. Thus velocity biasing
had to be taken into account when determining the time-averaged
velocities of the oscillating ﬂow @8,9#.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute ~IGTI! of THE AMERICAN
SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS for publication in the ASME JOURNAL OF
ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Paper presented at the Interna-
tional Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition, Atlanta, GA, June
16–19, 2003, Paper No. 2003-GT-38644. Manuscript received by IGTI, Oct. 2002,
ﬁnal revision, Mar. 2003. Associate Editor: H. R. Simmons.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2005, Vol. 127 Õ 295
Copyright © 2005 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

Review of Cold Flow Instabilities
Investigations of the nonreacting ﬂow @10# reveal a pronounced
frequency of the instabilities which is proportional to the air ﬂow
~constant Strouhal number! ~Fig. 4!. This phenomenon was attrib-
uted to vortex shedding at the burner mouth. An accompanying
large eddy simulation of the nonreacting ﬂow @11# revealed that
there is a precessing vortex core which triggers vortex shedding in
the shear ﬂow region at the burner mouth. In addition, investiga-
tions of the fuel concentration for nonreacting conditions showed
that alternating pattern of rich and lean fuel concentrations is gen-
erated by vortex shedding ~Fig. 5!, through the time-averaged fuel
concentration is axis symmetrical and much more homogeneous
@10#. For comparison, the corresponding operation point of the
reacting ﬂow is indicated in Fig. 4. The reacting ﬂow was inves-
tigated at constant air ﬂow.
Reacting Flow Analysis
Combustion Stability.
As indicated previously, under react-
ing ﬂow conditions the air ﬂow was kept constant and the equiva-
lence ratio was varied by modifying the fuel ﬂow.
The pressure ﬂuctuations of the combustion oscillations were
found to strongly increase with the equivalence ratio ~Fig. 6!. At
f50.66 ﬁrst oscillations could be detected by the pressure trans-
ducer. The pressure amplitude at the peak frequency was just
twice as high as the turbulent combustion noise at nominal oper-
ating conditions without oscillations ~f50.5!.
Audible oscillations started at an equivalence ratio greater than
0.71 with a pressure amplitude of the pronounced frequency peak
that is ﬁve times higher than the turbulent combustion noise. In
Fig. 1
Sketch of the test rig
Fig. 2
Sketch of the burner
Fig. 3
Experimental setup for the LDA investigations
Fig. 4
Frequency of instability
296 Õ Vol. 127, APRIL 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

the transition region at f'0.75, the sound level was not constant
over time but ﬂuctuated between quiet and loud. At f.0.77, the
oscillations became loud with a pressure amplitude that was more
than 50 times higher compared to the turbulent combustion noise
at nominal operation. The pressure ﬂuctuation amplitudes of the
quiet oscillations are 3.2% of the amplitude of the loud oscilla-
tions. This observation indicates that for the present burner the
amplitudes steadily grow with increasing equivalence ratio in con-
trast to a sudden excitation which can observed in other combus-
tion systems.
Self-Excited Combustion Instabilities at High Oscillation
Sound Level.
Subsequently, the ﬂow ﬁelds, as recorded by
LDA, will be compared. Nonoscillating ﬂow conditions at
f50.66 and the oscillating ﬂow condition exhibiting weak ~f
50.71! and strong pressure ﬂuctuations ~f50.83! will be consid-
ered.
Figure 7 shows the time-averaged axial velocity ﬁeld at high
oscillation level ~f50.83!. The ﬂame is stabilized in regions of
high velocity gradients and therefore is very sensitive to instabili-
ties like vortex shedding which are possibly triggering combustion
oscillations. The signal of the pressure sensor which is located
inside the air plenum ~Fig. 3!, was used as reference signal for
phase angle matching. All plots of the velocity measurements are
referenced to the phase angle of the pressure ﬂuctuations at the air
plenum ~Fig. 8!. From the phase-locked LDA data records, mean
ﬂuctuations have been derived by averaging over 5000 periods.
These averaged data revealed different phase shifts and wave
forms depending on the location. At the reaction zone (x/D
50.63, r/D50.56), the highest ﬂuctuations of the axial as well as
the tangential component were detected ~Fig. 7!. The averaged
phase-locked RMS values were nearly constant over the phase
angle. At a position radially further outward (x/D50.63, r/D
50.75) the highest mean axial velocities are present. There, the
axial as well as tangential velocity ﬂuctuations revealed the ﬁrst
harmonic frequency which must be attributed to nonlinear effects.
This phenomena was only detected at equivalence ratios greater
than 0.75. In the recirculation zone at x/D50.63, r/D50.19
strong oscillations of the tangential velocity were detected which
may be caused by mushroom shaped ring vortices.
The swirl has a major impact on ﬂame stabilization. In Fig. 9
the local velocity ratio v/u is plotted over the phase angle for
different positions and an equivalence ratio of 0.83. Regions
which may trigger combustion instability are characterized by
strong ﬂuctuations. The ﬂuctuations of the velocity ratio have
Fig. 5
Instantaneous fuel concentration for premixed opera-
tion „nonreacting ﬂow…
Fig. 6
Pressure amplitude and oscillation frequency for differ-
ent equivalence ratios
Fig. 7
Normalized axial velocity ﬁeld and normalized local
phase-locked velocity ﬂuctuations at high oscillation sound
level „fÄ0.83…
Fig. 8
Pressure amplitude at the air plenum
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2005, Vol. 127 Õ 297
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

been analyzed on basis of the LDA data. The data reveal, the
strongest ﬂuctuation of 0.1<v/u<0.8 are found in the reaction
zone (x/D50.63, r/D50.56). Because of the periodicity of the
signal, the ﬂuctuations must be attributed to coherent structures.
The plot also indicates that for a short time at around 150 deg
phase angle, swirl stabilization of the ﬂame is interrupted which
may cause to strong strain rates in the reaction zone and local
ﬂame quenching. Outside the recirculation zone only minor ﬂuc-
tuations of the velocity ratio were recorded.
Self-Excited Combustion Instabilities at Low Oscillation
Sound Level.
For an equivalence ratio of f50.71 barely au-
dible oscillations have been detected. The amplitude of the pres-
sure oscillations was more than thirty times smaller compared to
strong oscillations but ﬁve times higher than the turbulent com-
bustion noise ~Fig. 6!. Figure 10 shows the ﬂow ﬁeld and the
phase-locked velocity ﬂuctuations at different positions. Every-
where inside the combustion chamber the frequency of the veloc-
ity ﬂuctuations was identical to that of the pressure oscillations.
Higher harmonic frequencies amplitude compared to operation at
high oscillation level, the velocity ﬂuctuations were reduced only
by a factor of 4.
The velocity ratio v/u only varied between 0.35 and 0.5 ~Fig.
11!, and due to the reduced strain rate the ﬂame was more stable.
Fluctuations Close to the Onset of Combustion Oscilla-
tion.
As stated previously, the ﬁrst onset of combustion oscilla-
tions was detected at an equivalence ratio of 0.66. The time-
averaged velocity ﬁeld at f50.66 was quite similar to that of the
weakly oscillating ﬂow at f50.71.
Due to the small amplitude of the pressure oscillations that was
just twice as high as the turbulent combustion noise, it was not
possible to generate a useful trigger signal for synchronization of
the burst spectrum analyzers. Therefore subsequently frequency
spectra will be used for the analysis. For extracting the spectral
data, the resampling method was adopted @12,13#.
The frequency spectra of the local axial and tangential veloci-
ties are shown in Fig. 12. Generally, a pronounced frequency peak
was not found for the stable operating conditions. Very small sinu-
soidal velocity ﬂuctuations at about 254 Hz could only be detected
in the axial component at regions of high velocities (x/D50.37,
r/D50.56). Comparing the spectra obtained for the reacting case
~Fig. 12! to those of the corresponding nonreacting ﬂow case, the
coherent ﬂow structures which are present in the nonreacting ﬂow
and which cause the pronounced frequency peak at 263 Hz are not
reproduced under reacting ﬂow conditions.
Moreover, even in the ﬂow ﬁeld upstream of the reaction zone
~e.g., x/D50.37, r/D50.56) no ﬂuctuations are present. This em-
phasizes the strong impact of the heat release on the generation of
coherent ﬂow structures. This observation is also conﬁrmed by
Fig. 13. The frequency and the corresponding Strouhal number
Fig. 9
Phase-locked velocity ratio vÕu at high pressure ﬂuc-
tuations
Fig. 10
Normalized axial velocity ﬁeld and normalized local
phase-locked velocity ﬂuctuations at low oscillation sound
level „fÄ0.71…
Fig. 11
Phase-locked velocity ratio vÕu at low pressure ﬂuc-
tuations
298 Õ Vol. 127, APRIL 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

St5f StD/c` of the oscillations are plotted for nonreacting and
reacting conditions over the normalized volume ﬂow. For the non-
reacting ﬂow, the frequency increases linearly to volume ﬂow re-
sulting in a constant Strouhal number. Such an observation may
be attributed to vortex shedding @3,10#. For reacting ﬂow condi-
tions, however, the frequency only slightly changes with normal-
ized ﬂow and the Strouhal number decreases. This leads to the
conclusion that for self-excited reacting conditions, the resonant
frequencies are linked to the acoustic eigenfrequencies of the
combustion system which do not depend much on the burner air
ﬂow.
Conclusion
In order to study the impact of ﬂow instabilities such as pre-
cessing vortex cores and vortex shedding on combustion, the un-
steady reacting ﬂow has been investigated by phase-locked LDA
measurements. The velocity ﬂuctuations of the reacting ﬂow at
different equivalence ratios ~f50.66; f50.71; f50.83! have
been recorded and compared to those of the nonreacting ﬂow.
At an equivalence ratio of 0.66 no audible pressure ﬂuctuations
could be detected and in the spectrum of the velocity ﬂuctuations
no pronounced peak was found. For the same ﬂow conditions, but
for the nonreacting ﬂow, a predominant frequency peak was found
which could be attributed to coherent ﬂow structures. Comparing
the spectra of the velocity ﬂuctuations of nonreacting to those of
reacting ﬂow, the pronounced frequency peak previously found
under nonreacting conditions was not present under reacting con-
ditions. This observation indicates that the heat release has such a
strong impact on the onset of coherent structures in ﬂow.
At equivalence ratios lower than 0.66, a pronounced frequency
peak could not be detected either by the LDA ~Fig. 14! or by the
quartz pressure sensor. For nonaudible oscillation at f50.66 only
axial oscillation modes were identiﬁed, indicating that the onset of
combustion oscillation is mainly triggered by axial-acting ﬂuctua-
tions. A Strouhal number about 0.25 could be associated with the
presence of these vortex rings @14#.
Increasing the equivalence ratio to 0.71, weak oscillations were
found. The amplitude of the oscillations increased steadily ~not
suddenly! when increasing the equivalence ratio. The frequencies
of these weak oscillations correspond to the acoustic eigenfre-
quencies of the combustion system and do not change with air
ﬂow. The velocity oscillations are of sinusoidal shape and of the
same frequency as the pressure oscillation. This indicates that the
instability can still be described by linear acoustics. The velocity
ratio v/u showed small ﬂuctuations that did not compromise
stable combustion.
In the transient region ~f50.75! the sound level alternated be-
tween quiet and loud. A small increase of the equivalence ratio to
f.0.75 led to very strong pressure oscillations but only to a small
increase of the velocity ﬂuctuations. The ﬂow began to oscillate
strongly and higher harmonic frequencies could be detected in the
velocity ﬂuctuations. The velocity oscillations are so strong that
additional coherent structures such as ring vortices are generated
which may be the reason for the ﬁrst harmonic frequency found in
the main ﬂow region. In this region clearly a nonlinear acoustic
mechanism is present. Strong ﬂuctuations of the velocity ratio v/u
between 0.1 and 0.8 were detected, and thus the swirled stabiliza-
Fig. 12
Normalized axial velocity ﬁeld and power spectra with-
out oscillations „fÄ0.66…
Fig. 13
Frequency of instability and Strouhal number
Fig. 14
Power spectra of velocities without oscillations at
fÄ0.5
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2005, Vol. 127 Õ 299
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

tion of the ﬂame was disturbed periodically for a short time. This
mechanism seems to have a major impact on the combustion sta-
bility.
Acknowledgment
This study was supported by the EC under contract ENK5-CT-
2000-00060 ~PRECCINSTA! which is gratefully acknowledged.
Nomenclature
A 5 amplitude, magnitude
BSA 5 burst spectrum analyzer
c 5 velocity
c` 5 axial velocity at the burner exit
D 5 burner outlet diameter
f 5 frequency
f St 5 Strouhal frequency
p 5 pressure
PM1,
PM2 5 photomultiplier
r 5 radial direction
RMS 5 root-mean-square value
St 5 Strouhal number
u 5 axial velocity
V˙ 5 volume ﬂow
v 5 tangential velocity
x 5 axial direction
y 5 normal direction
f 5 equivalence ratio
Subscripts
0 5 nominal operation, design point
max 5 maximum
Superscripts
¯ 5 time-averaged component
˜ 5 periodical component
) 5 turbulent component
References
@1# Lefebvre, A. H., 1974, ‘‘Pollution Control in Continuous Combustion En-
gines,’’ Fifteenth Symposium on Combustion, Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh,
pp. 1169–1180.
@2# Kraemer, H., Dinkelacker, F., Huth, M., Leipertz, A., Poeschl, G., and Lenze,
M., 1999, ‘‘Optimization of the Mixing Quality of a Real Size Gas Turbine
Burner With Instantaneous Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence Imaging,’’
ASME Paper No. 99-GT-135.
@3# Coats, C. M., 1996, ‘‘Coherent Structures in Combustion,’’ Prog. Energy Com-
bust. Sci., 22, pp. 427–509.
@4# Gupta, A. K., Lilley, D. G., and Syred, N., 1984, ‘‘Swirl Flows,’’ ABACUS
Press.
@5# Gutmark, E. J., Shadow, K. C., and Yu, K. H., 1994, ‘‘Methods for Enhanced
Turbulence Mixing in Supersonic Shear Flows,’’ Appl. Mech. Rev., 47~2!, pp.
375–417.
@6# Prade, B., Streb, H., Berenbrink, P., Schetter, B., and Pyka, G., 1996, ‘‘Devel-
opment of an Improved Hybrid Burner—Initial Operating Experience in a Gas
Turbine,’’ ASME Paper No. 96-GT-43.
@7# Schildmacher, K.-U., Koch, R., Krebs, W., Hoffmann, S., and Wittig, S., 2002,
‘‘Experimental Investigation of Unsteady Flow Phenomena in High Intense
Combustion Systems,’’ Proceedings of the 6th European Conference on Indus-
trial Furnaces and Boilers.
@8# Loseke, A. H., and Gould, R. D., 1991, ‘‘A Comparison of Velocity Bias
Correction Techniques in Laser-Doppler-Velocimetry,’’ ASME Fluid Measure-
ment and Instrumentation Forum, 108, pp. 63–68.
@9# McLaughlin, D. K., and Tiedermann, W. G., 1973, ‘‘Biasing Correction for
Individual Realization of Laser-Doppler-Anemometer Measurements in Turbu-
lent Flow,’’ The Physics of Flow, 16, pp. 2082–2088.
@10# Schildmacher, K.-U., Koch, R., Krebs, W., Hoffmann, S., and Wittig, S., 2000,
‘‘Experimental Investigations of the Temporal Air-Fuel Mixing Fluctuations
and Cold Flow Instabilities of a Premixing Gas Turbine Burner,’’ASME Paper
No. 2000-GT-0084.
@11# Schlueter, J., Schoenfeld, T., Poinsot, T., Krebs, W., and Hoffmann, S., 2001,
‘‘Characterization of Conﬁned Swirl Flows Using Large Eddy Simulations,’’
ASME Paper No. 2001-GT-0060.
@12# Host-Madsen, A., 1994, ‘‘A New Method for Estimation of Turbulence Spectra
for Laser Doppler Anemometry,’’ 7th International Symposium on Applica-
tions of Laser Techniques of Fluid Mechanics, Lisbon.
@13# Host-Madsen, A., and Caspersen, C., 1981, ‘‘Spectral Analysis—A Modern
Perspective,’’ Proc. IEEE, 69~11!, pp. 1380–1419.
@14# Laufer, J., and Monkewitz, P., 1978, ‘‘The Inﬂuence of the Dominant Large
Scale Structures on the Initial Instability of a Low-Speed Circular Jet,’’ Bull.
Am. Phys. Soc., 23, p. 1008.
300 Õ Vol. 127, APRIL 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
