
--- Page 1 ---

Research Paper
Flow and emissions in a dual-stage counter-rotating nozzle: Effects of 
swirler structure and air distribution
Ruolin Zhao a, Wenjun Kong a,b,c,*
a School of Astronautics, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
b National Key Laboratory of Aerospace Liquid Propulsion, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
c Beijing Key Laboratory of System Design for Reusable Launch Vehicle, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Dual-stage counter-rotating nozzle
Swirler structure
Air distribution
Central toroidal recirculation zone
NOx emissions
A B S T R A C T
To reduce CO and NOx emissions in gas turbines, this study investigated a novel dual-stage counter-rotating 
nozzle based on lean direct injection technology, focusing on the effects of swirler structure and air distribution 
through numerical simulations. The results were validated using particle image velocimetry and emission ex­
periments. A systematic analysis reveals that increasing the inner swirl blade angle reduces the axial velocity 
while enhancing the radial and tangential velocities, thereby increasing the swirl intensity, expanding the central 
toroidal recirculation zone (CTRZ), and shortening the kerosene penetration depth. CO and NOx emissions 
initially decrease and then increase, with optimal performance observed at an angle of 39◦. Conversely, 
increasing the outer swirl blade angle weakens swirl intensity, reduces the volume of CTRZ, increases NOx 
emissions, and decreases CO emissions, with optimal performance occurring between 40◦and 50◦. The direction 
of the mixed airflow rotation aligns with the stage that has the higher airflow ratio. When the inner-to-outer air 
flow rate ratio approaches 1:1, the CTRZ disappears. The optimal performance is achieved at a 2:1 ratio, with CO 
and NOx emissions of 4.73 ppm and 17.38 ppm, respectively. The volume of CTRZ and recirculation rate show a 
linear correlation, while heat release and combustion products reduce the volume under hot state. Combustion is 
achieved when the dimensionless CTRZ volume exceeds 0.2 under the cold state. This work can provide technical 
support and new research insights for low-emission gas turbine combustion chambers.
1. Introduction
Gas turbine engines, which efficiently convert chemical energy to 
mechanical energy, play a critical role in the aviation, marine, and 
power generation industries. However, their emissions—primarily car­
bon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and unburned hydrocar­
bons (UHC)—pose significant environmental challenges [1]. As 
technology advances and living standards improve, the emission control 
requirements for gas turbine engines, particularly with respect to NOx 
emissions, have become increasingly stringent [2]. Therefore, there is an 
urgent need to develop low-emission combustion chamber technologies 
[3].
In gas turbine engine combustion chambers, NOx is primarily 
generated through high-temperature reactions of N2, forming thermal 
NOx according to the Zeldovich mechanism [4]. Therefore, reducing 
NOx emissions depends on lowering the local high temperatures within 
the combustion chamber. Among various low-emission combustion 
chamber technologies, lean direct injection (LDI) stands out due to ad­
vantages such as a reduced risk of flashback, excellent combustion sta­
bility, and strong development potential [5–7].
A traditional LDI nozzle consists of a single-stage swirler, nozzle, and 
Venturi tube. The swirling airflow generated by the swirler interacts 
with fuel droplets through the Venturi tube, enhancing atomization, 
accelerating fuel–air mixing, and stabilizing flame. This process lowers 
local high temperatures and consequently reduces thermal NOx emis­
sions [8,9].
Extensive research has been conducted on single-stage LDI nozzles, 
including swirler structure, Venturi tube geometry, combustor di­
mensions, atomization performance, and flow-spray-combustion 
coupling [10,11]. For multi-nozzle LDI systems, research focuses on 
array configurations, such as 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 arrangements, and swirl 
direction effects on flow and emissions 12,13,14.
Regarding the flow characteristics, Fu et al. [15] conducted 3D 
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) experiments and found that the 
* Corresponding author at: School of Astronautics, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China.
E-mail address: wjkong@buaa.edu.cn (W. Kong). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Thermal Engineering
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apthermeng
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2025.129311
Received 26 May 2025; Received in revised form 18 October 2025; Accepted 28 November 2025  
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
Available online 29 November 2025 
1359-4311/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 


--- Page 2 ---

interaction between adjacent swirler outlet regions in a multi-point LDI 
system significantly enhanced turbulent kinetic energy, leading to the 
formation of a unique inter-stage vortex chain. Twarog et al. [16]
investigated the flow characteristics of the counter-rotating multi- 
swirler (CTS) using time-resolved particle image velocimetry (TR-PIV) 
to quantify the velocity and flow structures of the non-reacting flow 
field. This study improved the understanding of the flow behavior in a 
multi-swirler. Shen et al. [17] employed large eddy simulation (LES) to 
examine the unsteady characteristics of swirling flow in an LDI 
combustor. They observed that the swirling flow exhibited multiple jet- 
like features, which interacted with central toroidal recirculation zone 
(CTRZ) to form a “starfish” shape. Additionally, both the jet diffusion 
angle and the outer recirculation zone were significantly increased.
Significant progress has been made in optimizing fuel mixing. Heath 
et al. [8] employed computational modeling to quantify geometric 
sensitivities. Their results demonstrated that geometric modifications 
significantly alter the axial flow field, including axial velocity profiles, 
turbulent kinetic energy distribution, temperature gradients, and fuel 
dispersion. Carreres et al. [18] conducted LES on an LDI nozzle, 
revealing that fewer swirler blades or larger blade angles enhance the 
recirculation zone, thereby improving atomization and mixing 
processes.
In terms of combustion impact, Broatch et al. [19] employed LES to 
investigate the flow characteristics of liquid sprays in an LDI burner. 
Their findings highlighted the critical role of droplet distribution in the 
combustion process. The study emphasized the importance of the 
rotating vortex core and turbulence structures in the fuel–air mixing 
process and investigated the interaction between the spray and vortices. 
In a follow-up study, Broatch et al. [20] analyzed combustion noise in a 
cyclone-stabilized LDI burner, discovering that noise generation is 
strongly linked to the precessing vortex core (PVC) and vortex break­
down bubble (VBB). Patel et al. [10] applied LES to examine the in­
teractions between spray, turbulence, and flame in an LDI combustor. 
The study found that under heat release conditions, VBB was smaller and 
exhibited stronger reverse flow, while PVC significantly enhanced the 
breakup process.
El-Asrag et al. [21] used LES to investigate the radiation-spray 
coupling effects in an LDI combustor. Their study found that combus­
tion altered the shape and structure of the CTRZ, making it more 
compact along its length while increasing its lateral diameter. Bonefaˇci´c 
et al. [22] optimized fuel oil spray combustion in a 7 MW industrial 
furnace, concluding that lean air–fuel mixtures and high swirl numbers 
promote complete combustion and lower emissions, while moderate 
swirl numbers and narrow spray angles increase heating output but may 
shorten flames. Ibrahim et al. [23] studied the effect of different atom­
izing gases on kerosene spray combustion, concluding that hydrogen 
produces the highest flame temperature and could be a sustainable op­
tion for atomizing gases, with reduced CO and NOx emissions compared 
to air. Dewanji et al. [24] examined the turbulent reacting spray process 
in a single-element LDI combustor, finding that modeling primary at­
omization significantly improved the overall prediction accuracy for 
both the gas phase and the spray.
Although single-stage swirler LDI nozzles can reduce NOx emissions, 
their effectiveness remains limited. Some researchers have made in­
novations in the structure of the swirler [25]. Zhou et al. [26] investi­
gated the three-dimensional rotational flow structures within a dual- 
stage swirler using 2D PIV experiments. Their results identified typical 
coherent flow features, including the corner recirculation zone (CRZ), 
CTRZ, and lip recirculation zone (LRZ). The counter-rotating swirler 
design resulted in the formation of an LRZ and a smaller CTRZ near the 
nozzle exit, significantly influencing the flow structure. Fang et al. [27]
employed planar Mie scattering, phase Doppler particle analysis, and 
high-speed PIV to investigate the effects of the relative rotation direction 
of dual-stage swirlers on the CTRZ and swirl jet regions. Their study 
found that the relative rotation direction significantly influenced the 
interaction between the spray and the swirling air. Zhou et al. [28,29]
observed that while the dual-stage swirler effectively suppressed PVC 
development and reduced thermoacoustic instability, it could lead to 
flame extension and an increase in NOx emissions due to delayed mix­
ing. Archer et al. [30] employed PIV to compare the flow characteristics 
of co-rotating and counter-rotating swirlers. The results indicated that 
the swirl number, combustion, and the size of the confined space 
significantly influenced the characteristics of the CTRZ and CRZ.
In this study, the nozzle was innovatively designed with a dual-stage 
counter-rotating swirler. For this nozzle, Zeng et al. [31,32] experi­
mentally identified three flow modes and investigated its emission 
performance using a CO-H2 blended fuel, demonstrating that the nozzle 
effectively reduces emissions. Zhao et al. [33] employed numerical 
simulations to explore the flow, atomization, and vaporization charac­
teristics of aviation kerosene with this nozzle under high-temperature 
conditions. Their results indicated that the dual-stage counter-rotating 
configuration facilitates faster vaporization of kerosene compared to the 
dual-stage co-rotating configuration, while also achieving a more uni­
form spatial distribution.
Based on the above findings, although Zeng et al. [31–33] have 
conducted studies on the flow, atomization, combustion, and emission 
characteristics of this nozzle, demonstrating its advantages in emissions 
compared to traditional single-stage swirl and dual-stage co-rotating 
nozzles, existing research has primarily focused on isolated studies of 
swirl intensity or nozzle geometry [28,34]. There is a lack of systematic 
research on flow field characteristics and emissions. In particular, the 
effects of dual-stage blade angles and the inner-to-outer air flow rate 
ratios on the flow field and emission have not been sufficiently explored 
[29]. Therefore, there is an urgent need for in-depth quantitative anal­
ysis of how the swirler structure and air distribution affect flow and 
emissions, as well as the exploration of optimal parameters.
To address this research gap, this study employs numerical methods 
to systematically investigate the effects of inner and outer swirl blade 
angles, as well as air distribution, in a dual-stage counter-rotating nozzle 
on flow and emission characteristics within the downstream confined 
space. The combustion and emission performance under various oper­
ating conditions is analyzed, leading to optimized nozzle design and air 
intake parameters. The findings provide both theoretical foundations 
and engineering guidance for optimizing dual-stage counter-rotating 
nozzle configurations, while contributing to the development of low- 
emission combustor technologies.
2. Experimental equipment and numerical methods
2.1. Nozzle description
The dual-stage counter-rotating nozzle, depicted in Fig. 1, consists of 
a dual-stage counter-rotating swirler, a pressure atomization nozzle, and 
a Venturi tube. The swirler is an axial-flow, straight-blade type, 
comprising inner and outer swirl sections rotating in opposite directions. 
Each section contains 12 blades, fabricated using stainless steel 3D 
printing technology. The pressure atomization nozzle and Venturi tube 
are aligned with the swirler along the same axis, with the nozzle outlet 
located at the throat of the Venturi tube.
As shown in Fig. 1(a), the dual-stage counter-rotating swirler gen­
erates a strong turbulent shear layer downstream of the Venturi throat, 
thereby enhancing secondary breakup. This promotes a more uniform 
mixing of liquid spray and air, resulting in a combustion effect similar to 
that of pre-mixed gaseous fuel. Consequently, local high temperatures 
are minimized, temperature uniformity is improved, and CO and NOx 
emissions are reduced.
To investigate the performance of the dual-stage counter-rotating 
nozzle, a study was conducted on both the cold and hot states of the 
nozzle within a confined space. The structural parameters of the nozzle 
are illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The inner swirl blade has an inner diameter of 
20 mm and an outer diameter of 29 mm, while the outer swirl blade has 
an inner diameter of 31 mm and an outer diameter of 40 mm. The 
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
2 


--- Page 3 ---

Fig. 1. Dual-stage counter-rotating nozzle. (a) Schematic diagram. (b) Actual image.
Fig. 2. (a) Key parameters of the nozzle. (b) Key parameters of the confined space.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
3 


--- Page 4 ---

swirler height is 10 mm. The pressure-atomizing nozzle is a Danfoss 
model with a hollow-cone spray type, a spray cone angle of 60◦, and a 
flow coefficient of 0.3. The converging section of the Venturi tube has an 
angle of 30◦, and the diverging section has an angle of 45◦.
The confined space is a rectangular chamber with a 60 mm × 60 mm 
square cross-sectional area and a length of 300 mm. One end of the 
confined space is connected to the outlet of the Venturi tube, and the 
other end is connected to an exhaust hood. The fluid domain, formed by 
the nozzle and confined space, is shown in Fig. 2(b). The center of the 
outlet plane of the Venturi tube is defined as the origin, with this plane 
corresponding to the y = 0 mm plane in the figure. The positive direction 
of the y-axis is directed towards the outlet of the confined space.
This study investigates the impact of swirler blade angles and air 
distribution on the flow field and emissions in confined spaces. Specif­
ically, it examines the inner swirl blade angle (a), outer swirl blade angle 
(b), and the inner-to-outer air flow rate ratio (Ra). The experimental 
conditions are set as follows: environmental pressure of 101.325 kPa, air 
temperature of 297 K, total air flow rate of 2.93 g⋅s−1, kerosene mass 
flow rate of 0.167 g⋅s−1, and an equivalence ratio of 0.83.
The study parameters are provided in Table 1, with the baseline 
conditions (bolded in the table) corresponding to an inner swirl blade 
angle of 39◦, an outer swirl blade angle of 45◦, and an inner-to-outer air 
flow rate ratio of 2:1. A single-variable control approach was employed 
to evaluate the impact of each parameter on the performance of the 
dual-stage counter-rotating nozzle.
Swirl intensity in the combustor is typically measured using the swirl 
number, which represents the ratio of tangential momentum to axial 
momentum. For axial swirlers, it can be evaluated using Eq. (1). The 
swirl numbers for both the inner swirl blade and outer swirl blade were 
calculated, and the results are provided in Table 1. 
SwirlNumber(Sn) = 2
3
[
1 −(Ri/Ro)3
1 −(Ri/Ro)2
]
tanα
(1) 
where Ri refers to the inner radius of the swirler, Ro represents the outer 
radius of the swirler, and α denotes the blade deflection angle.
2.2. Experimental method
The experimental setup used in this study, illustrated in Fig. 3, in­
cludes the fuel supply system, air supply system, nozzle, confined space, 
exhaust system, and data collection system.
The air supply system mainly includes an air compressor, a dryer, a 
pressure stabilizing tank, pressure reducing valves, and mass flow con­
trollers. The air compressor provides a maximum air flow of 18.3 
m3⋅min−1 and a maximum pressure of 1.2 MPa. The dryer has a 
maximum processing capacity of 23.5 m3⋅min−1. The mass flow 
controller has a flow range of 300 L⋅min−1 (under standard conditions), 
with a response time of 1 s. The inner and outer swirl air flow rates are 
independently controlled by the mass flow controllers.
The fuel supply system mainly includes a fuel tank, fuel filters, a gear 
pump, a volumetric flow meter, and pressure sensors. The fuel is sup­
plied by a gear pump driven by a variable-frequency motor, with a 
maximum pressure of 2 MPa and a maximum flow rate of 100 ml⋅min−1. 
A micro gear flow meter, with a range of 0.3–20 L⋅h−1, is employed.
The nozzle is a dual-stage counter-rotating nozzle, mounted on a 
stainless steel frame and connected to both the fuel and air supply sys­
tems. The confined space is constructed from four pieces of 60 mm ×
300 mm quartz glass welded along the long sides, with open ends at both 
the top and bottom. The lower end is connected to the outlet of a Venturi 
tube, and the upper end is connected to an exhaust hood.
The exhaust system includes a flow straightener, exhaust hood, and 
an axial fan, which cooperate to minimize the impact on the flow field 
while continuously venting flue gas to the outside.
The experimental data collection system includes a PIV measurement 
system and a flue gas analysis system. The LAVISION 1D1C PIV system is 
used to measure the planar velocity field of a confined space cross- 
section. This system includes a 532 nm dual-pulse laser with a sheet 
light source and a PIV frame-capture camera. In the experiment, TiO2 
particles with a diameter of 1 µm were used as tracer particles. The laser 
and camera operate at a frequency of 50 Hz, with a resolution of 1280 ×
1024. The PIV experiment was conducted only under cold conditions, 
and kerosene injection was not performed under this operating 
condition.
The flue gas analysis system is equipped with a Testo 340 flue gas 
analyzer, which measures the concentrations of CO, NOx, and O2 in the 
flue gas using a cross-shaped 13-hole collection rake. The CO and NOx 
sensors have measurement ranges of 0–500 ppm and 0–300 ppm, 
respectively, with an error margin of 0.1 ppm. The O2 sensor has a 
measurement range of 0–25 %, with an error margin of 0.2 %.
During the experiment, some instruments exhibit uncertainties that 
could lead to errors in the experimental results. The measurement un­
certainties for each instrument are listed in Table 2.
According to Moffat’s error propagation framework [35], assuming 
that the independent variables are denoted by X (where X1,X2,X3...Xn), 
with the relationship expressed as: 
R = f(X1, X2, X3...Xn)
(2) 
The total measurement error of the experimental system, σR, is deter­
mined by accumulating the measurement errors, as described by the 
following equation: 
σR =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
( ∂R
∂X1
)2
σ2
X1 +
( ∂R
∂X2
)2
σ2
X2 + ⋯+
( ∂R
∂Xn
)2
σ2
Xn
√
(3) 
The uncertainty in the velocity measurements is quantified as 1.5 %, 
while the uncertainties in the measurements of O2, NOx, and CO con­
centrations are 1.4 %, 1.2 %, and 1.2 %, respectively. These values 
confirm the reliability of the experimental data.
2.3. Numerical method
The spray combustion process is a complex, multi-physics phenom­
enon involveing the interaction of various mechanisms, including 
multiphase flow, phase change, and chemical reactions. These processes 
are intricately linked and together influence the flow characteristics and 
pollutant emissions. Since the process involves both discrete and 
continuous phases, the Euler-Lagrange approach is used to investigate 
this multiphase phenomenon. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the continuous 
phase (air, gaseous kerosene, and flue gas) is solved using the Euler 
method, while the discrete phase (kerosene droplets) is solved using the 
Lagrange method. A vaporization model is employed to convert kero­
sene into the continuous phase, the Flamelet Generated Manifold (FGM) 
model is used to simulate chemical reactions, and the Discrete Ordinates 
(DO) method is applied to calculate radiative heat transfer.
2.3.1. Simulation setup and boundary conditions
This study employs the finite volume method for numerical simula­
tions, solving the time-averaged conservation equations in a transient 
Table 1 
Research parameters.
Type
Value
Inner swirl blade angles 
(◦) 
(Swirl number)
30 (0.49), 33 (0.55), 36 (0.62), 39 (0.69), 42 (0.77), 45 
(0.85), 48 (0.95), 51 (1.05)
Outer swirl blade angles 
(◦) 
(Swirl number)
35 (0.62), 40(0.75), 45(0.89), 50(1.06), 55(1.27), 60 
(1.54)
Inner-to-outer air flow 
rate ratios
1:4, 1:3, 1:2, 2:3, 3:4, 1.1, 4:3, 3:2, 2:1, 3:1, 4:1
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
4 


--- Page 5 ---

solution framework. Kerosene (RP-3) is selected as the fuel, with a 
skeletal reaction mechanism comprising a 50-species, 90-step reaction 
that includes NOx formation [36]. Fuel injection is modeled using the 
Discrete Phase Model (DPM) with a 60◦atomization cone angle, hollow 
cone type, and a droplet size distribution following the R-R distribution, 
and a Sauter Mean Diameter (SMD) of 35 μm. The solution is obtained 
using a COUPLED pressure–velocity coupling scheme, discretizing the 
pressure term with the PRESTO! scheme, and other terms with second- 
order accuracy.
The boundary conditions for the fluid domain in the numerical 
simulation are shown in Fig. 5. Both the inner and outer swirl air inlets 
are ring-shaped and modeled as mass flow inlets. Kerosene is injected at 
the center of the pressure atomization nozzle’s conical section, with the 
injection directed along the positive y-axis. The combustion-generated 
exhaust gases are discharged from the rear square cross-section of the 
confined space, which is set as a pressure outlet at 101.325 kPa. The 
remaining unmarked surfaces are defined as wall boundary conditions.
2.3.2. Continuous phase
In the fluid computational domain, the pressure remains approxi­
mately constant. The continuous phase is treated as an incompressible 
ideal gas due to negligible density variations under constant pressure. 
Continuous phase equations are as follows: 
∂ρg
∂t + ∂
∂xi
(
ρg u→
i
)
= Sm
(4) 
∂
∂t
(
ρg u→
i
)
+ ∂
∂xj
(
ρg u→
i u→
j
)
= −∂p
∂xi
+ ∂τ
∂xj
+ ρg g→+ F→
g
(5) 
∂
∂t
( ρgEg
)
+ ∂
∂xj
[
u→
j
( ρgEg + p
) ]
= ∂
∂xj
[
kg
∂T
∂xj
+
(
τ⋅u→
i
) ]
+ Sh
(6) 
Fig. 3. (a) Diagram of the experimental system. (b) Partial experimental setup and images.
Table 2 
Measurement instruments and uncertainties.
Measured 
parameters
Instruments
Uncertainties
Range
Air flow rate
Mass flow controller
±1 %
0 ~ 300 
L⋅min−1
Kerosene flow 
rate
WT02A micro elliptical gear 
flowmeter
±0.5 %
0.3 ~ 20 
L⋅h−1
Velocity
LAVISION 1D1C particle 
image velocimetry system
±1 %
0 ~ 20 
m⋅s−1
Volumetric 
fraction of O2
Testo 340 flue gas analyzer
±0.2 %
0 ~ 25 %
NOx emission
Testo 340 flue gas analyzer
0.033 % (0.1 
ppm)
0 ~ 300 
ppm
CO emission
Testo 340 flue gas analyzer
0.02 % (0.1 
ppm)
0 ~ 500 
ppm
Fig. 4. Euler-Lagrange method for spray combustion simulation.
Fig. 5. Schematic of boundary conditions.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
5 


--- Page 6 ---

In these equations, ρg denotes the density of the continuous phase; t 
represents time; u→indicates the velocity of the continuous phase; Sm is 
the mass source term transferred from the discrete phase kerosene to the 
continuous phase; p denotes the gas pressure; τ represents the viscous 
stress tensor; g→is the gravitational acceleration; F→
g is the external 
force; Eg is the total energy of the fluid microelement, which includes 
internal, kinetic, and potential energy; kg is the thermal conductivity of 
the continuous phase; and Sh is the coupling energy source term from the 
discrete phase.
Spray combustion is generally a turbulent process [37]. In this study, 
the Realizable k-ε (RKE) model is employed to calculate the velocity 
distribution of the continuous phase. For swirling flow, this turbulence 
model has been validated to have high accuracy and reliability, effec­
tively capturing the turbulent characteristics of swirling flow [38,39]. 
The transport equations for turbulent kinetic energy (k) and turbulent 
dissipation rate (ε) are as follows: 
∂
∂t
( ρgk
)
+ ∂
∂xi
( ρgkui
)
= ∂
∂xi
[(
μ + μt
σk
) ∂k
∂xi
]
+ Gk + Gb −ρε
(7) 
∂
∂t (ρε) + ∂
∂xi
(ρεui) = ∂
∂xi
[(
μ
+ μt
σε
) ∂ε
∂xi
]
+ ρC1Sε −ρC2
ε2
k +
̅̅̅̅
vε
√
+ C1εε
kC3εGb
(8) 
In these equations, ui represents the velocity components of the 
continuous phase, μ is the dynamic viscosity, and μt denotes the turbu­
lent viscosity. The constant C1 is defined as max[0.43, η/(η + 5) ], η =
Sk/ε and S =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
2SijSij
√
. Gk represents the turbulence kinetic energy 
generated by the mean velocity gradient, while Gb denotes the turbu­
lence kinetic energy produced by buoyancy forces. The turbulence 
Prandtl numbers σk and σε for k and ε are fixed at values of 1 and 1.2, 
respectively, in this model. The constants C1ε and C2 are set at 1.44 and 
1.9, respectively.
The near-wall treatments for wall-bounded turbulent flows method 
used in this turbulence model is the Menter-Lechner approach. This 
approach employs a low-Reynolds model when the wall grid is fine, and 
uses wall functions when the wall grid is coarse. It is insensitive to y+
and introduces a source term in the transport equation of turbulent ki­
netic energy, as shown in the following equation: 
∂
∂t
( ρgk
)
+ ∂
∂xi
( ρgkui
)
= ∂
∂xi
[(
μ + μt
σk
) ∂k
∂xi
]
+ Gk + Gb −ρε + Snear−wall
(9) 
The additional source term Snear−wall is active only in the viscous sub­
layer and accounts for low Reynolds number effects. It automatically 
becomes zero in the logarithmic region.
2.3.3. Discrete phase
This study involves the heat and mass transfer processes between the 
gas and liquid phases. Tracking individual droplets is difficult due to the 
large number of droplets. Therefore, the DPM is employed to model 
kerosene injection. The mass, force, and energy balance equations are 
solved for each particle parcel, rather than for each individual droplet.
The DPM predicts the motion trajectory of discrete phase particles in 
the continuous phase by integrating the force balance on the particles. 
The equation is as follows: 
mp
d u→
p
dt
= mp
u→
g −
u→
p
τr
+ mp
g→( ρp −ρg
)
ρp
+ F→
p
(10) 
τr = ρpd2
p
18μ
24
CdRerel
(11) 
In this context, mp is the particle mass, u→
p is the particle velocity, ρp is 
the particle density, F→
p is the additional force acting on the particle, τr is 
the particle relaxation time, μ is the dynamic viscosity of the continuous 
phase, dp is the particle diameter, Cd is the drag coefficient, and Rerel is 
the relative Reynolds number, defined by the particle diameter and the 
difference between the particle velocity and the continuous phase ve­
locity. The equation for Rerel is: 
Rerel =
ρpdp
⃒⃒⃒⃒u→
g −
u→
p
⃒⃒⃒⃒
μ
(12) 
In Eq. (11), the dynamic drag model theory is employed, which accounts 
for the effects of droplet shape changes on drag. The drag coefficient Cd 
is calculated as [40]: 
Cd =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
0.424⋅(1 + 2.632yd)
Rerel > 1000
24
Rerel
(
1 + 1
6Re2/3
rel
)
⋅(1 + 2.632yd)
Rerel ≤1000
(13) 
where yd is the deformation coefficient of the droplet. At minimum 
deformation (yd = 0), the drag coefficient corresponds to a spherical 
droplet. At maximum deformation (yd = 1), it corresponds to a disc- 
shaped droplet.
The evolution of droplet temperature is governed by thermal equi­
librium, which accounts for sensible heat variation, convective ex­
change with the continuous phase, and latent heat transfer during 
vaporization. The governing equation is: 
mpCp
dTp
dt = hAp
(
Tg −Tp
)
−dmp
dt hfg
(14) 
where Cp denotes the droplet specific heat capacity, Tp represents the 
droplet temperature, h is the convective heat transfer coefficient, Ap is 
the surface area of the droplet, Tg is the continuous phase temperature, 
and hfg is the latent heat of vaporization for the dispersed phase. The 
heat transfer coefficient h is calculated using the correlation proposed by 
Ranz and Marshall [41]: 
Nu = hdp
kg
= 2.0 + 0.6Re1/2
rel Pr1/3
g
(15) 
where Nu and Prg are the Nusselt number and the Prandtl number of the 
continuous phase, respectively.
Under high Weber number (We) conditions, droplet secondary 
breakup is modeled using Reitz’s wave breakup theory [42]. The theory 
postulates that the breakup duration and resultant droplet sizes are 
correlated with the fastest-growing Kelvin-Helmholtz instability. Reitz 
derived empirical correlations for the maximum growth rate (Ω) and the 
corresponding wavelength (Λ) by fitting numerical solutions: 
Λ
ap
= 9.02
(
1 + 0.45Oh0.5)(
1 + 0.4Ta0.7)
(
1 + 0.87We1.67
2
)0.6
(16) 
Ω
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρ1ap3
σ
√
=
0.34 + 0.38We1.5
2
(1 + Oh)
(
1 + 1.4Ta0.6)
(17) 
where ap is the particle characteristic length, Oh is the Ohnesorge 
number defined as 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Wep
√
/Re, and Ta is the Taylor number defined as 
Oh
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
Weg
√
.
Finally, for simulations involving droplet collision and coalescence, 
O’Rourke’s stochastic approach [43] is employed to assess whether 
droplet paths collide. Once a collision is detected, further analysis is 
conducted to determine whether the collision results in coalescence or 
bouncing. Specific equations are omitted for brevity.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
6 


--- Page 7 ---

2.3.4. Combustion model
The FGM model simulates reaction in three-dimensional chemical 
reaction systems by calculating the reaction manifolds generated on a 
one-dimensional flame surface [44]. In this approach, the thermody­
namic state data of each species are stored in lookup tables. By incor­
porating reaction mechanisms, this model reduces the need to solve 
transport equations for each species, significantly decreasing the 
computational cost of turbulent flame simulations. To solve this model, 
the mixture fraction (f) and the reaction progress variable (c) are defined 
as follows: 
f =
Zi −Zi,ox
Zi,fuel −Zi,ox
(18) 
c =
∑
kαk
(
Yk −Yu
k
)
∑
kαk
(
Yeq
k −Yu
k
) = Yc
Yeq
c
(19) 
In the model, Zi represents the elemental mass fraction of species i, 
where the subscript “ox” denotes the oxidizer stream and “fuel” denotes 
the fuel stream. Yk represents the mass fraction of the k-th species, with 
superscripts “u” and “eq” indicating the unburned reactants at the flame 
inlet and chemical equilibrium at the flame outlet, respectively, and αk is 
a constant. In the FGM model, the chemical reaction state at the location 
is fully described by solving f and c. The transport equations for these 
two variables are as follows [45]: 
∂
∂t (ρf) + ∇⋅(ρ v→f) = ∇⋅
[(km
Cp
+ μt
σt
)
∇f
]
+ Sm
(20) 
∂
∂t (ρc) + ∇⋅(ρ v→c) = ∇⋅
[( km
Cp,m
+ μt
SCt
)
∇c
]
+ ρSc
(21) 
where km represents the laminar thermal conductivity of the mixture, 
Cp,m denotes the specific heat capacity of the mixture, σt is the Prandtl 
number, μt is the turbulent viscosity, Sm represents the mass source term 
from the transition of liquid or solid fuel to the gas phase, SCt is the 
turbulent Schmidt number, Sc is the source term for the reaction process.
2.3.5. Radiation model
In the computational domain of this study, numerous radiation 
sources are present, necessitating the modeling of radiative heat transfer 
in confined spaces. The radiative transfer equation describes the radia­
tive transfer behavior of a medium that absorbs, emits, and scatters 
radiation at a specific position r→and direction s→, and is given by [46]: 
dI( r→, s→)
ds
+ (κ + σs)I( r→, s→) = κn2σT4
π
+ σs
4π
∫4π
0
I( r→, s→ʹ)Φ( s→, s→ʹ)dΩʹ
(22) 
where r→is the position vector, s→is the direction vector, s→ʹ is the 
scattering direction vector, n is the refractive index, σ is the Stefan- 
Boltzmann constant (5.67 × 10−8W⋅m−2⋅K−4), I is the radiative in­
tensity at position r→and direction s→, Φ is the phase function, Ωʹ is the 
solid angle, κ denotes the absorption coefficient, and σs represents the 
scattering coefficient.
The DO model with spatial and angular discretization is employed to 
simulate radiative heat transfer, including both surface-to-surface radi­
ation and radiation exchange within participating media. The absorp­
tion coefficient calculated using the Weighted-Sum-of-Grey-Gas Model 
(WSGGM), which accounts for specific absorption bands. The total 
emissivity εr at a given distance s is defined by the following equation 
[47]: 
εr =
∑
I
i=0
ai(1 −e−κips)
(23) 
where ai is the weighting factor, κi is the absorption coefficient of the i-th 
grey gas, and p represents the sum of the partial pressures of all 
absorbing gases.
3. Models validations
3.1. Mesh independence study
The mesh used in this study consists of hexahedral elements, as 
shown in Fig. 6. To minimize the impact of the mesh on the simulation 
results, a mesh independence study was performed under the baseline 
conditions. By maintaining the same meshing strategy while varying the 
mesh density, four different meshes were generated, with the number of 
elements being 0.57 million, 2.63 million, 4.41 million, and 15.31 
million, respectively.
To assess the accuracy of the different meshes, the NOx and CO 
emissions with a 15 % O2 volumetric fraction at the outlet of the 
confined space, as well as the velocity-y at 20 mm and 40 mm along the 
y-axis, were compared. The equation used to calculate the pollutant 
emissions with a 15 % O2 volumetric fraction is as follows: 
(Emission)15%O2 = (20.9 −15)(Emission)
20.9 −φO2 × 100
(24) 
where (Emission)15%O2 denotes the pollutant concentration with a 15 % 
O2 volumetric fraction, (Emission) denotes the pollutant concentration, 
and φO2 denotes the oxygen concentration.
As shown in Fig. 7, as the number of mesh elements increases, CO 
emissions gradually rise, the velocity-y at the 20 mm position decreases, 
and the velocity-y at the 40 mm position increases. However, significant 
variations were observed from Mesh-1 to Mesh-3, indicating that mesh 
density significantly affects computational accuracy. In contrast, the 
changes from Mesh-3 to Mesh-4 were smaller, indicating that once the 
number of mesh elements exceeds that of Mesh-3, the results become 
less dependent on mesh configuration. Therefore, the Mesh-3 configu­
ration meets the accuracy requirements, and it was used for all subse­
quent simulations.
3.2. Comparison of experimental and simulation results
This study uses experimental data to validate the accuracy of the 
numerical simulations. Due to the limitations of the experimental setup, 
cold-state PIV and hot-state emission experiments were conducted under 
baseline conditions, providing cold-state velocity field data and hot- 
state emission data, respectively.
As shown in Fig. 8, the comparison of the radial distribution of ve­
locity-y at axial distances of 5 mm and 30 mm and the axial distribution 
of velocity-y along the y-axis in the confined space under cold condi­
tions, reveals that the numerical simulation results are in good agree­
ment with the PIV measurements. This indicates that the numerical 
simulation method used is capable of accurately predicting the velocity 
distribution.
To validate the accuracy of the emission predictions in the numerical 
simulations, a 13-hole collection rake was positioned 5 cm above the 
center of the confined space outlet to collect exhaust gases. CO, NOx 
Fig. 6. Image of mesh.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
7 


--- Page 8 ---

concentrations, and combustion efficiency were measured using a Testo 
340 flue gas analyzer. Sampling lasted for 1 min, and three trials were 
conducted to calculate the average and standard deviation. The results 
are presented in Table 3.
The numerical simulation results show that NOx emissions are 
slightly higher, while CO emissions are slightly lower. This discrepancy 
arises because radiation heat transfer from the confined space to the 
external mesh is not considered in the simulation. The confined space, 
constructed from quartz glass, radiates heat outward. As a result, the 
simulation underestimates heat loss through the walls, leading to a slight 
increase in temperature within the confined space. This causes a slight 
rise in NOx emissions and a reduction in CO emissions. However, the 
overall deviation is minor, and the results are considered to meet the 
accuracy requirements.
4. Results and discussions
To thoroughly analyze the impact of parameter changes on the flow 
field velocity, this study focused on extracting the distributions of radial 
velocity (Velocity-x), axial velocity (Velocity-y), and tangential velocity 
(Velocity-z) along the radial direction at an axial position of 20 mm. 
Additionally, the axial velocity (Velocity-y) distribution along the axis 
was examined. Specifically, the directions of the velocities are defined as 
follows: radial velocity is positive in the outward radial direction, axial 
velocity is positive toward the exit of the confined space along the 
central axis, and tangential velocity is positive in the direction consistent 
with the inner swirl flow. The precise locations for data extraction are 
shown in Fig. 9, designated as “Data Sampling Location 1″ and ”Data 
Sampling Location 2″.
In the LDI combustor, the CTRZ produced by the swirling flow is a 
key characteristic of the flow field. It enhances the mixing of fuel and air, 
significantly contributing to flame stability. This study adopts the defi­
nition by El-Asrag [21], where the region enclosed by the iso-surface 
with zero axial velocity along the axis is considered the CTRZ, while the 
region at the bottom edge of the confined space is defined as the CRZ. 
Consequently, this phenomenon is of considerable interest in both cold 
and hot flow field analyses. The iso-surface of zero axial velocity and 
streamline distribution are shown in Fig. 10. It is evident that the dual- 
stage counter-rotating nozzle induces swirling flow within the confined 
space, resulting in both a CTRZ and a CRZ.
To quantify the impact of parameter changes on the CTRZ, Vs is 
defined as the volume of the CTRZ from 0 to 60 mm, measured from the 
base of the confined space. By comparing it with the volume of the 
confined space Vc (60 mm × 60 mm × 60 mm in this study), a dimen­
sionless processing is applied, defining av as the dimensionless CTRZ 
volume, as follows: 
av = Vs
Vc
=
∫
0<y<60mmSdy
603mm3
(25) 
where S denotes the cross-sectional area of the CTRZ at the axial dis­
tance y.
Fig. 7. Comparison of results under different mesh.
Fig. 8. Comparison of velocity-y between experiment and simulation (a) y = 5 mm, y = 30 mm; (b) x  = 0 mm.
Table 3 
Table of experimental and numerical simulation results.
Type
Exp.
CFD
NOx emission (ppm @15 %O2)
15.3 ± 2.1
17.38
CO emission (ppm @15 %O2)
5.47 ± 1.3
4.73
Combustion efficiency (%)
99.99
99.99
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
8 


--- Page 9 ---

The recirculation rate ηq is defined as the ratio of the recirculation 
mass flow rate at the maximum cross-section of the CTRZ on the y-axis to 
the sum of the inlet air mass flow rate and the fuel mass flow rate, 
expressed as: 
ηq =
qm,s
qm,a + qm,f
=
∫
Smax:vy<0ρmix
⃒⃒vy
⃒⃒dSmax
qm,a + qm,f
(26) 
where Smax denotes the area of the maximum cross-section of the CTRZ 
on the y-axis, ρmix is the fluid density, vy is the axial velocity, qm,s is the 
recirculation mass flow rate at the maximum cross-section on the y-axis, 
and qm,a and qm,f are the total air mass flow rate and the fuel mass flow 
rate, respectively, which in this study are 2.93 g⋅s−1 and 0.167 g⋅s−1.
4.1. Effect of the inner swirl blade angles
The inner blade angle (a), a critical parameter of the dual-stage 
counter-rotating swirler, plays a crucial role in influencing the swirl 
intensity of the inner swirl airflow. To investigate its effect, a systematic 
study was conducted under baseline conditions by varying this 
parameter.
The morphology of the CTRZ under both cold state and hot state at 
different a is presented in Fig. 11. It is evident from the figure that when 
a is set at 30◦, the swirl intensity is notably weak, resulting in a signif­
icant axial velocity of the air after it passes through the Venturi tube, 
with relatively low tangential and radial velocities. Although a CTRZ 
exists in this configuration, its size is significantly small, whereas the 
CRZ is relatively large. This configuration failed to achieve ignition, 
resulting in the absence of combustion and, consequently, no hot-state 
data. Increasing a enhances the swirl intensity of the inner swirl 
airflow, resulting in the expansion of the CTRZ and the reduction of the 
CRZ. Under hot state, the shape of the CTRZ transitions from a “club- 
shaped” to a “spindle-shaped” configuration. When the angle reaches 
45◦, the size of the CTRZ stabilizes. A comparative analysis of the cold 
and hot state results reveals that the heat release from combustion ac­
celerates the axial velocity of the airflow, diminishes the overall swirl 
intensity, and subsequently contracts the central annular recirculation 
zone. This finding is consistent with the conclusions of Ren [25] and El- 
Asrag [21] regarding the effect of combustion on the CTRZ size.
The radial distributions of radial, axial, and tangential velocities at 
an axial position of 20 mm, as well as the axial velocity distribution 
along the centerline, for different a, are illustrated in Fig. 12. Comparing 
Figs. 11 and 12, it is evident that at a of 30◦, the CTRZ is nearly absent 
under cold state, and its velocity profile differs markedly from those at 
other inner swirl blade angles.
As shown in Fig. 12(a), under the cold state, for a of 33◦and 36◦, the 
radial velocity initially rises and then decreases as the dimensionless 
radial distance increases, with the velocity reaching its peak at a 
dimensionless radial position of 0.6. As a increases, the radial velocity 
decreases, with all values below 0.5 m⋅s−1. In Fig. 12(b), under the hot 
state, the radial velocity first drops from 0 m⋅s−1 to a negative value and 
then rises to a positive value for different a. This behavior indicates that 
the airflow first converges toward the axis and then diverges outward, 
demonstrating the existence of the CTRZ.
The axial velocity initially increases and then decreases with radial 
position is shown in Figs. 12(c) and 12(d). The region where the axial 
velocity is negative lies within the CTRZ, while the point where the axial 
velocity equals zero defines its boundary. As a increases, the width of the 
CTRZ gradually expands, which is consistent with the findings in Fig. 11.
The tangential velocity distribution along the radial position under 
cold and hot states is shown in Figs. 12(e) and 12(f). A positive 
tangential velocity confirms that the airflow rotates in the same direc­
tion as the inner blades of the swirler. Notably, the tangential velocity 
remains positive at all inner swirl blade angles due to the inner-to-outer 
airflow rate ratio of 2:1 in the baseline condition. The predominance of 
the inner airflow, combined with its interaction with fuel droplets, en­
sures that the overall airflow retains the same rotational direction as the 
inner swirling air. Moreover, as a increases, the swirl intensity of the 
airflow strengthens, significantly elevating the tangential velocity.
The axial velocity variation along the centerline under cold and hot 
states is depicted in Figs. 12(g) and 12(h), providing insights into the 
recirculation velocity and length of the CTRZ. The axial velocity initially 
decreases and then increases with axial distance, reaching its minimum 
(i.e., the maximum recirculation velocity) at an axial position of 40 mm. 
As a increases, the swirl intensity of the airflow strengthens, the recir­
culation velocity rises, and the length of the CTRZ extends.
Comparing the results of the cold and hot states, it is evident that 
under the hot state, the combustion reaction elevates the gas tempera­
ture through heat release, which reduces the gas density, and increases 
the number of gas moles through chemical reactions, leading to gas 
expansion. Consequently, the peaks of radial, axial, and tangential ve­
locities increase, with the axial velocity exhibiting the most pronounced 
rise. As a result, the swirl intensity of the airflow diminishes, and the size 
of the CTRZ contracts.
Fig. 9. Schematic of the velocity value extraction locations.
Fig. 10. 3D view of the iso-surface (Velcity-y = 0 m⋅s−1).
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
9 


--- Page 10 ---

The influence of a on the dimensionless CTRZ volume (av) and the 
recirculation rate (ηq) under both cold and hot states is demonstrated in 
Fig. 13. In this figure, the suffix “cs” represents the cold state, and “hs” 
represents the hot state. Analysis of the cold state results reveals that as a 
increases, both av and ηq rise significantly; they tend to stabilize when 
the angle exceeds 39◦. This suggests that increasing the inner blade 
angle effectively expands the volume of the CTRZ within the confined 
space and increases the proportion of gas involved in recirculation. The 
results are consistent with those obtained by Carreres [18], where 
increasing the blade angle enhances the CTRZ. However, beyond a 
certain threshold, the impact of a on the CTRZ diminishes. A comparison 
of cold and hot state results indicates that the heat release during 
combustion leads to a notable reduction in the volume of the CTRZ, 
while the decrease in ηq is relatively minor. Combined with the analysis 
of Figs. 12(g) and 12(h), it is concluded that the recirculation velocity 
within the CTRZ increases significantly under hot state.
Fig. 11. Morphology of CTRZ at different inner swirl blade angles.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
10 


--- Page 11 ---

The spatial distribution of vaporized kerosene and the temperature 
field under hot state for different a are illustrated in Fig. 14. As depicted, 
the swirling air exerts a significant influence on fuel distribution, with 
the vaporized kerosene displaying a distinct “V”-shaped pattern on the 
cross-section. Based on the analysis of Figs. 12(f) and 12(h), under hot 
state, an increase in a reduces the axial velocity of the airflow while 
enhancing the tangential velocity, thereby intensifying the overall swirl 
and recirculation strength. Consequently, the penetration depth of 
kerosene particles decreases, and their radial displacement increases, 
resulting in a broader “V”-shaped angle in the distribution of vaporized 
kerosene. The change in a not only alters the distribution of vaporized 
kerosene but also affects the flame front position. This is evident from 
the temperature field, where the high temperature region of the flame 
Fig. 12. Radial, axial, and tangential velocities distributions along the radial and axial directions for different inner swirl blade angles.
Fig. 13. Effect of the inner swirl blade angles on av and ηq.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
11 


--- Page 12 ---

progressively shifts forward as a increases.
The variations of CO and NOx emissions with a are presented in 
Fig. 15. The results demonstrate that as a increases, the overall swirl 
intensity of the airflow increases, leading to an initial decrease followed 
by an increase in both CO and NOx emissions. Notably, NOx emissions 
reach their minimum value of 17.38 ppm at a of 39◦, while CO emissions 
reach their lowest value of 4.52 ppm at an inner blade angle of 42◦. 
Current emission regulations impose more stringent limits on NOx. 
Therefore, within the parameters examined in this study, the optimal 
value of a is identified as 39◦. This is likely because the swirl intensity 
within this range is optimal, leading to stronger interactions between 
kerosene droplets and the airflow and a more uniform distribution of 
vaporized kerosene. Furthermore, the CTRZ contributes to stable and 
complete combustion, with a more uniform temperature distribution, 
leading to lower CO and NOx emissions.
4.2. Effect of the outer swirl blade angles
The outer swirl blade angle (b) has a significant impact on the swirl 
intensity of the outer swirl airflow. To investigate this effect, the outer 
blade angle was varied under baseline conditions for a detailed analysis.
The morphology of the CTRZ under both cold and hot states for 
different b is illustrated in Fig. 16. The results show that as b increases, 
the size of the CTRZ decreases. Under the cold state, the length of the 
CTRZ shortens and gradually adopts a spindle-like shape. Due to com­
bustion reactions, the size of the CTRZ under the hot state is smaller than 
Fig. 14. Kerosene, and temperature contours at different inner swirl blade angles.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
12 


--- Page 13 ---

under the cold state. A comparison with Fig. 11 indicates that this trend 
is inversely related to the influence of b. This is because the inner-to- 
outer air flow rate ratio is 2:1, and the swirl airflow in the confined 
space is primarily controlled by the inner airflow. Since the inner and 
outer swirl flows are in opposite directions, increasing b enhances the 
outer swirl intensity, which weakens the overall swirl intensity and re­
duces the size of the CTRZ.
The radial, axial, and tangential velocity distributions along the 
radial direction at an axial position of 20 mm, as well as the axial ve­
locity distribution along the centerline, for different values of b, are 
presented in Fig. 17. A comparison of the cold state results from Figs. 16 
and 17 reveals that when b is between 35◦and 50◦, the system behaves 
in one way, while between 55◦and 60◦, it exhibits distinct behavior, 
with notable differences in the morphology of the CTRZ and the velocity 
distribution patterns.
As shown in Fig. 17(a), when b is between 35◦and 50◦, the radial 
velocity is relatively low, peaking at a non-dimensional radial distance 
of 0.8. However, when b is between 55◦and 60◦, the radial velocity 
initially increases sharply, then decreases rapidly, reaching a peak at a 
non-dimensional radial distance of 0.57. It is demonstrated in Fig. 17(b)
that under the hot state, the radial velocity initially decreases, then in­
creases to a peak, and decreases again as the radial distance increases. 
This indicates that the airflow initially moves toward the axis and then 
expands radially outward.
The axial velocity distribution along the radial direction is shown in 
Figs. 17(c) and 17(d). The location with an axial velocity of 0 m⋅s−1 
Fig. 15. Effect of the inner swirl blade angles on emissions.
Fig. 16. Morphology of CTRZ at different outer swirl blade angles.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
13 


--- Page 14 ---

corresponds to the width of the CTRZ. In conjunction with Fig. 16, it can 
be observed that the CTRZ width decreases as b increases. Under cold 
state, the CTRZ width for b between 35◦and 60◦is notably smaller than 
that for b of 35◦~50◦. This is due to the inner-to-outer air flow rate ratio 
of 2:1, where an increase in b enhances the swirl intensity of the outer 
airflow but weakens the overall swirl intensity after mixing, thereby 
reducing the CTRZ width. Under hot state, the effect of b is mitigated by 
the heat release from combustion, which causes gas expansion in the 
confined space, elevates the axial velocity, and reduces the overall swirl 
intensity, thus shortening the width of the CTRZ.
The changes in tangential velocity along the radial direction in both 
the cold and hot states are shown in Figs. 17(e) and 17(f). As shown, 
with an increase in b, the tangential velocity decreases but remains 
positive. This indicates that while the increased outer swirl flow in­
tensity weakens the overall swirl strength after mixing, the direction of 
the airflow still matches the inner swirl flow.
The axial velocity distribution along the centerline under both the 
cold and hot states is shown in Figs. 17(g) and 17(h). The trends in axial 
velocity distribution are consistent in both the cold and hot states for all 
values of b. The axial velocity progressively increases as the value of b 
rises. Combined with Fig. 16, it can be concluded that the length of the 
CTRZ decreases with increasing b under both cold and hot states.
The effects of b on the dimensionless CTRZ volume (av) and the 
recirculation rate (ηq) are shown in Fig. 18. Under the cold state, as b 
increases, the overall swirl intensity of the airflow diminishes, leading to 
a gradual reduction in both av and ηq. However, when b exceeds 50◦, as 
Fig. 17. Radial, axial, and tangential velocities distributions along the radial and axial directions for different outer swirl blade angles.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
14 


--- Page 15 ---

depicted in Fig. 16, the CTRZ progressively transitions to a spindle 
shape, and both av and ηq decrease sharply. Under the hot state, av re­
mains relatively constant as b increases, but it is notably smaller 
compared to the cold state. Furthermore, ηq gradually decreases with 
increasing b, which is attributed to the rise in axial velocity.
The distributions of vaporized kerosene and temperature at different 
values of b are presented in Fig. 19. Analysis of the vaporized kerosene 
distribution reveals that as b increases, the overall swirl intensity of the 
airflow decreases under the influence of the swirling flow, with the 
vaporized kerosene distribution following a trend opposite to that 
observed in Fig. 14 for the inner swirl blade angles. As b increases, the 
swirl intensity of the airflow weakens, leading to an increase in the axial 
velocity of the kerosene entrained by the airflow, while the tangential 
velocity decreases. This causes the ’V’-shaped angle in the kerosene 
distribution to narrow. In the temperature field, this results in the high- 
temperature zone within the confined space shifting backward.
The variation in CO and NOx emissions with respect to b is shown in 
Fig. 20. The results indicate that as b increases, the overall swirl intensity 
of the airflow decreases, leading to a reduction in CO emissions, while 
NOx emissions initially show a gradual decline followed by a rapid in­
crease. This suggests that under the studied conditions, lower swirl in­
tensity improves combustion efficiency, but the associated higher 
combustion temperatures also increase NOx formation. Considering the 
stricter regulatory limits on NOx emissions and the relatively small 
Fig. 18. Effect of the outer swirl blade angles on av and ηq.
Fig. 19. Kerosene, and temperature contours at different outer swirl blade angles.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
15 


--- Page 16 ---

variation in CO emissions across different b values, the optimal b range is 
identified as 40◦–50◦.
4.3. Effect of the inner-to-outer air flow rate ratios
In this study, the total air flow rate remains constant, and the inner- 
to-outer air flow rate ratio (Ra) influences the interactions between the 
inner swirl flow, outer swirl flow, and kerosene. This ultimately affects 
the velocity of the mixed swirling flow, the distribution of vaporized 
kerosene, the temperature profile, and the pollutant emissions at the 
outlet of the confined space. Under baseline conditions, the effects of 
varying Ra on these results were systematically investigated.
The morphology of the CTRZ under different Ra values in both cold 
and hot states is shown in Fig. 21. Under the cold state, as Ra increases 
from 1:4 to 4:1, the size of the CTRZ initially decreases and then in­
creases. When Ra is between 1:2 and 3:2, the CTRZ is notably smaller, 
and at Ra values of 3:4, 1:1, and 4:3, the CTRZ nearly disappears. This 
phenomenon occurs because the inner and outer swirl airflows rotate in 
opposite directions. When their flow rates are approximately equal (i.e., 
1:1), the overall swirl intensity in the confined space is greatly reduced, 
causing the CTRZ to shrink drastically or even disappear. Under the hot 
state, when Ra is within the range of 1:2 to 3:2, the overall swirl intensity 
is insufficient to maintain combustion. These findings underscore the 
importance of a robust CTRZ for ensuring combustion.
The radial, axial, and tangential velocity distributions along the 
radial direction at an axial position of 20 mm, as well as the axial ve­
locity along the centerline under varying Ra, are shown in Fig. 22. The 
radial velocity profiles under the cold and hot states are illustrated in 
Figs. 22(a) and 22(b), respectively. When Ra approaches 1:1 (e.g., 3:2, 
4:3, 1:1, and 3:4 under the cold state, and 2:1 under the hot state), the 
radial velocity initially decreases, then increases, and finally decreases 
again as the radial distance increases. This illustrates the movement of 
airflow in the radial direction.
The axial velocity profiles along the radial direction are depicted in 
Figs. 22(c) and 22(d). Under the cold state, for Ra of 4:3, 1:1, and 3:4, the 
axial velocity near the centerline remains positive, indicating the 
absence of CTRZ under these conditions. As Ra deviates from 1:1, the 
axial velocity increases, reflecting a stronger overall swirl intensity. 
Notably, under both cold and hot states, the recirculation velocity is 
higher when the inner swirl flow dominates (e.g., 4:1, 3:1) compared to 
when the outer swirl flow dominates (e.g., 1:3, 1:4).
The tangential velocity profiles along the radial direction are illus­
trated in Figs. 22(e) and 22(f). Analysis of the tangential velocity reveals 
the swirl direction of the airflow. Under the cold state, when the inner 
swirl flow dominates (e.g., 4:1, 3:1, 2:1, 3:2, 4:3), the tangential velocity 
of the mixed swirling airflow is positive, aligning with the inner swirl 
direction. Conversely, when the outer swirl flow dominates (e.g., 3:4, 
2:3, 1:2, 1:3, 1:4), the tangential velocity aligns with the outer swirl 
direction. At Ra of 1:1, the tangential velocity transitions from positive 
to negative along the radial direction, indicating a change in the swirl 
direction from the inner to the outer swirl as the radial distance in­
creases. Comparing the tangential velocity under both cold and hot 
states shows that as Ra deviates further from 1:1, the tangential velocity 
increases, and the swirl intensity becomes stronger, which is also re­
flected in the volume of CTRZ in Fig. 21. Furthermore, the combustion 
reaction significantly enhances the tangential velocity under the hot 
state compared to the cold state.
The axial velocity profiles along the centerline under the cold and hot 
states are shown in Figs. 22(g) and 22(h), respectively. When Ra is close 
to 1:1 (e.g., 4:3, 1:1, 3:4), the axial velocity remains positive, indicating 
Fig. 20. Effect of the outer swirl blade angles on emissions.
Fig. 21. Morphology of CTRZ at different inner-to-outer air flow rate ratios.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
16 


--- Page 17 ---

the absence of CTRZ. As Ra deviates from 1:1, the absolute value of the 
axial velocity increases, which is reflected in the larger size of CTRZ 
shown in Fig. 21. Comparisons between the cold and hot states reveal 
that the axial velocity increases more rapidly along the centerline under 
the hot state, reaching 0 m⋅s−1 at 25 ~ 50 mm for different Ra, indicating 
that the combustion reaction significantly reduces the CTRZ length 
under the hot state.
The impact of Ra on the dimensionless volume of the CTRZ (av) and 
the recirculation rate (ηq) under both cold and hot states is illustrated in 
Fig. 23. For conditions where combustion cannot be achieved, hot state 
results were not recorded. Under the cold state, as the proportion of 
inner swirl flow ratio increases, the overall swirl intensity of the airflow 
initially weakens, leading to a gradual decline in both av and ηq. When 
Ra reaches 3:4, the overall swirl intensity of the airflow becomes mini­
mal, causing a sharp drop in av and ηq, approaching zero. As Ra increases 
Fig. 22. Radial, axial, and tangential velocities distributions along the radial and axial directions for different inner-to-outer air flow rate ratios.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
17 


--- Page 18 ---

from 4:3, the inner swirl flow dominates, enhancing the overall swirl 
intensity of the airflow. Once Ra reaches 3:2, av and ηq increase sharply. 
When Ra reaches 2:1, av and ηq remain at a high level, rising slowly. 
From the results, when av under the cold state is less than 0.2, com­
bustion cannot be achieved.
The mass fraction of vaporized kerosene and the temperature dis­
tribution under varying Ra are shown in Fig. 24. As the proportion of 
inner swirl flow ratio increases, the overall swirl intensity of the airflow 
initially decreases and then increases. The swirl direction first aligns 
with the outer swirl direction and then transitioning to align with the 
inner swirl direction. Under the influence of the swirling airflow, the 
kerosene distribution forms a ’V’ shape, with its angle narrowing 
initially and then widening, while the kerosene jet depth first increases 
and then decreases. In the temperature field, the high-temperature re­
gion initially shifts backward and then moves forward, a behavior 
attributed to the impact of the swirling airflow on the flame front. The 
distributions of vaporized kerosene and temperature are primarily 
determined by the overall flow characteristics of the swirling airflow 
within the confined space.
The trends of CO and NOx emissions with respect to Ra are shown in 
Fig. 25. The results demonstrate that as Ra increases from 1:4 to 1:3, CO 
emissions rise, while NOx emissions decrease. Further increasing the 
proportion of inner swirl flow ratio results in the inability to achieve 
combustion in the confined space. When Ra is elevated to 2:1, com­
bustion is reestablished in the confined space. Continued increases in the 
proportion of inner swirl flow ratio cause a rise in NOx emissions and a 
decrease in CO emissions. A comparison of emission results under 
dominant inner swirl flow and outer swirl flow conditions reveals that 
higher inner swirl flow ratios yield comparatively lower NOx and CO 
emissions. The optimal NOx emissions are achieved when Ra is 2:1, with 
CO and NOx concentrations of 4.73 ppm and 17.38 ppm, respectively, 
indicating that this Ra corresponds to the most effective air distribution.
Fig. 23. Effect of the inner-to-outer air flow rate ratios on av and ηq.
Fig. 24. Kerosene, and temperature contours at different inner-to-outer air flow rate ratios.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
18 


--- Page 19 ---

4.4. Quantitative analysis of CTRZ
In this study, the combustion reaction causes significant variations in 
the size of the CTRZ between the cold state and the hot state. To sys­
tematically compare these changes and quantify their impact, the nu­
merical simulation results across all operating conditions have been 
statistically evaluated. The focus is on the relationship between av and ηq 
under both the cold and hot states, and their correlation with achieving 
combustion.
The values of av and ηq under the cold and hot states are shown in 
Figs. 26 and 27, respectively. The horizontal axis corresponds to the 
results obtained under the cold state, while the vertical axis represents 
those under the hot state.
A linear relationship between av under the cold state and the hot 
state is demonstrated in Fig. 26. For the same operating conditions, 
larger av under the cold state correlates with larger av under the hot 
state. However, the combustion reaction in the hot state leads to a sig­
nificant reduction in the volume of CTRZ. The average results across all 
operating conditions reveal that the volume of CTRZ under the hot state 
is approximately 0.134 times that under the cold state. Furthermore, 
linear fitting yields Equation (27), where the parameter av-cs ranges 
from 0.2 to 0.39, with an R2 value of 0.62, as shown in the equation 
below: 
av −hs = 0.027 + 0.05 × av −cs
(27) 
A linear relationship between ηq under the cold state and the hot 
state is illustrated in Fig. 27. For the same operating conditions, higher 
ηq under the cold state correlates with higher ηq under the hot state. 
However, the combustion reaction under the hot state results in a slight 
decrease in ηq. The average results across all operating conditions show 
that ηq under the hot state is approximately 0.85 times that under the 
cold state. Compared to the effect of the combustion reaction on av, its 
impact on ηq is relatively minor, suggesting that the recirculation 
velocity within the CTRZ is greater under the hot state. Additionally, 
linear fitting yields Eq. (28), where the parameter ηq-cs ranges from 
0.131 to 0.165, with an R2 value of 0.69. The equation is as follows: 
ηq −hs = −0.017 + 0.969 × ηq −cs
(28) 
Under the hot state, the effect of the swirl blade angle is weakened. 
The heat released from the combustion reaction increases the gas tem­
perature and decreases its density, while also generating more gaseous 
products. According to the ideal gas law, this causes the gas volume to 
expand. As a result, the gas expands within the confined space, which 
leads to an increase in the axial velocity of the airflow. This reduces the 
swirl intensity and shrinks the size of the CTRZ.
To investigate the impact of CTRZ volume on the ability to achieve 
combustion in a confined space, Fig. 28 is constructed with av in the cold 
state on the horizontal axis and ηq under the cold state on the vertical 
axis. Operating conditions that enable combustion in the hot state are 
highlighted in red, while those that fail to achieve combustion are 
marked in blue. The CTRZ indicates the swirl intensity of the airflow 
within the confined space; higher swirl intensity corresponds to larger av 
and ηq. The vortex flow within CTRZ reverses airflow in the flame re­
gion, prolonging the flame’s residence time in the combustor and 
thereby enhancing flame stability while preventing flame extinction or 
unstable combustion. The results demonstrate that, within the studied 
range of operating conditions, combustion cannot be achieved in the 
confined space under hot state when av under the cold state is less than 
0.2 (i.e., ηq is below 0.125). Conversely, when av exceeds 0.2 (i.e., ηq 
surpasses 0.125), combustion is attainable in the confined space under 
hot state.
The relationship between av and ηq under both cold and hot states is 
illustrated in Fig. 29. The results reveal a linear relationship between av 
and ηq under both cold and hot states: as av increases, ηq also increases. 
This suggests that stronger swirl intensity in the confined space 
Fig. 25. Effect of the inner-to-outer air flow rate ratios on emissions.
Fig. 26. The relationship between av-cs and av-hs.
Fig. 27. The relationship between ηq-cs and ηq-hs.
Fig. 28. av-cs, ηq-cs, and the boundary of stable combustion.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
19 


--- Page 20 ---

promotes combustion.
Linear fitting of av and ηq for the cold state yields Equation (29), 
where av ranges from 0.03 to 0.17, with an R2 value of 0.903, as shown 
below: 
ηq −cs = 0.02 + 0.387 × av −cs
(29) 
Linear fitting of av and ηq under the hot state results in Equation (30), 
with av ranging from 0 to 0.7, with an R2 value of 0.969, as shown 
below: 
ηq −hs = 0.012 + 2.67 × av −hs
(30) 
Analysis of the fitting results for av and ηq indicates a distinct linear 
relationship between av and ηq in the confined space, demonstrating that 
the volume of CTRZ can effectively predict the recirculation rate.
5. Conclusions
This study investigates the flow and emission characteristics of an 
innovative dual-stage counter-rotating nozzle in a confined space, 
focusing on the effects of swirler structure (including the inner and outer 
swirl blade angles) and the inner-to-outer air flow rate ratio on the ve­
locity distribution, CTRZ morphology, vaporized kerosene distribution, 
and emission performance. The study aims to reduce nozzle emissions 
and explore the variation pattern of the CTRZ, providing theoretical 
basis for practical engineering applications. The main findings are as 
follows: 
(1) As the inner blade angle increases, the axial velocity of the 
airflow in the confined space decreases, while the radial and 
tangential velocities increase, enhancing swirl intensity. This 
enlarges the CTRZ, increases the recirculation rate, shortens the 
kerosene penetration depth, and shifts the flame front towards 
the nozzle. As the inner swirl blade angle increases, CO and NOx 
emissions initially decrease due to enhanced mixing efficiency, 
but begin to increase beyond 39◦. Therefore, the optimal emission 
performance is observed at 39◦, where the minimum NOx emis­
sions are 17.38 ppm.
(2) In contrast to the inner blade angle, under an inner-to-outer air 
flow rate ratio (Ra) of 2:1, as the outer swirl blade angle increases, 
the axial velocity of the airflow in the confined space increases, 
while the radial and tangential velocities decrease. This weakens 
the swirl intensity, reduces the volume of the CTRZ, decreases the 
recirculation rate, increases the kerosene penetration depth, and 
shifts the flame front towards the outlet. NOx emissions increase, 
while CO emissions decrease, with optimal emission performance 
observed when the outer blade angle ranges from 40◦to 50◦.
(3) The mixed airflow swirl intensity and direction are influenced by 
both the blade angles and Ra. The mixed airflow swirl direction 
aligns with the stage having a higher air flow ratio. When Ra 
approaches 1:1 (ranging from 1:2 to 3:2), the mixed airflow swirl 
intensity in the confined space is too weak, causing the CTRZ to 
vanish and preventing stable combustion. The further Ra deviates 
from 1:1, the greater the swirl intensity, the larger the CTRZ, and 
the higher the recirculation rate. The optimal NOx emissions are 
achieved when Ra is 2:1, with CO and NOx concentrations of 4.73 
ppm and 17.38 ppm, respectively.
(4) Under both cold and hot states, a correlation exists between the 
dimensionless CTRZ volume (av), the recirculation rate (ηq), and 
the ability to combustion. av and ηq exhibit a linear positive 
correlation. The heat release and combustion products increase 
the axial velocity in the confined space while reducing the 
tangential and radial velocities, leading to a reduction in av. 
When av exceeds 0.2 (ηq greater than 0.125) under the cold state, 
combustion can be achieved under the hot state.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ruolin Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Wenjun Kong: Writing – 
review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acqui­
sition, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China under grant number 52076007.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] K.G. Kyprianidis, E. Dahlquist, On the trade-off between aviation NOx and energy 
efficiency, Appl. Energy 185 (2017) 1506–1516, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2015.12.055.
[2] M. Zhang, A. Filippone, Optimum problems in environmental emissions of aircraft 
arrivals, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 123 (2022) 107502, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ast.2022.107502.
[3] Y. Liu, X. Sun, V. Sethi, D. Nalianda, Y.-G. Li, L. Wang, Review of modern low 
emissions combustion technologies for aero gas turbine engines, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 
94 (2017) 12–45, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2017.08.001.
[4] L.H. Lefebvre, D.R. Ballal, Gas turbine combustion: alternative fuels and emissions, 
CRC Press, Florida (2010), https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4001927.
[5] H. Li, J. Zhang, G. Xie, Y. Lou, Z. Zhou, Study on coupling characteristics between 
multi-swirler array combustor and NGVs, Appl. Therm. Eng. 235 (2023) 121271, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2023.121271.
[6] Q. Yao, O. Shi, L. Song, W. Jin, J. Li, H. Liu, L. Yuan, An experimental study of 
thermoacoustic instabilities in a RP-3 fueled multi-swirl stabilized lean direct 
injection combustor, Appl. Therm. Eng. 255 (2024) 124034, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2024.124034.
[7] Z. Qin, H. Song, X. Han, L. Li, Y. Lin, L. Xu, Fuel stratification effects on 
thermoacoustic instability for swirl spray flame in an aero-engine centrally-staged 
combustor, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 161 (2025) 110163, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ast.2025.110163.
[8] C.M. Heath, Characterization of swirl-venturi lean direct injection designs for 
aviation gas turbine combustion, J. Propul. Power 30 (2014) 1334–1356, https:// 
doi.org/10.2514/1.B35077.
[9] D. Mo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, X. Han, Characterization and validation of low 
emission mechanisms in hydrogen micromix diffusion combustor, Appl. Therm. 
Eng. 274 (2025) 126497, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2025.126497.
[10] N. Patel, M. Kırtas¸, V. Sankaran, S. Menon, Simulation of spray combustion in a 
lean-direct injection combustor, P. Combust. Inst. 31 (2007) 2327–2334, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.232.
Fig. 29. The relationship between av and ηq under cold state and hot state.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
20 


--- Page 21 ---

[11] T. Yi, D.A. Santavicca, Flame spectra of a turbulent liquid-fueled swirl-stabilized 
lean-direct injection combustor, J. Propul. Power 25 (2009) 1058–1067, https:// 
doi.org/10.2514/1.43003.
[12] R. Tacina, C. Wey, P. Laing, A. Mansour, Sector Tests of a Low NOx, Lean-Direct- 
Injection, Multipoint Integrated Module Combustor Concept, in: Turbo Expo 2002, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: ASMEDC; 2002, GT-2002-30089. Doi: 10.1115/ 
GT2002-30089.
[13] C.T. Chang, K. Tacina, C. Lee, D. Bulzan, Y. Hicks, N.-S. Liu, J. Lee, NASA Glenn 
combustion research for aeronautical propulsion, J. Aerosp. Eng. 26 (2013) 
251–259, https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)AS.1943-5525.0000289.
[14] D. Dewanji, A.G. Rao, M. Pourquie, J.P. Van Buijtenen, Investigation of flow 
characteristics in lean direct injection combustors, J. Propul. Power 28 (2012) 
181–196, https://doi.org/10.2514/1.B34264.
[15] Y. Fu, S.-M. Jeng, R. Tacina, Characteristics of the swirling flow in a multipoint LDI 
combustor, in: 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Reno, Nevada, 2007, AIAA 2007-846. 
Doi: 10.2514/6.2007-846.
[16] K. Twarog, O. Mannaa, C.-J. Sung, H.C. Mongia, On integrated experimentation 
and simulation of a counter-turning swirling mixer, part I: Experimentation, 
Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 119 (2021) 107186, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ast.2021.107186.
[17] Y. Shen, M. Ghulam, K. Zhang, E. Gutmark, C. Duwig, Vortex breakdown of the 
swirling flow in a lean Direct Injection burner, Phys. Fluids 32 (2020) 125118, 
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0028838.
[18] M. Carreres, J. García-Tíscar, M. Belmar-Gil, D. Cervell´o-Sanz, Influence of key 
geometrical features on the non-reacting flow of a lean Direct Injection (LDI) 
combustor through Large-Eddy simulation and a Design of Experiments, Aerosp. 
Sci. Technol. 126 (2022) 107634, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2022.107634.
[19] A. Broatch, M. Carreres, J. García-Tíscar, M. Belmar-Gil, Spectral analysis and 
modelling of the spray liquid injection in a lean Direct Injection (LDI) gas turbine 
combustor through Eulerian-Lagrangian Large Eddy Simulations, Aerosp. Sci. 
Technol. 118 (2021) 106992, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2021.106992.
[20] A. Broatch, M. Carreres, J. García-Tíscar, M. Rodríguez-Pastor, Numerical analysis 
of combustion noise in an atmospheric swirl-stabilized LDI burner through modal 
decomposition techniques, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 137 (2023) 108281, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ast.2023.108281.
[21] H.A. El-Asrag, A.C. Iannetti, S.V. Apte, Large eddy simulations for radiation-spray 
coupling for a lean direct injector combustor, Combust. Flame 161 (2014) 
510–524, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2013.09.020.
[22] I. Bonefaˇci´c, I. Wolf, P. Blecich, Improvement of fuel oil spray combustion inside a 
7 MW industrial furnace: a numerical study, Appl. Therm. Eng. 110 (2017) 
795–804, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.08.218.
[23] I.A. Ibrahim, A.M. Elzallat, M.M. Elsakka, T.M. Farag, H.M. Gad, Effect of 
atomizing gas type on kerosene spray combustion using gas-blast atomizer: a 
comparative numerical study, Appl. Therm. Eng. 239 (2024) 121996, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2023.121996.
[24] D. Dewanji, A.G. Rao, Spray combustion modeling in lean direct injection 
combustors, Part I: single-element LDI, Combust. Sci. Technol. 187 (2015) 
537–557, https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2014.965810.
[25] X. Ren, K.B. Brady, X. Xue, C.-J. Sung, H.C. Mongia, Swirl rotation direction effects 
on lean direct injection pilot mixer performance: experiments and LES modeling, 
Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 129 (2022) 107808, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ast.2022.107808.
[26] Y. Zhou, L. Dong, M. Shang, J. Li, A. Rinoshika, Tomographic particle image 
velocimetry measurement on three-dimensional swirling flow in dual-stage 
counter-rotating swirler, Chinese J. Aeronaut. 37 (2024) 7–20, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cja.2023.10.006.
[27] C. Fang, K. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Wang, F. Liu, J. Yang, C. Cao, C. Liu, Y. Mu, G. Xu, 
J. Zhu, Swirling flow and spray atomization interactions in a swirl cup airblast fuel 
injector: Outer swirler effect, Phys. Fluids 36 (2024) 043303, https://doi.org/ 
10.1063/5.0195293.
[28] T. Zhou, K. Zhao, F. Li, K. Wang, N. Meng, D. Wang, Impact of pilot swirling 
combination on the flow and emission characteristics of staged lean direct injection 
combustors, Energy Rep. 8 (2022) 13655–13671, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
egyr.2022.10.057.
[29] T. Zhou, F. Li, Large eddy simulation of non-premixed flame behavior and NOx 
emission characteristics in a staged combustor with multi-swirling flows, Appl. 
Therm. Eng. 246 (2024) 123020, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2024.123020.
[30] S. Archer, A.K. Gupta, Confinement effects on flow dynamics in swirling flames, in: 
ASME 2005 Power Conference, ASMEDC, Chicago, Illinois, USA, 2005: pp. 
717–726. Doi: 10.1115/PWR2005-50167.
[31] Q. Zeng, Y. Yuan, Flow dynamics of dual-stage counter-swirl combustor in different 
confinement spaces, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer 116 (2020) 104633, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icheatmasstransfer.2020.104633.
[32] Q. Zeng, D. Zheng, Y. Yuan, Counter-rotating dual-stage swirling combustion 
characteristics of hydrogen and carbon monoxide at constant fuel flow rate, Int. J. 
Hydrogen Energy 45 (2020) 4979–4990, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2019.12.068.
[33] R. Zhao, W. Kong, Study on the atomization and vaporization characteristics of 
kerosene with dual-stage counter-rotating nozzle, Appl. Therm. Eng. 271 (2025) 
126303, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2025.126303.
[34] X. Ren, X. Xue, K.B. Brady, C.-J. Sung, H.C. Mongia, The impact of swirling flow 
strength on lean-dome LDI pilot mixers’ operability and emissions, Exp. Therm 
Fluid Sci. 109 (2019) 109840, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
expthermflusci.2019.109840.
[35] R.J. Moffat, Describing the uncertainties in experimental results, Exp. Therm Fluid 
Sci. 1 (1988) 3–17, https://doi.org/10.1016/0894-1777(88)90043-X.
[36] C. Zhang, B. Li, F. Rao, P. Li, X. Li, A shock tube study of the autoignition 
characteristics of RP-3 jet fuel, P. Combust. Inst. 35 (2015) 3151–3158, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.05.017.
[37] M. Qenawy, J. Wang, J. Tian, B. Li, B. Chen, Investigation of unsteady flow 
behavior of cryogen-spray coupled with cold air jet, Appl. Therm. Eng. 235 (2023) 
121406, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2023.121406.
[38] C. Cao, Y. Gao, S. Wang, F. Liu, C. Liu, Y. Mu, D. Mei, G. Xu, Numerical 
investigation on mechanism of swirling flow of the prefilming air-blast fuel 
injector, Energies 16 (2023) 650, https://doi.org/10.3390/en16020650.
[39] A. Zhao, C. Duwig, C. Liu, D. Gerada, M. Leksell, Parameter study for oil spray 
cooling on endwindings of electric machines via Eulerian–Lagrangian simulation, 
Appl. Therm. Eng. 235 (2023) 121281, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2023.121281.
[40] A.B. Liu, D. Mather, R.D. Reitz, Modeling the effects of drop drag and breakup on 
fuel sprays, SAE Technical Paper 930072 (1993), https://doi.org/10.4271/ 
930072.
[41] W.E. Ranz, W.R. Marshall, Evaporation from Droplets: part I, Chem. Eng. Prog. 48 
(1952) 141–148.
[42] R.D. Reitz, Modeling atomization processes in high-pressure vaporizing sprays, 
Atom. Spray Tech. 3 (1988) 309–337.
[43] P.J. O’rourke, Collective drop effects on vaporizing liquid sprays, Department of 
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, USA, 1981. Ph.D. 
Thesis.
[44] N. Peters, Laminar flamelet concepts in turbulent combustion, Symp. (Int.) 
Combust. 21 (1988) 1231–1250, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(88)80355- 
2.
[45] J.A.V. Oijen, L.P.H.D. Goey, Modelling of premixed laminar flames using flamelet- 
generated manifolds, Combust. Sci. Technol. 161 (2000) 113–137, https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/00102200008935814.
[46] M.F. Modest, Radiative Heat Transfer, 2nd edition, Academic Press, New York, 
2003. Doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-503163-9.X5000-0.
[47] M.F. Modest, The weighted-sum-of-gray-gases model for arbitrary solution 
methods in radiative transfer, J. Heat Transfer 113 (1991) 650–656, https://doi. 
org/10.1115/1.2910614.
R. Zhao and W. Kong                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applied Thermal Engineering 286 (2026) 129311 
21 
