
--- Page 1 ---

Mirko R. Bothien1
e-mail: mirko.bothien@power.alstom.com
Nicolas Noiray
Bruno Schuermans
Alstom,
5401 Baden, Switzerland
A Novel Damping Device
for Broadband Attenuation
of Low-Frequency Combustion
Pulsations in Gas Turbines
Damping of thermoacoustically induced pressure pulsations in combustion chambers is a
major focus of gas turbine operation. Conventional Helmholtz resonators are an excel-
lent means to attenuate thermoacoustic instabilities in gas turbines. Usually, however,
the damping optimum is in a narrow frequency band at one operating condition. The
work presented here deals with a modiﬁcation of the basic Helmholtz resonator design
overcoming this drawback. It consists of a damper body housing multiple volumes that
are connected to each other. Adequate adjustment of the governing parameters results in
a broadband damping characteristic for low frequencies. In this way, changes in operat-
ing conditions and engine-to-engine variations involving shifts in the combustion pulsa-
tion frequency can conveniently be addressed. Genetic algorithms and optimization
strategies are used to derive these parameters in a multidimensional parameter space.
The novel damper concept is described in more detail and compared with cold-ﬂow
experiments. In order to validate the performance under realistic conditions, the new
broadband dampers were implemented in a full-scale test engine. Pulsation amplitudes
could be reduced by more than 80%. In addition, it is shown that, due to sophisticated
damper placement in the engine, two unstable modes can be addressed simultaneously.
Application of the damper concept allowed a considerable increase of the engine operat-
ing range, thereby reducing NOx emissions by 55%. Predictions obtained with the
physics-based model excellently agree with experimental results for all tested damper
geometries, bias ﬂows, excitation amplitudes, and most importantly with the measure-
ments in the engine. [DOI: 10.1115/1.4025761]
Introduction
One of the major challenges in the development process of
modern gas turbines is the stability of the combustion process. In
order to achieve best-in-class NOx emissions, the engine is oper-
ated lean-premixed. In this operation mode, the combustion pro-
cess is susceptible to self-induced oscillations arising due to the
interaction of unsteady heat release and acoustic ﬁeld in the com-
bustion chamber. If the two mechanisms constructively interfere,
high amplitude pressure and heat release ﬂuctuations might occur,
which have a detrimental effect on the combustion process. These
so-called thermoacoustic instabilities restrict the engine operating
regime and can in the worst case cause structural wear.
In principle, there are two ways of counteracting this, namely,
active and passive control methods that aim to disrupt the ther-
moacoustic feedback cycle, e.g., by dissipation of acoustic energy.
Due to requirements with respect to robustness, reliability, and
costs, usually, passive methods are applied in gas turbines [1,2].
Typical passive damping devices are Helmholtz resonators, the
most basic form being a volume that is connected to an enclosure
via a so-called neck. By doing so, a frequency-dependent acoustic
boundary condition is imposed that can be adjusted such that it
features low reﬂection, i.e., high absorption, of acoustic energy. A
very descriptive way to understand the underlying principle is the
analogy with a spring-mass (volume-neck) system featuring a
damping term. At the neck, where the acoustic velocity is highest,
the major part of acoustic energy dissipation occurs. The mass
oscillating inside the neck causes acoustic energy to be trans-
formed into vortices shedding from the neck’s edges that are
ﬁnally dissipated into heat [3–6]. Basic derivations for the damp-
er’s resonance frequency and absorption behavior can, for
instance, be found in Refs. [1,7,8].
An abundant amount of literature on theoretical and modeling
aspects of Helmholtz resonators as well as lab-scale experiments
exists. However, publications on application to full-scale land-
based gas turbines and their performance are scarce; Bellucci
et al. [1,2] and Bothien et al. [9] being the only ones who (at least
lately) reported on successful engine results. This lack was also
mentioned in an extensive review on passive control methods by
Richards et al. [10]. In contrast to this, application to sector or
atmospheric annular rigs can be found [11–13]. In Ref. [13], it is
explicitly stated that although having been successfully tested in
annular engine-scale test rigs, prior to using Helmholtz resonators
inside the engine some open challenges have to be addressed. Pan-
dalai and Mongia [14] show that multiple “damper tubes” (i.e.,
quarter wave resonators) are installed in their aeroderivative
engines to abate thermoacoustic pulsations.
Although common Helmholtz resonators are an excellent
means to attenuate thermoacoustic pulsations, they are only effec-
tive in a narrow frequency band. The lower the frequency of inter-
est, the smaller is the resonator’s frequency bandwidth. Pulsation
frequencies observed in gas turbines typically are below 500 Hz
for which this damping range is of the order of a few Hertz.
Engine-to-engine variations that are, for instance, caused by dif-
ferent ambient conditions or different fuels, might involve shifts
in the combustion pulsation frequency. Thus, adaptations of the
damper hardware might be required for each single case. Conse-
quently, a narrowband damper usually has its optimum damping
characteristic only at one operating condition.
This work deals with a modiﬁcation of the basic Helmholtz res-
onator design for broadband low-frequency ranges. It consists of a
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the Combustion and Fuels Committee of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received
August 16, 2013; ﬁnal manuscript received August 26, 2013; published online
December 10, 2013. Editor: David Wisler.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2014, Vol. 136 / 041504-1
Copyright V
C 2014 by ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/136/4/041504/6810023/gtp_136_04_041504.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 2 ---

damper body housing multiple volumes. The single volumes are
connected to each other by means of secondary necks. By
adequately adjusting the governing parameters, i.e., neck geome-
tries, bias ﬂows, and volume ratios, and using a multiparameter
optimization routine the coupling between the single volumes is
inﬂuenced so that a broadband damping characteristic for low fre-
quencies is obtained. Because of this, the resulting frequency
range of effective damping of one damper can be increased to
50–150 Hz. Hence, above-mentioned drawbacks are overcome. In
addition to this, simulations of an engine equipped with a number
of dampers show that the damping efﬁciency of the presented
multivolume conﬁguration can be considerably higher than that of
single-volume dampers with equal dimensions.
The concept of coupled Helmholtz resonators has been studied
by other authors as well [11,15,16]. In the works cited, two vol-
umes are connected to each other. However, application to full-
scale gas turbines or combustion systems in general has not been
reported before. In aeroengines, extensive use of acoustic liners is
made to attenuate the ﬂow-induced noise emitted from the nacelle.
Although not widely applied in the engine due to various reasons,
work has been done on so-called two- or multidegree-of-freedom
liners [17,18] that in essence are serial damper conﬁgurations.
The work and results reported here emphasize Alstom’s long-
term strategy with respect to an in-depth understanding of engine
thermoacoustics and suitable countermeasures against combustion
pulsations. In Refs. [19,20], a method to assess the damping per-
formance of generic Helmholtz dampers coupled to an engine was
introduced. This method is further developed and incorporates an
accurate model mimicking the acoustic characteristics of a multi-
volume damper. Recently, we published articles on optimum
damper placement in annular combustion chambers [21,22] out-
lining the importance of damper locations on their performance.
The principles explained therein are also used in this work.
Finally, the prediction of the onset of a second mode caused by
the suppression of the dominant one [23] and its importance for
full-scale gas turbines could be experimentally veriﬁed.
Acoustic Damper Model
It is common practice to represent the (thermo-) acoustic
behavior of combustion systems by making use of network mod-
els (see Ref. [24] for a literature overview of different approaches
in the combustion community). At Alstom, the in-house code Ta3
was developed for this purpose and is, in this paper, used to simu-
late the acoustic characteristics of the damper. This Matlab/Simu-
link-based tool describes a system’s (thermo-) acoustics as a
modular network of subsystems into which the system is divided.
Usually, Ta3 is used to mimic the thermoacoustics of full-scale
engines. It consists of a hybrid approach: Numerical, experimen-
tal, and analytical techniques are combined to describe the real
system. A brief general description of Ta3 is given in the follow-
ing paragraph. For an in-depth treatment and explanation of the
code, the interested reader is referred to Refs. [2,23]. Therein,
also, comparisons of Ta3 simulations with engine data are shown
demonstrating the tool’s capabilities to efﬁciently reproduce ther-
moacoustic coupling in gas turbines.
The acoustic variables for the single network modules, i.e.,
acoustic pressure p and particle velocity u, are expanded on a
modal basis to obtain a state-space representation of the acoustic
propagation. By doing so the acoustic input-output behavior of a
subsystem is described. If the geometry of a respective subsystem
is sufﬁciently simple, its acoustics can be described analytically.
For complex three-dimensional geometries, ﬁnite element calcula-
tions (FEM) are used. In this case, the FEM results are converted
into state-space models that can be connected to other network
blocks. The acoustic characteristics of the ﬂame are incorporated
by means of ﬂame transfer functions and source terms that are
obtained by ﬁtting state-space models to measured data. Depend-
ing on the size of the modal expansion, the state order of
the multi-input multi-output subsystems is deﬁned. The different
modules used to model the thermoacoustic system relate upstream
and downstream acoustic velocities and pressures. They are con-
nected to each other by using the Redheffer star product. The
state-space network approach allows either for time domain simu-
lations, including nonlinearities, or frequency domain calcula-
tions. For the latter, an eigenvalue analysis to assess the system
stability can be performed, which is straightforward due to the
state-space formulation.
A key aspect of this modeling approach is that the wave propa-
gation through a volume of any complexity is represented as a
multi-input multi-output system between N velocity inputs and N
pressure outputs. Such a system can conveniently be expressed in
state-space form as
@
@t
g
_g
"
#
¼
0
I
X
0
"
# g
_g
"
#
þ
0
WTA
"
#
u
p
qc ¼ c½0; W
g
_g
"
#
(1)
where W is a N  K matrix whose K columns contain wkðxnÞ=Kk,
and wkðxnÞ is the value of the kth mode at location xn on the
boundary and K2
k ¼
Ð
w2
kðxÞdx is a normalization factor for the
modes. The diagonal matrix A contains the area corresponding to
the m velocity inputs. The K  K diagonal matrix X contains the
eigenfrequencies of the solid–walled geometry, I and 0 are the
K  K unit matrix and zero matrix, respectively. The vectors g, p,
and u are the modal amplitudes, the input velocities um and the
output pressures pn. The quantities q and c are the medium’s den-
sity and speed of sound, respectively. In the limit case of K
approaching inﬁnity, the system of Eq. (1) is an exact solution of
the wave equation with negligible Mach number. The solution
converges rapidly, so in practice only a limited number of modes
K is required in the modal expansion.
The Mach number in gas turbine combustion applications is
typically sufﬁciently low to ensure a negligible effect on acoustic
wave propagation. However, Mach number effects cannot be
neglected on inlet/exit conditions and at area discontinuities. The
losses at area discontinuities are especially important when mod-
eling dampers. In the time domain (denoted by the ðÞ0), the rela-
tion between the acoustic velocities on both sides of the
discontinuity (denoted by u0
1 and u0
2) and the acoustic pressures
(denoted by p0
1 and p0
2) can be modeled by casting the unsteady
Bernoulli
equation
in
the
following
nonlinear
state-space
equation:
Fig. 1
Schematic block diagram for the damper model
041504-2 / Vol. 136, APRIL 2014
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/136/4/041504/6810023/gtp_136_04_041504.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 3 ---

@u0
1
@t ¼
1
2qfððu þ u0Þju þ u0j  ujujÞ þ p
0
1  p
0
2
Lvq
u0
2 ¼ A2
A1
u0
1
(2)
in which f is a loss coefﬁcient (typically obtained from correla-
tions found in literature or from experiment); Lv is the virtual
acoustic length, which takes into account the inertia of the mass
of air ﬂuctuating at the discontinuity (it can be obtained from cor-
relations, experiment or from acoustic FEM calculations).
The more subsystems the model exhibits the higher is its order
and the longer is the calculation time. This becomes important
when a multiparameter optimization routine should be used to
ﬁnd the optimum damper parameters to damp at certain frequen-
cies or in a broad frequency range. A tradeoff between accuracy
and model order is necessary. Therefore, once the model of the
damper is obtained, adequate model reduction techniques as, e.g.,
balanced truncation [25], are used in order to reduce the number
of states.
Figure 1 shows a schematic buildup of the damper model for
the acoustic wave propagation inside the damper. It consists of an
upstream boundary condition, N subsystems Si, and the intercon-
nection to the combustion chamber (CC). Note that only analytical
blocks are used.
The arrows connecting the single subsystem represent the prim-
itive acoustic variables, i.e., acoustic pressure and particle veloc-
ity. The number of subsystems depends on the complexity of the
inner damper geometry. For model validation and assessment of
the damper performance, the acoustic pressures inside the damper
pHHD and combustion chamber pCC are recorded.
Comparison of Models and Experiments
The acoustic properties of various damper variants are meas-
ured in a cold-ﬂow acoustic test facility. The prime objective of
these isothermal experiments is to obtain a physics-based damper
model that covers a sufﬁciently wide range of combinations of the
governing parameters inﬂuencing the damper’s performance.
Therefore, the test damper is built up modularly, allowing to indi-
vidually change all important parameters. This includes different
geometries and numbers of the ﬁrst and secondary necks, volume
ratios, and bias ﬂow velocities.
Figure 2 shows a schematic of the measurement setup. In the
test rig, woofers provide the acoustic excitation in the required
frequency and amplitude spectrum. The acoustic ﬁeld inside the
rig is measured by 1/4 in. Br€uel & Kjær condenser microphones
located on several axial positions. By means of the multimicro-
phone method (MMM) [26] the acoustic ﬁeld is decomposed into
the up- and downstream traveling waves g and f. The Riemann
invariants f and g are related to the primitive acoustic variables—
pressure
p
and
particle
velocity
u—by
p=qc ¼ f þ g
and
u ¼ f  g. This allows calculation of the reﬂection coefﬁcient R
at the reference location x0 in the frequency domain
R ¼ g
f
(3)
By using the MMM to determine the Riemann invariants f and g
an overdetermined system of equations is solved in a least-squares
sense. The error between measured and reconstructed acoustic
pressure can be calculated as is, e.g., done in Ref. [24]. Besides
noise contributions, possible relevant error sources are the deter-
mination of the speed of sound and the microphone calibration
coefﬁcients. The resulting relative error for the results shown here
is approximately 2%.
A suitable control routine is applied to prescribe a constant,
frequency-independent pressure amplitude in front of the damper.
The latter enables accurate study of nonlinear effects, which might
be important if the ﬂuctuation inside the damper neck is not small
compared to the main neck velocity.
In most of the cases, the space available to install dampers
inside the engine is limited. Thus, the development objective is to
realize the optimum performance, both in frequency range and
damping, within the given limitations.
Model Accuracy Under Isothermal Conditions. In Fig. 3, the
measured reﬂection coefﬁcients (dashed with ) are compared to
model predictions (solid) for three different damper conﬁgura-
tions. For all curves, the order of the model’s state-space system
is 6. The difference between the subﬁgures 3(a)–3(c) is the geom-
etry of the main and secondary necks, including neck diameters,
lengths, and edge shapes; the overall damping volume remains
constant. The different colors in each of the subﬁgures represent
different ratios of the volumes out of which the damper is com-
posed. It can be seen that the low-order model excellently corre-
sponds to the measured reﬂection coefﬁcients, both in magnitude
and phase. The characteristic dent observed at a normalized fre-
quency of around 1.4 is caused by the fact that the length dimen-
sion of the damper corresponds to the quarter wave length at this
frequency.
Generally, the acoustic response of dampers is strongly affected
by the pressure loss coefﬁcients and the effective lengths of the
necks. In a single-volume setup, the former mainly determines the
damping performance, whereas the latter has a governing inﬂu-
ence on the damper’s resonance frequency. In a multivolume
damper, both also strongly inﬂuence the coupling between the sin-
gle volumes. Although an abundant amount of literature of empir-
ical correlations exists for both quantities (see, for example,
[11,27–29]), one will hardly ﬁnd a case for which the used bound-
ary conditions or geometries exactly match those of the literature
Fig. 2
Schematic of measurement setup in cold-ﬂow acoustic test facility
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2014, Vol. 136 / 041504-3
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/136/4/041504/6810023/gtp_136_04_041504.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 4 ---

correlations. Due to this reason, a multiparameter optimization
routine is applied that ﬁnds the values resulting in the lowest devi-
ation between modeled and measured reﬂection coefﬁcient for all
parameter combinations investigated. A genetic algorithm mini-
mizes the function
D ¼ Rmeasuredðx; A; PÞ  Rmodelðx; A; P; Lv; fÞ
(4)
over the ranges of acoustic frequency x and excitation amplitude
A of interest. This is done for several different damper geometries
characterized by the geometrical parameters Pi. Finally, the opti-
mization algorithm yields values for the end corrections Lv;i and
pressure loss coefﬁcients fi. The validity of the identiﬁed parame-
ter values is checked by comparing model predictions to experi-
mental results that are not used to train the model. In the model,
only the physical dimensions, the bias ﬂow velocity, and the exci-
tation amplitude are adjusted as they are in the experiments,
whereas the identiﬁed parameters for length correction and pres-
sure loss coefﬁcients remain constant. Note, this does not mean
that the absolute value for the length correction is constant for all
conﬁgurations but the identiﬁed dependency of the length correc-
tion as a function of, e.g., neck diameter, remains the same.
Depending on the pulsation amplitude inside the rig or engine
the damper’s response might become nonlinear. If the acoustic ve-
locity inside the necks is of the order or larger than the main ﬂow
velocity, nonlinear effects have to be considered. This is
accounted for in the model. Figure 4 shows the reﬂection coefﬁ-
cient for different excitation amplitudes. The excitation amplitude
A0 represents the linear case—the amplitude ratio of ﬂuctuating to
static pressure inside the rig is approximately 0.025%. Although
relatively small for the conﬁguration considered here, the model
(solid) nicely captures the nonlinear effect caused by a 14 times
higher excitation amplitude that is observed in the experiments
(dashed with symbols).
The model is also capable of reproducing the effects of varying
bias ﬂow velocity. In Fig. 5, results for a variation of 650% are
shown. Both the resonance frequency and the magnitude of the
reﬂection coefﬁcient are considerably altered. The model excel-
lently agrees with the experimental observations. Note that in con-
trast to single-volume dampers, for multivolume conﬁgurations, a
change of bias ﬂow velocity also inﬂuences the resonance fre-
quency. For the former, it only changes the magnitude of the
reﬂection coefﬁcient.
The above reported results prove that the physics-based model
is able to describe the damping characteristic of all measured pa-
rameter variations. These are chosen to cover the whole range of
relevant parameter combinations. Hence, this enables performing
a subsequent optimization to ﬁnd the optimum geometrical dimen-
sions and bias ﬂow to achieve a certain damping objective. For
this purpose, the coupled system damper/engine is modeled simi-
lar to the approach described in Ref. [19] (see also next chapter
for more details).
The damping performance is assessed by means of the growth
rate reduction the dampers induce in one (or more) frequency
band(s). The genetic optimization routine ﬁnds the parameter con-
ﬁguration (both for geometry and bias ﬂow) yielding the
Fig.
3
Comparison
of
measured
reﬂection
coefﬁcients
(dashed with 3) and model (solid) for different geometries
(a)–(c); top: magnitude, bottom: phase. From red to blue, the ra-
tio between most downstream to most upstream volume
decreases.
Fig.
4
Comparison
of
measured
reﬂection
coefﬁcients
(dashed with symbols) and model (solid) for different excitation
amplitudes; top: magnitude, bottom: phase
041504-4 / Vol. 136, APRIL 2014
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/136/4/041504/6810023/gtp_136_04_041504.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 5 ---

maximum growth rate reduction. This is exemplarily depicted in
Fig. 6. It shows the isosurfaces of the growth rate reduction inte-
grated over the speciﬁed weighting of frequency regions. For visu-
alization, it is shown as a function of the geometrical parameters
P1; P2, and P3 only. In reality, the optimization was conducted for
more parameters. The parameters Pi represent three dimensions
(e.g., diameter, length of a secondary neck, and volume ratio). In
order to further visualize the three-dimensional volume enclosed
by the isosurface, the projections onto each of the Cartesian planes
are depicted in black. All parameter combinations enclosed by the
red surfaces represent possible conﬁgurations yielding 95% of the
maximum achievable growth rate reduction. Accordingly, those
on the gray isosurface give the parameter combination for which
the damping capacity is 90% of the maximum. By doing so, the
sensitivity on each of the parameters can be assessed. In addition,
in case several “islands” of maximum performance exist, the one
providing the largest margin is taken. The red lines mark the ﬁnal
parameter conﬁguration chosen for the engine tests.
Model Accuracy in Full-Scale Engine. To further validate the
model of the damper placed in the engine, damper and combustion
chamber are equipped with pulsation sensors (see Fig. 1). The ra-
tio of the measured acoustic pressure inside the damper and the
one in the combustion chamber can be seen in Fig. 7 (solid). It is
compared to the predictions of the state-space model (dashed),
which has an order of six. Note that in the engine a density differ-
ence between ﬂuid inside the damper and the combustion chamber
exists. This has to be accounted for in the model by scaling the
neck end corrections with the corresponding density ratios. Model
predictions and measurements show a striking correspondence,
thus, proving the validity and accuracy of the method proposed to
obtain the damper’s performance in the engine. Particularly, the
phases (bottom) nearly perfectly match, which is most important
for the prediction of the dampers resonance frequency when
mounted in the engine. Except for the deviation at a normalized
frequency of 1.05, the magnitudes match very well up to 1.25.
The main reason for the larger deviation at higher frequencies is
the axial distance between both sensors. This is not accounted for
in the model as it relates the pressure inside the damper to that
directly at its exit. For frequencies larger than 1.25, this distance
corresponds nearly to a quarter wave length. Note that no model
tuning is done a posteriori; the model prediction in Fig. 7 is
obtained with the model that is validated for cold-ﬂow measure-
ments and is taken for the damper layout.
Single- Versus Multivolume Damper
Figure 8 compares the damping performances of single-volume
and multivolume dampers. The only difference between the two
conﬁgurations is that the volume for the former is not subdivided
into several interconnected volumes. Both setups exhibit the same
total volume and geometry of the neck between damper and com-
bustion chamber. For a meaningful assessment, this is important
since the volume ratio of damper to combustion chamber is a cru-
cial parameter for the damping performance. The neck geometry
inﬂuences the broadness of the damper’s frequency bandwidth.
The engine is modeled as a second order harmonic oscillator; an
assumption that is valid if only the fundamental mode is consid-
ered. The acoustic transfer function of the damper is coupled to
the engine and the least stable mode’s poles of the closed-loop
system—representing growth rate and oscillation frequency—are
deduced. For the simulation, it is assumed that 12 dampers are
evenly distributed around the combustion chamber circumference.
In Fig. 8, the growth rate of the system without dampers is nor-
malized to unity. The model is used to vary the normalized
Fig.
5
Comparison
of
measured
reﬂection
coefﬁcients
(dashed with symbols) and model (solid) for different bias ﬂow
velocities; top: magnitude, bottom: phase
Fig. 6
Isosurfaces of damping performance versus combina-
tion of geometry parameters P1, P2, and P3. Red (gray) isosur-
face: 95% (90%) of maximum growth rate reduction.
Fig. 7
Comparison of ratios of acoustic pressures inside HHD
and combustion chamber for measurement (solid) and sixth
order model (dashed). Top: magnitude, bottom: phase.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2014, Vol. 136 / 041504-5
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/136/4/041504/6810023/gtp_136_04_041504.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 6 ---

pulsation frequency of the engine continuously from approxi-
mately 0.85 (black symbols) to 1.6 (white symbols) in order to
study the damper performance at off-design frequencies or in case
more than one mode has to be addressed. In reality, a change in
pulsation frequency can, for instance, be caused by engine-to-
engine variations and different operating or ambient conditions.
As can be seen from the corresponding reﬂection coefﬁcients plot-
ted in Fig. 9, the normalized resonance frequency of the single-
volume damper is at 1 (dashed). The solid curve represents the
reﬂection coefﬁcient for the multivolume damper.
Figure 8 compares the results for the growth rate reduction
obtained with the single-volume damper conﬁguration with those
of the multivolume setup. Application of the former results in a
split of the poles; the typical result one would expect for two
coupled second order harmonic oscillators (see, for instance, Refs.
[30,31]). In case the single-volume damper’s resonance frequency
is exactly matching the engine pulsation frequency (red symbols),
the poles are symmetrically shifted to 0.93 and 1.07. Both have a
negative growth rate; thus, the system is stable. In the example
shown, the growth rate reduction is a bit higher than for the multi-
volume conﬁguration. If the engine’s pulsation frequency is
shifted by 66%, the single-volume dampers are still able to main-
tain system stability. For larger frequency shifts, however, one of
the poles gets unstable.
For the multivolume dampers, two main observations can be
made. First, no pole splitting occurs. The reason for this can be
understood by considering the phase of the reﬂection coefﬁcient
in the bottom graph of Fig. 9. Nearly over the whole range of
frequencies for which jRj < 0:5, it is close to zero. In terms of
acoustic impedance2 this corresponds to the case for which its
imaginary part, its reactance, is zero. A purely real-valued imped-
ance, i.e., one that only has a resistive part, merely absorbs the
acoustic energy. In contrast to this, the phase of the single-volume
damper exhibits a phase jump and at resonance is p. The slope of
the phase is determined by the provided damping, which is a func-
tion of fu. Rowley and Williams [31] argue that in any feedback-
controlled linear system the reduction of system amplitudes
(growth rates) is accompanied by an increase of growth rates at
other frequencies. For a narrowband controller tuned to damp the
uncontrolled system’s frequency this results in the occurrence of
split poles close to the undamped oscillations. Bellucci [11]
derived a simple analytical formula to calculate the split poles’
frequencies. His result is valid for lightly damped resonators but
could also be extended to the more general case. Due to the real-
valued impedance of the multivolume damper and its broad damp-
ing characteristic the system’s growth rate is decreased without a
marked shift in frequency.
Secondly, the frequency bandwidth in which the system is ren-
dered stable is much larger. A shift of the nondimensional fre-
quency of approx. 15 % to 50% can be coped with. Apart from
the growth rates at a normalized frequency of 1, where both con-
ﬁguration result in comparable values, the reduction with the mul-
tivolume dampers is larger; hence, a system with a higher growth
rate can be stabilized.
Clearly, the broadband behavior of the single-volume conﬁgu-
ration could be enhanced by not adjusting all single dampers to
the same frequency (obviously with a payoff in damping at this
frequency). However, this would involve several different damper
designs—a fact that is clearly not desired for reasons of complex-
ity. In addition, the relevant pulsation modes important in this
work are of an annular nature. Depending on the critical mode
shape and the number of dampers that the engine can be equipped
with, a minimum number of dampers addressing the same mode
or frequencies not too far away from each other is required.
Damper Validation in Engine
The performance of the multivolume dampers is validated in a
test engine. In the top frame of Fig. 10, the normalized frequency
of the limiting mode as a function of two engine operating param-
eters A and B is shown. As can be seen the frequency increases
with decreasing A and increasing B (B1<B2<B3).
In order to decrease emissions, operating parameter A should
be minimized. The dashed curves are isolines of parameter B at
which dedicated measurement points are taken (). The area
shaded in gray in the top frame marks the operating window with-
out dampers. Although not shown here, below the lowest B curve
operation is always possible. The larger B, the larger is the mini-
mum achievable A. Thus, the major damping objective is to sufﬁ-
ciently increase the operating window along B3.
Implementing the dampers allows to widely increase the operat-
ing window of the engine to also cover the red shaded area (Fig.
10, middle frame). Measurement points with dampers are depicted
with . Since in the red shaded area no measurement points with-
out dampers can be taken, the frequency for the respective combi-
nation of A and B for the case without dampers is expected to be
on the extrapolations of the B-isolines. As can be seen, the fre-
quency of the former limiting mode changes by 610 % if the
averaged frequency is normalized to 1. In the whole operating
range shown, the dampers are able to reduce the pulsations by at
least 50% to more than 80%.
Fig. 9
Comparison of reﬂection coefﬁcients for single-volume
(dashed) and multivolume (solid) damper; top: magnitude, bot-
tom: phase
Fig. 8
Normalized growth rate versus normalized frequency
for system without dampers (), equipped with single-volume
(), and multivolume (w) dampers
2The acoustic impedance Z is related to the reﬂection coefﬁcient R by the bilinear
transform Z=qc ¼ ð1 þ RÞ=ð1  RÞ.
041504-6 / Vol. 136, APRIL 2014
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/136/4/041504/6810023/gtp_136_04_041504.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 7 ---

The bottom subﬁgure of Fig. 10 shows the reduction of normal-
ized NOx emissions at B3. Implementation of the multivolume
dampers results in a reduction of more than 55%.
Note that for the shown graph the ambient conditions are con-
stant. Tests at different ambient conditions involve additional
changes in frequency. Engine tests performed at different ambient
conditions caused lower pulsation frequencies for which the
dampers stabilized the system as well.
The engine can be equipped with a given number of N dampers.
Their effect on the pulsation spectrum at operating condition A1
(see Fig. 10) is depicted in Fig. 11(a). Without dampers (black), a
distinct peak is observed at the frequency of the ﬁrst azimuthal
mode. With 75% of the available dampers, this peak is attenuated
by approximately 70% (red) allowing a reduction of the operating
parameter A by 30% to A2 (Fig. 10). The remaining ones are
tuned to the second azimuthal mode, the effect being observable
at a normalized frequency of approximately 2.
Obviously, further decreasing operating parameter A gives rise
to the ﬁrst azimuthal mode. However, this mode is not the limiting
anymore. Now, the amplitude of the third azimuthal mode
becomes dominant as can be seen in Fig. 11(b) (black). The rea-
son for this is most probably twofold. First, it indicates that the
system has more than one unstable eigenvalue. If a system exhib-
its more than one linearly unstable pole, its limit-cycling state is
governed by the dominating one. This often is—but not necessar-
ily has to be—the one with the highest growth rate. Without
dampers, the ﬁrst azimuthal mode determines the limit-cycle
oscillations (most probably because it has the higher growth rate).
Furthermore, the dampers strongly decrease its growth rate so that
the third azimuthal mode becomes the one governing the limit-
cycle oscillations. A comparable behavior was already observed
in Ta3 simulations reported earlier in Ref. [23]. The stabilization
of the initially unstable mode caused a second one to become
dominant.
Depending on the shape of the mode causing high-amplitude
pulsations the positions of the dampers have to be determined. In
gas turbines, often azimuthal modes are the critical ones. These
modes exhibit pressure nodes around the circumference. If damp-
ers are arranged such that the nodal points of the mode coincide
with the damper positions, no damping is achieved. In a previous
publication [21], azimuthal staging concepts of dampers and fuel
injection in annular systems were studied in detail. It was shown
that the degree of symmetry of an azimuthal distribution of damp-
ing devices allows predicting its damping capability. This degree
of symmetry is deﬁned by the parameter C2n. The smaller this
value for the considered thermoacoustic mode is, the higher is the
damping performance. Consequently, for the respective applica-
tion, the dampers have to be positioned such that the correspond-
ing C2n value is minimal. Note that in practice there will be
multiple constraints probably impeding to go for the best calcula-
tional conﬁguration. Possible constraints are, for instance, the
restriction to put dampers on certain locations or insufﬁcient space
resulting in a limited number of dampers.
Given the engine pulsation behavior at operating condition A2
(Fig. 11(b) black), consequently, the dampers initially adjusted to
the second azimuthal mode are readjusted to deal with the third.
Prior to engine tests, the optimum conﬁguration resulting in the
lowest C2n values for both modes simultaneously is assessed.
Figure 12 shows the C2n values for six possible damper distribu-
tions. In the graph, it is normalized with its theoretical maximum
Fig. 10
Normalized frequency of critical mode without damp-
ers and NOx versus operating parameters A and B. Top: oper-
ating window of engine without dampers. Middle: enlarged
operating window by using dampers. Bottom: normalized NOx
improvement at B3 using dampers.
Fig. 11
Averaged spectra of scaled acoustic pressure ^p=^pmax for two different operating conditions
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2014, Vol. 136 / 041504-7
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/136/4/041504/6810023/gtp_136_04_041504.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 8 ---

C2n;max representing the worst case distribution for the respective
mode and number of dampers considered. For the ﬁrst azimuthal
mode (dashed with ), there are three different positions (distribu-
tions 1, 5, 6) resulting in the optimum damping performance. Dis-
tribution 6 is chosen to address the ﬁrst azimuthal mode in
damper conﬁguration A. The reason for this is that for this distri-
bution also the second azimuthal mode is damped best.
However, if also the third azimuthal mode (solid with ) has to
be accounted for, distribution 6 is not optimal anymore. For this
damper arrangement, the dampers addressing the third azimuthal
mode exhibit an even spacing of 60 deg between each other. As
expected, this is the worst case distribution because the circumfer-
ential distance of the mode’s nodes coincide with that of the
damper locations. Merely considering the ﬁrst azimuthal mode,
distribution 5 and 6 would also deliver optimum damping. How-
ever, as can be seen in the graph, the scaled C2n values for the
third azimuthal mode are the worst—C2n=C2n;max ¼ 1. Decreasing
the degree of symmetry with respect to this mode, results in a
decreasing C2n. The best conﬁguration is achieved for distribution
1 for which C2n=C2n;max is zero for both modes.
The results shown in Fig. 11(b) (red) are obtained with the
dampers arranged according to distribution 1. The pulsation am-
plitude of the third azimuthal mode is reduced by more than 80%.
Since this operating condition can only be reached with dampers
addressing the ﬁrst azimuthal mode, no exact quantiﬁcation of its
amplitude reduction compared to the case without dampers can be
given. It is deﬁnitely far more than the 70% that are already
observed for A1 (Fig. 11(a)). Note that the reason for the reduc-
tion observed at the ﬁrst azimuthal mode is due to tuning the
damper to slightly higher frequencies.
Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, a novel concept for broadband damping of low-
frequency combustion pulsations in gas turbines is presented. The
novel device consists of a damper body housing several volumes
that are connected to each other via secondary necks. This setup
results in a multi degree-of-freedom system, for which neck geo-
metries, bias ﬂow, and volume ratios are subject to optimization
so as to fulﬁll the damping objective. A physics-based model is
set up that is able to predict the inﬂuence of all governing parame-
ters on the damping performance. The model excellently matches
to cold-ﬂow as well as full-scale engine measurements. A compar-
ison to the performance of traditional single-volume dampers is
conducted showing the beneﬁt of the new approach.
The damper’s performance is validated in a full-scale test
engine. Recent research on azimuthal staging concepts [21] to
address azimuthal modes is used to optimally position the damp-
ers. Combustion pulsation amplitudes are reduced by more than
80%. By doing so, the engine operating regime is widely enlarged,
ﬁnally, allowing a reduction of NOx emissions by 55%. The
engine results conﬁrm that the dampers efﬁciently work in a broad
frequency range. Since the novel damper concept is engine-
independent multiple applications are possible.
References
[1] Bellucci, V., Flohr, P., Paschereit, C. O., and Magni, F., 2004, “On the Use of
Helmholtz Resonators for Damping Acoustic Pulsations in Industrial Gas
Turbines,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power, 126(2), pp. 271–275.
[2] Bellucci, V., Schuermans, B., Nowak, D., Flohr, P., and Paschereit, C. O.,
2005, “Thermoacoustic Modeling of a Gas Turbine Combustor Equipped With
Acoustic Dampers,” ASME J. Turbomach., 127(2), pp. 372–379.
[3] Tam, C. K. W., Kurbatskii, K. A., Ahuja, K. K., and, Jr., R. J. G., 2001, “A Nu-
merical and Experimental Investigation of the Dissipation Mechanisms of Res-
onant Acoustic Liners,” J. Sound Vib., 245(3), pp. 545–557.
[4] Eldredge, J. D., and Dowling, A. P., 2003, “The Absorption of Axial Acoustic
Waves by a Perforated Liner With Bias Flow,” J. Fluid Mech., 485, pp. 307–335.
[5] Randeberg, R., 2000, “Perforated Panel Absorbers With Viscous Energy Dissi-
pation Enhanced by Oriﬁce Design,” Ph.D. thesis, Department of Telecommu-
nications, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
Norway, http://ntnu.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:125365/FULLTEXT01
[6] Zhang, Q., and Bodony, D. J., 2011, “Direct Numerical Simulation of Three
Dimensional Honeycomb Liner With Circular Apertures,” AIAA Paper No.
2011–843.
[7] Alster, M., 1972, “Improved Calculation of Resonant Frequencies of Helmholtz
Resonators,” J. Sound Vib., 24(1), pp. 63–85.
[8] Huang, Y., and Yang, V., 2009, “Dynamics and Stability of Lean-Premixed
Swirl-Stabilized Combustion,” Prog. Energ. Combust., 35(4), pp. 293–364.
[9] Bothien, M., Pennell, D., Zajadatz, M., and D€obbeling, K., 2013, “On Key Fea-
tures of the AEV Engine Implementation for Operational Flexibility,” ASME
Paper No. GT2013-95693.
[10] Richards, G. A., Straub, D. L., and Robey, E. H., 2003, “Passive Control of
Combustion Dynamics in Stationary Gas Turbines,” J. Propul. Power, 19(5),
pp. 795–810.
[11] Bellucci, V., 2009, “Modeling and Control of Gas Turbine Thermoacoustic
Pulsations,” Ph.D. thesis, Institut f€ur Str€omungsmechanik und Technische
Akustik, Technische Universit€at Berlin, Berlin, Germany, http://opus.kobv.de/
tuberlin/volltexte/2009/2414/
[12] Gysling, D. L., Copeland, G. S., McCormick, D. C., and Proscia, W. M., 2000,
“Combustion System Damping Augmentation With Helmholtz Resonators,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power, 122(2), pp. 269–274.
[13] Lepers, J., Krebs, W., Prade, B., Flohr, P., Pollarolo, G., and Ferrante, A., 2005,
“Investigation of Thermoacoustic Stability Limits of an Annular Gas Turbine
Combustor Test-Rig With and Without Helmholtz Resonators,” ASME Paper
No. GT2005-68246.
[14] Pandalai, R. P., and Mongia, H. C., 1998, “Combustion Instability Characteris-
tics of Industrial Engine Dry Low Emission Combustion Systems,” AIAA Paper
No. 1998-3379.
[15] Grifﬁn, S., Lane, S. A., and Huybrechts, S., 2001, “Coupled Helmholtz Resona-
tors for Acoustic Attenuation,” ASME J. Vib. Acoust., 123, pp. 11–17.
[16] Xu, M. B., Selamet, A., and Kim, H., 2010, “Dual Helmholtz Resonator,” Appl.
Acoust., 71, pp. 822–829.
[17] Jones, M. G., and L. Parrott, T., 2006, “Assessment of Bulk Absorber Properties
for Multi-Layer Perforates in Porous Honeycomb Liners,” AIAA Paper No.
2006-2403.
[18] Bielak, G. W., Premo, J. W., and Hersh, A. S., 1999, “Advanced Turbofan Duct
Liner Concepts,” NASA/CR-1999-209002.
[19] Noiray, N., and Schuermans, B., 2009, “Theoretical and Experimental Investi-
gations on Dampers Performances for Suppression of Thermoacoustic Oscil-
lations,” 16th International Congress on Sound and Vibration, Krakow, Poland,
July 5–9.
[20] Noiray, N., Bothien, M., and Schuermans, B., 2011, “Investigation of Nonlinear
Mechanisms Driving Combustion Instabilities Using an Electro-Acoustic van
der Pol Oscillator,” 7th European Nonlinear Oscillations Conference (ENOC
2011), Rome, July 24–29.
[21] Noiray, N., Bothien, M. R., and Schuermans, B., 2011, “Investigation of Azi-
muthal Staging Concepts in Annular Gas Turbines,” Combust. Theor. Model.,
15(5), pp. 585–606.
[22] Noiray, N., Bothien, M., and Schuermans, B., 2010, “Analytical and Numerical
Analysis of Staging Concepts in Annular Gas Turbines,” n3l—International
Summer School and Workshop on Non-Normal and Nonlinear Effects in Aero-
and Thermoacoustics, M€unich, Germany, May 17–20.
[23] Schuermans, B., Bellucci, V., and Paschereit, C. O., 2003, “Thermoacoustic
Modeling and Control of Multi Burner Combustion Systems,” ASME Paper
No. GT2003-38688.
[24] Bothien, M. R., 2008, “Impedance Tuning: A Method for Active Control of the
Acoustic Boundary Conditions of Combustion Test Rigs,” Ph.D. thesis, Institut
f€ur Str€omungsmechanik und Technische Akustik, Technische Universit€at Ber-
lin, Berlin, Germany, http://opus.kobv.de/tuberlin/volltexte/2009/2105/
[25] Antoulas, A., and Sorensen, D., 2001, “Approximation of Large-Scale Dynami-
cal Systems: An Overview,” Int. J. Appl. Math. Comp., 11(5), pp. 1093–1121.
Fig. 12
C2n values for distributions 1–6 of damper conﬁgura-
tion B. Solid with 3: third azimuthal mode, dashed with : ﬁrst
azimuthal mode. The values are scaled with the maximum C2n
for the respective mode.
041504-8 / Vol. 136, APRIL 2014
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/136/4/041504/6810023/gtp_136_04_041504.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 9 ---

[26] Paschereit, C. O., Schuermans, B., Polifke, W., and Mattson, O., 2002,
“Measurement of Transfer Matrices and Source Terms of Premixed Flames,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power, 124(2), pp. 239–247.
[27] Idelchik, I. E., 1986, Handbook of Hydraulic Resistance, 2nd ed., Hemisphere
Publishing Corporation, New York.
[28] Peters, M. C. A. M., Hirschberg, A., Reijnen, A. J., and Wijnands, A. P. J., 1993,
“Damping and Reﬂection Coefﬁcient Measurements for an Open Pipe at Low
Mach and Low Helmholtz Numbers,” J. Fluid Mech., 256, pp. 499–534.
[29] Chanaud, R. C., 1994, “Effects of Geometry on the Resonance Frequency of
Helmholtz Resonators,” J. Sound Vib., 178(3), pp. 337–348.
[30] Banaszuk, A., Mehta, P., Jacobson, C., and Khibnik, A., 2006, “Limits of
Achievable Performance of Controlled Combustion Processes,” IEEE T. Contr.
Syst. T., 14(5), pp. 881–895.
[31] Rowley, C. W., and Williams, D. R., 2006, “Dynamics and Control of High-
Reynolds-Number Flow Over Open Cavities,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 38, pp.
251–276.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
APRIL 2014, Vol. 136 / 041504-9
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/136/4/041504/6810023/gtp_136_04_041504.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026
