
--- Page 1 ---

Nathan T. Weiland
National Energy Technology Laboratory,
Pittsburgh, PA 15236-0940;
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering,
West Virginia University,
Morgantown, WV 26506-6106
e-mail: nathan.weiland@mail.wvu.edu
Peter A. Strakey
National Energy Technology Laboratory,
Morgantown, WV 26507-0880
NOx Reduction by Air-Side
Versus Fuel-Side Dilution in
Hydrogen Diffusion Flame
Combustors
Lean-direct-injection (LDI) combustion is being considered at the National Energy Tech-
nology Laboratory as a means to attain low NOx emissions in a high-hydrogen gas
turbine combustor. Integrated gasiﬁcation combined cycle (IGCC) plant designs can
create a high-hydrogen fuel using a water-gas shift reactor and subsequent CO2 separa-
tion. The IGCC’s air separation unit produces a volume of N2 roughly equivalent to the
volume of H2 in the gasiﬁer product stream, which can be used to help reduce peak ﬂame
temperatures and NOx in the diffusion ﬂame combustor. Placement of this diluent in
either the air or fuel streams is a matter of practical importance, and it has not been
studied to date for LDI combustion. The current work discusses how diluent placement
affects diffusion ﬂame temperatures, residence times, and stability limits, and their re-
sulting effects on NOx emissions. From a peak ﬂame temperature perspective, greater
NOx reduction should be attainable with fuel dilution rather than air or independent
dilution in any diffusion ﬂame combustor with excess combustion air, due to the complete
utilization of the diluent as a heat sink at the ﬂame front, although the importance of this
mechanism is shown to diminish as ﬂow conditions approach stoichiometric proportions.
For simple LDI combustor designs, residence time scaling relationships yield a lower
NOx production potential for fuel-side dilution due to its smaller ﬂame size, whereas air
dilution yields a larger air entrainment requirement and a subsequently larger ﬂame, with
longer residence times and higher thermal NOx generation. For more complex staged-air
LDI combustor designs, the dilution of the primary combustion air at fuel-rich conditions
can result in the full utilization of the diluent for reducing the peak ﬂame temperature,
while also controlling ﬂame volume and residence time for NOx reduction purposes.
However, differential diffusion of hydrogen out of a diluted hydrogen/nitrogen fuel jet can
create regions of higher hydrogen content in the immediate vicinity of the fuel injection
point than can be attained with the dilution of the air stream, leading to increased ﬂame
stability. By this mechanism, fuel-side dilution extends the operating envelope to areas
with higher velocities in the experimental conﬁgurations tested, where faster mixing rates
further reduce ﬂame residence times and NOx emissions. Strategies for accurate compu-
tational modeling of LDI combustors’ stability characteristics are also discussed.
DOI: 10.1115/1.4000268
1
Introduction
Following the deregulation of the electric power industry, the
integrated gasiﬁcation combined cycle IGCC power plant has
become increasingly interesting to power producers, due to its
increased efﬁciency and reduced footprint, capital cost, and emis-
sion controls relative to conventional coal-ﬁred power plants. In
addition, reduction in CO2 emissions can be accommodated in the
IGCC plant design by using a water-gas shift reactor to convert
steam and the CO in the gasiﬁed coal syngas to hydrogen and
CO2, which is separated and sequestered, leaving a relatively
high-purity hydrogen fuel for combustion in the gas turbine. Pend-
ing future regulation of CO2 emissions, an increase in the number
of likely future IGCC installations with carbon capture and se-
questration capabilities presents an opportunity to redesign the gas
turbine combustor to more efﬁciently utilize high-hydrogen fuels.
The mode of combustion currently used for syngas and high-
hydrogen fuels in gas turbine engines is dominated by swirl-based
diffusion ﬂames 1–6. In comparison to premixed ﬂames, these
are much more tolerant of variations in the fuel content, and are
also immune to the damaging effects of ﬂashback and auto-
ignition that plague high-hydrogen premixed ﬂames due to hydro-
gen’s high ﬂame speed. However, stoichiometric conditions at the
ﬂame front result in high peak ﬂame temperatures and hence high
levels of NOx production in diffusion ﬂames. In addition, there
has been little optimization of the traditional swirl-based combus-
tor design to accommodate diffusion ﬂame combustion of high-
hydrogen fuels.
Much work has been done in recent years on lean-direct-
injection LDI burners 7–14, where fuel and excess air are in-
troduced separately into the combustor and are rapidly mixed in
an attempt to approach lean premixed ﬂame conditions. These
combustors avoid the ﬂashback issues associated with true pre-
mixed combustion systems, while producing NOx emissions at
levels below traditional swirl-based combustors, but still some-
what higher than premixed combustors. NOx emission reductions
in LDI combustors are achieved through distributed injection
schemes, utilizing many small ﬂames to reduce ﬂame residence
times. This is an improvement over traditional swirl-based com-
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute IGTI of ASME for pub-
lication in the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript
received May 1, 2009; ﬁnal manuscript received May 21, 2009; published online
April 14, 2010. Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071504-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME and U.S. Dept. of Energy
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

bustors that utilize large ﬂames and longer residence times to
improve CO burnout, a feature not required for high-hydrogen
combustion.
LDI burners can be further subdivided into swirl-based 7–11
and jet-based injection schemes 12–14. The swirl-based designs
originally developed for liquid-fuelled aero-engines 8,9 have
been recently modiﬁed to burn hydrogen fuel 10 and hold some
promise for reducing NOx emissions, though they are prone to
ﬂame anchoring issues at elevated pressures 11. Flame anchor-
ing too close to the injection point can overheat and damage the
injector, which has been a problem for some jet-based LDI com-
bustors 13.
While LDI combustors are still in the research stages for the
combustion of high-hydrogen fuels, traditional swirl-based diffu-
sion ﬂame combustors have already been used in ﬁelded turbines
burning syngas 3,6,15. These combustors have been able to
achieve a low of 12–15 ppm NOx with nitrogen dilution 15,
though the addition of steam to the combustor is also used to
reduce the combustion temperature and hence the NOx production
16,17. While frequently used, steam is not an ideal combustion
diluent, as it increases the water consumption of the plant. Fur-
thermore, the energy used to vaporize the water to form steam is
not recovered in the power-producing turbine section, and steam
addition increases the heat transfer to the turbine blades, thereby
decreasing their effective lifespan. In an oxygen-blown IGCC
plant, however, the air separation unit produces a nitrogen byprod-
uct that can be used as a diluent in the combustion chamber,
avoiding many of the issues associated with the steam dilution of
the combustor 16. In an air-blown IGCC, nitrogen from the air
supplied to the gasiﬁcation process is contained in the syngas,
essentially diluting the fuel stream in such a combustor.
It is likely that substantial reductions in NOx emissions can be
realized by combining the dilution approach of traditional swirl-
based combustors with the low residence times of LDI-style in-
jectors. Utilization of a combustor diluent has not been studied for
high-hydrogen fuelled LDI combustion systems to date with the
exception of Ref. 14, which utilizes a 65% hydrogen and 35%
nitrogen base fuel mixture. However, this study does not consider
alternative dilution levels or arrangements, such as premixing the
diluent with the combustion air or injecting the diluent separately
into the combustor.
Studies of dilution placement in traditional swirl-based com-
bustors have concluded that there is little difference between fuel
or air dilution from a NOx emission perspective 5,18, though
this is largely an artifact of the near-stoichiometric conditions in
the primary combustion zone in such combustors. One notable
exception to these studies concluded that fuel-side dilution re-
duced NOx more than air-side dilution in a model gas turbine
combustor operating on methane, though the stoichiometry em-
ployed in these experiments is unknown 19.
Typically, diluent has been added to the combustion air stream
to date, often to minimize the amount of redesign required to
accommodate a high-hydrogen fuel in existing diffusion ﬂame
combustors. Due to its low energy content per unit volume, the
diluent has typically not been added to the fuel as this would
increase the required fuel ﬂow rate, in some cases to eight times
that in a higher energy density natural gas combustor, resulting in
fuel manifold sizing problems 17. In industrial diffusion ﬂame
combustion conﬁgurations, Feese and Turns 20 investigated the
placement of a nitrogen diluent in either the methane or air
streams, and concluded that the effects of dilution placement on
ﬂame residence time is of great importance to the overall NOx
emissions of the combustor.
Accordingly, the following study investigates the effect of ni-
trogen diluent placement on NOx emissions of LDI-style hydro-
gen ﬂames in a laboratory setting, including its effects on ﬂame
temperature, ﬂame residence time, and static ﬂame stability. In
particular, this report targets simple turbulent diffusion ﬂame de-
signs, where swirl is imparted neither to the fuel nor air streams as
they enter the combustion chamber, although some aspects of di-
luent placement with respect to swirl-based designs are addressed
below, where applicable.
2
Experimental Setup
The atmospheric pressure combustor used in the experimental
portion of this study is shown in Fig. 1. The fuel tube has inside
and outside diameters of dF=1.45 mm and dF,o=3.18 mm, re-
spectively, and is positioned concentrically within interchangeable
coaxial air nozzles of dA=5.00 mm and 6.35 mm inside diameter.
Additional air can be supplied as low-velocity coﬂow air to enable
the effects of coaxial air velocity and global equivalence ratio to
be studied separately in the combustor. High purity hydrogen,
nitrogen, and air are metered separately to the combustor using
independent mass ﬂow controllers, while the nitrogen is supplied
to either the hydrogen or coaxial air lines well upstream of the
combustor to ensure full premixing of the diluent with its carrier
stream.
At the top of the combustor, three wire mesh screens, sus-
pended from the exhaust cap, are used to mix the combustion
products in advance of the gas sampling, and they have been
shown to eliminate sample proﬁle effects without affecting the
ﬂame in the current set of experiments. A gas sample is drawn
through a heated sample line to an NO2 to NO converter, then
through a gas cooler and a desiccant trap to remove the water
vapor. The gas is then analyzed at steady state conditions by Rose-
Fig. 1
Dilute diffusion ﬂame combustor
071504-2 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

mount chemiluminescent and paramagnetic detectors to measure
the NOx and oxygen content in the dry combustion products, re-
spectively.
The measured NOx is converted to a corrected NOx using the
measured product gas O2 mole fraction and the following for-
mula:
NOx,corr = NOx,meas
0.2095 −0.15
0.2095 −O2,meas1 +
1
20.2095
1 −0.2095D
= 6.6  EINOx
1
where D is the number of moles of nitrogen diluent per mole of
hydrogen,
and
EINOx
is
the
emission
index
in
units
g NO2/kg H2. The ﬁrst part of Eq. 1 is the standard correc-
tion to 15% O2 in the combustion products 21, while the last
term in parentheses accounts for the diluent effect of nitrogen on
the corrected NOx measurement, such that the same corrected
NOx results if the diluent nitrogen is replaced by the same number
of moles of air to yield 15% O2 in the dry combustion products.
Equation 1 can be derived from the more general expression of
ElKady et al. 22 as a special case for hydrogen combustion,
though the result is greatly simpliﬁed if the quantity D is known,
as it is in this work.
Computations of adiabatic ﬂame temperatures were performed
with the
GASEQ program 23. Computational ﬂuid dynamic
CFD modeling of the diluted coaxial air ﬂames was done with
FLUENT’S code, using a Reynolds stress model coupled with an
eddy dissipation concept EDC model 24 and the H2/O2 chemi-
cal mechanism of Li et al. 25.
3
Results and Discussion
Simpliﬁed scaling analyses of thermal NOx in a simple hydro-
gen turbulent jet ﬂame predict that EINOx scales with ﬂame resi-
dence time and the Damköhler number as 26
EINOx  tres Da−1/2dNO
dt
2
The ﬂame temperature primarily affects NOx production via the
thermal NO production rate 27
dNO
dt
 ON2e−38,370/T
3
in which O and N2 are the concentrations of O-atoms and N2
molecules, respectively, and T is the ﬂame temperature in Kelvin.
The residence time for a jet ﬂame can be determined from the
ﬂame volume, which is proportional to the ﬂame length cubed Lf
3,
divided by the volume ﬂow rate of fuel leaving the jet exit UFdF
2
26. Equations 2 and 3 form the basis for determining the
effects of the dilution placement on NOx through temperature and
residence time effects, which will be considered individually in
Secs. 3.1 and 3.2 for a simple jet conﬁguration. Following this,
more realistic LDI-type injection schemes are studied from an
idealized coaxial jet conﬁguration, where the effects of static
ﬂame stability and operating regimes on NOx emissions can be
determined.
3.1
Dilute Flame Temperatures. Calculated adiabatic ﬂame
temperatures for different types of ﬂames and dilution scenarios
are presented as a function of the overall combustor equivalence
ratio in Fig. 2. For each level of nitrogen diluent available, pre-
mixed ﬂame temperatures also represent fully mixed adiabatic
combustor exit/turbine inlet temperatures for both premixed and
nonpremixed combustor types. Peak diffusion ﬂame temperatures,
which control thermal NOx formation, are also shown for air- and
fuel-side nitrogen dilutions.
To illustrate the effects of the dilution placement on peak ﬂame
temperatures, consider the operation of the combustor at a global
equivalence ratio of global=0.5, where twice as much air is
present than is needed for complete combustion. The dilution of
the air stream at this equivalence ratio will result in half of the
diluent arriving at the ﬂame front, where the fuel and air meet in
stoichiometric proportions. For air-side dilution with one mole of
nitrogen per mole of hydrogen the dotted light gray line in Fig.
2, this yields an equivalent adiabatic ﬂame temperature to fuel-
side dilution for N2/H2=0.5 marked by the square in Fig. 2. By
comparison, all of the diluent must pass through the ﬂame front if
it is added to the fuel stream, thereby reducing peak ﬂame tem-
peratures at lean overall equivalence ratios. Likewise, if the dilu-
ent is independently injected into the combustor as a separate
stream, there are no guarantees that all of the diluent will arrive at
the ﬂame front to serve, essentially, as a heat sink. Thus, the use of
the diluent for peak ﬂame temperature suppression is maximized
with the dilution of the fuel stream, regardless of whether or not
swirl is utilized in the combustor.
However, from a ﬂame front dilution perspective, this tempera-
ture effect diminishes with an increasing equivalence ratio. When
a stoichiometric amount of air is supplied to the combustor, it is
irrelevant whether the fuel or air is diluted, as all of the diluent
must arrive at the ﬂame front in either case. In traditional swirl-
based diffusion ﬂame combustors, the primary combustion zone
typically operates at near-stoichiometric conditions, with the bal-
ance of the air used to provide liner cooling, complete CO burnout
downstream, and create the desired pattern factor at the inlet to the
turbine 21. For these combustors, the effects of air- or fuel-side
dilution have been found to be negligible due to the absence of a
substantial ﬂame temperature reduction 5,18, leading manufac-
turers to use air-side dilution for ease of implementation 17. LDI
combustors, on the other hand, strive to supply air at low equiva-
lence ratios to the ﬂame front for peak ﬂame temperature NOx
reduction and rapid quenching of thermal NOx reactions, thus
fuel-side dilution is expected to achieve the maximum beneﬁt in
this regard.
It is important to note that this idealized ﬂame temperature
analysis does not account for other effects that often occur in
actual combustor operations. For instance, if mixing times are
relatively slow, the differential diffusion of hydrogen out of a
hydrogen/nitrogen fuel jet may cause localized regions of higher
hydrogen content and superequilibrium ﬂame temperatures not ac-
counted for in this analysis 28. In addition, cases may arise in
which independent diluent injection may be beneﬁcial to LDI
combustor operation, for instance, for cooling the injector surface
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
Global Equivalence Ratio,  global
Adiabatic Flame Temperature, Tad (K)
N2/H2 = 0, Premixed
N2/H2 = 0, Diffusion
N2/H2 = 0.5, Premixed
N2/H2 = 0.5, Air-side Diffusion
N2/H2 = 0.5, Fuel-side Diffusion
N2/H2 = 1, Premixed
N2/H2 = 1, Air-side Diffusion
N2/H2 = 1, Fuel-side Diffusion
Fig. 2
Adiabatic ﬂame temperatures for premixed and diffu-
sion ﬂames with varying N2/H2 dilution ratios
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071504-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

or for creating a nonreactive buffer zone that ensures that the
ﬂame does not attach to the injector and cause damage from over-
heating 13.
3.2
Flame Residence Time. The effect of air-side dilution
versus fuel-side dilution on ﬂame residence times and NOx emis-
sions is easily understood by considering the factors inﬂuencing
the ﬂame length of a simple momentum-dominated turbulent jet
ﬂame 29
Lf  dF
fs
F
A
1/2
4
where fs is a stoichiometric mixture fraction and F and A are the
fuel and air densities, respectively. This similarity-based scaling
heavily inﬂuences the ﬂame residence time through its cubic de-
pendence on ﬂame length. Under this scaling, the fuel jet’s mo-
mentum increases linearly with its density, and the conservation of
momentum requires that the mass entrainment of air increase in
proportion, resulting in a velocity-independent ﬂame length scal-
ing. With the N2 dilution of H2 fuel, this yields increased turbulent
mixing and more oxygen available for combustion of a smaller
amount of fuel, by volume. The overall effect of decreasing the
ﬂame height by simultaneously increasing the jet density and stoi-
chiometric mixture fraction through fuel-side dilution, according
to Eq. 4, can be seen in Fig. 3. Note that the stoichiometric
mixture fraction for a pure hydrogen fuel burning in ambient air is
fs=0.03. Adding an equal part of nitrogen by volume to the fuel
stream N2/H2=1 yields fs=0.30, while adding this same quan-
tity of nitrogen to a stoichiometric air stream instead yields fs
=0.02.
Chen and co-workers 26,30,31 have shown that for pure and
diluted hydrogen jet ﬂames, the NOx emission index, normalized
by the ﬂame’s characteristic residence time, is proportional to the
square root of the global strain rate of the ﬂame UF/dF1/2. This
gives rise to the Da−1/2 scaling in Eq. 2 for a given fuel compo-
sition, and results from turbulence-chemistry interactions that
arise at high mixing rates. Including the effect of global ﬂame
strain with residence time, the NOx emission scaling of Eq. 2 for
a simple turbulent jet ﬂame, excluding temperature effects, can be
expressed as
EINOx 
Lf
3
UFdF
2
UF
dF
1/2
 1
fs
3
dF
UF
1/2
F
A
3/2
5
For a given fuel jet diameter and hydrogen ﬂow rate, the scaling
of Eq. 5, normalized by the case for no dilution, is plotted
against the N2/H2 ratio in Fig. 4 for fuel- and air-side dilutions at
two different global equivalence ratios dotted lines. From a resi-
dence time perspective, Fig. 4 shows that the effect of air-side
dilution is to increase NOx emissions, primarily due to an increase
in ﬂame volume, while fuel-side dilution can reduce NOx by two
orders of magnitude in a simple jet ﬂame. The effects of ﬂame
temperature on NOx, as embodied in Eq. 3 and Fig. 2, are plot-
ted as dashed lines in Fig. 4, where the effects of fuel-side dilution
and air-side dilution at global=1 are identical, as noted in Sec.
3.1. The solid lines in Fig. 4 show the combined effect of tem-
perature, residence time, and global ﬂame strain on NOx, accord-
ing to Eq. 2. For air-side dilution, the potential NOx reductions
due to ﬂame temperature are tempered somewhat by the adverse
residence time effect, while the combined temperature and resi-
dence time effects yield substantially higher NOx reduction poten-
tial for fuel-side dilution.
While not likely to be directly applicable to many LDI injector
designs, this analysis illustrates that residence time reduction is
very important to decreasing NOx emissions in LDI combustors.
In addition, the dilution of the air or fuel streams can have a
signiﬁcant effect on the fuel/air mixing in cases where mass en-
trainment by a jet is relied upon to produce or enhance mixing. In
particular, the dilution of a low-density hydrogen fuel jet, even
with a small amount of premixed air, may drastically increase its
jet momentum and mixing characteristics, which is an important
consideration in LDI injector styles that rely on jet-in-crossﬂow
conﬁgurations for mixing 12,13, and in swirl-based injectors in
which a fuel jet penetrates into a swirling air ﬂow 5–7.
Before leaving the topic of simple jet ﬂames, it is important to
note that many of the above results are speciﬁc to the use of
hydrogen as a fuel, and will be altered by the presence of other
fuel components such as CO or methane. In particular, the above
results are primarily applicable to the thermal NOx generation
mechanism, and are further complicated by the inclusion of the
prompt NOx mechanism, which accompanies the use of hydrocar-
bons as fuel components 19,30.
3.3
Operating Regimes. Jet entrainment alone does not pro-
vide adequate fuel/air mixing to create a realistic jet-based LDI
injector. Forced mixing strategies such as angled injection, in
which fuel and air jets impinge upon one another, are frequently
used to signiﬁcantly reduce ﬂame lengths, residence time, and
hence NOx emissions 13,14. Since these geometry-dependent
schemes do not lend themselves to parametric or analytical study,
the current study utilizes the coaxial air injection scheme shown in
Fig. 1 to simulate various aspects of the forced mixing strategy.
Analytically, the ﬂame length of a staged coaxial air ﬂame, as
utilized in this study, can be expressed as 26,32
Fig. 3
Flame length versus the nitrogen dilution of hydrogen
in a simple turbulent jet ﬂame
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
N2/H2 Ratio
EINOx , Relative to No Dilution
Fuel
Air,  global = 1.0
Air,  global = 0.5
t res
T ad
t res &T ad
Fig. 4
Simple jet ﬂame temperature and residence time scal-
ing of NOx emissions with air- and fuel-side dilutions
071504-4 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

Lf  dF
fs	
F/A
1 + AUA
2dA
2 −dF,o
2 
FUF
2dF
2
6
where UA is the coaxial air velocity. This equation quantiﬁes the
effects of coaxial air jet momentum on reducing the overall ﬂame
length. Although this is a good indicator of reduced ﬂame resi-
dence time, it should be noted that Lf
3 is no longer proportional to
the ﬂame volume for a coaxial air ﬂame 33, thus the simple
residence time scaling in Eq. 5 no longer applies.
The effect of coaxial air on NOx emissions for a simple
hydrogen/air ﬂame with no nitrogen dilution can be seen clearly in
Fig. 5. For a fuel jet velocity of 100 m/s with no coaxial air, a
baseline reading of 68 ppm NOx at 15% O2 is attained. Increasing
coaxial air to 45 m/s reduces the ﬂame length considerably, result-
ing in about 3.3 ppm NOx, though increasing the coaxial air ve-
locity further results in blowoff. While a seemingly large reduc-
tion in NOx is attained, note that the ﬂame is very stable at UF
=100 m/s without coaxial air, but is on the verge of blowoff with
45 m/s coaxial air, a substantial reduction in the ﬂame’s stability
margin. A more reasonable comparison would consider the 45 m/s
coaxial air case against a case with a similar stability margin, i.e.,
just before blowoff. Although the required fuel ﬂow could not be
attained for this case, in the absence of coaxial air ﬂow the ﬂame
should detach from the burner at UF
700 m/s, yielding about
26 ppm NOx at 15% O2 according to the scaling of Eq. 5. The
addition of high velocity coaxial air therefore represents a factor
of 8 reduction in the NOx output at a similar stability condition.
Maximizing the utilization of a diluent for peak ﬂame tempera-
ture reduction purposes dictates that the diluent be added to the
coaxial air ﬂow, adjacent to the fuel jet, rather than the coﬂow air
in the current conﬁguration. In addition, if the coaxial air equiva-
lence ratio is limited to coax1, then coaxial air dilution could
potentially reduce the ﬂame temperature as well as fuel-side dilu-
tion. In this case, forced mixing ensures that nearly all of the
coaxial air will be mixed with the hydrogen fuel jet prior to com-
plete combustion, allowing the diluent to reduce combustion tem-
peratures and thermal NOx production at the ﬂame front.
For the simple coaxial air arrangement discussed above, using
dA=6.35 mm, the effects of movement of the nitrogen diluent
from the coaxial air stream to the hydrogen fuel stream on NOx
emissions are shown in Fig. 6. In these experiments, for a given
hydrogen ﬂow rate in standard L/min slm, a stoichiometric
amount of air is supplied through the coaxial air ﬂow coax
=1.0, with the same amount of air also supplied via the low-
velocity coﬂow air. This arrangement yields a constant global
equivalence ratio global=0.5 and provides a direct comparison
between nitrogen diluent placement in either the air or fuel
streams, accounting for differences in the air and fuel velocities
caused by the diluent. Figure 6 reveals that at most, 10% reduc-
tion in NOx is achieved in this case by diluting the hydrogen
stream rather than the air stream. In addition, note that in the case
of low nitrogen dilution, higher hydrogen ﬂow rates are attained
for coaxial air dilution than for fuel dilution, while the opposite is
true at high nitrogen dilution levels.
As with the diluent-free case in Fig. 5, it is worthwhile to con-
sider the effect of dilution on combustor stability margins, where
the potential to reduce NOx emissions via residence time reduc-
tions can result from high velocity fuel and air injections. The
practical stability limits of coaxial air ﬂames are linked to the
ﬂameholding mechanism, in which the ﬂame attaches to the fuel
tube in the low-velocity wake region behind the fuel tube’s lip
thickness. This wake region extends from the edges of the tube lip
up to the intersection of the jet’s shear layers, and contains a
potentially combustible mixture of fuel and air. Similar ﬂame-
holding regions exist in jet-type LDI injectors 13,14, though
angled fuel or air injection may create stronger recirculation vor-
tices within this wake region.
For coaxial air ﬂames attached to the tube lip, instability can
occur in one of two primary ways 34: detachment of the ﬂame
base from the wake region, sometimes leading to the formation of
a lifted ﬂame, and the creation of a “split ﬂame” as shown in Fig.
7c, where high shear strain creates a region of local ﬂame ex-
tinction at the intersection of the jet shear layers. In a split ﬂame,
a “rim ﬂame” exists within the wake region of the fuel tube, and
supplies heat and radicals to the upper ﬂame above the shear layer
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
10
20
30
40
50
Coaxial Air Velocity, U A (m/s)
Corrected NOx (ppm @ 15% O2)
d A = 5.00 mm
No N2 dilution
U F = 100 m/s
U F = 700 m/s
Fig. 5
NOx reduction with increased mixing from coaxial air
ﬂow without dilution
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
5
10
15
20
25
Hydrogen Flow Rate (slm)
Corrected NOx (ppmv @ 15% O2)
Fuel N2/H2 = 0.25
Air N2/H2 = 0.25
Fuel N2/H2 = 0.5
Air N2/H2 = 0.5
Fuel N2/H2 = 1
Air N2/H2 = 1
d A = 6.35 mm
 coax = 1.0
 global = 0.5
Fig. 6
Effect of air-side dilution versus fuel-side dilution on
NOx with dA=6.35 mm and coax=1
Fig. 7
Split ﬂame formation for dA=5.00 mm, N2/H2=0.25, and
coax=0.5. „a… Stable ﬂame at UF=100 m/s, „b… near split ﬂame
at 120 m/s, and „c… split ﬂame at 140 m/s
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071504-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

intersection. In very high coaxial air ﬂows, the upper ﬂame can be
extinguished altogether, leaving a residual rim ﬂame at the injec-
tor tip 35. Stability limits relating to the formation of a split
coaxial air ﬂame are applicable, to some extent, to the high strain
regions at the point of jet impingement in an angled injection LDI
burner.
Stability limits for air- and fuel-side dilutions are shown in Fig.
8 as a function of jet exit velocities for the dA=5.00 mm coaxial
air case. For the dilute fuel cases, the “blowoff” results indicate
conditions in which a rim-attached ﬂame abruptly blows off the
burner without establishing a stable lifted ﬂame, while the “split”
limits correspond to the point at which the tip of the split ﬂame
extinguishes, leaving a residual rim ﬂame attached to the fuel tube
i.e., very low combustion efﬁciency. For the dilute coaxial air
cases, the nitrogen diluent is expressed in terms of the resulting
oxygen content of the coaxial air stream. For reference, the
N2/H2=0.25, coax=1 and N2/H2=0.5, coax=0.5 cases both re-
sult in 19.0% O2 content; the N2/H2=0.5, coax=1 and N2/H2
=1, coax=0.5 cases both result in 17.4% O2 content; and the
N2/H2=1, coax=1 case yields 14.8% O2 content in the coaxial
air stream. In these cases, only the blowoff stability limit is
shown, although the maximum hydrogen jet velocities plotted are
those at which a stable jet ﬂame exists. Higher fuel jet velocities
can result in lifted or split ﬂames, as discussed above, although
lifted ﬂames were not observed for the dilute fuel cases in this
study.
The results of Fig. 8 show that for the increasing nitrogen di-
lution of the coaxial air, both the maximum stable fuel jet and
coaxial air velocities decrease. The stability limit governing the
formation of a split ﬂame seems to be equally affected by air or
fuel dilution, as decreasing fuel jet velocities are accompanied by
the dilution of either stream. This is consistent with a decrease in
ﬂame speed and/or ﬂame temperature in the high strain regions
characterized by fast mixing rates, in which nitrogen diluent is
present regardless of its point of origin.
The most interesting result from Fig. 8 is that the addition of
nitrogen to the fuel jet increases the attainable air/fuel velocity
ratio, even above the case in which there is no diluent present. For
instance, 70 m/s or 80 m/s coaxial air is not attainable for a pure
H2 jet, but can be attained with 30% N2 dilution in the hydrogen.
This is related to the entrainment properties of the fuel jet and its
effect on the fuel/air stoichiometry in the wake region, as will be
discussed in Sec. 3.4.
Although not shown here, it should be noted that, from a jet
velocity perspective, the stability regimes of Fig. 8 are not a func-
tion of the coaxial air jet diameter. In addition, the stability limits
can be further increased by increasing the fuel tube lip thickness,
though there is an upper limit beyond which increasing lip thick-
ness ceases to increase the stability limit 35, which is related to
the quenching distance for a given fuel/air mixture 34. Further-
more, decreasing the fuel jet diameter serves to increase the sta-
bility limits as well 35, which also reduces NOx emissions
through reduced ﬂame residence times.
The resulting effect of the dilution placement on the combus-
tor’s stability margins is shown in Fig. 8 for N2/H2=1, where
moving the nitrogen diluent from the coaxial air to the fuel side
results in increases in attainable fuel and air velocities, as deter-
mined by their respective stability regimes. These increases in fuel
and air velocities for fuel dilution can be expected to yield a
decrease in residence time and NOx emissions according to Eqs.
5 and 6.
Measured NOx reductions for these N2/H2=1 cases are illus-
trated in Fig. 9, where replacing the 6.35 mm diameter coaxial air
nozzle with the 5.00 mm nozzle has the effect of doubling the
coaxial air velocity at a given volume ﬂow rate or coax of
coaxial air. This results in a 30–40% reduction in NOx at a given
hydrogen ﬂow rate, as shown in Fig. 9, although increased stabil-
ity margins allow for much higher hydrogen ﬂow rates, and hence
lower NOx, for fuel-side dilution with the 5.00 mm coaxial air jet
diameter. To further illustrate this beneﬁt, the dilute fuel case in
which all of the air is supplied through the coaxial air jet coax
=0.5 is also shown, where doubling the air velocity again further
reduces NOx by about 38%. Turbulent ﬂames are not attainable at
these hydrogen ﬂow rates and coaxial air velocity levels using
air-side dilution, as the blowoff stability limit is exceeded, as
shown in Fig. 8. Thus, the operating regimes attainable with fuel-
side dilution allow for greater NOx reduction than those attainable
with air-side dilution in the coaxial air conﬁguration. Similar re-
sults should be expected for angled LDI-injection schemes, as the
stability mechanisms that determine the operating regimes of
these burners are similar to those of the current study.
3.4
Flameholding Mechanism. The predominant stability
mechanism that is relevant to coaxial air and angled LDI-injection
burners is blowoff of the rim ﬂame from the small recirculation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
50
100
150
200
250
Fuel Jet Velocity, U F (m/s)
Coaxial Jet Velocity, UA (m/s)
No Dilution
30% Fuel N2 (Blowoff)
19% Coax O2
30% Fuel N2 (Split)
17% Coax O2
50% Fuel N2 (Blowoff)
15% Coax O2
50% Fuel N2 (Split)
Air, 6.35 mm, Phi = 1
Fuel, 6.35 mm, Phi = 1
Air, 5.00 mm, Phi = 1
Fuel, 5.00 mm, Phi = 1
Air, 5.00 mm, Phi = 0.5
Fuel, 5.00 mm, Phi = 0.5
Unstable
Stable
Fig. 8
Stability regimes for coaxial air-side dilution versus
fuel-side dilution using dA=5.00 mm. Air dilution is expressed
in terms of the resulting percent oxygen in the air. NOx test
conditions of Fig. 9 for N2/H2=1 are shown as lines of constant
UF/UA emanating from the origin.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Hydrogen Flow Rate (slm)
Corrected NOx (ppmv at 15% O2)
Air, 5.00 mm
Air, 6.35 mm
Fuel, 5.00 mm
Fuel, 6.35 mm
Fuel, 5.00 mm,  coax = 0.5
Fig. 9
Corrected NOx measurements for N2/H2=1, as a func-
tion of diluent placement, dA, and coax „=1 unless otherwise
noted…
071504-6 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

region between the fuel and air injection points. This region is
typically small enough that heat transferred from the attached
ﬂame to the burner surface can be sufﬁciently removed by the
incoming fuel and air ﬂows to prevent thermal damage to the
burner. As discussed above in connection with Fig. 8, the blowoff
velocity associated with the ﬂameholding mechanism in this re-
gion is signiﬁcantly increased with fuel-side dilution and reduced
with air-side dilution. This leads to increased ﬂameholding ability
in the recirculation region with fuel-side dilution, while air-side
dilution can be used in cases where ﬂameholding on the LDI
injector face is to be avoided to reduce the risk of overheating,
provided that another stability mechanism is employed to anchor
the ﬂame in this situation.
The ﬂameholding mechanism is primarily a function of the sto-
ichiometry in the recirculation region, which is a balance between
hydrogen diffusion out of the fuel jet and radial air velocity to-
ward the fuel jet. In the absence of a coaxial air ﬂow, the diffusion
of hydrogen out of the fuel jet is such that the ﬂame base is
established far outside the jet’s shear layer, as shown in Fig. 10a.
With the addition of a small amount of coaxial air, the ﬂame
stabilization point moves to the outer edge of the fuel tube as
shown in Fig. 10b. Adding nitrogen diluent to the coaxial air
reduces the ﬂame temperature and reaction rate at this location,
due to reduced oxygen availability, eventually leading to extinc-
tion of the ﬂame when the reduced temperature and radical pro-
duction rate can no longer sustain the ﬂame. This is shown in
Figs. 10c and 10d, where the visible luminosity of the an-
chored ﬂame, primarily the result of H2O thermal broadband
emissions 36, diminishes with increasing coaxial air nitrogen
content. By contrast, the dilution of the fuel stream has a reduced
impact on the stability of the rim ﬂame comparing Fig. 10c to
Fig. 10f, and Fig. 10d to Fig. 10g. In this case, hydrogen
diffuses across the wake region much more quickly than nitrogen,
minimizing the concentration of the diluent nitrogen at the loca-
tion of the ﬂame base near the fuel tube’s outer rim, and increas-
ing its stability characteristics.
With the increasing nitrogen dilution of the fuel, the rate of the
differential diffusion of hydrogen out of the fuel jet decreases due
to a decrease in the species concentration gradient across the wake
region. In addition, the momentum of the fuel jet increases with
increasing jet density via dilution and/or jet velocity, thus in-
creasing its mass entrainment requirements and hence the radial
inﬂow of air toward the fuel jet. Eventually, the inward air veloc-
ity exceeds the outward hydrogen diffusion velocity, moving the
ﬂame base toward a more stable location closer to the fuel jet
Figs. 10b, 10f, and 10g, thereby enhancing ﬂame stability
with fuel jet dilution as seen in Fig. 8. Increasing the dilute fuel jet
velocity leads to the formation of an inefﬁcient split ﬂame well
before extinction of the rim ﬂame, while increasing the coaxial air
velocity eventually leads to lifting of the rim ﬂame off of the fuel
tube Fig. 10h and extinction as the ﬂame base approaches the
high strain region at the intersection of the jet shear layers.
The various nuances of the rim ﬂame stability mechanism in
coaxial air ﬂames are also important in angled LDI-injection
schemes. CFD is a valuable tool for assessing the feasibility of
these angled injection schemes without resorting to parametric
experimental studies of the multitude of possible geometric con-
ﬁgurations injection angles, hole sizes, hole spacing, and so on.
Accurately modeling the ﬂowﬁeld and differential diffusion char-
acteristics in the ﬂameholding recirculation region between the
fuel and air injection points is essential to the success of such
CFD models, and it can be veriﬁed with the simpliﬁed coaxial air
mechanism employed in this study. Attaining a stable, anchored
ﬂame in CFD models of the coaxial air conﬁguration requires the
use of a turbulence-chemistry interaction model that models the
differential diffusion process accurately. While probability distri-
butio function models do not account for such processes, the EDC
model does allow for differential diffusion 24. Several 2D, axi-
symmetric CFD simulations were conducted using the FLUENT
code, using a Reynolds stress turbulence model, the EDC com-
bustion model and the H2/O2 mechanism of Li et al. 25. The
35,000 cell computational domain encompassed the entire experi-
mental apparatus including the fuel and air inlets and passageways
and the full combustor can downstream to the exit. The inlets
were prescribed as mass ﬂow inlets and the exit of the combustor
as a pressure outlet boundary. The walls of the combustor were set
at a ﬁxed temperature of 500 K, which was approximately equal
to the average surface temperature measured in the experiments.
Stable ﬂame models could typically only be attained by ﬁrst speci-
fying a high-temperature condition 1500 K at the fuel tube tip to
maintain ﬂame stability until some degree of convergence was
attained with the initial velocity and species ﬁelds, after which
this temperature boundary condition was replaced by an adiabatic
boundary condition.
Figure 11 compares the CFD modeling results for fuel- and
air-side dilution cases with near-ﬁeld photos taken under the same
conditions at a spatial resolution of 26.5 m and an exposure
time of 5 s. Radius-dependent line-of-sight averaging effects are
removed from the ﬂame photos by using an Abel inversion routine
37, and the contrast is enhanced to yield the radial ﬂame proﬁles
shown on the right side of Fig. 11. The modeled H2O formation
rate matches well with the luminous ﬂame photo locations and
Fig.
10
Flame
base
photos
with
UF=75 m/s
and
dA
=5.00 mm: „a… UA=0 m/s, no dilution; „b… UA=15 m/s, no di-
lution; „c… UA=15 m/s, 17.4% coaxial air O2; „d… UA=15 m/s,
14.8% coaxial air O2; „e… UA=0 m/s, fuel N2/H2=1; „f… UA
=15 m/s, fuel N2/H2=0.5; „g… UA=15 m/s, fuel N2/H2=1; and
„h… UA=45 m/s, fuel N2/H2=1
Fig. 11
Comparison of CFD H2O formation rate with ﬂame lu-
minosity for fuel and air dilutions using dA=6.35 mm, 5 slm H2,
N2/H2=0.5, and coax=1, up to x/dF=10
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071504-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

intensities, as expected. The effects of air-side dilution versus
fuel-side dilution also match observations fairly well, showing
their respective ﬂame base locations at the outer edge of the fuel
tube rim and center of the fuel tube rim.
The details of the ﬂame base location are also evident in Fig.
12, which shows the enhanced stability of the fuel-side dilution
case in the increased ﬂame temperature within the recirculation
region. Differential diffusion effects resulting from fuel-side dilu-
tion can also be seen in the downstream portions of this ﬁgure,
where higher hydrogen content causes increased ﬂame tempera-
tures compared with the dilute coaxial air case. Furthermore, the
air ﬂow and differential diffusion effects on ﬂame stability can
also be seen in Fig. 13, where a line denoting stoichiometric con-
ditions H2/O2=2 is superimposed on the velocity ﬁeld in the
recirculation region. This ﬁgure reveals that the net radial velocity
in the recirculation region is toward the jet with the higher veloc-
ity i.e., the fuel jet, as determined previously by water-table 35
and laser Doppler velocimetry 34 experiments. In addition, the
high-hydrogen content at the outer edge of the fuel tube in the
air-dilution case is indicative of a high rate of hydrogen diffusion
radially out of the fuel jet, in spite of a radial inﬂow of air. The
dilute fuel case, meanwhile, shows that the increased inward air
velocity shifts the stoichiometric H2/O2 mixture toward the fuel
jet.
4
Conclusions
The use of a nitrogen diluent in either the fuel or air streams of
an LDI-style combustor has been investigated from several view-
points, for the overall purpose of reducing NOx emissions. The
use of the diluent for reducing the peak ﬂame temperature, and
hence the NOx emissions, is maximized with fuel stream dilution,
as all of the nitrogen must pass through the ﬂame front along with
the fuel. Likewise, fuel-side dilution also minimizes the ﬂame
residence time in a simple turbulent jet diffusion ﬂame, thus re-
ducing NOx emission. Although this is an unrealistic approxima-
tion of an LDI-style injector, the analysis illustrates the effects of
dilution on fuel/air mixing processes, particularly the effect of
nitrogen dilution on the hydrogen jet momentum and penetration,
which applies in both swirl-based and jet-based LDI-injection
schemes. For jet-based LDI burners, ﬂame stability issues within
the recirculation region between the fuel and air injection points,
and at the intersection between their respective shear layers, plays
an important role in determining the operating regimes that are
attainable with either air- or fuel-side dilution. For the coaxial air
ﬂame considered in this study, the dilution of the fuel stream was
preferable in that it allowed for higher fuel and air velocities to be
attained, which serve to further reduce ﬂame residence times and
NOx emissions. This is largely due to differential diffusion of
hydrogen out of the hydrogen/nitrogen fuel jet, leading to the
formation of a very stable, mostly diluent-free ﬂame base in the
recirculation region between the fuel and air jets. Properly mod-
eling this ﬂame anchoring behavior is essential to the success of
CFD codes for investigating more complex angled injection LDI
schemes, and it has been performed with reasonable success using
the modeling technique in the current study.
Acknowledgment
The support from the Turbines Program of the U.S. Department
of Energy is gratefully acknowledged, along with the administra-
tive support of the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education.
A portion of this technical effort was performed in support of the
National Energy Technology Laboratory’s ongoing research in hy-
drogen gas turbine combustion under the RDS Contract No. DE-
AC26-04NT41817.
Nomenclature
D  moles of nitrogen diluent per mole of
hydrogen
Da  Damköhler number
dA  coaxial air nozzle inside diameter
dF  fuel tube inside diameter
dF,o  fuel tube outside diameter
EINOx  NOx emission index g NO2/kg H2
fs  stoichiometric mixture fraction
Lf  ﬂame length
T  ﬂame temperature K
Tad  adiabatic ﬂame temperature K
tres  ﬂame residence time
UA  coaxial air exit velocity
UF  fuel jet exit velocity
NOx,meas  measured NOx ppm
NOx,corr  corrected NOx ppm
O2,meas  measured product gas O2 mole fraction
coax  coaxial air equivalence ratio
global  global equivalence ratio
A  air density
Fig. 12
Computed near-ﬁeld ﬂame temperatures. Same condi-
tions as in Fig. 11.
Fig. 13
Computed velocity vectors „max 6 m/s shown… and
stoichiometric location in the wake region of the fuel tube.
Same conditions as in Fig. 11.
071504-8 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

F  fuel density
X  molar concentration of species X
References
1 Vogt, R. L., 1980, “Low Btu Coal Gas Combustion in High Temperature
Turbines,” ASME Paper No. 80-GT-170.
2 Beebe, K. W. and Blanton, J. C., 1985, “Design and Development of a Heavy-
Duty Industrial Gas Turbine Combustion System for Low-Btu Coal Gas Fuel,”
ASME Paper No. 85-GT-45.
3 Becker, B., and Schetter, B., 1993, “Use of LHV Gas in a Gas Turbine,”
Bioresour. Technol., 46, pp. 55–64.
4 Kelsall, G. J., Smith, M. A., and Cannon, M. F., 1994, “Low Emission Com-
bustor Development for an Industrial Gas Turbine to Utilize LCV Fuel Gas,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 116, pp. 559–566.
5 Battista, R. A., and Dudley, J. C., 1995, “Full-Scale F Technology Combustor
Testing of Simulated Coal Gas,” DOE Final Report No. DOE-MC/27221-1.
6 Reiss, F., Grifﬁn, T., and Reyser, K., 2002, “The Alstom GT13E2 Medium
BTU Gas Turbine,” ASME Paper No. GT-2002-30108.
7 Ziemann, J., Shum, F., Moore, M., Kluyskens, D., Thomaier, D., Zarzalis, N.,
and Eberius, H., 1998, “Low-NOx Combustors for Hydrogen Fueled Aero
Engine,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 234, pp. 281–288.
8 Tacina, R. R., Wey, C., and Choi, K. J., 2001, “Flame Tube NOx Emissions
Using a Lean-Direct-Wall-Injection Combustor Concept,” Paper No. AIAA-
2001-3271.
9 Tacina, R., Wey, C., Liang, P., and Mansour, A., 2002, “A Low NOx Lean-
Direct Injection, Multipoint Integrated Module Combustor Concept for Ad-
vanced Aircraft Gas Turbines,” NASA Report No. TM-2002-211347.
10 Hernandez, S. R., Wang, Q., McDonell, V., Mansour, A., Steinthorsson, E, and
Hollon, B., 2008, “Micro-Mixing Fuel Injectors for Low Emissions Hydrogen
Combustion,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-50854.
11 Hernandez, S., Wang, Q., Lee, H., McDonell, V., Hollon, B., Mansour, A., and
Steinthorsson, E., 2008, “Micro-Mixing Fuel Injection for Low Emission
Combustion of Hydrogen for Gas Turbine Applications,” International Pitts-
burgh Coal Conference, Pittsburgh, PA.
12 Dahl, G., and Suttrop, F., 1998, “Engine Control and Low-NOx Combustion
for Hydrogen Fuelled Aircraft Gas Turbines,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 238,
pp. 695–704.
13 Marek, C. J., Smith, T. D., and Kundu, K., 2005, “Low Emission Hydrogen
Combustors for Gas Turbines Using Lean Direct Injection,” Paper No. AIAA-
2005-3776.
14 GE Energy, 2005, “Premixer Design for High Hydrogen Fuels—Final Report,”
DOE Cooperative Agreement No. DE-FC26-03NT41893.
15 Todd, D. M., and Battista, R. A., 2000, “Demonstrated Applicability of Hy-
drogen Fuel for Gas Turbines,” Proceedings of the IChemE “Gasiﬁcation 4 the
Future” Conference, Noordwijk, The Netherlands.
16 Chiesa, P., Lozza, G., and Mazzocchi, L., 2005, “Using Hydrogen as Gas
Turbine Fuel,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 127, pp. 73–80.
17 Todd, D. M., 2000, “Gas Turbine Improvements Enhance IGCC Viability,”
Gasiﬁcation Technologies Conference, San Francisco, CA.
18 Cook, C. S., Corman, J. C., and Todd, D. M., 1995, “System Evaluation and
LBTU Fuel Combustion Studies for IGCC Power Generation,” ASME J. Eng.
Gas Turbines Power, 117, pp. 673–677.
19 Rokke, P. E., and Hustad, J. E., 2005, “Exhaust Gas Recirculation in Gas
Turbines for Reduction of CO2 Emissions; Combustion Testing With Focus on
Stability and Emissions,” Int. J. Thermodyn., 8, pp. 167–173.
20 Feese, J. J., and Turns, S. R., 1998, “Nitric Oxide Emissions From Laminar
Diffusion Flames: Effect of Air-Side Versus Fuel-Side Diluent Addition,”
Combust. Flame, 113, pp. 66–78.
21 Lefebvre, A. H., 1999, Gas Turbine Combustion, 2nd ed., Taylor and Francis,
Ann Arbor.
22 ElKady, A. M., Evulet, A., Brand, A., Ursin, T. P., and Lynghjem, A., 2008,
“Exhaust Gas Recirculation in DLN F-Class Gas Turbines for Post-
Combustion CO2 Capture,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-51152.
23 Morley, C., 2005, “GASEQ: Chemical Equilibria in Perfect Gases,” Version
0.79, http://www.gaseq.co.uk
24 Magnussen, B. F., 1981, “On the Structure of Turbulence and a Generalized
Eddy Dissipation Concept for Chemical Reaction in Turbulent Flow,” Paper
No. AIAA-1981-42.
25 Li, J., Zhao, Z., Kazakov, K., and Dryer, F., 2004, “An Updated Comprehen-
sive Kinetic Model of Hydrogen Combustion,” Int. J. Chem. Kinet., 3610,
pp. 566–575.
26 Chen, R.-H., and Driscoll, J. F., 1990, “Nitric Oxide Levels of Jet Diffusion
Flames: Effects of Coaxial Air and Other Mixing Parameters,” Proc. Combust.
Inst., 23, pp. 281–288.
27 Turns, S. R., 1995, “Understanding NOx Formation in Nonpremixed Flames:
Experiments and Modeling,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 21, pp. 361–385.
28 Meier, W., Prucker, S., Cao, M.-H., and Stricker, W., 1996, “Characterization
of Turbulent H2/N2/Air Jet Diffusion Flames by Single-Pulse Spontaneous
Raman Scattering,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 118, pp. 293–312.
29 Delichatsios, M. A., 1993, “Transition From Momentum to Buoyancy-
Controlled Turbulent Jet Diffusion Flames and Flame Height Relationships,”
Combust. Flame, 92, pp. 349–364.
30 Driscoll, J. F., Chen, R.-H., and Yoon, Y., 1992, “Nitric Oxide Levels of
Turbulent Jet Diffusion Flames: Effects of Residence Time and Damköhler
Number,” Combust. Flame, 88, pp. 37–49.
31 Gabriel, R., Navedo, J. E., and Chen, R.-H., 2000, “Effects of Fuel Lewis
Number on Nitric Oxide Emissions of Diluted H2 Turbulent Jet Diffusion
Flames,” Combust. Flame, 121, pp. 525–534.
32 Dahm, W. J. A., and Mayman, A. G., 1990, “Blowout Limits of Turbulent Jet
Diffusion Flames for Arbitrary Source Conditions,” AIAA J., 287, pp. 1157–
1162.
33 Chen, J.-Y., and Kollmann, W., 1992, “PDF Modeling and Analysis of Ther-
mal NO Formation in Turbulent Nonpremixed Hydrogen-Air Jet Flames,”
Combust. Flame, 88, pp. 397–412.
34 Takahashi, F., and Schmoll, W. J., 1990, “Lifting Criteria of Jet Diffusion
Flames,” Sym. Int. Combust., Proc., 23, pp. 677–683.
35 Vranos, A., Taback, E. D., and Shipman, C. W., 1968, “An Experimental Study
of the Stability of Hydrogen-Air Diffusion Flames,” Combust. Flame, 12, pp.
253–260.
36 Halls, D. J., and Pungor, E., 1969, “An Examination of the Equilibrium Be-
tween H and OH Radicals and of Related Effects in Turbulent Hydrogen
Flames as Used in Spectrophotometric Methods of Analysis,” Anal. Chim.
Acta, 44, pp. 40–50.
37 Villarreal, R., and Varghese, P. L., 2005, “Frequency-Resolved Absorption
Tomography With Tunable Diode Lasers,” Appl. Opt., 4431, pp. 6786–
6795.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071504-9
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
