
--- Page 1 ---

Kyu Tae Kim
Jong Guen Lee1
e-mail: jxl145@psu.edu
Bryan D. Quay
Domenic Santavicca
Center for Advanced Power Generation,
Department of Mechanical and Nuclear
Engineering,
The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802
Experimental Investigation of the
Nonlinear Response of
Swirl-Stabilized Flames to
Equivalence Ratio Oscillations
The nonlinear response of a swirl-stabilized ﬂame to equivalence ratio oscillations was
experimentally investigated in an atmospheric-pressure, high-temperature, lean-premixed
model gas turbine combustor. To generate high-amplitude equivalence ratio oscillations,
fuel was modulated using a siren-type modulating device. The mixture ratio oscillations
at the inlet of the combustion chamber were measured by the infrared absorption tech-
nique, and the ﬂame’s response, i.e., the ﬂuctuation in the ﬂame’s rate of heat release, was
estimated by CH chemiluminescence emission intensity. Phase-resolved CH chemilumi-
nescence images were taken to characterize the dynamic response of the ﬂame. Results
show that the amplitude and frequency dependence of the ﬂame’s response to equivalence
ratio oscillations is qualitatively consistent with the ﬂame’s response to inlet velocity
oscillations. The underlying physics of the nonlinear response of the ﬂame to equivalence
ratio oscillations, however, is associated with the intrinsically nonlinear dependence of
the heat of reaction and burning velocity on the equivalence ratio. It was found that
combustion cannot be sustained under conditions of high-amplitude equivalence ratio
oscillations. Lean blowoff occurs when the normalized amplitude of the equivalence ratio
oscillation exceeds a threshold value. The threshold value is dependent on the mean
equivalence ratio and modulation frequency. DOI: 10.1115/1.4001999
1
Introduction
Lean-premixed combustion has been successful in meeting cur-
rent NOx emission regulations; however, this has been achieved at
the expense of increased combustion dynamics. Combustion in-
stabilities are characterized by large amplitude pressure oscilla-
tions that are driven by unsteady heat release. Because of limita-
tions in our understanding of the fundamentals of combustion
dynamics, it is currently not possible to design a lean-premixed
gas turbine combustor that is stable over its entire operating range
or to even predict the instability characteristics frequency and
intensity of a given system at the development state. As a result,
in-ﬁeld modiﬁcations to the engines are typically required so as to
navigate around unstable operating conditions or to protect the
system from high-amplitude pressure oscillations. Such solutions
can be time consuming, expensive, and often compromise the sys-
tem’s performance. Therefore, the successful development of the
next generation of ultralow emission lean-premixed gas turbine
engines requires a complete understanding of the nature of com-
bustion instabilities and design tools that are based on accurate
physics-based ﬂame response models.
Over the past two decades, extensive research has been per-
formed to investigate the mechanisms that drive combustion in-
stability 1. The most signiﬁcant contributing factors include
ﬂame surface area ﬂuctuations driven by acoustic velocity oscil-
lations 2–4, large scale vortex structures 5–8, ﬂame-wall inter-
action 9, and equivalence ratio oscillations 10–13. Recently,
related studies have been performed to examine the effect of inlet
velocity perturbations induced by acoustic waves on the response
of a premixed ﬂame 14–17. Flame transfer functions, which
describe the amplitude-dependent response characteristics of a
ﬂame and the inﬂuence of large scale coherent structures on the
ﬂame’s nonlinear response, were experimentally determined. Nu-
merical simulations have also been performed to compare with
measured ﬂame transfer functions 18. The response of a ﬂame to
acoustic excitation and the interaction of the ﬂame with coherent
structures induced by strong acoustic forcing are now well under-
stood.
To date, however, the response of a swirl-stabilized lean-
premixed ﬂame to equivalence ratio modulations has not been
well explored experimentally. Making simultaneous measure-
ments of the temporal ﬂuctuations of equivalence ratio and the
ﬂame’s heat release response is a challenging problem. Generating
large amplitude oscillations of equivalence ratio in the mixing
section, while keeping the amplitude of velocity ﬂuctuations neg-
ligible, is also a difﬁcult task. Due to these limitations in experi-
mental investigations, the response of a ﬂame to equivalence ratio
modulation has been treated analytically or numerically. Cho and
Lieuwen 12 performed a complete analysis of the major sources
of heat release for a laminar premixed ﬂame subjected to equiva-
lence ratio oscillations. They concluded that the heat release re-
sponse is controlled by the superposition of three disturbances:
heat of reaction, ﬂame speed, and ﬂame area. As illustrated sche-
matically in Fig. 1, ﬂuctuations of the heat of reaction and burning
velocity are directly generated by equivalence ratio oscillations.
Flame area has an indirect inﬂuence on heat release because it is
generated by ﬂame speed ﬂuctuations. Recently, Birbaud et al.
19 numerically investigated the nonlinear dynamics of an in-
verted laminar dihedral ﬂame spreading in an open geometry
when the ﬂame is submitted to equivalence ratio modulations.
They reported that the rapid burning of fresh mixture pockets
generates a nonlinear heat release signal with abrupt changes in
the waveform. Sengissen et al. 20 studied the response of
swirled partially premixed ﬂames to fuel ﬂow rate modulations
using large eddy simulation LES. They described no noticeable
saturation effect: The ﬂame behaves linearly up to an amplitude of
80%.
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute IGTI of ASME for pub-
lication in the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript
received April 12, 2010; ﬁnal manuscript received April 19, 2010; published online
October 27, 2010. Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 021502-1
Copyright © 2011 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

In the present paper, the response of a turbulent swirl-stabilized
ﬂame to equivalence ratio oscillations is experimentally exam-
ined. Fuel modulation is used to induce mixture ratio perturba-
tions of signiﬁcant amplitudes at the combustor inlet, while the
amplitude of the velocity perturbations is kept negligible due to
the high ratio of air to fuel ﬂow rates. Therefore, the effect of
velocity disturbances and large scale vortex structures on the
ﬂame’s heat release response is not considered here. The present
article begins with the details of the operating conditions. Results
of the measurements are described and discussed. Lastly, linear
and nonlinear responses of the ﬂame are discussed based on
phase-resolved CH chemiluminescence images and nonlinear
ﬂame transfer function measurements.
2
Experimental Methods
2.1
Model Lean-Premixed Gas Turbine Combustor. A
schematic drawing of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2.
The combustor consists of an air inlet section, a fuel siren, a
mixing section, an optically accessible quartz combustor section, a
steel combustor section, and an exhaust section. The air can be
heated to a maximum temperature of 400°C by a 30 kW electric
heater. A small-size siren-type modulation device driven by a dc
motor was used to modulate the fuel ﬂow rate. The device consists
of a rotor number of holes=12, dhole=1.5 mm and a stator
number of holes=1, dhole=1.5 mm. A needle valve was used to
adjust the bypass fuel ﬂow rate, thereby changing the amplitude of
modulation /mean at a given frequency. Modulated fuel is
injected into the mixing section and mixed with steady-ﬂow, high-
temperature air, leading to equivalence ratio oscillations in the
mixing section. The fuel injector has a ring-shaped conﬁguration
with 24 holes with dhole=0.5 mm on its circumference with equal
spacing, and it is located 152 mm upstream of the combustor
dump plane. The fuel ﬂow rate is not choked so that modulation
amplitudes are high enough for the nonlinear ﬂame response
study. The mixing section is 0.333 m long and has an annular
cross section with an outer diameter of 38.1 mm. The center body
with a diameter of 19.2 mm is used for ﬂame stabilization. It is
centered in the mixing tube and is positioned such that its down-
stream end is ﬂush with the combustor dump plane. A 30 deg
ﬂat-vane axial swirler with six vanes is mounted in the mixing
section 76.2 mm upstream of the combustor dump plane. The
swirl vanes provide swirling ﬂow ﬁelds to enhance mixing of fuel
and air and to stabilize the ﬂame. At the entrance to the mixing
section, the ﬂow is choked to decouple acoustic ﬁelds between the
system and the upstream plenum.
The combustor consists of a stainless steel dump plane, to
which
an
optically
accessible
fused-silica
combustor
ID
=109.2 mm and L=334.8 mm is attached. The downstream end
of the quartz combustor is connected to a stainless steel variable-
length combustor section. The length of the combustor can be
continuously varied between 762 mm and 1524 mm by moving a
water-cooled plug along the length of the steel combustor section.
For forced response measurements, the combustor length was
maintained at its minimum to minimize the inﬂuence of system
acoustics on upstream forcing.
2.2
Instrumentation and Operating Conditions. Several
measurement techniques were used to characterize the convective-
acoustic perturbations in the mixing plenum and the ﬂame’s re-
Fig. 1
Mechanism of the ﬂame response to „a… velocity pertur-
bations and „b… equivalence ratio perturbations †12‡
Fig. 2
Schematic of a swirl-stabilized, lean-premixed, gas turbine combus-
tor. Dimensions in millimeters. „a… Side view „mixing section and quartz
combustor section…, „b… schematic drawing of experimental setup for
equivalence ratio measurements.
021502-2 / Vol. 133, FEBRUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

sponse to upstream excitation. High frequency-response, water-
cooled, piezoelectric pressure transducers PCB 112A04 were
used to measure pressure perturbations in the mixing and the com-
bustor sections. The pressure signals were ampliﬁed by charge
ampliﬁers, digitized by an analog-to-digital converter, and stored
in microcomputer memory for processing at a sampling rate of
8192 Hz. Pressure signals measured from the two pressure trans-
ducers located 12.7 mm PT4 and 50.8 mm PT3 upstream of
the combustor dump plane were used to estimate the inlet velocity
ﬂuctuations using the two-microphone method 21,22. The mea-
sured velocity was used to ensure that fuel modulation does not
produce perturbations of acoustic velocity at the inlet of the com-
bustion chamber. To calibrate the two-microphone method, direct
measurements of velocity ﬂuctuations were performed under cold
ﬂow conditions with a hot wire anemometer TSI 1210-20. A
photomultiplier
tube
PMT,
Hamamatsu
model
H7732–10
coupled with a bandpass interference ﬁlter 4325 nm was used
to measure the global CH chemiluminescence emission intensity
from the whole ﬂame. An intensiﬁed charge coupled device
ICCD camera Princeton Instruments model 576G with a CH
bandpass ﬁlter centered at 430 nm 10 nm full width at half maxi-
mum FWHM was used to record phase-averaged ﬂame images.
The ICCD camera was synchronized with the combustor pressure
signal, and phase-synchronized images were taken over a cycle of
oscillation with a phase interval of 30 deg. The phase angle 
=0 deg corresponds to the positive-to-negative zero transition,
and =270 deg corresponds to the maximum combustor pres-
sure. Because CH chemiluminescence images are line-of-sight
integrated images, a three-point Abel deconvolution scheme was
used to extract two-dimensional information from the line-of-sight
images.
Temporal variations of equivalence ratio at the combustor inlet
were measured using the infrared IR laser absorption technique,
which relates the radiation intensities of the laser beam before and
after passing through a medium of interest 23. Figure 2b shows
a schematic of the experimental setup for equivalence ratio mea-
surements using the IR absorption technique. A He–Ne laser pro-
vides a coherent source of radiation with a wavelength of
3.39 m. The intensity of light is detected by thermoelectrically
cooled indium-arsenide InAs detectors. The measurement point
is located 7 mm upstream of the combustor dump plane. Two
different lenses focal length: LS1=533 mm, LS2=51 mm were
used to focus the laser beam onto the sensing area =2 mm of
the indium-arsenide detectors.
Experimental data were recorded with a National Instruments
data acquisition system controlled by LABVIEW software. A total of
16,384 data points at a sampling rate of 8192 Hz were taken
during each test, resulting in a frequency resolution of 0.5 Hz and
a time resolution of 0.122 ms. A spectral analysis of the signals
was performed using the fast Fourier transform FFT technique.
All tests were performed at a mean pressure of 1 atm and at
mean equivalence ratios from 0.55 to 0.65. The mean velocity in
the mixing section was 60 m/s, and the inlet temperature was kept
constant at 200°C, giving a Reynolds number of approximately
33,000. Natural gas and air were used as fuel and oxidizer, respec-
tively. The fuel ﬂow rate modulation frequencies were varied from
100 Hz to 400 Hz f =25 Hz. The frequency range of 100–400
Hz includes two distinct frequencies at which self-excited insta-
bilities were observed in the combustor 24. Forcing amplitudes
were varied from a minimum near zero to a maximum, which, in
most cases, was limited by lean blowoff LBO.
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Flame Transfer Function Measurements. The heat re-
lease response of natural gas-air premixed ﬂames to mixture ratio
oscillations was determined experimentally for various levels of
equivalence ratio oscillation. This section describes the amplitude
and frequency dependence of the ﬂame’s response to equivalence
ratio oscillations. The dependence of the linear/nonlinear response
of the ﬂame upon mean equivalence ratios will also be discussed.
To generate equivalence ratio perturbations, mass fractions of
either air or fuel must be modulated. If the mass ﬂow rate of fuel
is modulated and the mass ﬂow rate of air is kept constant ma
=0, the amplitude of equivalence ratio oscillations is directly
related to that of the fuel mass ﬂow rate:


¯  =
mf
m¯ f
−ma
m¯ a
1 + ma
m¯ a
= mf
m¯ f
1
The term on the left indicates the normalized equivalence ratio
oscillations, the ﬂame transfer function input, which was mea-
sured using the IR absorption technique, as described in the pre-
vious section. It was assumed that the radial spatial distribution of
the fuel and air mixture is uniform, because of the fuel injector
design. This is consistent with the use of the infrared absorption
technique to measure the equivalence ratio oscillation since it is a
line-of-sight measurement. The output of the ﬂame transfer func-
tion, i.e., the heat release rate oscillation, was determined by mea-
suring the intensity of the ﬂame chemiluminescence emission.
Chemiluminescence intensity is directly related to the heat release
rate of the ﬂame since fuel ﬂow rates are modulated to generate
mixture rate disturbances. To quantitatively describe the response
of the ﬂame to mixture ratio oscillations, the ﬂame transfer func-
tion is deﬁned as the ratio of the normalized heat release and
equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations:
Hf,A = Qf/Q¯
f/¯
2
where Q¯ is the time-averaged heat release rate, ¯ is the mean
equivalence ratio in the mixing section, Qf and f are the
amplitudes of the heat release and equivalence ratio oscillations at
the oscillation frequency, f, and A is the magnitude of normalized
equivalence ratio oscillation f/¯ .
A typical example of the ﬂame’s heat release response to
equivalence ratio modulation is shown in Fig. 3, which presents
the normalized CH chemiluminescence ﬂuctuation intensity
CH/CHmean

 and the phase of the ﬂame transfer function ver-
sus the normalized magnitude of the equivalence ratio oscillation
at a modulation frequency of 100 Hz. These measurements were
made at an inlet temperature of 200°C, a mean nozzle velocity of
60 m/s, and a mean equivalence ratio of 0.60. It can be observed
that the amplitude of the inlet velocity ﬂuctuations is less than 3%
of the mean velocity, even at the maximum amplitude of fuel
modulation. This indicates that the inﬂuence of inlet velocity ﬂuc-
tuations on heat release oscillations is negligible, and therefore the
response of the ﬂame is essentially determined by mixture ratio
modulations.
Figure 3a shows that the heat release response increases al-
most linearly with an increase in the amplitude of the equivalence
ratio oscillation up to /mean=3%. This represents the linear
ﬂame response at a relatively low forcing frequency: The gain is
nearly constant with respect to the modulation amplitude. It is
noteworthy that the maximum driving amplitude point is not de-
termined by a limitation of the modulating device but by ﬂame
blowoff. When the amplitude of mixture ratio perturbations is
greater than 3%, the ﬂame becomes detached from the center
body and lean blowoff occurs. The fact that combustion cannot be
sustained at large amplitude equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations sug-
gests that the dynamic ﬂammability limit, deﬁned as the minimum
equivalence ratio above which the unsteady ﬂame can sustain
combustion 25, depends on the inlet ﬂow conditions.
An example of the ﬂame’s shape near blowoff is shown in Fig.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 021502-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

4. It shows an instantaneous CH chemiluminescence image taken
at a modulation frequency of 100 Hz and a normalized equiva-
lence ratio ﬂuctuation of 4.3%. The gate width of the ICCD cam-
era was set at 0.833 ms, which corresponds to Tacs/12. It can be
observed that the ﬂame exhibits a tornado-like vortex core struc-
ture. The ﬂame is highly unsteady, and it is detached from the
center body. It is believed that incomplete combustion near the
lean blowoff point is a major source of pollutant emissions. There-
fore, the dependence of the dynamic ﬂammability limits and tran-
sient behavior near LBO upon inlet disturbance conditions needs
to be elucidated. This work is left for future studies.
Figure 3b shows that the phase difference between the heat
release rate and equivalence ratio oscillation gradually increases
with an increase in the amplitude of the normalized equivalence
ratio ﬂuctuation. This is in contrast to previous results of the ﬂame
response to inlet velocity ﬂuctuations, where it was found that the
phase of the ﬂame transfer function was independent of the am-
plitude of the normalized velocity ﬂuctuation for all forcing fre-
quencies 24. The experimental results shown in Fig. 3b indi-
cate that the time required for the ﬂame to respond to 
oscillations
gradually
increases
with
perturbation
amplitude
/mean. This suggests that the temporal evolution of ﬂame
surface may be signiﬁcantly affected by the amplitude of the
equivalence ratio disturbance. That issue will be discussed in de-
tail in this section using phase-resolved CH chemiluminescence
images. Note that some scatter is observed in the data shown in
Fig. 3. This may be due to uncertainties related to the IR absorp-
tion technique, such as the inherent random noise of a He–Ne
laser beam. The trend of the variation is nevertheless well
captured.
The heat release response at a modulation frequency of 150 Hz
is plotted against perturbation amplitude in Fig. 5. The plot shows
Fig. 3
„a… Normalized CH chemiluminescence intensity and
„b… phase of the ﬂame transfer function at a modulation fre-
quency of 100 Hz. Inlet conditions: Tin=200°C, Vmean=60 m/s,
and mean=0.60.
Fig. 4
Instantaneous CH chemiluminescence image at a
modulation frequency of 100 Hz and /mean=4.3%. Inlet con-
ditions: Tin=200°C, Vmean=60 m/s, and mean=0.55.
Fig. 5
„a… Normalized CH chemiluminescence intensity and
„b… phase of the ﬂame transfer function at a modulation fre-
quency of 150 Hz. Inlet conditions: Tin=200°C, Vmean=60 m/s,
and mean=0.60.
021502-4 / Vol. 133, FEBRUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

that the response increases linearly up to /mean=2% and then
starts to decrease with increasing modulation amplitude. This is a
typical example of the nonlinear response of a ﬂame subjected to
 perturbations: After a certain point, the gain starts to level off
or decrease with increasing normalized equivalence ratio ﬂuctua-
tion, /mean. The mechanisms responsible for the observed
nonlinear behavior will be discussed when the phase-locked ﬂame
images are presented. It should be noted that as in the prior case
Fig. 3, the phase gradually increases with increasing perturba-
tion amplitude, indicating that the effective ﬂame length increases
with modulation amplitude. Note that the normalized velocity
ﬂuctuation is less than 3%, indicating that the nonlinear response
of the ﬂame is caused mainly by equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations.
It can be seen in Fig. 3 100 Hz forcing and Fig. 5 150 Hz
forcing that the nonlinearity occurs at lower /mean as the
modulation frequency increases. The ﬂame response is linear up
to /mean=3% at a frequency of 100 Hz, while the nonlinear
response is observed at /mean=2% at a frequency of 150 Hz.
Figure 6 shows the dependence of the normalized CH chemilu-
minescence intensity on the modulation frequency between 100
Hz and 400 Hz. It is evident in Fig. 6 that the normalized CH
chemiluminescence intensity ﬂuctuation decreases with increasing
excitation frequency at a ﬁxed perturbation amplitude, and the
ﬂame’s response at modulation frequencies of 300 Hz and 400 Hz
is nonlinear over the range of equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations tested.
Although the controlling physics of the nonlinear response to
equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations is totally different from the control-
ling physics of the nonlinear response to velocity ﬂuctuations, the
fact that the perturbation amplitude at which the nonlinear re-
sponse occurs decreases with increasing frequency is observed in
both cases. The dependence of the inception of the nonlinear re-
sponse on modulation frequency shows the same trend 26.
In summary, the above results indicate that the effect of modu-
lation frequency on the ﬂame response to both velocity and
equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations is qualitatively similar, although the
ﬂame response to equivalence ratio and to velocity ﬂuctuations
are quantitatively very different.
The normalized CH chemiluminescence intensity ﬂuctuation is
an order of magnitude greater for equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations
than for velocity oscillations. Furthermore, the nonlinear response
occurs at smaller normalized equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations e.g.,
/mean2% for 200 Hz modulation than normalized velocity
ﬂuctuations e.g., V/Vmean20% for 200 Hz modulation. When
the ﬂame is perturbed by inlet velocity oscillations, high-
amplitude perturbations are required for shear layer rollup, lead-
ing to shedding of a coherent vortex-ring structure. Flame area
modulation induced by ﬂame-vortex interaction thus leads to the
nonlinear response of heat release oscillations. On the other hand,
equivalence ratio modulations directly affect the heat release rate
by means of variations in burning velocity and the heat of reaction
of the incoming reactants. Perturbations of ﬂame surface area are
also indirectly induced by the burning velocity ﬂuctuations 12.
The dependence of the ﬂame’s response upon mean equivalence
ratio at a modulation frequency of 100 Hz is illustrated in Fig. 7.
As the mean equivalence ratio increases from 0.60 to 0.65, the
magnitude of the heat release response decreases for a constant
amplitude of perturbation, and the response remains in the linear
region for both cases. This is attributed to the enhanced ﬂame
stabilization as the mean equivalence ratio increases. When the
mean equivalence ratio is near the static lean blowoff limit, on the
other hand, the ﬂame is more easily destabilized when subjected
to upstream disturbances.
It is also noted that the dynamic ﬂammability limit is extended
from /mean=3% to 6% with increasing mean equivalence ra-
tio. This is consistent with the results of Sankaran and Im 25.
They computationally studied the response of an unsteady pre-
mixed methane/air ﬂame subjected to time-varying composition
ﬂuctuations and concluded that the ﬂammability limit is extended
to lower equivalence ratios as the mean equivalence ratio in-
creases or the characteristic frequency of oscillation increases.
Figure 8 shows the effects of the mean equivalence ratio on the
response of the ﬂame at a modulation frequency of 150 Hz. It is
evident that the ﬂame at a mean equivalence ratio of 0.60 exhibits
a nonlinear behavior, while the ﬂame at mean=0.65 shows linear
response characteristics. This is associated with the improved sta-
bility characteristic of the ﬂame as the mean equivalence ratio
increases. Note that the dynamic ﬂammability limits are also ex-
tended by approximately 60%, as the mean equivalence ratio in-
creases from 0.60 to 0.65.
The results shown in Figs. 7 and 8 suggest that the linear/
nonlinear dynamics of a ﬂame submitted to equivalence ratio os-
cillations are strongly dependent on the mean equivalence ratio.
As the mean equivalence ratio decreases, e.g., when mean is near
the static LBO limit, the nonlinear response of a ﬂame to equiva-
lence ratio perturbations is more prominent. This could be due to
the fact that near the lean blowoff limit the burning rate and heat
of reaction are nonlinearly related to the equivalence ratio. A simi-
Fig. 6
Dependence of the normalized CH chemiluminescence
intensity ﬂuctuation on the modulation frequency. Inlet condi-
tions: Tin=200°C, Vmean=60 m/s, and mean=0.60.
Fig. 7
Dependence of the response of a ﬂame upon mean
equivalence ratio at a modulation frequency of 100 Hz. Inlet
conditions: Tin=200°C, Vmean=60 m/s, and mean=0.60,0.65.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 021502-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

lar observation was made by Shreekrishna and Lieuwen 27.
They showed that the key mechanism leading to heat release satu-
ration is the intrinsically nonlinear dependence of ﬂame speed and
mixture heat of reaction on fuel/air ratio.
The gain and phase of the ﬂame transfer function can be ex-
pressed in the frequency domain at the same magnitude of equiva-
lence ratio perturbations /mean=1%. This amplitude limits the
ﬂame response to the linear region. Figure 9 shows the ﬂame
transfer function against modulation frequency for a mean equiva-
lence ratio of 0.60 and a mean inlet velocity of 60 m/s. The ﬂame
transfer function exhibits a low-pass ﬁlter behavior, as when the
ﬂame area is inﬂuenced by acoustic velocity perturbations. It can
be seen in Fig. 9a that a strong overshoot at a modulation fre-
quency of 175 Hz is observed and the gain asymptotically de-
creases to zero with increasing modulation frequency. The physi-
cal signiﬁcance of this result is that the ﬂame selectively ampliﬁes
equivalence ratio perturbations within certain frequency ranges.
The frequency where the response of the ﬂame is most ampliﬁed
is consistent with one of self-excited instability frequencies ob-
served in the test rig 24.
Figure 9b shows the corresponding phase of the ﬂame transfer
function, which provides the convection times needed for the
ﬂame to respond to upstream equivalence ratio perturbation. The
overall time delay consists of a characteristic time delay for the
convective transport of the equivalence ratio perturbation from the
combustor inlet to the main reaction zone, a time delay for the
heating of the reactant mixtures to ignition temperature, and a
characteristic kinetic time delay for the chemical reaction. It can
be seen in Fig. 9b that the phase difference between  and
CH evolves quasi-linearly with frequency, =2f. This
phase dependence indicates a roughly constant time delay  be-
tween the equivalence ratio perturbation  and the heat release
perturbation CH, which implies that their relationship is purely
convective in nature. The global ﬂame transfer functions subjected
to equivalence ratio oscillations show many similarities to the
ﬂame’s response to acoustic velocity perturbations in terms of
both the gain and the phase time delay.
3.2
Nonlinear Flame Dynamics. This section describes the
nonlinear features of a ﬂame subjected to equivalence ratio modu-
lation. Phase-averaged CH chemiluminescence ﬂame images
were recorded using an ICCD camera at phase intervals of 30 deg.
Figure 10 shows phase-averaged CH chemiluminescence images
during a cycle of oscillation at a modulation frequency of 200 Hz
with a normalized equivalence ratio ﬂuctuation of 2.2% a and
3.2% b. The intensity of the CH chemiluminescence emission is
highest at =270 deg for both cases. No shear layer rollup is
seen due to the low amplitude of the velocity perturbation at the
combustor inlet; consequently, the heat release oscillations are
caused by equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations. Figure 11 plots a time
series of the global CH chemiluminescence, measured by the
photomultiplier tube. This corresponds to the ﬂame dynamics
shown in Fig. 10a. It clearly shows that the heat release signal
varies signiﬁcantly. The waveform features a nonlinear behavior
since a sharp peak of heat release is produced in each cycle 2
	1. Birbaud et al. 19 observed similar phenomena. They
found that the ﬂame behaves like a relaxation oscillator, with slow
growth followed by a sharp drop.
It is noteworthy see Fig. 10a that the overall ﬂame length is
almost constant over a cycle of oscillation at a given perturbation
amplitude. This suggests that the inﬂuence of the variation in heat
of reaction upon the heat release rate oscillation is more signiﬁ-
cant than that of ﬂame speed. If the ﬂame speed varies substan-
tially during a period of oscillation, the ﬂame length change will
be prominent; Lflame
ST
−1 ST=turbulent ﬂame speed. This be-
havior is similar to the LES results of Sengissen et al. 20. They
found that the ﬂame does not move signiﬁcantly when the equiva-
lence ratio modulation impinges on the swirl-stabilized ﬂame.
Fig. 8
Dependence of the response of a ﬂame upon mean
equivalence ratio at a modulation frequency of 150 Hz. Inlet
conditions: Tin=200°C, Vmean=60 m/s, and mean=0.60,0.65.
Fig. 9
„a… Gain and „b… phase of the ﬂame transfer function in
frequency domain. Inlet conditions: Tin=200°C, Vmean=60 m/s,
mean=0.60, and /mean=1%.
021502-6 / Vol. 133, FEBRUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

Figure 10b shows phase-resolved CH chemiluminescence
images over a period of oscillation 200 Hz for a normalized
equivalence ratio ﬂuctuation of 3.2%. This forcing condition is
very close to the dynamic blowoff limit. The ﬂame length, at a
given phase, is longer in this case than it is for a normalized
equivalence ratio ﬂuctuation of 2.2% Fig. 10a. The fact that
increasing the normalized equivalence ratio ﬂuctuation increases
the ﬂame length, as shown in Fig. 10, indicates that the time
required for the equivalence ratio perturbation to convect from the
dump plane to the ﬂame should increase with increasing normal-
ized equivalence ratio ﬂuctuation. This is consistent with the ef-
fect of the normalized equivalence ratio ﬂuctuation on the transfer
function phase shown in Fig. 5b. The nonlinear dynamics of the
ﬂame results in enhanced unsteadiness near blowoff. However,
unsteady local extinction events, which are known to be the ﬁrst
stage of near-blowoff dynamics of bluff-body stabilized ﬂames,
are not observed here 28,29. This indicates that the instanta-
neous stretch rate does not exceed the local extinction stretch rate.
4
Conclusions
Even though it is well understood that temporal oscillations in
the equivalence ratio play an important role in inducing self-
sustained pressure oscillations in lean-premixed gas turbines, this
key issue has not been well explored experimentally. Results are
presented in this paper from an experimental study of the response
of
swirl-stabilized
ﬂames
to
equivalence
ratio
oscillations.
Equivalence ratio perturbations were achieved by modulating the
fuel ﬂow rate, giving nearly sinusoidal equivalence ratio oscilla-
tions at the combustor inlet. It was found that the response of the
ﬂame can be divided into linear and nonlinear regimes, depending
on the magnitude of the equivalence ratio oscillations. For large
perturbation amplitudes, the heat release response shows a nonlin-
ear behavior with abrupt changes in the waveform. The nonlinear-
ity is related to the nonlinear dependence of the heat of reaction
and burning velocity on equivalence ratio. The nonlinear response
becomes more pronounced as modulation frequencies increase
and the mean equivalence ratio decreases. It was also found that
the ﬂame acts as an ampliﬁer of equivalence ratio perturbations at
modulation frequencies of approximately 175 Hz and that the
measured phase between the CH chemiluminescence intensity
and the inlet equivalence ratio oscillations increases linearly with
excitation frequency. This suggests that the overall characteristics
of the ﬂame’s response to equivalence ratio oscillations are very
similar to the ﬂame’s response to velocity ﬂuctuations, although
the mechanism responsible for the nonlinear behavior is different.
The data presented in the present paper provide insight into the
physics controlling the response of the ﬂame to equivalence ratio
modulation and can be used to validate analytic ﬂame response
models.
Acknowledgment
Funding for this research was provided by the Department of
Energy University Coal Research Program through Contract No.
DE-FG26-07NT43069 and the National Science Foundation
through Award No. 0625970.
Nomenclature
A  amplitude
dhole  diameter of holes in rotor of modulation device
f  modulation frequency
H  ﬂame transfer function
Lflame  characteristic ﬂame length distance from the
corner of center body to maximum chemilumi-
nescence intensity location
m  mass ﬂow rate
Q  heat release from ﬂame
ST  turbulent ﬂame speed
V  inlet mixture velocity
Greek Symbols
  diameter of infrared detector
  equivalence ratio
  phase difference between  and CH
  time delay
Superscripts and Subscripts
‘  root-mean-square ﬂuctuation
¯  mean quantity
f  fuel
a  air
References
1 Lieuwen, T., and Yang, V., 2005, “Combustion Instabilities in Gas Turbine
Engines,” Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 210, AIAA, Wash-
ington, DC.
2 Candel, S., 2002, “Combustion Dynamics and Control: Progress and Chal-
lenges,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 29, pp. 1–28.
3 Ducruix, D., Schuller, T., Durox, D., and Candel, S., 2003, “Combustion Dy-
Fig. 10
Phase-resolved CH chemiluminescence imaging dur-
ing a period of oscillation at a modulation frequency of 200 Hz
and amplitudes of „a… /mean=2.2% and „b… /mean=3.2%.
Inlet conditions: Tin=200°C, Vmean=60 m/s, and mean=0.60.
Fig. 11
Time signal of CH chemiluminescence intensity at a
modulation frequency of 200 Hz and amplitude of /mean
=2.2%. Inlet conditions: Tin=200°C, Vmean=60 m/s, and mean
=0.60.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 021502-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

namics and Instabilities: Elementary Coupling and Driving Mechanisms,” J.
Propul. Power, 19, pp. 722–734.
4 Fleiﬁl, M., Annaswamy, A. M., Ghoneim, Z. A., and Ghoniem, A. F., 1996,
“Response of a Laminar Premixed Flame to Flow Oscillations: A Kinematic
Model and Thermoacoustic Instability Results,” Combust. Flame, 106, pp.
487–510.
5 Venkataraman, K. K., Preston, L. H., Simons, D. W., Lee, B. J., Lee, J. G., and
Santavicca, D. A., 1999, “Mechanism of Combustion Instability in a Lean
Premixed Dump Combustor,” J. Propul. Power, 156, pp. 909–918.
6 Yu, K., Trouve, A., and Daily, J., 1991, “Low-Frequency Pressure Oscillations
in a Model Ramjet Combustor,” J. Fluid Mech., 232, pp. 47–72.
7 Schadow, K. C., and Gutmark, E., 1992, “Combustion Instability Related to
Vortex Shedding in Dump Combustors and Their Passive Control,” Prog. En-
ergy Combust. Sci., 18, pp. 117–132.
8 Poinsot, T. J., Trouve, A. C., Veynante, D. P., Candel, S. M., and Esposito, E.
J., 1987, “Vortex-Driven Acoustically Coupled Combustion Instabilities,” J.
Fluid Mech., 177, pp. 265–292.
9 Schuller, T., Durox, D., and Candel, S., 2002, “Dynamics of and Noise Radi-
ated by a Perturbed Impinging Premixed Jet Flame,” Combust. Flame, 128,
pp. 88–110.
10 Lee, J. G., Kim, K., and Santavicca, D., 2000, “Measurement of Equivalence
Ratio Fluctuation and Its Effect on Heat Release During Unstable Combus-
tion,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 28, pp. 415–421.
11 Lieuwen, T., and Zinn, B., 1998, “The Role of Equivalence Ratio Oscillations
in Driving Combustion Instabilities in Low NOx Gas Turbines,” Proc. Com-
bust. Inst., 27, pp. 1809–1816.
12 Cho, J., and Lieuwen, T., 2005, “Laminar Premixed Flame Response to
Equivalence Ratio Oscillations,” Combust. Flame, 140, pp. 116–129.
13 Sattelmayer, T., 2003, “Inﬂuence of the Combustor Aerodynamics on Com-
bustion Instabilities From Equivalence Ratio Fluctuations,” ASME J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power, 125, pp. 11–19.
14 Balachandran, R., Ayoola, B. O., Kaminski, C. F., Dowling, A. P., and Mas-
torakos, E., 2005, “Experimental Investigation of the Nonlinear Response of
Turbulent Premixed Flames to Imposed Inlet Velocity Oscillations,” Combust.
Flame, 143, pp. 37–55.
15 Bellows, B. D., Neumeier, Y., and Lieuwen, T., 2006, “Forced Response of a
Swirling, Premixed Flame to Flow Disturbances,” J. Propul. Power, 22, pp.
1075–1084.
16 Kang, D. M., Culick, F. E. C., and Ratner, A., 2007, “Combustion Dynamics
of a Low-Swirl Combustor,” Combust. Flame, 151, pp. 412–425.
17 Kim, K. T., Lee, J. G., Lee, H. J., Quay, B., and Santavicca, D., 2010, “Char-
acterization of Forced Flame Response of Swirl-Stabilized Turbulent Lean-
Premixed Flames in a Gas Turbine Combustor,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power, 132, pp. 041502.
18 Armitage, C. A., Balachandran, R., Mastorakos, E., and Cant, R. S., 2006,
“Investigation of the Nonlinear Response of Turbulent Premixed Flames to
Imposed Inlet Velocity Oscillations,” Combust. Flame, 146, pp. 419–436.
19 Birbaud, A., Ducruix, S., Durox, D., and Candel, S., 2008, “The Nonlinear
Response of Inverted “V” Flames to Equivalence Ratio Nonuniformities,”
Combust. Flame, 154, pp. 356–367.
20 Sengissen, A. X., Van Kampen, J. F., Huls, R. A., Stoffels, G. G. M., Kok, J.
B. W., and Poinsot, T. J., 2007, “LES and Experimental Studies of Cold and
Reacting Flow in a Swirled Partially Premixed Burner With and Without Fuel
Modulation,” Combust. Flame, 150, pp. 40–53.
21 Waser, M. P., and Crocker, M. J., 1984, “Introduction to the Two-Microphone
Cross-Spectral Method of Determining Sound Intensity,” Noise Control Eng.
J., 22, pp. 76–85.
22 Åbom, M., and Bodén, H., 1988, “Error Analysis of Two-Microphone Mea-
surements in Ducts With Flow,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 83, pp. 2429–2438.
23 Lee, J. G., and Santavicca, D. A., 2003, “Experimental Diagnostics for the
Study of Combustion Instabilities in Lean Premixed Combustors,” J. Propul.
Power, 19, pp. 735–750.
24 Kim, K. T., Lee, H. J., Lee, J. G., Quay, B., and Santavicca, D., 2009, “Flame
Transfer Function Measurement and Instability Frequency Prediction Using a
Thermoacoustic Model,” ASME Paper No. GT2009-60026.
25 Sankaran, R., and Im, H. G., 2002, “Dynamic Flammability Limits of
Methane/Air Premixed Flames With Mixture Composition Fluctuations,” Proc.
Combust. Inst., 29, pp. 77–84.
26 Kim, D., Lee, J. G., Quay, B. D., Santavicca, D. A., Kim, K., and Srinivasan,
S., 2010, “Effect of Flame Structure on the Flame Transfer Function in a
Premixed Gas Turbine Combustor,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 132,
p. 021502.
27 Shreekrishna, S. H., and Lieuwen, T., 2007, “Premixed Flame Response to
Equivalence Ratio Perturbations,” 43rd AIAA/ASME/ASEE Joint Propulsion
Conference, AIAA Paper No. 2007-5656.
28 Nair, S., and Lieuwen, T., 2007, “Near-Blowoff Dynamics of a Bluff-Body
Stabilized Flame,” J. Propul. Power, 23, pp. 421–427.
29 Kim, K. T., Lee, J. G., Quay, B., and Santavicca, D., 2010, “Reconstruction of
the Heat Release Response of Partially Premixed Flames,” ASME Paper No.
GT2010-22245.
021502-8 / Vol. 133, FEBRUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
