
--- Page 1 ---

Qingguo Zhang
Santosh J. Shanbhogue
Tim Lieuwen
School of Aerospace Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332-0150
Dynamics of Premixed H2/CH4
Flames Under Near Blowoff
Conditions
Swirling ´Čéows are widely used in industrial burners and gas turbine combustors for ´Čéame
stabilization. Several prior studies have shown that these ´Čéames exhibit complex dynam-
ics under near blowoff conditions, associated with local ´Čéamelet extinction and alteration
in the vortex breakdown ´Čéow structure. These extinction events are apparently due to the
local strain rate irregularly oscillating above and below the extinction strain rate values
near the attachment point. In this work, global temporally resolved and detailed spatial
measurements were obtained of hydrogen/methane ´Čéames. Supporting calculations of
extinction strain rates were also performed using detailed kinetics. It is shown that ´Čéames
become unsteady (or local extinctions happen) at a nearly constant extinction strain rate
for different hydrogen/methane mixtures. Based upon analysis of these results, it is sug-
gested that classic Damk├Âhler number correlations of blowoff are, in fact, correlations
for the onset of local extinction events, not blowoff itself. Corresponding Mie scattering
imaging of near blowoff ´Čéames also was used to characterize the spatio-temporal dy-
namics of holes along the ´Čéame that are associated with local extinction.
DOI: 10.1115/1.4000601
Keywords: swirling, hydrogen, lean blowout
1
Introduction
Swirling ´Čéows are widely used in industrial burners and gas
turbine combustors for ´Čéame stabilization. A number of opera-
tional and performance issues are of concern in modern highly
tuned dry low NOx DLN combustion systems utilizing swirl
stabilized ´Čéames, including blowout, ´Čéashback, combustion insta-
bilities, and emissions 1,2. The issue of lean blowoff is the focus
of this study, a concern due to the requirement to operate DLN
systems under very fuel lean conditions and, therefore, close to
their blowoff limits. Flames can only be stabilized in high velocity
reactant streams over a certain range of conditions. Determining
these conditions, and those where the ´Čéame cannot be stabilizedÔÇö
referred to here as blowoffÔÇöis an important issue in any practical
combustion device.
A large literature on predicting, measuring, and correlating
blowoff limits already exists 3ÔÇô6. Several different theories or
physical considerations have been used in past blowout correla-
tion studies, such as those of Zukoski and Marble 7, Spalding
8, Longwell 9,10, and others. As noted by Glassman 4, how-
ever, they lead to essentially the same form of correlation that
relates the blowoff limits to a Damk├Âhler number, i.e., ratio of a
´Čéuid mechanic and chemical kinetic time, res/chem. The work of
Hoffman et al. 3 is of particular interest here, as it demonstrated
that related scaling could be used to correlate blowoff limits in
swirling premixed ´Čéames.
We next brie´Čéy review several prior phenomenological charac-
terizations of blowoff. Longwell et al. 9 suggested that blowoff
occurs when it is not possible to balance the rate of entrainment of
reactants into the recirculation zone, viewed as a well-stirred re-
actor, and the rate of burning of these gases. Since entrainment
rates scale as D/U 11, this criterion reduces to a Damk├Âhler
number blowoff criterion, using a chemical time that is derived
from the well-stirred reactor, PSR. A similar idea relates to an
energy balance between heat supplied by the hot recirculating
´Čéow to the fresh gases and that released by reaction 12ÔÇô15. In
this view, blowoff occurs when the heat required by the combus-
tible stream exceeds that received from the recirculation zone.
This leads to the same entrainment based, ´Čéuid mechanical time
scaling as above, and the resultant similar Damk├Âhler number
blowoff criterion.
A different view is that the contact time between the combus-
tible mixture and hot gases in the shear layer must exceed a
chemical ignition time 8,15ÔÇô17. For example, Zukoski 16,18
suggested that ignition of the incoming fresh unburnt mixture oc-
curs in the shear layer as it mixes with combustion products from
the recirculation zone behind the bluff body. The relevant chemi-
cal time in this description is an ignition time. The ´Čéuid mechanic
time scaling associates the characteristic dimension by the recir-
culation zone length, which also being proportional to the bluff
body size, leads to a similar Damk├Âhler number correlation.
Finally, several studies have proposed a ´Čéamelet based descrip-
tion based on local extinction by excessive ´Čéame stretch 19,20.
It is dif´Čücult to determine which of the above descriptions most
accurately describes the controlling processes based on analyses
of Da correlations alone because the different velocity, length, and
chemical time scales generally lead to comparable groupings of
the data. However, improvements in fundamentals of turbulent
combustion provide further insight for evaluation of these differ-
ent blowoff descriptions. As emphasized by Driscoll 21 in a
recent review, there is little evidence of the existence of distrib-
uted combustion or well-stirred reactors. Rather, modern diagnos-
tics and computations have demonstrated that ´Čéamelets exist un-
der a very broad range of conditions; reaction regions deemed to
be spatially distributed from line of sight images have often been
shown to consist of highly contorted three-dimensionally oriented
reaction sheets when visualized with planar laser imaging tech-
niques. This point is illustrated in Fig. 1, which illustrates two OH
planar laser induced ´Čéuorescence PLIF images and a single short
time exposure line of sight image of the same swirling ´Čéame.
There is some possibility of the existence of a ÔÇťthickened ´Čéame-
letÔÇŁ regime, where turbulent diffusivity plays a role due to ÔÇťstir-
ringÔÇŁ by Kolmogorov scale eddies in the preheat zone, but evi-
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received May
8, 2009; ´Čünal manuscript received September 3, 2009; published online August 5,
2010. Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 111502-1
Copyright ┬ę 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

dence is lacking at this point 21. As such, blowoff theories
postulating the existence of well-stirred reactor regimes, such as
in the recirculation zone, probably do not correctly capture the
controlling processes. Furthermore, a critical component to sev-
eral of the above described blowoff theories is heat exchange from
the hot wake to the reactants. However, given the fact that a pre-
mixed ´Čéame acts as an interface between reactants and products,
there is no ÔÇťcontactÔÇŁ between the wake zone and fresh reactants,
except for the thermodiffusive processes and possibly mixing by
Kolmogorov scale eddies con´Čüned to the preheat zone of the
´Čéamelet. In other words, no such exchange occurs outside of
points very near the attachment region, except for ´Čéames near
blowoff where extensive holes in the ´Čéame sheet exist.
Given these points, the subsequent discussion will focus on
´Čéamelet based descriptions of the controlling blowoff processes,
which are also captured by Damk├Âhler number scalings. Extinc-
tion of ´Čéamelets occurs through two mechanisms: heat transfer
and ´Čéame straining 23,24. Flame strain is apparently the domi-
nant effect, with heat/radical losses only dominant very near the
bluff body. Flame strain occurs due to gradients in ´Čéow velocity,
such as if the ´Čéame resides in a shear layer, or ´Čéame curvature,
such as when it is rolled up in a vortex. Flames are only capable
of withstanding certain levels of strain before extinction, denoted
as the extinction strain rate, ext. As detailed in Ref. 23, the
extinction strain rate is a function of fuel composition particu-
larly its molecular weight relative to air, stoichiometry, and
chemical time scale. The inverse of the extinction strain rate forms
a chemical time, ext=1/ESR, whose relationship to other kinetic
time scales is discussed in a number of references 25ÔÇô27.
The local Damk├Âhler number de´Čünition used in this paper can
be written as a ratio of the extinction ´Čéame strain rate and the ´Čéow
strain rate
Da = flow
ESR
= ext

1
where  denotes the reference strain rate, inversely proportional to
the reference ´Čéuid mechanical time, flow.
As suggested in several prior studies, it is clear that ´Čéamelet
extinction occurs near blowoff, but does not immediately lead to
blowoff 28,29. In other words, blowoff does not occur the instant
when ext= at some point along the ´Čéame. As such, the presence
of strain induced extinction of the ´Čéame sheet near blowoff con-
ditions, and the fact that the Da describes such extinction, is use-
ful, but not a complete description of the blowoff phenomenon.
Local extinction is known to lead to substantial unsteadiness in
´Čéames near blowoff 20,30ÔÇô33. Holes on the ´Čéame sheet are
initiated at points of high ´Čéame strain. This topic has received
extensive discussion in the more general turbulent combustion
literature 34ÔÇô36. The formation of ÔÇťedgesÔÇŁ that are associated
with holes on the ´Čéame sheet is a more general combustion prob-
lem that has received recent attention for both premixed and non-
premixed ´Čéames 37ÔÇô41, including a recent review by Buckmas-
ter 42. Once a ´Čéame hole is initiated by excessive local strain/
scalar dissipation rates, it can stay the same size, grow, or shrink,
associated with whether the edge ´Čéame stays stationary, retreats,
or advances into the hole, respectively. In addition, the hole is
convected with the mean ´Čéow at the local tangential mean ´Čéow
velocity, as will be discussed further in this paper. For premixed
´Čéames, it is important to note that the advance/retreat velocity of
the ´Čéame edge is not related to the laminar burning velocity. Fur-
thermore, while ´Čéame holes appear at points where the local strain
rate, , exceeds ext in the quasisteady case, the ´Čéame edge does
not correspond to the point in the ´Čéow where =ext. Rather, Liu
and RonneyÔÇÖs results 41 show that the ´Čéow strain rate at the
´Čéame edge value, edge, is lower than ext by a factor of up to two
i.e., 0.5edge/ext1. In other words, once a hole is initiated
in a region of high strain, it can lead to ´Čéamelet extinction at
adjoining points that would otherwise not have extinguished at the
local conditions.
It has been suggested that ´Čéames approach blowoff in two
phases, the ´Čürst characterized by local extinction on the ´Čéame
sheet, and the second by large-scale alteration of the ´Čéuid mechan-
ics. The objective of this study is to characterize these dynamical
blowoff processes in this ´Čürst phase. This study closely follows
several related studies of our group, which have characterized the
dynamic blowoff process of pilot, bluff body, and swirl stabilized
´Čéames 29,43. In the swirling ´Čéame, Muruganadam et al. 29
and Zhang et al. 44 showed that the swirling ´Čéame tends to
oscillate between extinction and re-ignition phases. The number of
extinction/re-ignition events per unit time monotonically grows as
blowoff is approached. Very near blowoff, the entire structure of
the vortex breakdown appears to change in a complex manner,
with various helical ´Čéow features appearing and reappearing in a
sporadic fashion.
2
Instrumentation, Experimental Facility, Experimen-
tal Procedures, and Data Reduction
Measurements were obtained in a lean premixed swirl combus-
tor, which was duplicated from an experimental rig at Sandia Na-
tional Laboratories 45. This was done in order to have the same
test facility to facilitate comparisons of data and simulations with
the Sandia group. The combustor is schematically shown in Fig. 2.
The facility consists of a swirler/nozzle, combustor, and exhaust
sections. Premixed gas, consisting of H2/CH4 mixtures, and air
´Čéows through a swirler/nozzle section. The nozzle is an annular
tube with inner diameter of 28 mm. The center body has an outer
diameter of 20 mm. The overall ´Čéow area remains constant at
3.0 cm2 inside the nozzle. Tests were performed with a six-vane
Fig. 1
Two instantaneous OH PLIF images of acoustically
forced swirling ´Čéame ÔÇ×left and middleÔÇŽ and associated line of
sight image ÔÇ×rightÔÇŽ. Flow bottom to top. Reproduced from Ref.
ÔÇá22ÔÇí.
Fig. 2
Schematic of the combustor facility with Mie measure-
ment window and optical probe
111502-2 / Vol. 132, NOVEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

45 deg swirler, which is located in the annulus between the cen-
terbody and nozzle wall. The theoretical swirl number, which is
0.85, is calculated from the relation 46
S = 2
3
1 Ôłĺdh/d3
1 Ôłĺdh/d2tan 
2
where dh and d are the diameters of centerbody and swirler, re-
spectively, and  is the swirler vane angle. The fuel is injected 150
cm upstream of the combustor to achieve a premixed condition.
The combustor consists of a 305 mm 12 in. long quartz tube,
with a 115 mm and 120 mm inner and outer diameter, respec-
tively. It rests in a circular groove in a base plate. An exhaust
nozzle has a 152 mm contraction section with the area ratio 0.44,
and a 102 mm long, 51 mm inner diameter chimney section.
The air and fuel ´Čéow rates are measured with a ´Čéowmeter and
mass ´Čéow controllers MFCs, respectively. Both the ´Čéowmeter
and MFCs were calibrated using the speci´Čüc gas with which they
were to meter. The maximum resultant uncertainty in ratios is
0.01ÔÇô0.02 for most of the cases. The largest uncertainty in  of
0.03 occurs with pure CH4. The air is choked before the mixing
section, and the premixed air/fuel is choked again inside the inlet
tube of the combustor not shown upstream of the swirler to
minimize the impact of perturbations in the combustor impacting
the fuel/air mixing process.
All experimental measurements were obtained at a constant
nozzle exit velocity of 33 m/s. Tests were performed at a combus-
tor pressure of 1.0 atm and 300 K reactants.
The Mie scattering test in the combustor was performed using
particle image velocimetry PIV facility. The system consists of a
dual head Nd:YAG laser, a high resolution charge coupled device
CCD camera, a mechanical shutter, and a centralized timing
generator. In addition a cyclone seeder was used to supply anhy-
drous aluminum oxide Al2O3 with an average particle size of
3 m.
Each laser head delivered a 5 mm 120 mJ/pulse beam at a
wavelength of 532 nm. The beams pass though an optical arrange-
ment for generation of a light sheet with desired height and thick-
ness. This arrangement consisted of a convex spherical f =1 m
and a convex cylindrical lens f =25.4 mm that resulted in a light
sheet 1 mm thin at the centre of the combustor. The CCD camera
captured the images of the illuminated particles at a resolution of
16001200 pixels corresponding to 5239 mm2 in frame
straddling mode. The duration between laser shots was set at
5 s. In addition the camera was also ´Čütted with a 532 nm laser
line ´Čülter with a FWHM of 3 nm to restrict any background noise.
For each image group two images, the ´Čürst image was used.
In addition, UV radiation from ´Čéames was monitored with an
optical ´Čüber bundle NA=0.44, with the head located 46 mm
above the dump plate of the combustor and 171 mm radially from
the combustor centerline, see Fig. 2. This volume was placed such
that light is collected from the lower one-third of the combustor,
in order to image the inner recirculation zone IRZ. The light
passes through an interference ´Čülter centered at 308 nm and with
a full-width-half-maximum FWHM of 10 nm, which corre-
sponds to the primary spectral region of OH emission. This ra-
diation was detected by a miniature metal package photomultiplier
tubes PMT Hamamatsu H5784-04. This PMT has a built-in
ampli´Čüer bandwidth of 20 kHz to convert the current to voltage
and operates from a 12 VDC source.
The signal output from the sensors was low pass ´Čültered by a
Krohn-Hite Model 3362 digital Butterworth ´Čülters and then fed
into a National Instruments A/D board. The sampling frequency
was 2 kHz. The low pass ´Čülter frequency for anti-aliasing was
set at half the sampling frequency, 1 kHz.
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Global Dynamics-Observation. The blowoff limits for
this combustor are indicated by the dashed red line in Fig. 6.
However, the ´Čéame becomes unsteady and exhibits transient be-
haviors before blowoff. This section presents typical results of
these ´Čéames under near blowoff conditions.
We ´Čürst present ÔÇťglobal,ÔÇŁ but time resolved characterization of
near blowoff dynamics. Figure 3 plots the OH chemiluminescence
signal from the optical probe see Fig. 2 at three equivalence
ratios approaching the blowoff value. There is clearly a signi´Čücant
change in characteristics of these time series as blowoff is
approached.
A detail of the time series for a near blowoff case is shown in
Fig. 4. The regions associated with a drop and rise in chemilumi-
nescence signal are referred to here as ÔÇťevents,ÔÇŁ which are inter-
preted as local extinction and/or convection of the ´Čéame down-
stream, followed by re-ignition and/or propagation of the ´Čéame
into the mass of unburned reactants, which accumulate due to the
´Čéame moving downstream. Following the method of Muruganan-
dam et al. 29, events are de´Čüned here as initiating at the point in
time where the intensity of the signal drops lower than some
threshold, and ending when the signal goes above a second higher
Fig. 3
Time series data of OH signal of CH4 ´Čéame at equiva-
lence ratios of 0.8 ÔÇ×topÔÇŽ, 0.62 ÔÇ×middleÔÇŽ, and 0.51 ÔÇ×bottomÔÇŽ, where
OHo
 denotes time average of OHÔÇ×tÔÇŽ
Fig. 4
Time series data of OH signal for methane ´Čéame at
equivalence ratio of 0.54
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 111502-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

valued threshold. This second threshold value is needed to elimi-
nate multiple counts of the same event that oscillates above and
below the same threshold. For these data, 0.3 and 0.5 of the
mean were used as the ´Čürst and second thresholds for local ex-
tinction. These distinctive extinction and re-ignition events span a
period from O1s to O0.001s, without any obvious periodicity
or frequency prior to blowoff. As the LBO limit is approached,
more of these events occur in a given time period and thus the
time between successive events decreases.
The average number and duration of events per unit time can be
quanti´Čüed for a given set of prescribed threshold values. Typical
results are shown in Fig. 5 as a function of equivalence ratio for
three CH4/H2 mixtures. The test was initiated under stable condi-
tions with the equivalence ratio decremented over steps of 0.01,
with 30 s of data taken at each point all the way to blowoff. These
sweeps were repeated three times and the results averaged. The
near zero value of the event count far from blowoff, the ÔÇťknee in
the curveÔÇŁ associated with the initiation of events, and the mono-
tonic rise in event count with further reduction in fuel/air ratio are
evident in the ´Čügure. Similar results are exhibited for three fuel
blends, with the higher hydrogen ones shifted towards lower
equivalence ratios, as expected 6, but the curves have similar
characteristics. The absolute value of equivalence ratio at which
events begin is a function of the speci´Čüc threshold values used to
´Čéag events, but does not change the trends shown in this ´Čügure.
An alternative way of plotting these data is indicated by the
dashed lines in Fig. 6. This ´Čügure plots lines of constant event
count as a function of equivalence ratio and percentage of H2 in
the fuel. These data illustrate that these lines are roughly parallel
to each other.
3.2
Global Dynamics-Discussion. This section describes an
analysis of the above data using computed chemical times. Three
chemical times were calculated: 1 the ÔÇťblowoff residence timeÔÇŁ
of a perfectly stirred reactor, PSR, i.e., the minimum residence
time for which non-negligible reaction progress occurs 2 un-
stretched laminar premixed ´Čéame time scale, given by the ratio of
the premixed ´Čéame thickness and ´Čéame speed, /SL
2. 3 inverse
of the extinction strain rate of an opposed ´Čéow, laminar premixed
´Čéame, ESR=1/ext, and the ´Čürst two times were determined using
CHEMKIN software tools PSR and PREMIX, respectively. Extinc-
tion strain rates were calculated using an arc-length continuation
method,
implemented
in
COSILAB
2.0
using
the
GRI
3.0
mechanism.
Referring back to Fig. 6, computations of extinction strain rate
were also performed for similar ranges of  and CH4/H2 ratios.
These calculations were interpolated and used to plot isolines of
extinction strain rates, indicated by the solid black lines. Since all
geometric and dimensions and ´Čéow velocities were ´Čüxed, these
lines also correspond to lines of constant global Damk├Âhler num-
ber, as will be discussed in the context of Fig. 7.
Signi´Čücantly, these data show that these iso-event count lines
are parallel to constant Damk├Âhler number lines, showing that
each Damk├Âhler number can be associated with a particular event
rate. De´Čüne the ´Čéow time in the Damk├Âhler number de´Čünition, see
Eq. 1, as D/Uo, where D indicates the diameter of the center-
body and U0 is the ´Čéow speed at nozzle exit. With this de´Čünition,
event counts of 1 events/s, 2 events/s, and 3 events/s correspond
to Da=0.5, 0.35, and 0.2, respectively.
Using these ideas, the data shown in Fig. 5 can be replotted by
replacing the x-axis with the calculated Damk├Âhler number, see
Fig. 7. This ´Čügure shows a very similar relationship between
Damk├Âhler number and event rate across the three different fuel
blends. Note that the lowest equivalence ratio data shown in Fig.
5 is not presented in Fig. 7 due to dif´Čüculties in obtaining con-
verged chemical time solutions at these points.
These data can also be used to support the argument that the
extinction strain rate, ext=1/ESR, as opposed to other kinetic
time scales, is the most physically meaningful in describing these
near blowoff dynamics. In many cases, different kinetic time
Fig. 5
Dependence of local extinction event frequency on
equivalence ratio of CH4/H2 ´Čéames
Fig. 6
Dependence of ext, blowoff limits, and event rate on
percentage of hydrogen and equivalence ratio. Contour lines of
extinction strain rate are indicated at 1400 1/s, 1200 1/s, 800 1/s,
400 1/s, and 200 1/s. These contours were estimated by calcu-
lating ext at 0/100%, 20/80%, 40/60%, 50/50%, and 75/25%
H2/CH4 mixtures with equivalence ratio steps of 0.02. Blowoff
limits and event information ÔÇ×dash linesÔÇŽ were collected for
0/100, 20/80, 50/50, and 75/25 H2/CH4 mixtures.
Fig. 7
Dependence of extinction event rate upon Damk├Âhler
number of CH4/H2 ´Čéames
111502-4 / Vol. 132, NOVEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

scales, such as those based on PSR or ignition times, are closely
related and, thus, give comparable Damk├Âhler scaling. However,
there are substantial variations in chemical time relationships for
CH4/H2 mixtures with H2 levels greater than about 20%, particu-
larly between extinction strain rate based time scales and un-
strained ´Čéame or PSR based time scales. Note that the latter is
purely a kinetic time scale, while the former two time scales also
depend on diffusive processes. Given the substantial difference in
diffusivity of the fuel relative to oxidizer with increasing H2 lev-
els, it then follows that appropriate choice of time scale becomes
increasingly important with high H2 fuels. To restate, systematic
differences between different kinetic time scales can be antici-
pated when comparing over a range of fuels with different diffu-
sivities. This point is born out in this data. Figure 8 compares
three calculated chemical times for near blowout conditions at
constant event rates for CH4/H2 ´Čéames. Again, nozzle velocity
and geometry were ´Čüxed so it is reasonable to presume relatively
constant ´Čéuid mechanic time scale. As such, the y-axis on this
graph is inversely proportional to the global Damk├Âhler number.
These data show that the extinction based kinetic scale is roughly
constant across the whole range of H2 levels, while the PSR and
´Čéame propagation based scales are not.
Further insight into these results can be obtained by distinguish-
ing between a global average Damk├Âhler number, Da, such as
used in plots in the Results section, and the actual instantaneous
Damk├Âhler number at the ´Čéame.1 The actual strain rate is a ´Čéuc-
tuating quantity with a mean and variance given by ┬» and 	k. For
a given Da and strain ´Čéuctuation amplitude and time scale, the
´Čéame sheet at a given point will be extinguished for some fraction
of time, 
. This is illustrated in Figure 9, which reproduces a plot
from Shanbhogue et al. 28. This ´Čügure plots a notional time
series of the instantaneous Da value at some position, as well as
the extinction value and time averaged value, Da. The vertical
highlighted stripes correspond to regions where the instantaneous
Da value falls below the extinction value. If Da is decreased e.g.,
by decreasing fuel/air ratio, the ´Čéame sheet is extinguished at this
point for a larger fraction of time, illustrated by comparing the top
and bottom ´Čügures. The fraction of time, which the ´Čéame is ex-
tinguished, will be denoted as 
Consider this extinction fraction, 
, in further detail. Figure 10
overlays a hypothetical probability density function of the ´Čéame
strain rate, with the extinction strain rate at a particular point
along the ´Čéame, s. For illustrative purposes, it is assumed that ext
is a single number, not a distribution itself and that extinction
occurs at points where the local strain rate, , exceeds the extinc-
tion strain rate, ext. The latter assumption assumes a quasilocal2
and quasisteady3 ´Čéamelet 47. The fraction of time that the ´Čéame
is extinguished is given by the hatched area under the curve. This
is given by the integral

s =
Ôłĺ
extÔłĺ
P,sd +
ext+

P,sd
3
where extÔłĺand ext+ denote the negative and positive extinction
strain rates. In order to see the form of the results, consider a
Gaussian probability density function PDF in general, not a
good representation of strain rate PDFs, but one that allows for
illustrative analytical treatment
P = exp Ôłĺ┬»2/2	k
2
2	k
2
4
Assuming equality of extÔłĺand ext+, setting ┬» =ref, integrating,
and rearranging the resulting expression to solve for the average
Damk├Âhler number, Da=ext/┬», leads to
Das = ext/┬» = 1 + 2	s
s erfÔłĺ11 Ôłĺ
s
5
Or equivalently, the local extinction fraction can be expressed in
terms of Da and 	/┬» as

s = 1 Ôłĺerf Das Ôłĺ1
2	s/┬»s
6
These expressions relate the fraction of the ´Čéame sheet that is
locally quenched for a given average Damk├Âhler number and
strain rate ´Čéuctuation. They nicely mirror the experimental data
shown earlier which show that each average Damk├Âhler number is
1Much of the discussion in this section closely follows arguments from Ref. 28,
made in the context of bluff body ´Čéames.
2This quasilocal treatment of the ´Čéame holes neglects the fact that once a ´Čéame
hole is initiated, it can advance into a region with a strain rate that is lower than ext,
as discussed earlier.
3This reasoning can also be generalized to the non quasisteady ´Čéamelet case. A
more general parameterization of ´Čéame extinction and strain rate is with functions of
the form ext= f,╦Ö ,┬Ę ,... and P,╦Ö ,┬Ę ,.... We will not carry through the details
of the calculation, but a similar integration can be performed.
Fig. 8
Comparison of three chemical time scales at fuel/air
ratios associated with event rate of 1 event/s
Fig.
9
Notional
description
of
time
variation
of
local
Damk├Âhler number at given point on ´Čéame sheet, illustrating
local extinction events at two average Damk├Âhler number val-
ues, Da, one farther ÔÇ×topÔÇŽ and closer ÔÇ×bottomÔÇŽ to blowoff
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 111502-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

associated with a given event count rate. Our bluff body blowoff
review suggested that from a fundamental point of view, the av-
erage Damk├Âhler number should not be considered as a blowoff
predictor, but rather a local extinction predictorÔÇöin particular,
that each Da value is associated with a certain probability/event
count of local extinction on the ´Čéame sheet.
3.3
Local Dynamics-Observations. We next consider more
ÔÇťlocalÔÇŁ characterization of these extinction processes. Mie scatter-
ing diagnostics were used to visualize a density-based boundary
between product and reactants. Such an approach is less direct and
spatio/temporally precise than, say CH PLIF or other reaction rate
measurements, but provides some indicator of where breaks in the
´Čéame exist. As long as the ´Čéame is suf´Čüciently removed from
blowoff, the raw image has two regions of high and low particle
density regions, which indicate the cold reactants and hot prod-
ucts, see Fig. 11. Holes in the ´Čéame are associated with regions of
signi´Čücantly lower gradient in seed density. The raw image is
´Čültered and processed in order to determine an edge between re-
gions of high and low particle density. A threshold level 40% is
selected by examining the probability density function of the in-
tensity gradients of a stable ´Čéame image. Flame holes are de´Čüned
as the broken area along the ´Čéame, where the gradient of particle
densities falls below the threshold, see Fig. 11. An instantaneous
isovorticity ´Čüeld is also plotted on the top of ´Čéame fronts. It shows
that each ´Čéame hole is associated with a region of high vorticity.
However, it should be pointed out that there is a time delay be-
tween ´Čéame extinction and when a hole is evident from the den-
sity. When local extinction occurs, the density will not change
immediately but over a molecular and turbulent diffusive time
scale.
Figure 12 quanti´Čües the spatial distribution of holes for a CH4
´Čéame. Out of 30 total images, the fraction of these that contained
a hole regardless of its size in the inner ´Čéame branch was deter-
mined at each axial location from y to y+y, where y=1 mm.
Interestingly, no holes are evident near the centerbody 2ÔÇô5 mm
downstream, even though this is the region of highest shear.
There are two possibilities for this. One is that holes are initiated,
but not yet evident in the Mie scattering intensity gradient, due to
the ´Čünite time required for the temperature to smooth out. The
second is that this is a region of product recirculation, which
causes ignition of this region in the near´Čüeld and which renders
the ´Čéame dif´Čücult to locally extinguish. Similar situations occur in
bluff body ´Čéames, where ´Čéame extinction usually initiates down-
stream and moves progressively closer to the bluff body as blow-
off is approached and opposite to nonpiloted jet ´Čéames which lift
off the burner before blowoff 28.
Moving downstream, the fraction of images with holes in-
creases monotonically in a roughly linear manner. Note that the
threshold used for ´Čéagging a hole does affect the location of the
inferred hole. However, changing the threshold value shifts the
linearly increasing region up or downstream downstream but not
the basic shape of this plot. Also shown is data for a 50/50
H2/CH4 ´Čéame, which shows similar behavior.
3.4
Local Dynamics-Discussion. These data show that ´Čéame
holes locations are not uniformly distributed along the ´ČéameÔÇö
rather they increase monotonically with downstream distance.
This behavior can be understood by noting that once a hole is
formed, it is convected downstream at the local tangential veloc-
ity. The size of these holes will change with downstream distance,
initially growing and then shrinking. However, if the time re-
quired for these holes to close is slow relative to the time in the
viewing
window
	20 mm/30 m/s=0.67 ms,
then
once
formed, the hole will persist. Denote the probability of initiation
of a hole per unit axial location and per unit time as p. If this
probability is spatially uniform i.e., equal likelihood of hole be-
ing initiated over entire viewing window, then the probability of
a hole being present at a given axial location, x, per unit axial
distance, Px, is simply
Fig. 10
Notional PDF of ´Čéame strain rate and extinction strain
rate at a particular point along the ´Čéame, s
Fig. 11
Flame front in raw Mie scattering images ÔÇ×top leftÔÇŽ;
Instantaneous isovorticity ´Čüeld and ´Čéame front ÔÇ×remaining im-
agesÔÇŽ of methane ´Čéame at equivalence ratio of 0.61
Fig. 12
Distribution of holes along the ´Čéame front for CH4 ÔÇ×ÔÇŽ
and 50/50 H2/CH4ÔÇ×OÔÇŽ ´Čéame at equivalence ratio of 0.62 and
0.43, respectively. Line denotes calculated result assuming
holes are generated uniformly and randomly along the ´Čéame
and propagate downstream with the speed of 30 m/s.
111502-6 / Vol. 132, NOVEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

Px = px/Ut
7
where Ut denotes the axial convection velocity of the hole. In
other words, this equation shows that a spatially uniform probabil-
ity of hole initiation implies a linearly increasing probability of a
hole being present with axial location, x. Thus, the slope of the
data shown in Figure 12 can be interpreted as the probability of
hole initiation. The dashed line in the data is a ´Čüt to these data
with a slope of p=0.7 hole initiation events/ms.
4
Concluding Remarks
We close this paper with some speculations regarding the pro-
cesses controlling swirling ´Čéames near blowoff. Many of these
comments are very similar to hypotheses raised in our bluff body
work 28. Lean blowoff occurs in at least two phases. The ´Čürst is
associated with spatiotemporally localized extinction events, lead-
ing to ´Čéame ÔÇťholes.ÔÇŁ Such a phenomenon is largely independent
of the recirculation zone dynamics. This study has shown that
H2/CH4 mixtures reach this limit at similar global Damk├Âhler
numbers. The actual blowoff event is a more complex phenom-
enon that also involves interactions between the inner recircula-
tion zone vortex breakdown bubble, outer recirculation zone of
the rapid expansion, and ´Čéame extinction/reignition phenomenon,
which are not well understood. Some appreciation for the com-
plexity of these ÔÇťStage 2ÔÇŁ dynamics can be gained by studying the
image sequences and discussion in the Ph.D. theses of Murugan-
dam 48 and Zhang 49.
It appears that classical Damk├Âhler number scalings based on
average quantities are correlations for the ´Čürst preblowoff stage
where holes in the ´Čéame occur. That is, from a fundamental point
of view, these global Damk├Âhler number correlations do not de-
scribe the ultimate blowoff condition itself, but rather the condi-
tion at which ´Čéame extinction begins to occur. Figure 6 shows that
these two limits are correlated: the lines representing these two
limits are almost parallel with each other. Global Damk├Âhler num-
ber scaling cannot describe, however, what is the critical I value,
Icrit, at which blowoff occurs; this critical value is likely in´Čéu-
enced by the recirculating phenomenon that provides a ÔÇťtorchÔÇŁ for
the near separation point region from which the ´Čéame then propa-
gates out from. As such, the ability of Da correlations to describe/
predict the actual blowoff condition is directly linked with the
extent to which the ultimate blowoff event is correlated with these
extinction events. Local extinction and global blowoff must be
related, e.g., ´Čéame holes appear under near blowoff conditions and
increase in frequency and duration as one gets closer to blowoff.
Moreover, given the fact that average Damk├Âhler number scalings
can reasonably collapse blowoff data also indicates that they are
related 44. The problem, however, lies in the fact that the ´Čéame
can withstand a certain amount of extinction, but not ÔÇťtoo much,ÔÇŁ
i.e., 0

crit. It is clear from data that the ´Čéame can withstand
some extinction, but that blowoff occurs well before the majority
of the ´Čéame sheet is extinguished. However, determination of
what constitutes this critical level of ´Čéamelet disruption and ex-
tinction is unclear at this point and is, we suggest, a key unsolved
problem remaining to understand the blowoff phenomenology.
Nomenclature
D, d  diameter
Da  Damk├Âhler number
S  swirl number
s  ´Čéame surface
SL  laminar ´Čéame speed
U  ´Čéow speed
P  probability of presenting a hole
p  probability of initiation a hole
x,y  coordinate
  thermal diffusivity
  strain rate
  swirl angle
	  variance
  time scale

  extinction fraction
Subscripts
chem  chemical
edge  ´Čéame edge
ESR  extinction strain rate
ext  extinction
´Čéow  based on ´Čéow
PSR  perfectly stirred reactor
res  residence
References
1 Lieuwen, T., McDonell, V., Santavicca, D., and Sattelmayer, T., 2008, ÔÇťFuel
Flexibility In´Čéuences on Premixed Combustor Blowout, Flashback, Autoigni-
tion, and Stability,ÔÇŁ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 130, p. 011506.
2 Richards, G. A., McMillian, M. M., Gemmen, R. S., and Cully, S. R., 2001,
ÔÇťIssues for Low Emission, Fuel Flexible Power Systems,ÔÇŁ Prog. Energy Com-
bust. Sci., 27, pp. 141ÔÇô169.
3 Hoffmann, S., Habisreuther, P., and Lenze, B., 1994, ÔÇťDevelopment and As-
sessment of Correlations for Predicting Stability Limits of Swirling Flames,ÔÇŁ
Chem. Eng. Process., 33, pp. 393ÔÇô400.
4 Glassman, I., 1996, Combustion, 3rd ed., Academic, San Diego, CA.
5 Plee, S. L., and Mellor, A. M., 1979, ÔÇťCharacteristic Time Correlation for Lean
Blow off of Bluff-Body Stabilized Flames,ÔÇŁ Combust. Flame, 35, pp. 61ÔÇô80.
6 Strakey, P., Sidwell, T., and Ontko, J., 2006, ÔÇťInvestigation of the Effects of
Hydrogen Addition on Lean Extinction in a Swirl Stabilized Combustor,ÔÇŁ
Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 3173ÔÇô3180.
7 Zukoski, E. E., and Marble, F. E., 1956, ÔÇťExperiments Concerning the Mecha-
nism of Flame Blowoff From Bluff Bodies,ÔÇŁ Proceedings of the Gas Dynamics
Symposium on Aerothermochemistry, pp. 205ÔÇô210.
8 Spalding, D. B., 1953, ÔÇťTheoretical Aspects of Flame Stabilization,ÔÇŁ Aircr.
Eng., 25, pp. 264ÔÇô276.
9 Longwell, J. P., 1952, ÔÇťFlame Stabilization by Bluff Bodies and Turbulent
Flames in Ducts,ÔÇŁ Proc. Combust. Inst., 4, pp. 90ÔÇô97.
10 Longwell, J. P., Chenevey, J. E., Clark, W. W., and Frost, E. E., 1948, ÔÇťFlame
Stabilization by Baf´Čées in a High Velocity Gas Stream,ÔÇŁ Proc. Combust. Inst.,
3, pp. 40ÔÇô44.
11 Bovina, T. A., 1959, ÔÇťStudies of Exchange Between Re-Circulation Zone Be-
hind the Flame-Holder and Outer Flow,ÔÇŁ Proc. Combust. Inst., 7, pp. 692ÔÇô
696.
12 Kundu, K. M., Banerjee, D., and Bhaduri, D., 1980, ÔÇťOn Flame Stabilization
by Bluff-Bodies,ÔÇŁ ASME J. Eng. Power, 102, pp. 209ÔÇô214.
13 Kundu, K. M., Banerjee, D., and Bhaduri, D., 1977, ÔÇťTheoretical Analysis on
Flame Stabilization by a Bluff-Body,ÔÇŁ Combust. Sci. Technol., 17, pp. 153ÔÇô
162.
14 Williams, G. C., Hottel, H. C., and Scurlock, A. C., 1951, ÔÇťFlame Stabilization
and Propagation in High Velocity Gas Streams,ÔÇŁ Proc. Combust. Inst., 3, pp.
21ÔÇô40.
15 Williams, F. A., 1966, ÔÇťFlame Stabilization of Premixed Turbulent Gases,ÔÇŁ
Applied Mechanics Surveys, Spartan Books, Washington, pp. 1157ÔÇô1170.
16 Zukoski, E. E., 1954, ÔÇťFlame Stabilization on Bluff Bodies at Low and Inter-
mediate Reynolds Numbers,ÔÇŁ Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena.
17 Zukoski, E. E., 1997, Afterburners, G. Oates, ed., Afterburners, AIAA, Reston,
VA.
18 Zukoski, E. E., and Marble, F. E., 1955, ÔÇťThe Role of Wake Transition in the
Process of Flame Stabilization on Bluff Bodies,ÔÇŁ AGARD Combustion Re-
searches and Reviews, Butterworth Scienti´Čüc Publishers, London, pp. 167ÔÇô
180.
19 Pan, J. C., and Ballal, D. R., 1992, ÔÇťChemistry and Turbulence Effects in Bluff
Body Stabilized Flames,ÔÇŁ 30th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit.
20 Yamaguchi, S., Ohiwa, N., and Hasegawa, T., 1985, ÔÇťStructure and Blow-Off
Mechanism of Rod-Stabilized Premixed Flame,ÔÇŁ Combust. Flame, 62, pp.
31ÔÇô41.
21 Driscoll, J., 2008, ÔÇťTurbulent Premixed Combustion: Flamelet Structure and
Its Effect on Turbulent Burning Velocities,ÔÇŁ Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 34,
pp. 91ÔÇô134.
22 Bellows, B., and Lieuwen, T., 2007, ÔÇťNonlinear Flame Transfer Function
Characteristics in a Swirl Stabilized Combustor,ÔÇŁ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power, 129, pp. 954ÔÇô961.
23 Law, C. K., 2006, Combustion Physics, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, England.
24 Poinsot, T., and Veynante, D., 2001, Theoretical and Numerical Combustion,
RT Edwards, Flourtown, PA.
25 Kobayashi, H., and Kitano, M., 1989, ÔÇťExtinction Characteristics of a
Stretched Cylindrical Premixed Flame,ÔÇŁ Combust. Flame, 76, pp. 285ÔÇô296.
26 Wang, P., Hu, S., Wehrmeyer, J., and Pitz, R., 2004, ÔÇťStretch and Curvature
Effects on Flames,ÔÇŁ 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit,
AIAA Paper No. 2004-148.
27 Chung, S. H., Chung, D. H., Fu, C., and Cho, P., 1996, ÔÇťLocal Extinction
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 111502-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

Karlovitz Number for Premixed Flames,ÔÇŁ Combust. Flame, 106, pp. 515ÔÇô520.
28 Shanbogue, S., Hussain, S., and Lieuwen, T., 2009, ÔÇťLean Blowoff of Bluff
Body Stabilized Flames: Scaling and Dynamics,ÔÇŁ Prog. Energy Combust. Sci.,
35, pp. 98ÔÇô120.
29 Muruganandam, T., Nair, S., Scarborough, D., Neumeier, Y., Jagoda, J., Lieu-
wen, T., Seitzman, J., and Zinn, B. T., 2005, ÔÇťActive Control of Lean Blowout
for Turbine Engine Combustors,ÔÇŁ J. Propul. Power, 21, pp. 807ÔÇô814.
30 Hertzberg, J. R., Shepherd, I. G., and Talbot, L., 1991, ÔÇťVortex Shedding
Behind Rod Stabilized Flames,ÔÇŁ Combust. Flame, 86, pp. 1ÔÇô11.
31 Yang, J. T., Yen, C. W., and Tsai, G. L., 1994, ÔÇťFlame Stabilization in the
Wake Flow Behind a Slit V-Gutter,ÔÇŁ Combust. Flame, 99, pp. 288ÔÇô294.
32 Kim, W., Lienau, J., van Slooten, P., Colket, M., Malecki, R., and Syed, S.,
2006, ÔÇťTowards Modeling Lean Blowout in Gas Turbine Flameholder Appli-
cations,ÔÇŁ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 128, pp. 40ÔÇô48.
33 Karlovitz, B., Denniston, D. W., Knapschaefer, D. H., and Wells, F. E., 1953,
ÔÇťStudies on Turbulent Flames,ÔÇŁ Proc. Combust. Inst., 4, pp. 613ÔÇô620.
34 Chen, J., and Im, H., 2000, ÔÇťStretch Effects on the Burning Velocity of Tur-
bulent Premixed Hydrogen/Air Flames,ÔÇŁ Proc. Combust. Inst., 28, pp. 211ÔÇô
218.
35 Kostiuk, L. W., Bray, K. N. C., and Cheng, R. K., 1993, ÔÇťExperimental Study
of Premixed Turbulent Combustion in Opposed Streams. Part IIÔÇöReacting
Flow Field and Extinction,ÔÇŁ Combust. Flame, 92, pp. 396ÔÇô409.
36 Bradley, D., Lauu, A. K. C., and Lawes, M., 1992, ÔÇťFlame Stretch Rate as a
Determinant of Turbulent Burning Velocity,ÔÇŁ Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London,
Ser. A, 338, pp. 359ÔÇô387.
37 Pantano, C., and Pullin, D. I., 2003, ÔÇťOn the Dynamics of the Collapse of a
Diffusion-Flame Hole,ÔÇŁ J. Fluid Mech., 480, pp. 311ÔÇô332.
38 Buckmaster, J., 1996, ÔÇťEdge-Flames and Their Stability,ÔÇŁ Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol., 115, pp. 41ÔÇô68.
39 Nayagam, V., Balasubramaniam, R., and Ronney, P. D., 1999, ÔÇťDiffusion
Flame-Holes,ÔÇŁ Combust. Theory Modell., 3, pp. 727ÔÇô742.
40 Brown, C. D., Watson, K. A., and Lyons, K. M., 1999, ÔÇťStudies on Lifted Jet
Flames in Co´Čéow: The Stabilization Mechanism in the Near-and Far-Fields,ÔÇŁ
Flow, Turbul. Combust., 62, pp. 249ÔÇô273.
41 Liu, J.-B., and Ronney, P. D., 1999, ÔÇťPremixed Edge Flames in Spatially
Varying Straining Flows,ÔÇŁ Combust. Sci. Technol., 144, pp. 21ÔÇô45.
42 Buckmaster, J. , 2002, ÔÇťEdge-Flames,ÔÇŁ Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 28, pp.
435ÔÇô475.
43 Nair, S., and Lieuwen, T., 2005, ÔÇťAcoustic Detection of Blowout in Premixed
Flames,ÔÇŁ J. Propul. Power, 21, pp. 32ÔÇô39.
44 Zhang, Q., Noble, D., Shanbogue, S., and Lieuwen, T., 2007, ÔÇťImpacts of
Hydrogen Addition on Near Lean Blowout Dynamics in a Swirling Combus-
tor,ÔÇŁ ASME Paper No. 2007-27308.
45 Williams, T. C., Schefer, R. W., Oefelein, J. C., and Shaddix, C. R., 2007,
ÔÇťIdealized Gas Turbine Combustor for Performance Research and Validation
of Large Eddy Simulations,ÔÇŁ Rev. Sci. Instrum., 78, p. 035114.
46 Beer, J., and Chigier, N., 1972, Combustion Aerodynamics, Wiley, New York.
47 Im, H., Bechtold, J., and Law, C. K., 1996, ÔÇťResponse of Counter´Čéow Pre-
mixed Flames to Oscillating Strain Rates,ÔÇŁ Combust. Flame, 105, pp. 358ÔÇô
372.
48 Muruganandam, T., 2006, ÔÇťSensing and Dynamics of Lean Blowout in a Swirl
Dump Combustor,ÔÇŁ Ph.D. thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.
49 Zhang, Q., 2008, ÔÇťLean Blowoff Characteristics of Swirling H2/CO/CH4
Flames,ÔÇŁ Ph.D. thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.
111502-8 / Vol. 132, NOVEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
