
--- Page 1 ---

Numerical study for enhancement of laminar ο§²ow mixing
using multiple conο§¹ned jets in a micro-can combustor
Peter L. Woodο§¹eld a,1, Kazuyoshi Nakabe b,2, Kenjiro Suzuki a,*
a Heat Transfer Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Kyoto University, 4-6-1 Komaba,
Meguro-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
b Applied Energy Science Laboratory, Department of Energy System Engineering, Osaka Prefecture University,
Sakai, Osaka 599-8531, Japan
Received 27 September 2002; received in revised form 28 November 2002
Abstract
To meet demands arising as a result of present trends towards miniaturization, an innovative design for promoting
mixing enhancement in a miniature can combustor is investigated using an unstructured ο§¹nite-volume technique. A
multi-holed baο§³e plate is employed to create a ring of oxidizer jets surrounding a single fuel jet in parallel with the axis
of the cylindrical chamber. The baο§³e plate is found to produce a dramatic improvement to the mixing performance
when compared with simpler co-axial jet cases. Relatively small changes in geometry are found to have a major in-
ο§²uence on mixing for laminar isothermal ο§²ow.
 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
As a result of the present global trend towards min-
iaturization, increasingly more attention is being given
to the behavior of ο§²ows at low Reynolds number [1βÄ™5].
For mini-scaled combustion systems one of the key is-
sues is the mixing of fuel and oxidizer streams or the
mixing of incoming reactants with high temperature
gases resident in the combustor. To realize a practical
device for this situation, it is necessary to ο§¹nd a method
for enhancing mixing within miniature chambers.
The challenge to rapidly mix or entrain ο§²uids at low
Reynolds number has been a source of innovation in the
open literature. It has been shown that crossing two
laminar jets at a small angle can aid mixing by invoking
a transition to turbulent ο§²ow and can hence improve the
performance of a miniature jet pump [6]. Directly op-
posed jets have been proposed for small combustors and
in the design of low Reynolds number mixers for reac-
tion injection molding (RIM) [7,8]. Acoustic excitation
of jets at low Reynolds number [6] oο§Äers another rela-
tively unexplored means of achieving higher mixing rates
by inducing an early transition to turbulent ο§²ow. In the
present study a new solution to this problem is presented
whereby convective mixing enhancement is achieved
through the introduction of a multi-holed baο§³e plate in
a cylindrical can combustor as shown in Fig. 1.
The present investigation is a part of a much larger
project to develop a combustor for a micro-gas turbine
(MGT) to be used within a distributed hybrid solid
oxide fuel-cell/MGT energy generation system [1]. Al-
though the authors primarily are interested in the per-
formance of the above design for turbulent ο§²ow at low
Re, this paper focuses on the laminar regime which may
be applicable during the start-up phase of the system
and for applications where size limitations necessitate
laminar ο§²ow (for example Ref. [2]). In addition, the
laminar study provides valuable insight into the con-
vective mixing process associated with this design with-
out the additional complication due to turbulence. The
present work extends the previous work of the authors
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +81-75-753-5250; fax: +81-75-
753-5851.
E-mail
addresses:
peter@htlab.mbox.media.kyoto-u.ac.jp
(P.L. Woodο§¹eld), nakabe@energy.osakafu-u.ac.jp (K. Nak-
abe), ksuzuki@mech.kyoto-u.ac.jp (K. Suzuki).
1 Tel.: +81-75-753-5218; fax: +81-75-753-5251.
2 Tel.: +81-72-254-9224 (oο§Ä.); fax: +81-72-254-9905 (admin.
oο§Ä.).
0017-9310/03/$ - see front matter  2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0017-9310(03)00014-0
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 2655βÄ™2663
www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhmt


--- Page 2 ---

[3] to include the region upstream of the baο§³e plate
within the calculation domain and to investigate more
thoroughly the mixing performance of the device for a
wider range of possible conο§¹gurations of the holes.
In order to separate the eο§Äects of chemical reaction
from those of convective mixing, but yet include the
mixing of two diο§Äerent chemical species, fuel and oxi-
dizer, the ο§²ow investigated is taken to be non-reacting,
isothermal and of constant density. This allows the
energy equation to be decoupled from the system.
Although only constant property cases are considered
in the present work, the mathematical and numerical
formulations allow for straight forward extension to
variable property problems.
2. Mathematical model
2.1. Governing equations
Eqs. (1) and (2) show unsteady mass and momentum
conservation equations for incompressible ο§²ow.
oΟΑqujΟû
oxj
¬Φ 0
ΟΑ1Οû
oΟΑquiΟû
ot
ΟΨ o
oxj
ΟΑqujuiΟû ¬Φ  op
oxi
ΟΨ o
oxj
l oui
oxj


ΟΑ2Οû
Eq. (3) represents species conservation where n is the
mass fraction of gas originating in the primary (fuel)
stream and rn is the Schmidt number, here taken to be
0.7.
oΟΑqnΟû
ot
ΟΨ o
oxj
ΟΑqujnΟû ¬Φ o
oxj
l
rn
on
oxj


ΟΑ3Οû
2.2. Generalized form
Using the divergence theorem, Eqs. (2) and (3) can be
expressed conveniently in integral form for an arbitrary
control volume as given in Eq. (4).
Z Z Z
Vol
oΟΑq/Οû
ot


dv ΟΨ
Z Z
Surf
ΟΑquj/njΟûds
¬Φ
Z Z
Surf
C o/
oxj
nj


ds ΟΨ
Z Z Z
Vol
ΟΑbΟΑ/ΟûΟûdv
ΟΑ4Οû
3. Numerical method
To accurately handle the complex geometry shown in
Fig. 1, a vertex-centered unstructured ο§¹nite-volume
method is employed to discretize Eq. (4) over the com-
putational domain. The computer code used in the
simulation was written by the ο§¹rst author and full details
of the method are given elsewhere [5]. For clarity of the
discussion the main features of the code are summarized
in the following.
Nomenclature
bΟΑ/Οû
source term
Bi
ith component of unit vector in direction IβÄ™
J in Fig. 2
c
mid-point of line IβÄ™J
D
diameter
Nu
Nusselt number
p
pressure
Re
Reynolds number, qUD=l
~SΟΑcΟû
vector representing all facets of the control
volume connected to point c
Si
ith component of the vector SΟΑCΟû
U
mean velocity over cross-section
ui
ith component of velocity
xi
Cartesian coordinate
X
locally rotated Cartesian coordinate aligned
with edge direction
x
Cartesian coordinate ΟΑ¬Φ x1Οû
y
Cartesian coordinate ΟΑ¬Φ x2Οû
z
Cartesian coordinate ΟΑ¬Φ x3Οû
Greek symbols
C
diο§Äusion coeο§Écient
DΟΑIJΟû
distance from point I to point J
l
dynamic viscosity
n
mixture fraction
q
density
r
Schmidt number
/
dependent variable
Fig. 1. Chosen design for investigation.
2656
P.L. Woodο§¹eld et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 2655βÄ™2663


--- Page 3 ---

3.1. Deο§¹nition of control volume for integration
The computational domain is constructed entirely of
hexahedrons with the unknowns being solved at the
vertices. The median dual of the hexahedral mesh deο§¹nes
the control volumes surrounding each vertex as is shown
for a typical case in Fig. 2.
The geometry shown in Fig. 2 is neatly summarized
in the computer program as a set of three component
vectors, assuming that the value of any variable or
property interpolated to the mid-point of a line con-
necting the grid point I to its neighbor J is represen-
tative for all facets of the control volume which have a
corner at c. Only one vector, ~SΟΑcΟû is required for each
edge as is shown for edge IβÄ™J in Fig. 2. ~SΟΑcΟû equals the
sum of the facet-area vectors for all facets of the control
volume which have a corner at c (where a facet-area
vector is deο§¹ned as a vector normal to the facet having a
magnitude equal to the area of the facet [5]).
3.2. Treatment of convection terms
The convection term in Eq. (4) is discretized as given
in Eq. (5) where for the control volume surrounding a
single point I, the summation includes all edges con-
necting I to neighboring points J.
Z Z
Surf
quj/nj ds 
X
NIneighbors
qjC/jC~ujC ~SΟΑCΟû
ΟΑ5Οû
To determine /jC in Eq. (5) both the value of / and its
gradient at the upstream end of the line IβÄ™J are used in
the interpolation. For example, if I is the upwind point,
/jC is given by Eq. (6) where uppercase X denotes the
direction IβÄ™J.
/jC ¬Φ /jI ΟΨ DΟΑIJΟû
2
	
o/
oX


I
ΟΑ6Οû
The gradient of / at the grid point I is approximated
using a numerical discretization of the divergence theo-
rem with a linear interpolation to the edge mid-point as
given in Eq. (7).
o/
oxi

I

1
VolΟΑIΟû
X
NIneighbors
1
2 ΟΑ/jI
 
ΟΨ /jJΟûSijC
!
ΟΑ7Οû
In this equation, SijC is the ith component of the
vector, ~SΟΑcΟû, shown in Fig. 2 and VolΟΑIΟû is the volume of
the control volume surrounding the point I.
In order to prevent non-physical grid related over-
shoots appearing in the solution as a result of the
second-order upwind interpolation, the criteria for pre-
serving boundedness given by Gaskell and Lau [9] are
implemented in the same manner as the previous work
of the authors [5]. Thus, to show that the slope has been
controlled by a limiter an over-bar is included in Eq. (6).
The remaining parameter to be determined in Eq. (5)
at c is the volumetric ο§²ow rate, ΟΑujSjΟûjC. To avoid
oddβÄ™even decoupling of the pressure ο§¹eld due to the co-
located grid, a variation of the pressure adjusted inter-
polation originally proposed by Rhie and Chow [10] is
employed in the present work.
3.3. Treatment of diο§Äusion terms
The diο§Äusion terms appearing in Eq. (4) are ap-
proximated using Eq. (8).
Z Z
Surf
C o/
oxj
nj


ds 
X
NIneighbors
CjC
o/
oxj

C
SjjC
ΟΑ8Οû
In Eq. (8) a linear interpolation is used for Cjc and the
gradient of / is determined using Eq. (9).
o/
oxi

C
 /jJ  /jI
DΟΑIJΟû
Bi ΟΨ 1
2
o/
oxi

I

ΟΨ o/
oxi

J

 1
2
o/
oxj


I
ΟΨ o/
oxj

J

BjBi
ΟΑ9Οû
3.4. Pressure and velocity coupling
To couple the momentum and continuity equations,
the pressure algorithm, SIMPLE [11], is adapted for the
co-located grid and whole system is solved iteratively.
Fig. 2. Three-dimensional median-dual control volume for a
typical grid point I (c is the mid-point of the line IβÄ™J; a and
b are face centers and d is the center of the hexahedron).
P.L. Woodο§¹eld et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 2655βÄ™2663
2657


--- Page 4 ---

4. Computational domain, grids and boundary conditions
Fig. 3 gives the details of the computational domain
and Table 1 the geometry and ο§²ow conditions for the
base case in this study. As can be seen in Table 1, the
domain extends one diameter upstream of the baο§³e
plate where uniform velocity proο§¹les are assumed. Non-
slip boundary condition is applied to all walls and sur-
faces of the baο§³e plate. A zero normal gradient
boundary condition is assumed at the exit which from
Table 1 is located 15 diameters downstream of the baο§³e
plate.
Reynolds number, ReD is based on the can diameter
and the mean velocity over the cross-sectional area
of the can. It should be emphasized that all cases con-
sidered have the same mass ratio of fuel and oxidizer
streams so that comparisons of the mixing ο§¹elds show
directly the performance of the baο§³e plate design. The
value of m1=m2 ¬Φ 0:0488 was chosen to approximately
correspond to a methane/air combustor operating with
about 18% excess air.
The computational grid for the base case is shown in
Fig. 4. As can be seen, the ο§²exibility of the unstructured
method allows very accurate representation of the
complex geometry. The adopted computational domain
includes the whole of the full 360 in the peripheral
direction. This provides a check on the symmetry and
allows for the possibility that the ο§²ow may become
asymmetrically unsteady. Control volumes are allocated
ο§¹nely on the edges of the jets and in the close vicinity of
the baο§³e plate. Using ο§¹ner grid spacing than that shown
in Fig. 4 was found to produce little change to predicted
ο§²ow and mixing patterns indicating low grid dependency
for the cases considered in the present study.
5. Overall eο§Äect of baο§³e plate
To assess the overall performance of the design, it is
useful to compare the present geometry with the much
simpler co-axial jet case where no baο§³e plate is used.
Fig. 5a and b show the mixture fraction distribution for
these two cases where ReD ¬Φ 100 (cf. Table 1). In Fig. 5a
it is apparent that the downstream end of the mixture
fraction iso-surface n ¬Φ 0:055 is less than one can di-
ameter from the baο§³e plate. This is a remarkable im-
provement on the co-axial jet case where the tip of this
surface is over four diameters downstream of the inlet
for the same ο§²ow rates of fuel and oxidizer.
The reason for this dramatic improvement to the
mixing performance can be established by examining the
ο§²ow ο§¹elds for the two cases. Fig. 6 gives three-dimen-
sional representations of the ο§²ow ο§¹elds together with the
mixture fraction iso-surfaces for the cases shown in Fig.
5a and b. Outer surfaces of the cylindrical sections given
in Fig. 6 show the results at r=D ¬Φ 0:47 and the front
surface illustrates a slice of the domain at a position just
downstream of the baο§³e plate where z=D ¬Φ 0:15.
Fig. 6a shows the very complex nature of the ο§²ow
ο§¹eld in the baο§³e plate case. A large region of reverse
ο§²ow appears in the center of the can in front of the fuel
jet. This produces a stagnation point immediately in
front of the fuel inlet and forces the fuel stream to ο§²ow
outwards in the positive radial direction. In particular it
is apparent that the fuel stream ο§²ows into the regions
Fig. 3. Details of computational domain and location of Car-
tesian frame of reference.
Table 1
Flow conditions and geometry of computational domain for base case
d1=D
d2=D
R2=D
bth=D
d3=D
L=D
Lup=D
ReD
m1=m2
Inlet-proο§¹les
0.182
0.182
0.341
0.05
0.282
15
1
100
0.0488
Flat
Fig. 4. Computational grid on the boundary of the domain
from the upstream side of the baο§³e plate (base case).
2658
P.L. Woodο§¹eld et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 2655βÄ™2663


--- Page 5 ---

between neighboring oxidizer jets. The complex ο§²ow
structure promotes rapid mixing as can be seen by the
close proximity of the mixture fraction contours to the
combustion chamber inlet. In contrast, the ο§²ow ο§¹eld for
the co-axial case in Fig. 6b is relatively simple with no
recirculation and very little change in the radial com-
ponents of the velocity vectors. Thus in the co-axial case,
mixing of fuel and oxidizer streams is dominated by the
time scale for molecular diο§Äusion with little enhance-
ment due to the convective ο§¹eld.
6. Eο§Äect of fuel jet diameter
From a close examination of Fig. 6 one might expect
that if the velocity of the fuel stream is increased, the
region of reverse ο§²ow in the center of the can may be-
come less dominant and thus alter the convective en-
hancement to the mixing process. To examine this
possibility and yet maintain the same ο§²ow rate of fuel
and oxidizer, we have reduced the diameter of the fuel
jet whilst keeping all other parameters constant. Fig. 5a,
c and d show calculated mixture fraction ο§¹elds for three
diο§Äerent diameters of the fuel tube. Clearly, as the dia-
meter is decreased, the enhancement to mixing is di-
minished. In fact in the case of a very small diameter,
Fig. 5d, the overall mixing pattern is not much of an
improvement on the co-axial jet case shown in Fig. 5b.
Fig. 7 gives velocity vectors for the three diο§Äerent fuel
jet diameters. The solid lines in Fig. 7 represent the
mixture fraction surface n ¬Φ 0:055. In Fig. 7a (the base
case) the ο§²ow ο§¹eld is highly recirculating with a large
region of reverse ο§²ow in the center of the can as men-
tioned above. The stagnation point in front of the fuel
jet moves further downstream in Fig. 7b and the velocity
of the reverse ο§²ow diminishes. In Fig. 7c the stagnation
point has disappeared altogether. There is still some
reverse ο§²ow between the jets in Fig. 7c in order to satisfy
the entrainment appetite of the jets. However this minor
recirculation appears to do little towards enhancing the
mixing as is evident in Fig. 5d. The ratios of fuel velocity
to mean oxidizer velocity through the holes are 0.293,
Fig. 5. Mixture fraction distributions for various conο§¹gura-
tions of the baο§³e plate (x ¬Φ 0 plane).
Fig. 6. Overall performance of baο§³e plate. Velocity vectors and mixture fraction contours.
P.L. Woodο§¹eld et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 2655βÄ™2663
2659


--- Page 6 ---

1.17 and 2.08 for Fig. 7a, b and c, respectively. Hence we
can observe that the stagnation point in front of the fuel
jet moves further downstream as the fuel velocity ap-
proaches the oxidizer jet velocity and this point disap-
pears for the case where the fuel velocity has exceeded
twice the oxidizer jet velocity.
From Figs. 7 and 5a, c and d we can conclude two
things. Firstly, in terms of mixing enhancement it is
valuable to have a low velocity fuel jet in comparison to
the oxidizer jet velocity. Hence it is desirable to have a
large diameter fuel injection tube at the inlet to the
combustor. Secondly, the stagnation point and strong
recirculation region in the center of the can shown in
Fig. 7a are valuable ο§²ow features for convective mixing
enhancement.
7. Eο§Äect of oxidizer hole diameter
Having considered the eο§Äect of the fuel jet diameter,
an alternative method for adjusting the velocity ratio of
fuel and oxidizer streams is to change the diameters of
the holes in the baο§³e plate for the same total ο§²ow rate
and a ο§¹xed fuel jet diameter. Fig. 8 shows the resulting
ο§²ow and mixing patterns for both larger (a) and smaller
(b) hole diameters. For the larger hole diameter, the
velocity through the holes is greatly reduced and so is
the reverse-ο§²ow velocity in the center of the can. The
extent of the recirculation region also is reduced signif-
icantly in comparison with Fig. 7a. The stagnation point
in front of the fuel jet is a little further downstream in
Fig. 8a relative to the base case, but not as far down-
stream as that in Fig. 7b. This might be expected as the
velocity ratio of fuel to oxidizer jets is 0.46 in Fig. 8a
which is greater than that for Fig. 7a (0.29) but less than
that for Fig. 7b (1.17).
Conversely, reducing the oxidizer hole diameters
produces an increase in the velocities and an expansion
of the reverse-ο§²ow region as shown in Fig. 8b. The
mixture fraction contour in Fig. 8b comes to an almost
rectangular shape at z=D ¬Φ 0:15 just in front of the fuel
jet indicating very abrupt changes in gas composition. In
comparison with Fig. 7a, it appears that more fuel has
been forced out into the region between the oxidizer jets
Fig. 7. Velocity vectors for diο§Äerent fuel jet diameters (x ¬Φ 0
plane). The solid line represents the mixture fraction iso-surface
n ¬Φ 0:055.
Fig. 8. Eο§Äect of: (a) enlarging and (b) reducing the oxidizer
hole diameters whilst maintaining the same total ο§²ow rates of
fuel and oxidizer (x ¬Φ 0 plane). The solid line represents the
mixture fraction contour n ¬Φ 0:055.
2660
P.L. Woodο§¹eld et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 2655βÄ™2663


--- Page 7 ---

and the wall of the combustor. This is apparent as the
mixture fraction contour at the wall extends to about
z=D ¬Φ 0:9 in Fig. 8b and to z=D ¬Φ 0:4 in Fig. 7a. The
tendency in Fig. 8b to push too much fuel into the near-
wall region indicates that for rapid mixing there is an
optimum velocity ratio for the fuel and oxidizer streams.
We may expect from the cases considered in this present
work that this ratio will fall between cases (b) 0.165 and
(a) 0.457 in Fig. 8 and is probably close to that of the
base case (Fig. 7a). In summary, the overall mixing
performance appears to be similar or slightly better in
the base case (Fig. 7a) than in either of the cases shown
in Fig. 8.
8. Eο§Äect of oxidizer hole radial position
A further parameter that requires examination is the
eο§Äect of the radial location of the holes in the plate. Fig.
5e shows the eο§Äect on the mixing ο§¹eld of moving the
holes a little closer to the center. Again this relatively
small change in the geometry produces a surprisingly
large change in the mixing pattern.
The reason for the vast diο§Äerence between cases (a)
and (e) in Fig. 5 again can be established through an
examination of the ο§²ow ο§¹elds. Fig. 9 shows velocity
vectors in a plane cut between neighboring oxidizer jets.
The ο§²ow structure for the two cases is considerably
diο§Äerent. In Fig. 9a, which shows the base case, there is a
very large region of reverse ο§²ow in the center of the can
compared with the tiny region appearing at about
z=D ¬Φ 0:5 in Fig. 9b. The fact that neighboring jets are
closer together in case b is evidenced by the much higher
velocities in the regions around x=D ¬Φ 
0:2 from
z=D ¬Φ 0:5 to 1.5. Also there is a pair of counter rotating
recirculation regions having eyes positioned 0.2 diame-
ters downstream of the baο§³e plate and at x=D ¬Φ 
0:3 in
Fig. 9a. In Fig. 9b these structures are not present and a
pair of recirculating structures that are rotating in the
opposite direction appear near the combustion chamber
wall. As a result of this diο§Äerence we can see in Fig. 9a
the fuel stream ο§²ows directly into the region between the
oxidizer jets whereas in Fig. 9b the velocity in this region
is in the negative radial direction, thus inhibiting the
convective enhancement to mixing. As an overall ob-
servation from Fig. 9 we can conclude that the en-
trainment appetite of the oxidizer jets is satisο§¹ed largely
from fuel rich ο§²uid in the center of the can in Fig. 9a but
from leaner ο§²uid in the region nearer the wall in Fig. 9b.
Thus it is advantageous to place the holes in the baο§³e
plate nearer the wall for mixing enhancement in the
laminar regime.
9. Eο§Äect of Reynolds number
As one may wish to operate the combustor for a
range of ο§²ow rates with a similar fuel/oxidizer ratio, it is
constructive to consider the eο§Äects of Reynolds number
based on the diameter of the can and the mean velocity
over the full cross-sectional area of the can.
Many laminar ο§²ow ο§¹elds such as sudden expansion
duct ο§²ow [12], backward facing step ο§²ow [13] and lam-
inar free jets [14] expand almost linearly in the stream-
wise direction in proportion to an increase in Reynolds
number. The same is found true for laminar conο§¹ned co-
axial jets as can be seen by comparing the mixture
fraction ο§¹elds shown in Figs. 10a, b and 5b. Thus gen-
erally the laminar mixing problem also increases in
proportion to Reynolds number until a transition to
unsteady or turbulent ο§²ow is achieved.
Fig. 10c and d show the mixture fraction ο§¹elds for the
baο§³e plate case for an increase from Re ¬Φ 50 to 200
whilst maintaining a ο§¹xed fuel/oxidizer ratio. For both
cases the mixing is greatly enhanced in comparison with
Fig. 9. Flow and mixing patterns for diο§Äerent radial positions
of holes (y ¬Φ 0 plane). The solid line represents the mixture
fraction contour n ¬Φ 0:055.
P.L. Woodο§¹eld et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 2655βÄ™2663
2661


--- Page 8 ---

the cases without the baο§³e plate shown in Fig. 10a and
b. Clearly from Fig. 10, while the mixing ο§¹eld expands
linearly with Reynolds number in the axial direction for
the co-axial jet cases, the same is not true for the baο§³e
plate cases.
Fig. 11 shows the ο§²ow and mixing patterns for the
present geometry at Reynolds numbers of 50 and 200 in
the x ¬Φ 0 plane. Comparing Fig. 11a with Fig. 11b, in-
creasing Reynolds number from 50 to 200 does in fact
produce a general expansion of the ο§²ow ο§¹eld in the axial
direction. However, in contrast to the co-axial jet case,
not all features expand directly in proportion to Re over
this range. In particular, the stagnation point in front of
the fuel jet is located at a similar axial position for
Re ¬Φ 50 (Fig. 11a), Re ¬Φ 100 (Fig. 9a) and Re ¬Φ 200
(Fig. 11b). Also, the mixture fraction contour n ¬Φ 0:055
at the center of the can moves closer to the baο§³e plate as
Reynolds number is increased. On the other hand, the
downstream stagnation point at around z=D ¬Φ 1:25 in
Fig. 9a appears at z=D ¬Φ 0:7 in Fig. 11a and at
z=D ¬Φ 2:3 in Fig. 11b. Also the point where the mixture
fraction contour n ¬Φ 0:055 touches the wall moves up or
downstream roughly in proportion to Reynolds number
comparing Fig. 11a and b with Fig. 9a.
The diο§Äerences between the co-axial case and the
baο§³e plate case can be explained by a consideration of
the meaning of Reynolds number. Reynolds number
gives a measure of the importance of convection or
inertial terms with respect to diο§Äusion terms. In the case
of the co-axial jet, cross-stream transport is dominated
by diο§Äusion and stream-wise transport by convection.
Thus Reynolds number for the co-axial jet case gives a
measure of the ratio of stream-wise transport with re-
spect to cross-stream transport. In such a case it is easy
to see that an increase in Reynolds number will produce
a corresponding increase in the length of the ο§²ow ο§¹eld
in the stream-wise direction. In the baο§³e plate case
however, particularly in the vicinity of the stagnation
point and near the tight recirculation zones, transport
in the radial direction is clearly a combination of both
convection and diο§Äusion. Moreover, due to the steep
gradients appearing in the axial direction, transport by
diο§Äusion in the axial direction will also play a role.
Thus Reynolds number is no longer a clear cut measure
of the ratio of axial transport with respect to radial
transport and the proportional expansion of the ο§²ow
ο§¹eld with Re is not so obviously apparent in the baο§³e
plate case. As a result, the mixing performance of the
present design is less sensitive to an increase in Re from
50 to 200 than what is observed of the corresponding
co-axial jet case.
10. Conclusions and closing remarks
The main ο§¹ndings and conclusions of this present
work on the chosen geometry with isothermal, constant
density ο§²ow can be summarized as follows.
1. The baο§³e plate can produce a dramatic improvement
to mixing when compared with the co-axial jet case.
2. Relatively small changes in the geometry of the baο§³e
plate can have a major eο§Äect on the mixing perfor-
mance of the design for laminar jets.
Fig. 10. Eο§Äect of Reynolds numberβÄ™βÄ™Mixture fraction ο§¹elds
(x ¬Φ 0 plane)
Fig. 11. Eο§Äect of Reynolds number based on the can diameter
and mean velocity over cross-section; (y ¬Φ 0 plane). The solid
line represents the mixture fraction contour n ¬Φ 0:055.
2662
P.L. Woodο§¹eld et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 2655βÄ™2663


--- Page 9 ---

3. To promote mixing it is desirable to reduce the veloc-
ity of the fuel stream by enlarging the diameter of the
fuel jet or increase the oxidizer jet velocity by decreas-
ing the diameters of the holes in the baο§³e plate.
4. The velocity ratio of fuel and oxidizer streams at the
baο§³e plate appears to be an important consideration
in characterizing the ο§²ow ο§¹eld.
5. To promote convective enhancement of mixing for
the laminar conditions considered, it is advantageous
to place the holes in the baο§³e plate nearer the wall of
the combustion chamber.
6. For the range of Reynolds number from 50 to 200,
the multi-hole baο§³e plate design was found less sen-
sitive to an increase in Re than a conο§¹ned co-axial jet
with the same ο§²ow ratio of fuel and oxidizer.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported through the project βÄ‰βÄ‰Micro
Gas Turbine/Fuel Cell Hybrid-Type Distributed Energy
SystemβÄôβÄô by the Japan Science and Technology Corpo-
ration (JST) as Core Research of Evolutional Science
and Technology (CREST). The support of the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) for the ο§¹rst
author also is gratefully acknowledged.
References
[1] K. Suzuki, J.H. Kim, K. Teshima, Solid oxide fuel cell and
micro gas turbine hybrid cycle for a distributed energy
generation system, Key-note, in: Proceedings of the Fourth
KSME-JSME Thermal Engineering Conference 3, Kobe,
Japan, 2000, pp. 1βÄ™7.
[2] I.A. Waitz, G. Gauba, Y. Tzeng, Combustors for micro-
gas turbine engines, Trans. ASME, J. Fluids Eng. 120
(1998) 109βÄ™117.
[3] P.L. Woodο§¹eld, K. Nakabe, K. Suzuki, The eο§Äect of three-
dimensional recirculation ο§²ow structures on ο§²ow mixing of
micro-scaled conο§¹ned jets, in: Proceedings of the 13th
International Symposium Transport Phenomena, Elsevier,
Victoria, Canada, 2002, pp. 381βÄ™386.
[4] T.A. Ameel, R.O. Warrington, R.S. Wegeng, M.K. Drost,
Miniaturization technologies applied to energy systems,
Energy Convers. Manage. 38 (1997) 969βÄ™982.
[5] P.L. Woodο§¹eld, K. Nakabe, K. Suzuki, Performance of a
three-dimensional pressure-based unstructured ο§¹nite-vol-
ume method for low Reynolds number ο§²ow and wall heat
transfer rate prediction, Numer. Heat Transfer, Part B, in
press.
[6] D.K. Milojevic, W. Schneider, Free and conο§¹ned jets at
low Reynolds numbers, Fluid Dynam. Res. 12 (1993) 307βÄ™
322.
[7] S.M. Hosseinalipour, A.S. Mujumdar, Flow and thermal
characteristics of steady two dimensional conο§¹ned laminar
opposing jets: Part 1. Equal jets, Int. Commun. Heat Mass
Transfer 24 (1) (1997) 27βÄ™38.
[8] D.A. Johnson, Experimental and numerical examination
of conο§¹ned laminar opposed jets, Part 1: Momentum
imbalance, Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer 27 (4) (2000)
443βÄ™454.
[9] P.H. Gaskell, A.K.C. Lau, Curvature-compensate convec-
tive transport: SMART, a new boundedness-preserving
transport transport algorithm, Int. J. Numer. Meth. Fluids
8 (1988) 617βÄ™641.
[10] C.M. Rhie, W.L. Chow, Numerical study of the turbulent
ο§²ow past an airfoil with trailing edge separation, AIAA J.
21 (11) (1983) 1525βÄ™1532.
[11] S.V. Patankar, Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow,
Hemisphere Publishing Corporation, 1980.
[12] E.O. Macagno, T. Hung, Computational and experimental
study of a captive annular eddy, J. Fluid Mech. 28 (1967)
43βÄ™64.
[13] B.F. Armaly, F. Durst, J.C.F. Pereira, B. Schonung,
Experimental and theoretical investigation of backward-
facing step ο§²ow, J. Fluid Mech. 127 (1983) 473βÄ™496.
[14] S.I. Pai, T. Hsieh, Numerical solution of laminar jet mixing
with and without free stream, Appl. Sci. Res. (The Hague)
27 (1) (1972) 39βÄ™62.
P.L. Woodο§¹eld et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003) 2655βÄ™2663
2663
