
--- Page 1 ---

1393
Twenty-Seventh Symposium (International) on Combustion/The Combustion Institute, 1998/pp. 1393–1399
NyOx FORMATION IN LEAN PREMIXED COMBUSTION OF METHANE IN A
HIGH-PRESSURE JET-STIRRED REACTOR
KARIN U. M. BENGTSSON,1 PETER BENZ,1 ROLF SCHA¨ REN1 and CHRISTOS E. FROUZAKIS2
1Paul Scherrer Institute
Villigen PSI, Switzerland
2Institute for Energy Technology
ETH, Zu¨rich, Switzerland
A novel high-pressure jet-stirred reactor (JSR) has been used to study the formation of NOx, N2O, and
CO in lean premixed combustion of methane-air mixtures at pressures up to 20 bars. Experiments were
carried out at residence times of 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 ms, at an equivalence ratio of 0.55 and at temperatures
of 1510 and 1550 8C. The measured NOx concentrations show a distinct negative trend with increasing
pressure and clearly decrease with decreasing residence times at pressures ,5 bars. At higher pressures,
the inﬂuence of residence time is diminished. The NOx and N2O concentrations are slightly lower than
the predictions of a perfectly stirred reactor (PSR) using four well-known reaction mechanisms of the
system. However, the measured CO levels are considerably lower than the PSR predictions.
C-H-O-N
This is mainly attributed to spatial inhomogeneities of the JSR, conﬁrmed by measured temperature and
concentration proﬁles at atmospheric conditions. To take these effects into account, the JSR was modeled
as a series of two PSRs and one PFR (plug ﬂow reactor). This model predicts the measured NOx, N2O,
and CO concentrations well with all but one reaction mechanism; for NOx concentrations, signiﬁcant
deviations occur between measurements and predictions using the Miller–Bowman mechanism. The in-
ﬂuence of ﬁnite-rate micromixing was studied by computations of a partially stirred reactor (PaSR), which
show a minor inﬂuence on NOx and CO levels; for the CO concentrations, these effects are negligible
compared to the macromixing effects.
Introduction
Lean premixed combustion is presently the best-
known technique for reduction of NOx emissions in
stationary gas turbines. To meet the future emission
restrictions of NOx and CO without compromising
efﬁciency, stability, or loading capacity, improve-
ments of present combustion techniques are re-
quired. Further reduction of NOx emissions can be
obtained by improving premixing and by optimizing
the combustion process. This requires better under-
standing on NOx formation at gas turbine relevant
conditions, that is, pressures up to 30 bars and adi-
abatic ﬂame temperatures and inlet temperatures of
about 1600 and 400 8C, respectively. At these con-
ditions, few experimental data are available in the
literature, and the aim of this work is to ﬁll this gap
and to investigate the NOx pressure dependence. In
addition, chemical mechanisms are far from agree-
ing in NOx tendencies with pressure [1].
In gas turbines, most of the NOx is formed in the
primary stabilization zone, characterized by shear
layers and high turbulence. This zone can be simu-
lated by a jet-stirred reactor (JSR), as their ﬂow ﬁelds
show great similarities. The JSR is aimed to provide
mixing times shorter than the chemical times (Dam-
ko¨hler (Da) numbers K 1), that is, conditions re-
sembling a PSR (perfectly stirred reactor). For at-
mospheric combustion at high temperatures ($1500
8C), such mixing conditions have been achieved in
former JSR designs [2]; however, as the chemical
times decrease with increasing pressure, shorter
mixing times are required for high-pressure experi-
ments. This work presents experimental data up to
20 bars from a novel JSR design, aimed to provide
low Da numbers and a distributed reaction zone at
elevated pressures. High-pressure NOx formation
data have been reported in practical burners [3,4]
and perforated plate burners [5,6]; to our knowl-
edge, the NOx measurements of the present work
are the ﬁrst ones at gas turbine relevant conditions
in a JSR at pressures above 7 bars [7,8].
Concentrations of NOx, N2O, and CO as well as
temperatures were measured at pressures up to 20
bars and residence times of 1.0, 1.5, and 2 ms, at
reactor temperatures of 1510 and 1555 8C and an
equivalence ratio f of 0.55. The measurements were
compared to PSR model predictions and to a reactor
model composed of 2 PSRs and one plug ﬂow re-
actor (PFR) in series, the latter simulating the spatial
inhomogeneities of the JSR. The chemical modeling
included four well-known complete chemical reac-
tion mechanisms of the C-H-O-N system.
Due to the increase in Da numbers with increas-
ing pressure and residence time, deviations from the
PSR behavior are expected. To take the effect of


--- Page 2 ---

1394
NOx FORMATION AND CONTROL
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of the test rig and (b) details of
the JSR geometry. All dimensions in millimeters. T1, T2,
T3: thermocouples; G: gas probe.
ﬁnite-rate micromixing into account, predictions
were made with a stochastic model for a partially
stirred reactor (PaSR), where turbulent mixing is ac-
counted for by the Curl’s model [9].
Experimental Setup
A schematic of the test rig and the geometry of
the JSR is shown in Fig. 1. The high-pressure vessel,
designed for 64 bars, contains a stainless steel liner,
enclosing the combustion chamber. The incoming
air is ﬁrst electrically preheated with two 10-kW
heaters, then fuel is added in the air stream and
mixed in a static mixer. The premixed gas is injected
into the 19-cm3-volume JSR through 20 nozzles with
a diameter of 0.6 mm and a radial angle of 128. The
JSR has three 8-mm-diameter exits at a radius of 7.5
mm from the axis of symmetry. The nozzle angle and
the exit locations were optimized by tracer experi-
ments in a scale-up water model. The JSR is cast of
zirconium oxide and is placed in the liner, which is
ﬁlled with an aluminum oxide ﬁber material with
very low heat conductivity, enabling adiabatic con-
ditions; the wall and mean gas temperatures differ
by less than 20 8C.
The nozzles are distributed over the JSR circum-
ference, perpendicular to the axis of symmetry, and
are connected to a mixture supply ring. Similar an-
gled nozzle conﬁgurations have been used in earlier
JSRs [2] inducing a jet-in-cross-ﬂow mixing, creating
large shear forces and high turbulence. The injection
velocity is sonic at a residence time of 2.5 ms and
350 8C inlet temperature; at shorter residence times,
the nozzle exit pressure exceeds the reactor pres-
sure, causing free jet expansion. Due to the large
pressure drop over the nozzles, the reactor pressure
is limited to 20 bars at a residence time of 2.0 ms;
at 1.5 ms and 1.0 ms residence times, the pressure
limit is 15 and 10 bars, respectively.
The air and fuel are regulated by two Bronkhost
mass-ﬂow controllers, and the pressure is controlled
by a pneumatic valve. The reactor temperature, res-
idence time, and pressure are changed by ramping
the inlet temperature, total mass ﬂow, and pressure.
The gas temperatures are measured by three S-
type thermocouples, coated with a thin layer of alu-
minum oxide (Al2O3). One is positioned inside the
JSR and the others at two of the exit tubes, 25 mm
downstream the JSR exit (see Fig. 1b). The average
of the exit temperatures is taken as the mean JSR
temperature. Gas samples were withdrawn using a
water-cooled stainless steel probe located 25 mm
downstream of the JSR exit. Good quenching was
established in the entire pressure range by installing
a pump between the probe and the gas analyzers at
low pressures and using probes with different oriﬁce
diameters; at pressures #5 bars, a 0.9-mm-diameter
and at higher pressures a 0.6-mm-diameter oriﬁce
was used. The probe gas was fed through a heated
sampling line to prevent condensation of water va-
por. NOx, CO, CO2, and O2 were measured on line
with the following analyzers: NOx: Tecan CLD 700
EL, CO and CO2: Siemens Ultramat 5, NDIR and
O2: Siemens Oximat, paramagnetic. The N2O sam-
ples were analyzed discontinuously with a GC Perkin
Elmer, type 8700 equipped with ECD detector. The
presented concentrations are in terms of parts per
million on a wet and actual O2 basis. The presented
temperatures and concentrations are mean values of
data collected at steady state over a time period of
at least 2.5 min. The temperatures have not been
corrected for radiation, as its inﬂuence is estimated
to be 0.5 K. The steady-state temperatures vary
510–15 8C and the NOx and CO concentrations
5,5%. These ﬂuctuations are attributed to small
variations in the air ﬂow causing ﬂuctuations in the
equivalence ratio. The estimated error in N2O is
10% for concentrations of about 1 ppm.
Experimental Results
Experiments were made at pressures ranging from
1 to 20 bars, at residence times of 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0
ms and at f 4 0.55. At pressures less than 5 bars,
the temperature was 1510 8C, close to the maximum


--- Page 3 ---

NyOx FORMATION IN HIGH-PRESSURE JET-STIRRED REACTOR
1395
Fig. 2. Measured NOx and N2O concentrations in a JSR
at three residence times: 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 ms; temperature
4 1510 8C; equivalence ratio 4 0.55.
Fig. 3. Measured NOx and N2O concentrations in a JSR
at three residence times: 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 ms; temperature
4 1555 8C; equivalence ratio 4 0.55.
achievable temperature in this pressure range due
to limitations in the preheat temperature. For pres-
sures above 5 bars, a higher reactor temperature of
1555 8C was chosen for combustion stabilityrequire-
ments.
The homogeneity of the JSR was estimated at at-
mospheric conditions by measuring temperature
and gas proﬁles. A coated thermocouple and a gas
probe, introduced through one of the three JSR ex-
its, were traversed parallel to the symmetry axis. Pro-
ﬁles at different radial locations were acquired using
a bent thermocouple. In the zone near the nozzles,
the temperature is 50–150 8C lower than in other
regions of the JSR, due to imperfect mixing of the
entering fresh gas with the burned gases. Along the
symmetry axis from the exit toward the center of the
JSR, the NOx concentrations decrease slightly, and
the CO concentrations increase considerably.
The decrease in NOx can be attributed to a 40 8C
drop in mean reactor temperature, caused by the
cooling effect of the introduced probe. This causes
only a minor increase in CO levels. The major
change is attributed to macromixing effects, which
imply a two-zone behavior of the JSR. The zone near
the nozzles is considered as the ignition zone of the
fresh gas with high radical and CO concentrations.
Away from this zone, the temperature is higher and
constant within 20 8C, and CO is converted into
CO2. The inﬂuence of pressure and residence time
on NOx and N2O are shown in Figs. 2 and 3. The
day-to-day repeatability of the measurements was
very good as the data were acquired during several
days in an interval of 3 months. The NOx levels de-
crease with increasing pressure in the entire pres-
sure range, the decrease being weaker at pressures
$5 bars. The NOx pressure dependence above 5
bars correlates to a quadratic function of pressure
(in bars) as [NOx](ppm) 4 A ` B•p ` C•p2, with
A 4 8.3 53%, B 4 10.36 5 3%, and C 4 0.009
5 10%. A weaker pressure dependence with a pres-
sure exponent n of 10.10 to 10.35 was found by
Steele and coworkers [7,8] at pressures up to 7 bars.
The inﬂuence of residence time s on NOx levels
is pronounced at pressures ,5 bars and dependes
as s0.7 at atmospheric pressure; at pressures above 5
bars, the inﬂuence diminishes. Measurements from
Steele and coworkers [7,8] showed a linear depen-
dence on s at atmospheric pressure and nearly no
inﬂuence at elevated pressures.
The N2O concentrations are mildly inﬂuenced by
pressure, contrary to the strong positive dependence
reported by Steele and coworkers [7,8] at pressures
,5 bars. At elevated pressures, the N2O levels drop
with increasing residence time, which is in agree-
ment with Refs. [7,8].


--- Page 4 ---

1396
NOx FORMATION AND CONTROL
Fig. 4. Measured NOx, N2O, and CO concentrations in
a JSR and predictions of a PSR using four reaction mech-
anisms: Miller–Bowman (M-B), GRI, Bockhorn (Bh.), and
Leeds ` NO (Leeds). Residence time 4 1.5 ms, tem-
perature 4 1555 8C, and equivalence ratio 4 0.55.
Modeling and Discussion
Modeling was made with CHEMKIN-II [10] us-
ing four complete reaction mechanisms of the C-H-
O-N system: (1) Miller–Bowman [11], (2) “GRI”
[12], (3) Bockhorn (also used by Ref. [13]) where
the C-H-O system is mainly from Warnatz [14] and
the NO reactions are mainly from Bockhorn [15,16],
and (4) Leeds`NO, the C-H-O system is from Ref.
[17] and the NO reactions correspond to those of
the Bockhorn mechanism.
The measured NOx, N2O, and CO concentrations
were compared to predictions of a PSR at the ex-
perimental equivalence ratio, temperature, pres-
sure, and residence time. The pressure trend of the
measured NOx concentrations is best predicted by
the Bockhorn, Leeds`NO, and GRI mechanisms
(Fig. 4). All measured concentrations are lower than
the predictions of all mechanisms, the CO concen-
trations deviating considerably form the PSR pre-
dictions. Measured concentrations at residence
times and pressures other than those of Fig. 4 show
a similar relation to PSR predictions. The extremely
low CO concentrations are attributed to the devia-
tion of the JSR mixing from the ideal mixing of a
PSR, mainly caused by the two-zone behavior of the
JSR. To take this effect into account, the JSR was
modeled as a 2PSR–PFR series. The ﬁrst PSR sim-
ulates the ignition zone near the nozzles with high
CO concentrations and lower temperatures, where
60–70% of the NOx and high amounts of N2O are
formed. The second PSR is the zone of partial burn-
out where most of the CO and N2O are converted
to CO2 and NO, respectively; the temperature of the
second PSR is about 50 8C higher than the one of
the ﬁrst PSR. The PFR is physically represented by
the exit tube zones, where the remaining CO is fur-
ther oxidized and the temperature increases slightly.
The total volume of the model equals the volume of
the JSR plus the volume of the exit tubes up to the
measurement location. The inlet temperature was
varied to match the exit temperature of the PFR
with the measured temperature. The volume parti-
tion among the reactors was done by matching mea-
sured and predicted CO levels at all studied condi-
tions and atmospheric extinction limits using the
Bockhorn mechanism, giving volume fractions of
30% (PSR1), 60% (PSR2), and 10% (PFR). There
is only one volume partition matching both CO and
extinction limits, and the PFR exit temperature is
very insensitive to the volume partition at a ﬁxed
PSR1 inlet temperature. The PFR volume fraction
is smaller than its corresponding physical value
(16%), which is attributed to back mixing in the re-
gion close to the JSR exit, also conﬁrmed by the wa-
ter model experiments. Matching the CO concen-
trations to the predictions using the GRI mechanism
would give nearly the same partition; however, using
the Leeds and Miller–Bowman mechanisms, the
partition would be PSR1: 27%, PSR2: 53%, and
PFR: 20%, giving 3–4% lower NOx levels compared
to the former partition. The atmospheric experimen-
tal lean blowouts, deﬁned by the f at which mea-
sured CO increased drastically, are well predicted
with the 2PSR–PFR model using all four mecha-
nisms. At 1.4 ms residence time, experimental blow-
out occurred at f 4 0.43, and the predicted one,
using the Bockhorn mechanism at the experimental
pressure, inlet temperature, and massﬂow, occurred
at f 4 0.41. Predictions using the Miller–Bowman
and Leeds`NO mechanisms gave similar results,
with the GRI mechanism blowout occurring at f 4
0.46.
Alternative models such as a 2PSR series with re-
cycle of burned gases to both PSRs and a PSR–PFR
series has been evaluated. The recycle model is not
able to reduce the high CO concentrations formed
in the ﬁrst PSR. Replacing the last PSR with a PFR
gives too low CO concentrations unless the PFR is
made very small, which increases the NOx concen-
trations and decreases the extinction temperature,
deteriorating the agreement to the measured data.
The measured NOx, N2O, and CO concentrations
and predictions of the 2PSR–PFR model using the
four reaction mechanisms at three residence times


--- Page 5 ---

NyOx FORMATION IN HIGH-PRESSURE JET-STIRRED REACTOR
1397
Fig. 5. Measured NOx, N2O, and CO concentrations in
a JSR and predictions of a 2PSR–PFR using four reaction
mechanisms: Miller–Bowman (M-B), GRI, Bockhorn
(Bh.), and Leeds ` NO (Leeds). Residence time 4 2.0
ms, temperature 4 1555 8C, and equivalence ratio 4 0.55.
Fig. 6. Measured NOx, N2O, and CO concentrations in
a JSR and predictions of a 2PSR–PFR using four reaction
mechanisms: Miller–Bowman (M-B), GRI, Bockhorn
(Bh.), and Leeds ` NO (Leeds). Residence time 4 1.5
ms, temperature 4 1555 8C, and equivalence ratio 4 0.55.
and at pressures of 5–20 bars are shown in Figs. 5,
6, and 7, respectively. Comparing the predictions of
the 2PSR–PFR model with PSR predictions (Fig. 4)
shows that the NOx concentrations are only slightly
inﬂuenced by the change in model; however, the
N2O and CO concentrations are lower in the former,
and the agreement between measurements and pre-
dictions is greatly improved. The NOx is very sensi-
tive to the reactions of the O–H system and is de-
pendent
on
the
O,
H,
and
OH
radical
concentrations, which drastically drop as pressure
increases, causing a decrease in NOx concentrations.
A reactor model similar to the 2PSR–PFR was
used by Steele and coworkers [7,8], who simulated
their two-zone behavior of the JSR as a 2PSR series
and ﬁtted the reactor volumes to get agreement with
measured CO concentrations and temperatures.
They attributed the negative inﬂuence of pressure
on NOx to a decrease in the volume of the primary
zone (ﬁrst PSR) at increasing pressure. The predic-
tions of the 2PSR–PFR model of our work agree
well with the experimental data at all pressures and
residence times, suggesting that there is no major
change in the JSR macromixing as pressure is in-
creased. The mixing of the fresh gas with the burned
gases is mainly inﬂuenced by the inlet velocity and
the jet-to-cross-ﬂow ratio; both parameters remain
constant during a pressure increase at ﬁxed resi-
dence time, which motivates the assumption of an
unchanged macromixing.
Computations of a PaSR were made by Frouzakis
and Boulouchos [18] to study the inﬂuence of mi-
cromixing effects at a mixing frequency x relevant
to the experimental conditions of this work. The sca-
lar mixing frequency is x 4 0.5/tm [19], where tm is
the ﬂuid mechanical micromixing time. An estimate
of the JSR micromixing time was obtained by assum-
ing that all of the kinetic energy introduced by the
jets is transformed into turbulent kinetic energy that
is dissipated in the reactor and that the turbulent
length scale is equal to the nozzle diameter d0. The
mixing time is then given as tm 4 2.1(
/m2)1/3,
2
sd0
where m is the gas velocity at the nozzle exit and s
the reactor residence time. Residence times of 1 and
2 ms at a reactor temperature of 1500 8C and gas
inlet temperature of 350 8C give mixing times of
0.014 and 0.028 ms, respectively. Assuming chemical
times tc of 0.3 ms at 1 bar and 0.1 ms at 10 bars, the
Da number (4tm/tc) changes from 0.05 (1 ms, 1 bar)
to 0.3 (2 ms, 10 bars), which shows that deviations


--- Page 6 ---

1398
NOx FORMATION AND CONTROL
Fig. 7. Measured NOx, N2O, and CO concentrations in
a JSR and predictions of a 2PSR–PFR using four reaction
mechanisms: Miller–Bowman (M-B), GRI, Bockhorn
(Bh.), and Leeds ` NO (Leeds). Residence time 4 1.0
ms, temperature 4 1555 8C, and equivalence ratio 4 0.55.
from ideal micromixing are expected, especially at
high pressures.
The PaSR model was based on a stochastic mod-
eling approach. In this study, the code by Chen [9]
with the GRI mechanism [12] and the Curl’s mixing
model was used at a mixing frequency of 40 kHz (tm
4 0.012 ms) for pressures of 1–15 bars at a resi-
dence time of 1.5 ms and an equivalence ratio of 0.5.
Comparing the PaSR NOx and CO concentrations
at elevated pressures with the ones of a PSR at the
same temperature, pressure, and f shows that the
PaSR CO concentrations are about 20–50% lower
than in the PSR, indicating that the low measured
CO concentrations are mainly due to macromixing
effects. The negative NOx trend with increasing
pressure is slightly diminished, and the levels are
about 20–40% higher in the PaSR than in the PSR
[18].
Concluding Remarks
The formation of NOx, N2O, and CO was studied
at pressures up to 20 bars and residence times of
1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 ms in a JSR designed to give small
Da numbers and a distributed reaction zone at at-
mospheric as well as elevated pressures. Concentra-
tion and temperature proﬁle measurements have
shown a two-zone behavior of the JSR, causing CO
concentrations measured at the JSR exit consider-
ably lower than the ones predicted in a PSR. The
inﬂuence of micromixing effects was studied by the
computation of a PaSR, which showed that these
effects have minor inﬂuences on CO levels com-
pared to the macromixing effects. The macromixing
as well as the micromixing effects have minor inﬂu-
ences on NOx, and the pressure trend is not inﬂu-
enced by these effects. To simulate the spatial in-
homogeneities, the JSR was modeled as a 2PSR–
PFR series. Predictions were made using four
chemical reaction mechanisms of the C-H-O-N sys-
tem. The measured NOx concentrations show a dis-
tinct negative trend with increasing pressure and
clearly decrease with decreasing residence times at
pressures less than 5 bars. The NOx levels are best
predicted by the Bockhorn, Leeds`NO, and GRI
mechanisms. The predictions with the Miller–Bow-
man mechanism show a positive trend in NOx with
increasing pressure and levels that are 1.4–2.5 times
higher than the measurements, suggesting that this
mechanism is not suitable for predictions of NOx
formation at high pressures. The measured N2O
concentrations show weak dependence of pressure
that is also conﬁrmed by the predictions of all mech-
anisms.
This work also points out the need for further
studies (in progress) of the reaction mechanisms, to
clarify the reason for the varying pressure depen-
dence of the reaction mechanisms.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge ABB Corporate Research
Center, Switzerland and the National Energy Research
Foundation (NEFF) for the ﬁnancial support as well as
Prof. J.-Y. Chen for providing the PaSR code.
REFERENCES
1. Nicol, D. G., Steele, R. C., Marinov, N. M., and Malte,
P. C., “Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress,” ASME
paper 93-GT-342, Cincinnati, OH, 1993.
2. Nenninger, J. E., Kridiotis, A., Chomiak, J., Longwell,
J. P., and Saroﬁm, A. F., in Twentieth Symposium (In-
ternational) on Combustion, The Combustion Insti-
tute, Pittsburgh, 1984, pp. 473–479.
3. Joshi, N. D., Epstein, M. J., Durlak, S., Marakovits, S.,
and Sabla, P. E., “Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Con-
gress,” ASME paper 94-GT-253, The Hague, The
Netherlands, 1994.
4. Snyder, T. S., Rosfjord, T. J., McVey, J. B., Hu, A. C.,
and Schlein, B. C., “Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Con-
gress,” ASME paper 94-GT-234, The Hague, The
Netherlands, 1994.


--- Page 7 ---

NyOx FORMATION IN HIGH-PRESSURE JET-STIRRED REACTOR
1399
5. Leonard, G. and Stegmaier, J., “Gas Turbine and
Aeroengine Congress,” ASME paper 93-GT-288, Cin-
cinnati, OH, 1993.
6. Michaud, M. G., Westmoreland, P. R., and Feitelberg,
A. S., in Twenty-Fourth Symposium (International) on
Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh,
1992, pp. 879–887.
7. Steele, R. C., “NOx and N2O Formation in Lean-Pre-
mixed Jet-Stirred Reactors Operated from 1 to 7 atm,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Washington, Seattle, 1995.
8. Steele, R. C., Tonouchi, J. H., Nicol, D. G., Horning,
D. C., Malte, P. C., and Pratt, D. T., “Characterization
of NOx, N2O and CO for Lean-Premixed Combustion
in a High-Pressure Jet-Stirred Reactor,” presented at
Turbo Expo., Birmingham, June 1996.
9. Chen, J.-Y., Combust. Sci. Technol. 122:1–6 (1997).
10. Kee, R. J., Rupley, F. M., and Miller, J. A., “CHE-
MKIN-II: A Fortran Chemical Kinetics Package for
the Analysis of Gas-Phase Chemical Kinetics,” Sandia
report SAND89-8009.
11. Miller, J. A. and Bowman, C. T., Prog. Energy Com-
bust. Sci. 15:287–338 (1989).
12. Smith, G. P., Crosley, D. R., Golden, D. M., Frenk-
lach,
M.,
Gardiner,
W. C.,
Hanson,
R. K.,
and
Bowman,
C. T.,
“GRI-Mech.
2.11,”
Annual
Report SRI International, 1996,
http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri
mech/.
13. Schlegel, A., “Experimentelle und Numerische Unter-
suchung der NOx-Bildung bei der Katalytisch Stabili-
sierten und der Nicht-Katalysierten Mageren Vormis-
chverbrennung,” Ph.D. dissertation, ETH Zu¨rich,
Switzerland, 1994.
14. Warnatz, J., in Combustion Chemistry (W. C. Gardi-
ner, ed.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1984.
15. Bockhorn, H., Chevalier, Ch., Warnatz, J., and Wey-
rauch, V., “VDI Report 922,” VDI Verlag, Du¨sseldorf,
1991.
16. Bockhorn, H., Chevalier, Ch., Warnatz, J., and Wey-
rauch, V., ASME HTD-Vol. 166, Book no. G00629,
1991.
17. Pilling, M. J., Turanyi, T., Hughes, K. J., and Clague,
A. R., “The Leeds Methane Oxidation Mechanism,”
Version 1.3, July 25, 1996, School of Chemistry Leeds
University, UK,
http://chem.leeds.ac.uk/combustion/combustion.html.
18. Frouzakis, C. E. and Boulouchos, K., in First Meeting
of the Greek Section of the Combustion Institute, Ath-
ens, Greece, 1997, pp. 59–64.
19. Pope, S. B., Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 11:119–192
(1985).
COMMENTS
James A. Miller, Sandia National Laboratories, USA.
What is it in the Miller–Bowman mechanism that causes it
to give results that are different from the other mecha-
nism? The casual observer (and even the not-so-causal ob-
server) would conclude that there is little or no difference
in the signiﬁcant features of any of these mechanisms.
Author’s Reply. Sensitivity analysis showed that the NO
concentration is most sensitive to radical reactions of the
H/H system, which indicate a dependence of NO levels on
the radical pool concentration ([O] ` [OH] ` [H] `
[HO2]) [1]. Steele et al. [2] related the NOx formation to
the O radical concentration, which is important in the re-
actions of the N2O and Zeldovich reactions. Further stud-
ies showed that the radical pool concentration of the
Miller–Bowman mechanism is higher than that of the other
mechanisms in the entire pressure range (1–20 bars); at 1
bar, the radical pool concentrations are about 10% higher,
at 5 bars, 75% higher; and at 10–20 bars, 90–95% higher.
Rate constants of reactions in the Miller–Bowman
mechanism to which the radical pool concentration is sen-
sitive were changed to the corresponding constants of the
GRI mechanism (only rate constants of the C/H/O system
were changed). Thereby, an NOx pressure dependence
similar to the one of the GRI mechanism was obtained;
NOx decreases with increasing pressure. This further con-
ﬁrms the inﬂuence of the radical pool concentration on
NOx and indicates that the differences in NOx pressure
dependence are due to differences in the C/H/O systems
of the mechanisms [1].
REFERENCES
1. Bengtsson, K., “Experimental and Numerical Study of
the NOx Formation in High-Pressure Lean-Premixed
Combustion of Methane,” PhD. thesis, submitted to the
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zu¨rich,
Switzerland, October 1998.
2. Steele, R. C., Tonouchi, J. H., Nicol, D. G., Horning,
D. C., Malte, P. C., Pratt, D. T., “Concentration of the
NOx, N2O and CO for Lean-Premixed Combustion in
a High-Pressure Jet-Stirred Reactor,” J. Eng. Gas Tur-
bines Power Trans. ASME 120(2):303–310 (1998).
