
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
www.elsevier.com/locate/jnlabr/cnf
Fuel effects on NOx emissions in partially premixed ﬂames
Sayangdev Naha, Suresh K. Aggarwal ∗
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, 2039 ERF, 842 W. Taylor Street,
Chicago, IL 60607, USA
Received 8 October 2003; received in revised form 23 April 2004; accepted 23 July 2004
Available online 11 September 2004
Abstract
The requirement to signiﬁcantly reduce NOx and particulate emissions while maintaining combustor perfor-
mance is one of the main drivers for internal combustion engine research. Partially premixing and using fuel blends
represent two promising approaches for reducing both the NOx and the particulate emissions from ﬂames. This
paper reports on the results of a numerical investigation on the effects of using different fuels on NOx emissions in
counterﬂow partially premixed ﬂames. The fuels investigated include methane, n-heptane, and their blends with
hydrogen. The methane ﬂame is computed using the GRI-3.0 mechanism, while the n-heptane ﬂame is computed
by combining the Held et al. oxidation mechanism with the Li and Williams NOx mechanism. Results indicate
that, with regard to their NOx characteristics, partially premixed ﬂames can be grouped into two distinct regimes,
namely a double-ﬂame regime, characterized by high levels of partial premixing and/or low strain rates (as) with
two physically separated reaction zones, and a merged-ﬂame regime, characterized by low levels of partial pre-
mixing and/or high as with nearly merged reaction zones. In the ﬁrst regime, NOx characteristics of both methane
and n-heptane ﬂames are strongly affected by changes in equivalence ratio (φ) and strain rate, while in the second
regime, they exhibit a relatively weak dependence on φ and as. In addition, the n-heptane and methane ﬂames
established under identical conditions exhibit widely different NOx emission behavior in the ﬁrst regime but qual-
itatively similar behavior in the second regime. Major differences include (i) signiﬁcantly higher NO level and
NOx emission index, (ii) much wider double-ﬂame regime with regard to φ and as, (iii) dominance of the prompt
mechanism over the thermal mechanism in the entire partially premixed regime, and (iv) noticeable reduction in
NOx emission with hydrogen addition for n-heptane ﬂames compared to methane ﬂames. These differences are
attributable to the different fuel pyrolysis/oxidation chemistry of the two fuels, as the consumption of n-heptane
occurs mainly through the C2 path, while that of methane occurs mainly through the C1 path. As a result, the
amounts of C2H2 and, consequently, of CH radicals formed in n-heptane ﬂames are signiﬁcantly higher than
those in methane ﬂames and are responsible for the observed differences in NOx characteristics of the two fuels.
2004 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Due to their immense practical relevance, NOx
emissions from various types of ﬂames and com-
* Corresponding author. Fax: +1-312-413-0447.
E-mail address: ska@uic.edu (S.K. Aggarwal).
bustion devices have been extensively investigated.
Barlow and Carter [1] investigated experimentally the
effects of temperature and mixture fraction on NOx
emission in H2 jet ﬂames. Hayhurst and Lawrence
[2] reported an experimental investigation of NOx
emission in a ﬂuidized bed combustor during burn-
ing of coal volatiles. Meunier and Carvalho [3] per-
0010-2180/$ – see front matter 2004 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2004.07.006


--- Page 2 ---

S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
91
formed experimental and numerical investigations
on NOx emissions from turbulent propane diffusion
ﬂames. Schlegel et al. [4] reported an experimental–
numerical study on NOx emissions from catalyti-
cally stabilized lean premixed methane–air ﬂames.
Poppe et al. [5] investigated control of NOx emis-
sions from conﬁned methane–air premixed ﬂames by
imposing oscillations. Many researchers have also fo-
cused on the development of appropriate NOx mech-
anisms for more detailed prediction and investigation
of NOx emissions from ﬂames. These include the Li
and Williams mechanism [6], the Warnatz and Klaus
mechanism [7], the Leeds mechanism [8], and the
mechanisms discussed by Miller and Bowman [9].
The NOx reduction strategies based on using fuel
diluents and fuel blends have also been examined.
Roberts [10] performed an experimental investigation
and observed reduction in both NOx emission and
soot formation using water injection. Rortveit et al.
[11] investigated the effect of diluents such as NO2,
CO2, and He on NOx formation in H2–air counter-
ﬂow ﬂames. Zhao et al. [12] studied the effect of
OH radical on NOx emission in methane–air diffu-
sion ﬂame with steam addition. It was noted that, al-
though steam addition increased OH concentration, it
reduced CH concentration, which led to subsequent
reduction in NOx emission.
Rortveit et al. [13] reported an experimental–
numerical study of NOx emissions in methane–
hydrogen mixtures in a counterﬂow conﬁguration.
Al-Baghdadi [14] examined NOx emissions in spark
ignition engines using a hydrogen–ethanol mixture as
fuel and observed a signiﬁcant reduction (about 33%)
in NOx production when such a fuel mixture was used
instead of gasoline. This was attributed to lower peak
temperatures due to the higher heat of vaporization of
alcohol. Choudhuri and Gollahali [15] studied the ef-
fect of using a hydrogen–hydrocarbon composite fuel
in turbulent jet ﬂames. Although increase of hydrogen
content was shown to decrease CO and soot produc-
tion, NOx was found to increase.
Many recent studies dealing with NOx emission
have focused on partially premixed ﬂames (PPFs)
[16–23], motivated by the considerations that these
ﬂames may have superior pollutant emission char-
acteristics and that the emissions from these ﬂames
may be minimized by appropriately modifying the
level of partial premixing. Partially premixed ﬂames
are formed by mixing air (in less than stoichiomet-
ric amounts) into the fuel stream prior to the reaction
zone, where additional air is available for complete
combustion. These ﬂames have also been studied due
to their fundamental relevance to ﬂame liftoff and sta-
bilization, nonpremixed turbulent ﬂames, and spray
combustion. With regard to their NOx emission char-
acteristics, Gore and Zhan [16] performed a numeri-
cal investigation on the effect of partial premixing on
NOx production in methane–air PPFs and observed
the existence of an optimum level of partial premixing
that yielded the lowest NOx emission index. Tanoff et
al. [17] conducted a numerical–experimental study of
counterﬂow methane–air PPFs and observed a drastic
change in NO emission behavior as the ﬂame changed
from a merged-ﬂame to a double-ﬂame structure as
the equivalence ratio (φ) was reduced below a certain
threshold value. Ravikrishna and Laurendeau [18]
also reported a numerical–experimental investigation
on the effect of partial premixing on NO emission
from counterﬂow methane–air ﬂames. They com-
pared the laser-induced ﬂuorescence measurements of
NO with predictions using the GRI-2.11 and GRI-
3.0 mechanisms and noted that the GRI-3.0 mecha-
nism overpredicted NO concentrations compared to
the measurements and predictions based on the GRI-
2.11 mechanism. A similar observation was made by
Barlow et al. [19] in their numerical–experimental
study of counterﬂow methane–air PPFs. Dupont and
Williams [20] examined the dominant NOx formation
mechanisms in rich methane–air ﬂames. Xue and Ag-
garwal [21] reported a numerical investigation of the
NOx emission characteristics of n-heptane counter-
ﬂow PPFs. Their results also indicated an optimum
level of partial premixing that yields the lowest NOx
emission index. In addition, it was observed that the
NO formation rate in the nonpremixed zone is signiﬁ-
cantly higher than that in the rich premixed zone. This
was attributed to the transport of acetylene from the
rich premixed to the nonpremixed zone and the sig-
niﬁcantly higher concentrations of O and OH radicals
in the latter zone.
The possibility of using fuel blends including fuel
diluents to obtain superior pollutant emission char-
acteristics seems to be a promising area of research.
While previous investigations have focused on NOx
emissions in a variety of ﬂames and conﬁgurations,
issues pertaining to the use of fuel diluents and fuel
blends for reducing NOx emission have not been ex-
amined in detail. Moreover, to characterize the effects
of fuel blends on NOx, it is imperative to under-
stand ﬁrst how the NOx characteristics are affected
by the use of different fuels under identical condi-
tions. Motivated by this consideration, the present
study focused on the comparison of NOx character-
istics of methane/air and heptane/air PPFs. A detailed
examination of the dominant pathways and concentra-
tion proﬁles of key radical species is used to explain
the qualitative and quantitative differences in NOx
emission behavior of the two ﬂames at various lev-
els of partial premixing. In addition, the effect of fuel
blends on NOx emissions was examined by employ-
ing methane/hydrogen and heptane/hydrogen blends.


--- Page 3 ---

92
S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
Fig. 1. Schematic of the counterﬂow ﬂame conﬁguration
used in the present study.
2. Objective
The major objective of this study was to inves-
tigate the effects of using different fuels on NOx
emissions in PPFs. To understand the NOx emission
behavior of fuel blends, it is essential ﬁrst to per-
form a detailed comparison of the NOx characteristics
of pure fuels. For this purpose, the methane and n-
heptane PPFs are simulated. Methane represents per-
haps the most investigated gaseous fuel, while hep-
tane is the most representative of liquid fuels. More-
over, detailed chemistry models for the oxidation of
these two fuels have been extensively studied and val-
idated. Thus, these two fuels provide a good starting
point for studying the fuel effects on pollutant species.
Flame structures of heptane/air and methane/air
partially premixed ﬂames are compared to explain
both the qualitative and the quantitative differences in
the NOx emission behavior of the two ﬂames. While
previous studies have investigated the NOx emission
characteristics of methane and n-heptane ﬂames sep-
arately, they have not focused on the comparison
of their ﬂame structures and NOx emission behav-
ior. In addition, the present study considers a com-
plete partially premixed regime that includes both the
double-ﬂame and the merged-ﬂame regimes and ex-
tends to the diffusion ﬂame limit. It is important to
consider these two regimes separately since the NOx
characteristics of methane and n-heptane ﬂames are
signiﬁcantly different in the two regimes. Previous
investigations have not focused on this aspect. The
present study also examines the issue of using fuel
blends for reducing NOx emissions by employing
methane/hydrogen and heptane/hydrogen fuel blends.
A counterﬂow conﬁguration as illustrated in Fig. 1
has been employed, since it facilitates detailed study
of the dominant pathways associated with the vari-
ous NOx mechanisms and the relative contributions
of the premixed and nonpremixed reaction zones in
NOx formation and destruction. Moreover, this con-
ﬁguration makes it easier to separate the effects of
stoichiometry and transport on the ﬂame structure and
NOx emissions.
3. Numerical model and boundary conditions
Simulations of partially premixed ﬂames are per-
formed using the OPPDIF code [24] in the Chemkin
package [25]. The OPPDIF code is written in Fortran
and used for computing the ﬂow ﬁeld in a counterﬂow
conﬁguration. The temperature of the fuel stream is
taken as 400 K to ensure that the n-heptane fuel is
in the gaseous phase. The air stream temperature is
300 K. The velocities of the fuel and oxidizer streams
are chosen to conform to the global strain rate
(1)
as = 2|VO|
L

1 + |VF|√ρF
|VO|√ρO

and to satisfy the momentum balance
(2)
ρOV 2
O = ρFV 2
F .
Using these two equations, the fuel and air stream
velocities can be computed for a given value of the
global strain rate as. The plug ﬂow boundary con-
ditions are used to specify the fuel and air stream
velocities at the respective boundaries.
Boundary conditions for the species conservation
equations require the speciﬁcation of the species mole
fractions at the two boundaries. For the simulation of
ﬂames burning pure fuels, the fuel side equivalence
ratio provides the mole fractions of fuel, O2, and N2
species at the fuel nozzle, while the assumption of
standard air composition provides the mole fractions
of O2 and N2 at the air nozzle. For the simulations
of ﬂames burning fuel blends, we consider a blend
containing 1 mole of hydrocarbon (CxHy) fuel and f
mole (f being the molar ratio of H2 to CxHy in the
blend) of H2. For PPFs, the fuel stream contains a
mixture of fuel blend and air according to a speciﬁed
equivalence ratio (φ). The mole fractions of various
species at the fuel boundary are then computed using
the following stoichiometric equation:
CxHy + f H2 + c(O2 + (79/21)N2)
(3)
⇒xCO2 + (f + y/2)H2O + (79/21)N2.
The mass balance yields c = (x + f/2 + y/4). For
a given φ, c on the right-hand side is replaced by
(x +f/2+y/4)/φ. Then the mole fractions of CxHy,
H2, O2, and N2 at the fuel stream boundary can be
obtained as
X(CxHy) = 84φ/N,
X(H2) = 84f φ/N,
X(O2) = 21(4x + y + 2f )/N,


--- Page 4 ---

S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
93
and
X(N2) = 79(4x + y + 2f )/N,
where the total number of moles, N, is given by
N = 400x + 100y + 200f + 84φ + 84f φ.
It is important to note that for the pure hydrocar-
bon fuel case, f = 0, while for nonpremixed ﬂames,
the fuel stream does not contain any air (c = 0).
The n-heptane oxidation chemistry is modeled by
using the Held et al. mechanism [26]. It is combined
with the NOx chemistry model developed by Li and
Williams [6], resulting in a full mechanism consist-
ing of 54 species and 327 elementary reactions. The
methane–air partially premixed ﬂame is computed us-
ing the GRI-Mech 3.0 mechanism [27]. For both the
methane and the n-heptane ﬂames, the transport prop-
erties are computed using the mixture–average trans-
port model. The transport properties for n-heptane
ﬂames were provided by Held et al. [26].
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Validation of reaction mechanisms
Both the methane and the n-heptane reaction
mechanisms used in the present study have been pre-
viously validated for different conﬁgurations. The
GRI-Mech 3.0 mechanism [27] and its earlier ver-
sions have been validated by many researchers using
a variety of conﬁgurations. Sung et al. [28] validated
the GRI-Mech 1.2 mechanism using experimental
data for perfectly stirred reactors, autoignition and
shock tube ignition delay times, ignition-extinction
limits in counterﬂowing systems, and laminar ﬂame
propagation speeds. More recent studies reported by
Xue et al. [22] and Barlow et al. [19] provide valida-
tion of the GRI-Mech 2.11 and 3.0 mechanisms for
methane–air partially premixed ﬂames in a counter-
ﬂow geometry. Similarly the n-heptane mechanism
used in the present study has been validated by Held
et al. [26] using measurements in ﬂow reactor, shock
tube, stirred reactor, and freely propagating laminar
ﬂames. Another validation using a perfectly stirred
reactor has been reported by Montgomery et al. [29].
Xue and Aggarwal [21] have provided additional
validation of the mechanism for the simulation of
premixed and nonpremixed heptane/air ﬂames using
measurements of Davis and Law [30] and Seiser et al.
[31], respectively.
The NOx mechanisms used in the present study
have also been validated in previous investigations.
Li and Williams [6] used the same NOx mechanism
to examine the effects of various diluents on NOx
Fig. 2. Comparison of simulated NO mole fraction proﬁle
with experimental data from Ravikrishna and Laurendeau
[18] for a methane/air PPF established at as = 20 s−1 and
φ = 1.6 (a) and φ = 2.0 (b).
emissions in methane–air PPFs and reported excellent
agreement between the measured and the predicted
NOx proﬁles. The validity of using this mechanism
for NOx emissions in n-heptane ﬂames has been re-
ported by Xue and Aggarwal [21]. The NOx mech-
anisms used in GRI-Mech 2.11 and 3.0 have been
evaluated by Ravikrishna and Laurendeau [18] and
Barlow et al. [19], who compared the measured and
predicted NO concentration proﬁles in methane–air
PPFs. While both mechanisms provided good qualita-
tive agreement with measurements, the GRI-Mech 3.0
overpredicted NO concentrations compared to the
measurements and predictions based on the GRI-
Mech 2.11. In the context of these two mechanisms,
it is important to mention that while the nonpremixed
ﬂame structures predicted using these mechanisms
are essentially the same, the differences between the
mechanisms become more signiﬁcant for PPFs. This
aspect has been examined further in [22].
In the present study, we report two additional val-
idations of the reaction mechanisms. For the ﬁrst val-
idation, we compare the predicted NO concentration
proﬁles based on the GRI-Mech 2.11 and 3.0 mech-
anisms with measurements reported in [28]. Fig. 2


--- Page 5 ---

94
S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
Fig. 3. Comparison of temperature and major species mole
fraction proﬁles computed using the Held et al. mechanism
and a more comprehensive mechanism for n-heptane/air
PPFs established at as = 100 s−1 and φ = 5.0 (a) and
φ = 2.5 (b).
presents this comparison for methane–air PPFs estab-
lished at a global strain rate of as = 20 s−1 and fuel
side equivalence ratios of φ = 1.6 and 2.0. For both
of these cases, the NO mole fraction proﬁles based on
the GRI-Mech 2.11 are in good agreement with mea-
surements, while those based on the GRI-Mech 3.0
are overpredicted. These results are consistent with
those reported by Ravikrishna and Laurendeau [18]
and Barlow et al. [19]. In both of these studies, the
GRI-Mech 3.0 overpredicted NO levels compared to
those based on the GRI-Mech 2.11 and the measure-
ments.
The second validation pertains to the Held et al.
[26] mechanism for predicting the n-heptane partially
premixed ﬂame structure. Here we compare numeri-
cal results based on the Held et al. mechanism with
those based on a more comprehensive mechanism re-
ported by Ranzi et al. [32]. Fig. 3 shows this compar-
ison with regard to the temperature and major species
proﬁles for heptane/air partially premixed ﬂames es-
tablished at φ = 5.0 and 2.5 with a global strain rate of
as = 100 s−1. The distance between the two nozzles
is 1.5 cm and the fuel and air streams are introduced
at temperatures of 400 and 300 K, respectively. For
both mechanisms, results for φ = 5.0 indicate a par-
tially premixed ﬂame in the merged-ﬂame regime, in
which the two reaction zones are merged, and results
for φ = 2.5 indicate a partially premixed structure in
the double-ﬂame regime, characterized by the pres-
ence of a rich premixed reaction zone on the fuel side
and a nonpremixed reaction zone on the oxidizer side.
Overall, there is an excellent agreement between the
two simulations, providing further validation of the
Held et al. mechanism.
4.2. Structure and NOx characteristics of methane
and n-heptane PPFs
The grid independence of the computed results
was achieved by controlling the values of the GRAD
and CURV parameters and using adaptive regridding
to resolve the structures of both the premixed and the
nonpremixed reaction zones. The computed results
were found to be essentially grid independent when
the number of grid points was changed from 130 to
250. The results presented in this paper employed 160
grid points.
Having provided grid independence and valida-
tion of the reaction mechanisms for both the oxidation
and the NOx chemistry of the two fuels, we now fo-
cus on the comparison of the NOx characteristics of
methane and n-heptane partial premixed ﬂames. In
this context, partially premixed combustion can be
classiﬁed into two distinct regimes, namely a double-
ﬂame regime and a merged-ﬂame regime. In the ﬁrst
regime, a partially premixed ﬂame contains two dis-
tinct or physically separated reaction zones, while in
the second regime, the two reaction zones are nearly
merged. For counterﬂow ﬂames at atmospheric pres-
sure, these two regimes can be represented with re-
gard to φ and as. The double-ﬂame regime is char-
acterized by relatively low φ (high levels of partial
premixing) and low as values. As φ (or as) is in-
creased at ﬁxed as (or φ), the two reaction zones move
closer to each other and eventually merge, indicating a
transition to the merged-ﬂame regime. A detailed dis-
cussion on the effects of φ and as on the transition
has been provided in a previous investigation [33].
As discussed in [33], increasing φ at constant as es-
sentially affects the rich premixed zone, which moves
away from the fuel nozzle or toward the nonpremixed
zone, while increasing as at constant φ causes the
nonpremixed zone to move toward the rich premixed
zone. The ﬂame structure and interactions between
the reaction zones are different in the two regimes.
As a result, the NOx characteristics of methane and
n-heptane ﬂames are found to be signiﬁcantly differ-
ent in the two regimes. Consequently, it is relevant to
examine each regime separately.


--- Page 6 ---

S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
95
4.3. Comparison of NOx characteristics in the
double-ﬂame regime
A direct quantitative comparison of the NOx
characteristics of methane and n-heptane PPFs un-
der identical conditions is somewhat limited due to
their signiﬁcantly different double-ﬂame regimes.
For counterﬂow ﬂames at atmospheric pressure, this
regime is represented by a range of φ and as for which
a PPF contains two distinct or physically separated re-
action zones. As φ is increased, the range of as for this
regime becomes narrower, with a similar effect oc-
curring when as is increased. Previous experimental
and numerical studies [6,17,22,23] have observed that
the double-ﬂame regime for counterﬂow methane–air
ﬂames is approximately given by 1.4 < φ < 2.0 and
20 < as < 50 s−1. As φ is increased above 2.0 and/or
as is increased above 50 s−1, the distance between the
two reaction zones decreases, and the ﬂame structure
approaches the merged-ﬂame regime. For heptane–air
counterﬂow ﬂames, previous studies [21,34] indicate
that the corresponding double-ﬂame regime is given
by 1.5 < φ < 3.5 and 20 < as < 120 s−1. A compari-
son of the double-ﬂame regimes for the two fuels thus
indicates a rather narrow range of φ and as in which
both the methane and the n-heptane ﬂames exhibit a
double-ﬂame structure and can be compared with re-
gard to their NOx characteristics. Consequently, we
select two cases, with regard to φ and as, to com-
pare the ﬂame structure and NOx characteristics of
methane and n-heptane PPFs.
Figs. 4 and 5 present a comparison of the struc-
tures of methane/air and n-heptane/air PPFs, both
established at φ = 1.6, and as = 40 s−1. The fuel
and air stream temperatures are 400 and 300 K, re-
spectively, and the distance between the two nozzles
is 2 cm. Fig. 4 presents the temperature and major
species mole fraction proﬁles, while Fig. 5 shows the
proﬁles of temperature and the mole fractions of some
species relevant to NO formation. The global ﬂame
structure for the two fuels is similar in the sense that
for both fuels the ﬂame contains two distinct reaction
zones, namely a rich premixed reaction zone on the
fuel side and a nonpremixed reaction zone on the ox-
idizer side. The premixed reaction zone is character-
ized by the fuel-rich oxidation chemistry that involves
the pyrolysis/consumption of fuel, the production of
“intermediate fuel” species (C2H2, CO, and H2), and
to a lesser extent production of CO2 and H2O. The
intermediate fuel species are transported to the non-
premixed reaction zone, where they are oxidized to
form CO2 and H2O. Thus, the nonpremixed zone is
characterized by the oxidation of these intermediate
fuel species.
Apart from this global similarity, the structures
of methane and n-heptane ﬂames exhibit signiﬁcant
Fig. 4. Temperature and major species mole fraction proﬁles
for (a) methane/air and (b) n-heptane/air PPFs established at
as = 40 s−1 and φ = 1.6.
differences, although they are established under iden-
tical conditions. One important difference pertains to
their ﬂame topology, in particular the location of the
premixed reaction zone and the distance between the
two reaction zones. The premixed reaction zones for
the methane and n-heptane ﬂames are located at 0.55
and 0.2 cm, respectively, while the two corresponding
nonpremixed reaction zones are located at x ≈1.2.
Thus, the separation distances between the two reac-
tion zones are 0.65 and 1.0 cm, respectively, for the
two cases. This difference can be attributed to the
fuel-rich or low-temperature oxidation chemistry of
the two fuels. The pyrolysis/oxidation chemistry of
methane is known to be slow compared to that of
higher hydrocarbon fuels (n-heptane in the present
case), and, consequently, the rich premixed zone for
the methane ﬂame is located farther downstream from
the fuel nozzle than that for the n-heptane ﬂame. The
evidence for the slower pyrolysis/oxidation chemistry
of methane is provided by its ignition characteristics,
i.e., the minimum ignition temperature and the igni-
tion delay time. As reported in [35,36], the autoigni-
tion temperatures of methane/air and n-heptane/air


--- Page 7 ---

96
S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
Fig. 5. Temperature and NO and intermediate species mole
fraction proﬁles for (a) methane/air and (b) n-heptane/air
PPFs discussed in the context of Fig. 4.
mixtures at 1 atm are 810 and 477 K, respectively.
In addition, the shock tube data reported by Horning
et al. [37] and Hidaka et al. [38] indicate that the ig-
nition delay times for methane/air and n-heptane/air
mixtures under similar conditions are 0.8 and 0.16 ms,
respectively. Due to the differences in ignition char-
acteristics, which are related to the fuel-rich low-
temperature oxidation chemistry, the premixed reac-
tion zone in methane ﬂame is located farther down-
stream (from the fuel nozzle) than that in n-heptane
ﬂame, and this leads to a greater separation distance
between the reaction zones in n-heptane ﬂame. It is
also worth mentioning that the Held et al. mecha-
nism, being a high-temperature mechanism, does not
include the low-temperature chemistry. However, the
predicted H2O2 and OH proﬁles (not shown) indi-
cated that the H2O2 mole fraction in the premixed
reaction zone was signiﬁcantly higher than that in
the nonpremixed zone, while the OH mole fraction
was signiﬁcantly higher in the premixed reaction zone
than in the nonpremixed zone. This implies that the
intermediate-temperature chemistry involving fuel +
HO2 producing H2O2, and H2O2 decomposing to
give OH radicals, plays a role in determining the lo-
cation of the premixed reaction zone of n-heptane
PPFs.
A major difference between the two ﬂames, in the
context of their NOx characteristics, is exhibited by
the C2H2 and CH concentration proﬁles presented in
Fig. 5. As discussed below, the difference in the NOx
characteristics of methane and n-heptane PPFs can
be attributed to their ﬂame structures and especially
to the C2H2 and CH proﬁles. Important observations
with regard to these differences include the following:
(1) The peak C2H2 value, which occurs in the pre-
mixed zone, is about four times higher for n-
heptane ﬂame than for methane ﬂame (cf. Fig. 5).
A rate of production analysis (ROPA) was per-
formed to characterize the fuel consumption be-
havior in the two ﬂames. It was observed that, for
the present case, 60% of methane is consumed
through the C1 path, while 40% is consumed
through the C2 path. In contrast, for n-heptane
ﬂame, more than 90% of the fuel is consumed
through the C2 path, with the remaining being
consumed through the C1 path. This explains
why the C2H2 concentration is much higher in
n-heptane ﬂame than in methane ﬂame. A simi-
lar difference in C2H2 concentrations is observed
for other cases investigated in the present study.
There are two points worth mentioning here.
First, as discussed in [21], the C1–C2 charac-
terization has extended to heptane–air chemistry,
since C3–C6 species are decomposed mainly to
C3H5, which is converted to C4H6, which is then
converted to vinyl, acetylene, and C2H3HCO.
Second, the Held et al. mechanism has been
shown to overpredict C2H2 concentrations [21,
37], and this would lead to an overprediction of
prompt NO for n-heptane ﬂames.
(2) Due to the high acetylene concentration in n-
heptane ﬂames, only a fraction of acetylene is
consumed in the premixed reaction zone, produc-
ing CH in this zone; as indicated in Fig. 5b, the
CH peak in the premixed zone coincides with
the sharp drop in C2H2 mole fraction.1 The re-
maining C2H2 is transported to the nonpremixed
reaction zone, producing additional CH there.
Consequently, the CH proﬁle exhibits two peaks,
one in the premixed zone and the other in the
nonpremixed zone. However, most of the prompt
NO is produced in the nonpremixed zone, even
though the CH peak in the premixed zone is
1 Previous investigations of partially premixed ﬂames
[6,21] have established that C2H2 is the major source of CH
in these ﬂames. This was further conﬁrmed by performing a
rate of production analysis in the present study.


--- Page 8 ---

S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
97
Fig. 6. Mole fraction proﬁles of the prompt and thermal NO
for (a) n-heptane/air and (b) methane/air PPFs discussed in
the context of Fig. 4.
much higher than that in the nonpremixed zone.
This is shown clearly in Fig. 6a, which presents
the mole fraction proﬁles of prompt and thermal
NO, and it can be attributed to the paucity of O
and OH radicals in the premixed reaction zone.
While the presence of CH radicals immediately
leads to the formation of HCN through the re-
action CH + N2 ↔HCN + N, the subsequent
conversion of HCN to NO occurs mainly in the
nonpremixed zone due to the availability of O
and OH radicals in that zone. This is clearly indi-
cated by the mole fraction proﬁles of CH, HCN,
O, and OH species in Fig. 5b.
(3) In both n-heptane and methane ﬂames, most of
the NO is produced in the nonpremixed zone
(cf. Fig. 6). However, while most of the NO is
produced through the prompt mechanism in n-
heptane ﬂame, it is produced mainly through the
thermal mechanism in methane ﬂame. This rep-
resents an important difference with regard to the
NOx characteristics of the two ﬂames and is di-
rectly related to the signiﬁcantly higher amount
of C2H2 produced in n-heptane ﬂame. As dis-
cussed above, for n-heptane ﬂame, a signiﬁcantly
higher amount of C2H2 is produced in the pre-
mixed reaction zone and, consequently, trans-
ported to the nonpremixed zone. This leads to
a much higher concentration of CH and, con-
sequently, much higher concentrations of HCN
and prompt NO in the nonpremixed zone of
n-heptane ﬂame. This is clearly indicated by
the comparison of the two ﬂames in Figs. 5
and 6. Similar behavior was observed for the
other cases investigated in the double-ﬂame
regime.
(4) The ROPA analysis [39] indicated that while
acetylene is the major source of CH in both the
n-heptane and the methane ﬂames, the amount
of CH produced for a given amount of acety-
lene is much smaller in methane ﬂame than in
heptane ﬂame. This is directly related to the ox-
idation chemistries of the two fuels2 and further
explains why, in the double-ﬂame regime, most
of the NO is due to the thermal mechanism in
methane ﬂames and to the prompt mechanism in
n-heptane ﬂames.
(5) Another important observation from Figs. 5 and 6
is the much higher NO level in n-heptane ﬂame
compared to that in methane ﬂame. For the case
presented in Figs. 5 and 6, the peak NO value in
n-heptane ﬂame is about seven times higher than
that in methane ﬂame and is mainly due to the
much higher level of prompt NO in n-heptane
ﬂame. As indicated in Fig. 6, the peak values of
prompt and thermal NO in n-heptane ﬂame are,
respectively, about six and two times higher than
those in methane ﬂame. The higher prompt NO in
n-heptane ﬂame is due to the signiﬁcantly larger
amount of acetylene transported to the non-
premixed reaction zone, while the higher thermal
NO is due to the higher temperature and higher
concentrations of O and OH radicals in the non-
premixed zone. The peak temperatures for the n-
heptane and methane ﬂames presented in Figs. 5
and 6 are ≈2180 and 2130 K, while the peak O
mole fractions are ≈0.0022 and 0.00143, respec-
tively. It is important to note that the adiabatic
2 The pathway analysis indicated that a signiﬁcantly
higher (about two times) amount of C2H2 is converted to
CH2 for n-heptane ﬂames than for methane ﬂames. More
importantly, the amount of CH2 converted to CH is an order
of magnitude higher for n-heptane ﬂames than for methane
ﬂames. This is due to the fact that, for methane ﬂames, most
of the CH2 is converted to CO through its reaction with O2,
while for n-heptane ﬂames, the conversion to CO is rela-
tively small.


--- Page 9 ---

98
S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
ﬂame temperatures for n-heptane and methane
ﬂames are 2484 and 2226 K, respectively.
(6) In both methane and n-heptane ﬂames, NO con-
centration in the rich premixed zone is negligible
compared to that in the nonpremixed zone. This
is due to the lower temperature and lower con-
centrations of O and OH radicals in the premixed
zone. As discussed in [6,21], the presence of
CH, OH, and O is essential for prompt NO and
that of OH and O for thermal NO. Moreover,
the paucity of OH and O radicals in the pre-
mixed zone makes the reburn mechanism more
active, which further diminishes the formation of
prompt NO in this zone. The participation of the
reburn mechanism is more evident in n-heptane
ﬂame (cf. Fig. 5b), which shows a decrease in
the NO mole fraction in the region between the
two reaction zones. Important reaction pathways
associated with the prompt, thermal, and reburn
NO mechanisms in n-heptane ﬂames have been
discussed previously in [21]. As discussed in the
cited study, the reburn mechanism involves the
conversion of NO to HCN and HNCO, mainly
through reactions NO + CH ⇔HCN + O and
NO + CH2 ⇔HNCO + H.
Fig. 7 presents a comparison of the structures of
methane/air and n-heptane/air PPFs for another set of
identical conditions, with φ = 2.0 and as = 100 s−1.
The temperature and species proﬁles for n-heptane
depict a partially premixed ﬂame in the double-ﬂame
regime, i.e., containing two distinct reaction zones.
However, the proﬁles for methane indicate a broad-
ened ﬂame in the merged-ﬂame regime, as the two
reaction zones are nearly merged. Similar to the case
discussed in the context of Figs. 4–6, the NO level
for this case is also signiﬁcantly higher in n-heptane
ﬂame than in methane ﬂame. In addition, for both
fuels, the NO level in the rich premixed zone is neg-
ligible compared to that in the nonpremixed zone,
which is also similar to the previous case. However,
there is one notable difference between the two cases.
In the previous case (cf. Fig. 6), the prompt mecha-
nism was the major contributor to total NO for the
n-heptane ﬂame, while the thermal mechanism was
the major contributor for the methane ﬂame. How-
ever, for the case presented in Fig. 7, the prompt
mechanism becomes the major contributor to total
NO for both the n-heptane and the methane ﬂames.
This crossover from thermal NO to prompt NO occurs
only for methane ﬂames and represents an important
difference between the NOx characteristics of the two
fuels. As discussed in the next section, this is related
to the transition from the double-ﬂame to the merged-
ﬂame regime.
Fig. 7. Comparison of methane and n-heptane partially pre-
mixed ﬂame structures for as = 100 s−1 and φ = 2. Tem-
perature and species mole fraction proﬁles are shown in (a);
prompt and thermal NO proﬁles are shown in (b).
4.4. Comparison of NOx characteristics in the
merged-ﬂame regime
The double-ﬂame regime discussed in the preced-
ing section is characterized by relatively high levels
of partial premixing and low strain rates. With in-
creasing φ and/or as, the two reaction zones move
closer and eventually merge, representing a transition
to the merged-ﬂame regime. Fig. 8 presents the pro-
ﬁles of temperature and some species relevant to NO
formation for methane/air and n-heptane/air PPFs es-
tablished at conditions corresponding to this regime.
The global ﬂame structures for the two fuels appear
to be similar in this regime. Note, however, that the
methane ﬂame is established at φ = 1.8 and as =
40 s−1, while the n-heptane ﬂame is established at
φ = 2.8 and as = 50 s−1. Similar to the cases dis-
cussed for the double-ﬂame regime, most of the NO
is produced in the nonpremixed zone for both the
ﬂames, and the NO level in n-heptane ﬂame is much
higher than that in methane ﬂame.
The major difference between the double-ﬂame
and the merged-ﬂame regimes is due to the relative


--- Page 10 ---

S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
99
Fig. 8. Comparison of temperature and species mole fraction
proﬁles for methane (a) and n-heptane (b) partially premixed
ﬂames in the merged-ﬂame regime. For methane ﬂame,
as = 50 s−1 and φ = 2.0; for n-heptane ﬂame, as = 50 s−1
and φ = 2.8.
contributions of the prompt and thermal mechanisms
for the two fuels. This difference is clearly seen by
comparing the thermal and prompt NO proﬁles for
the two fuels in the double-ﬂame and merged-ﬂame
regimes, presented in Figs. 6 and 9, respectively.
In the double-ﬂame regime depicted in Fig. 6, the
prompt mechanism is the major contributor to total
NO in n-heptane ﬂames, while the thermal mecha-
nism is the major contributor to total NO in methane
ﬂames. However, in the merged-ﬂame regime de-
picted in Fig. 9, the prompt mechanism becomes the
major contributor to total NO in both the n-heptane
and the methane ﬂames. Thus, for methane ﬂames,
there is a switch between the relative contributions of
the thermal and prompt NO during the transition from
the double-ﬂame to the merged-ﬂame regime. There
is no such crossover, however, for n-heptane ﬂames,
as the prompt NO remains the major contributor to the
total NO in the entire partially premixed regime. This
represents an important difference in the NOx charac-
teristics of n-heptane and methane partially premixed
ﬂames and has not been reported by previous investi-
gations.
Fig. 9. Mole fraction proﬁles of the prompt and thermal NO
in methane and n-heptane/air PPFs discussed in the context
of Fig. 8.
Several additional simulations were performed to
characterize the effects of φ and as on the relative
contributions of the prompt and thermal mechanisms
in the two reaction zones and to conﬁrm the crossover
observed for methane ﬂames. The general observa-
tions with regard to the relative contributions of the
prompt and thermal mechanisms and with regard to
the crossover for methane ﬂames were the same as
those discussed in the preceding sections.
4.5. Comparison of NOx characteristics with regard
to NOx emission index (EINOx)
The global NOx characteristics of methane and n-
heptane PPFs can be compared by plotting the NOx
emission index as a function of fuel-rich equivalence
ratio and global strain rate. The NOx emission index
is deﬁned as
(4)
EINOx =
 L
0 MNOx ˙ωNOx dx
−
 L
0 Mfuel ˙ωfuel dx
.
Here, M represents the molecular weight, ˙ω is the
net production/consumption rate, L is the distance be-
tween the nozzles, and x is the axial coordinate. The
emission index is a global parameter that has been
commonly used to characterize NOx emission from
different ﬂames [6,16,21].
Fig. 10 presents the NOx emission index as a func-
tion of φ for n-heptane and methane PPFs established
at strain rates of as = 50 and 100 s−1. There are two
important observations from this ﬁgure. One, EINOx
is much higher for n-heptane ﬂames than for methane
ﬂames. While their relative values depend upon φ and
as, EINOx for n-heptane ﬂames is generally 5 to 10
times higher than that for methane ﬂames. This is
consistent with the results presented in the preceding


--- Page 11 ---

100
S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
Fig. 10. NOx emission index plotted versus φ for methane
and n-heptane PPFs established at as = 50 and 100 s−1.
sections and can be attributed to the dominant path-
ways involving the C1 and C2 species, leading to a
signiﬁcantly higher amount of acetylene being pro-
duced in n-heptane ﬂames. Two, with regard to the
dependence of EINOx on φ in the double-ﬂame and
merged-ﬂame regimes, in the double-ﬂame regime,
the EINOx exhibits strong dependence on φ, while
in the merged-ﬂame regime, the emission index has a
weak dependence on φ, decreasing slowly to the dif-
fusion ﬂame limit as φ is increased.
As noted earlier, the ranges of φ and as for the
double-ﬂame regime are signiﬁcantly different for the
two fuels. For n-heptane ﬂames, this regime is ap-
proximately given by 1.5 < φ < 3.5 and 20 < as <
120 s−1, while for methane ﬂames, it is given by
1.4 < φ < 2.0 and 20 < as < 50 s−1. Moreover, as
as (or φ) increases, the range of φ (or as) for the
double-ﬂame region becomes narrower for both fu-
els. For n-heptane ﬂames at as = 50 s−1, this regime
is given by 1.5 < φ < 3.0. In this regime, as indicated
in Fig. 10, the EINOx ﬁrst increases and then de-
creases with φ. In the merged-ﬂame regime (φ > 3.0),
the EINOx decreases slowly with φ as it approaches
the diffusion ﬂame limit. A similar behavior is ob-
served for methane ﬂames at as = 50 s−1, except
that the double-ﬂame regime is narrower, given by
1.4 < φ < 2.0, and the EINOx is much lower than
that for n-heptane ﬂames. The EINOx values in the
diffusion ﬂame limit are 7.2 and 1.3, respectively,
for n-heptane and methane ﬂames. The above results
are consistent with those reported by previous re-
searchers. For n-heptane ﬂames, a detailed discussion
on the variation of EINOx with φ has been provided
by Xue and Aggarwal [21]. As discussed in the cited
study, for as = 50 s−1, the variation of EINOx with φ
in the double-ﬂame region is related to the interaction
of the two reaction zones as the level of the partial
premixed zone is reduced. For lower φ (φ = 1.5), the
premixed reaction zone is located far from the non-
premixed zone. Consequently, there is little transport
of C2H2 from the premixed zone to the nonpremixed
zone, and this reduces the prompt NO formation rate
in the latter zone. This in turn decreases the total NO
formation rate, since most of the NO in n-heptane
ﬂames formed due to the prompt mechanism. As φ
is increased, interactions between the two reaction
zones are enhanced due to the reduced separation dis-
tance between them and the transport of C2H2 to the
nonpremixed zone becomes signiﬁcant. This causes a
signiﬁcant increase in the prompt NO formation rate
in the nonpremixed zone. The thermal NO formation
rate in this zone is also enhanced due to the increased
radical activity. Consequently, as φ is increased, the
total NO formation rate increases, which leads to
higher EINOx. This trend does not continue, however,
since further increase in φ leads to a transition from
the double-ﬂame to the merged-ﬂame regime, and
EINOx then decreases slowly with φ. Our results with
regard to the variation of EINOx with φ for methane
PPFs are consistent with those reported in previous
investigations [6,23,40]. The computed EINOx values
in the present study agree well with those reported by
Li and Williams [6]. For example, for a methane ﬂame
established at φ = 3.0 and as = 50 s−1, the EINOx
values in our simulation and in [6] are 1.46 and 1.4,
respectively. There is also good qualitative agreement
between our results and those reported by Blevins and
Gore [23] and Nishioka et al. [40], although a quanti-
tative comparison could not be done due to different
parameters.
For the higher-strain case (as = 100 s−1), the
double-ﬂame regime for n-heptane ﬂames is given by
1.5 < φ < 2.5, and in this range, the EINOx ﬁrst de-
creases, reaching a minimum at φ ≈1.75, and then
increases as φ is increased up to 2.5. For φ > 2.5,
which corresponds to the merged-ﬂame region, the
EINOx again decreases slowly to the diffusion ﬂame
value of 7.93 as φ is increased. For methane ﬂames
at as = 100 s−1, there is no double-ﬂame region, and,
consequently, the EINOx decreases slowly to the dif-
fusion ﬂame limit.
4.6. Effect of using fuel blends on NOx emissions
The second part of this paper focuses on the ef-
fect of adding hydrogen on the NOx characteristics of
methane and n-heptane ﬂames. For methane ﬂames,
we employed two different approaches to character-
ize the effect of hydrogen addition on NOx emission.
In the ﬁrst approach, which has been used previously
by Rortveit et al. [13], the peak ﬂame temperature for
different CH4–H2 blends is kept constant by using ni-
trogen dilution. The objective is to validate our results
by comparing them with those from the cited study


--- Page 12 ---

S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
101
Fig. 11. NO (a) and CH (b) mole fraction proﬁles for
nonpremixed ﬂames established with different methane/
hydrogen blends at a strain rate of 100 s−1. Nitrogen dilution
is used to maintain the peak ﬂame temperature at 2040 K for
all the cases.
and to eliminate the temperature effect on NOx emis-
sion as the amount of hydrogen addition is increased.
In the second approach, no nitrogen dilution is used,
which allows us to characterize the effect of hydrogen
addition on both the prompt and the thermal NO.
Fig. 11 presents the NO and CH mole fraction pro-
ﬁles for nonpremixed ﬂames simulated using CH4–
H2 blends with nitrogen dilution. The global strain
rate is 100 s−1 and the distance between the nozzles
is 1.27 cm. Results are presented for four different
blends containing 0, 10, 50, and 90% H2 by vol-
ume. For all four cases, the peak ﬂame temperature
was maintained at 2040 K using nitrogen dilution.
Results for the 0% hydrogen case were indistinguish-
able from those for the 10% hydrogen case and are
not shown in the ﬁgure. As indicated in Fig. 11a, as
the H2 concentration is increased, the amount of NO
formed decreases in a monotonic manner. This is due
to a reduction in prompt NO, since thermal NO re-
mains essentially the same as the ﬂame temperature is
maintained constant. These results are consistent with
those reported by Rortveit et al. [13]. Further insight
Fig. 12. Temperature (a) and NO mole fraction (b) proﬁles
for nonpremixed ﬂames established at as = 100 s−1, using
different methane/hydrogen blends without nitrogen dilu-
tion.
into this behavior is provided by the CH proﬁles pre-
sented in Fig. 11b. As the amount of H2 in the blend
is increased, the CH concentration decreases, since
the amount of methane in the fuel blend decreases,
which in turn decreases the prompt NO. It is worth
mentioning, however, that a relatively large amount of
H2 is needed to bring a noticeable reduction in NOx
emission. For example, addition of 10% H2 by vol-
ume (1.4% by mass) has essentially no effect on the
computed NO proﬁle, while addition of 50% H2 by
volume (or 11.1% by mass) decreases the peak NO
value by about 30%.
Fig. 12 presents the temperature and NO mole
fraction proﬁles for nonpremixed ﬂames using CH4–
H2 blends without nitrogen dilution. Results are
shown for four different blends containing 10, 50, 70,
and 90% H2 by volume, or 1.4, 11.1, 22.6, and 52.9%
H2 by mass. Results for the 0% H2 were again in-
distinguishable from those for 10% H2 and are not
included in the ﬁgure. As expected, H2 addition in
the fuel blend increases the ﬂame temperature (cf.


--- Page 13 ---

102
S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
Fig. 13. Thermal and prompt NO proﬁles for nonpremixed
ﬂames established using two different methane/hydrogen
blends containing 50 and 70% H2 by volume.
Fig. 12a), since the adiabatic ﬂame temperature in-
creases with hydrogen addition. For the four cases
depicted in Fig. 12, the peak ﬂame temperatures are
2027, 2130, 2199, and 2294 K, and the corresponding
adiabatic ﬂame temperatures are 2324, 2368, 2408,
and 2484 K, respectively. The ﬂame width also in-
creases with H2 in the fuel blend, since the effective
mass diffusivity is enhanced due to hydrogen addi-
tion. The effect of hydrogen addition on NO emission
is illustrated in Fig. 12b. Although the peak NO value
exhibits a nonmonotonic variation with H2 concen-
tration, as it ﬁrst increases (for H2 up to 50% by
volume) and then decreases, the important observa-
tion is that hydrogen addition has a relatively minor
effect on NOx concentration in methane ﬂames. The
peak NO varies in a very narrow range as the amount
of H2 in the blend is increased from 10 to 90% by
volume. This can be attributed to the fact that the ad-
dition of H2 decreases the prompt NO, as it lowers the
CH concentration, but increases the thermal NO due
to the higher ﬂame temperature. This is conﬁrmed by
plotting the thermal and prompt NO proﬁles shown in
Fig. 13. The prompt NO decreases while the thermal
NO increases as H2 in the blend is increased from 50
to 70% by volume. Since these two effects essentially
cancel each other, the hydrogen addition has an incon-
sequential effect on NOx concentration in methane
ﬂames.
Fig. 14 presents the temperature and NO mole
fraction proﬁles for nonpremixed ﬂames established
using different n-heptane/hydrogen fuel blends with-
out nitrogen dilution. For the four cases depicted in
the ﬁgure, the fuel blend contains 10, 50, 70, and
90% H2 by volume or 0.22, 1.96, 4.46, and 15.25%
H2 by mass. It is important to note that for the same
Fig. 14. Temperature (a) and NO mole fraction (b) pro-
ﬁles for nonpremixed ﬂames established with different
n-heptane/H2 blends at as = 100 s−1.
amount of H2 by volume, the hydrogen mass in a
n-heptane/hydrogen blend is much smaller than that
in a methane/hydrogen blend. The temperature pro-
ﬁles in Fig. 14a indicate that the addition of H2 in the
fuel blend increases the ﬂame temperature and thick-
ness. However, the effect is small compared to that
observed for CH4–H2 blends.
The NO mole fraction proﬁles presented in
Fig. 14b indicate that the NOx emission in n-heptane
ﬂames can be signiﬁcantly reduced using H2 addi-
tion, which is in contrast to that for methane ﬂames,
for which the NOx emission is only marginally af-
fected by H2 addition. For n-heptane ﬂames, as the
amount of H2 in the blend is increased, it signiﬁ-
cantly lowers the NO concentration. As noted earlier,
50 and 70% H2 by volume represent only 1.96 and
4.46% H2 by mass, implying that a relatively small
H2 mass can signiﬁcantly reduce NO emission in n-
heptane ﬂames. This is due to the fact that most of
the NO in n-heptane ﬂames is formed through the
prompt mechanism, and the prompt NO is signiﬁ-
cantly reduced by adding H2 in the blend. This is
conﬁrmed by the prompt and thermal NO proﬁles


--- Page 14 ---

S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
103
Fig. 15. Thermal and prompt NO proﬁles for nonpremixed
ﬂames established using two different n-heptane/hydrogen
blends containing 50 and 70% H2 by volume or 1.96 and
15.25% H2 by mass.
shown in Fig. 15. As hydrogen mass in the blend is in-
creased from 1.96 to 4.46%, the prompt NO decreases
considerably while the thermal NO increases only
slightly. As indicated in Fig. 15, the addition of hy-
drogen in the blend leads to a signiﬁcant reduction in
CH concentration, which causes a signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in prompt NO. Although the addition of hydrogen
increases thermal NO due to the increased ﬂame tem-
perature, its effect on the total NO is negligible, due
to the dominance of the prompt mechanism. Thus
an important observation here is that the addition of
hydrogen can signiﬁcantly reduce NOx emission in n-
heptane ﬂames but has a negligible effect in methane
ﬂames.
5. Conclusions
In this numerical study we have examined the
effects of using different fuels on NOx emissions
in counterﬂow nonpremixed and partially premixed
ﬂames. The fuels investigated include methane, n-
heptane, and their blends using hydrogen. Methane
ﬂames have been computed using the GRI-Mech 3.0
mechanism, while n-heptane has been computed by
combining the Held et al. oxidation mechanism with
the Li and Williams NOx mechanism. While these
mechanisms have been validated previously in sev-
eral conﬁgurations, two additional validations for the
simulation of methane and n-heptane PPFs have been
provided in the present study. A detailed investigation
has been conducted to characterize the fuel effects on
NOx emissions. Important observations are the fol-
lowing:
(1) In the context of NOx characteristics, the par-
tial premixed combustion can be classiﬁed into
two distinct regimes, namely a double-ﬂame
regime and a merged-ﬂame regime. In the ﬁrst
regime, a partially premixed ﬂame contains two
distinct or physically separated reaction zones,
namely a rich premixed zone on the fuel side
and a nonpremixed zone on the oxidizer side.
In the second regime, these two reaction zones
are nearly merged. The double-ﬂame regime is
characterized by relatively high levels of partial
premixing and low strain rates. With increasing
φ and/or as, the two reaction zones move closer
and eventually merge, representing a transition
to the merged-ﬂame regime. Due to the differ-
ence in fuel pyrolysis/oxidation chemistry, the
ranges of φ and as for the double-ﬂame regime
are signiﬁcantly different for the two fuels. For
counterﬂow methane ﬂames, this regime is ap-
proximately given by 1.4 < φ < 2.0 and 20 <
as < 50 s−1, while for n-heptane ﬂames, it is
given by 1.5 < φ < 3.5 and 20 < as < 120 s−1.
(2) In the double-ﬂame regime, NOx characteris-
tics of both methane and n-heptane ﬂames are
strongly affected by changes in φ and as, while
in the merged-ﬂame regime, they exhibit a rel-
atively weak dependence on φ and as. More-
over, in the double-ﬂame regime, the methane
and n-heptane ﬂames established under identical
conditions exhibit widely different NOx emis-
sion behavior, while in the merged-ﬂame regime,
their NOx characteristics are qualitatively sim-
ilar. These differences are also observed in the
NOx emission indices for both the methane and
the n-heptane ﬂames and are related to their re-
spective fuel oxidation chemistry.
(3) Under identical conditions, the amount of NO
produced in n-heptane ﬂames is signiﬁcantly
higher than that in methane ﬂames, and this is
directly attributable to the higher concentration
of acetylene in n-heptane ﬂames. A rate of pro-
duction analysis indicated that the consumption
of n-heptane occurs mainly through the C2 path,
while that of methane occurs mainly through the
C1 path, with the implication that the amount
of C2H2 formed in n-heptane ﬂames is signiﬁ-
cantly higher than that in methane ﬂames. This
leads to a much higher concentration of CH
radicals and, consequently, of prompt NO in n-
heptane ﬂames. The thermal NO is also higher
in n-heptane ﬂames due to the higher tempera-
ture and higher O and OH radical concentrations.
Consequently, the amount of total NO formed in
n-heptane ﬂames is signiﬁcantly higher than that
in methane ﬂames.


--- Page 15 ---

104
S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
(4) For both methane and n-heptane ﬂames, the NO
level in the nonpremixed reaction zone far ex-
ceeds that in the premixed reaction zone. This is
due to the paucity of O and OH radicals and to
a lesser extent to lower temperature in the pre-
mixed zone. While CH radicals are produced in
both the premixed and the nonpremixed reac-
tion zones and immediately lead to the forma-
tion of HCN through the reaction CH + N2 ↔
HCN + N, the subsequent conversion of HCN to
NO occurs mainly in the nonpremixed zone due
to the availability of O and OH radicals there.
Consequently, the prompt NO is much higher in
this zone than in the premixed zone. The thermal
NO is also higher in the nonpremixed zone due to
the higher temperature and radical concentration
in this zone.
(5) Another important difference in the NOx char-
acteristics of the two fuels pertains to the rel-
ative contributions of the prompt and thermal
mechanisms in the two regimes. For n-heptane
ﬂames, the prompt mechanism is the major con-
tributor to the total NO in both the double-ﬂame
and the merged-ﬂame regimes. In contrast, for
methane ﬂames, the thermal mechanism is the
major contributor to the total NO in the double-
ﬂame regime, while the prompt mechanism be-
comes the major contributor in the merged-ﬂame
regime. This switch between the relative contri-
butions of the thermal and prompt NO during
transition from the double-ﬂame to the merged-
ﬂame regime occurs only in methane ﬂames. It
is also noteworthy that for n-heptane ﬂames, the
amount of NO formed due to the prompt mech-
anism far exceeds that formed due to the ther-
mal mechanism in the entire partially premixed
regime, and the difference becomes greater with
increase in φ and as. This is again attributable
to the signiﬁcantly higher amount of acetylene
produced in the premixed zone, which is sub-
sequently transported to the nonpremixed zone
in n-heptane ﬂames. In contrast, for methane
ﬂames, the amount of acetylene transported to
the nonpremixed zone is relatively small, and the
relative contributions of the prompt and thermal
mechanisms are generally comparable.
(6) NOx characteristics of methane/hydrogen and n-
heptane/hydrogen blends have also been inves-
tigated. Results indicate that the addition of hy-
drogen can signiﬁcantly reduce NOx emission in
n-heptane ﬂames but has a negligible effect on
NOx emission in methane ﬂames. This is due to
the fact that most of the NO in n-heptane ﬂames
is produced through the prompt mechanism, and
the prompt NO is signiﬁcantly reduced by H2,
since the C2H2 and, consequently, the CH con-
centrations are reduced due to H2 addition. In
contrast, for methane ﬂames, the decrease in the
prompt NO due to hydrogen addition is balanced
by the corresponding increase in the thermal NO,
and the total NO is essentially unaffected by hy-
drogen addition.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the NSF Combus-
tions and Plasma Systems Program for which Drs.
Farley Fisher and Thomas Chapman have been the
Program Directors. We thank Professor F.L. Dryer
and Dr. T. Held for providing the n-heptane mecha-
nism, Mr. Hongshe Xue for help with numerical simu-
lations, and Mr. Paolo Berta for performing n-heptane
ﬂame simulations using a more comprehensive mech-
anism. Many stimulating discussions with Professor
I.K. Puri are gratefully appreciated.
References
[1] R.S. Barlow, C.D. Carter, Combust. Flame 104 (1996)
288–299.
[2] A.N. Hayhurst, A.D. Lawrence, Combust. Flame 105
(1996) 341–357.
[3] M.C. Meunier, M.G. Carvalho, Combust. Flame 112
(1998) 221–230.
[4] A. Schlegel, P. Benz, T. Grifﬁn, W. Weisenstein, H.
Bockhorn, Combust. Flame 105 (1996) 332–340.
[5] C. Poppe, S. Sivasegaram, J.H. Whitelaw, Combust.
Flame 113 (1998) 13–26.
[6] S.C. Li, F.A. Williams, Combust. Flame 118 (1999)
399–414.
[7] J. Warnatz, P. Klaus, CEC reaction mechanism for
methane/air combustion, http://www.ca.sandia.gov/tdf/
3rdworkshop/chemmech/JW-C2NO98.mec.html.
[8] Leeds NOx mechanism, http://www.chem.leeds.ac.uk/
combustion/nox.html.
[9] J.A. Miller, C.T. Bowman, Prog. Energy Combust.
Sci. 15 (1989) 287.
[10] C.E. Roberts, Determination of the effect of wa-
ter on soot formation, http://www.swri.edu/3pubs/
IRD1999/03907399.htm.
[11] G.J. Rortveit, J.E. Hustad, S.C. Li, F.A. Williams, Com-
bust. Flame 130 (2002) 48–61.
[12] D. Zhao, H. Yamashita, K. Kitawaga, N. Arai, T. Fu-
ruhata, Combust. Flame 130 (2002) 352–360.
[13] G.J. Rortveit, J.E. Hustad, F.A. Williams, NOx forma-
tion in diluted CH4/H2 counterﬂow diffusion ﬂames,
in: Proc. of the 6th International Conference on Tech-
nologies and Combustion for a Clean Environment,
Porto, Portugal.
[14] M.A.S. Al-Baghdadi, Renewable Energy 28 (9) (2002)
1471–1478.
[15] A.R. Choudhuri, S.R. Gollahali, Int. J. Hydrogen En-
ergy 28 (4) (2002) 445–454.


--- Page 16 ---

S. Naha, S.K. Aggarwal / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 90–105
105
[16] J.P. Gore, N.J. Zhan, Combust. Flame 105 (1996) 414–
427.
[17] M.A. Tanoff, M.D. Smooke, R.J. Osborne, T.M.
Brown, R.W. Pitz, Proc. Combust. Inst. 26 (1996)
1121–1128.
[18] R.V.
Ravikrishna,
N.M.
Laurendeau,
Combust.
Flame 122 (2000) 471–482.
[19] R.S. Barlow, A.N. Karpetis, J.H. Frank, J.Y. Chen,
Combust. Flame 127 (2001) 2102–2118.
[20] V. Dupont, A. Williams, Combust. Flame 114 (1998)
103–118.
[21] H.S. Xue, S.K. Aggarwal, Combust. Flame 132 (2003)
723–741.
[22] H.S. Xue, S.K. Aggarwal, R.J. Osborne, T.M. Brown,
R.W. Pitz, AIAA J. 40 (6) (2002) 1236–1238.
[23] L.G. Blevins, J.P. Gore, Combust. Flame 116 (1999)
546–566.
[24] A.E. Lutz, R.J. Kee, J.F. Grear, F.M. Rupley, OPPDIF:
A Fortran program for computing opposed ﬂow diffu-
sion ﬂames, Sandia National Laboratories Report No.
SAND96-8243.
[25] R.J. Kee, F.M. Rupley, J.A. Miller, Chemkin: A Fortran
chemical kinetics package for the analysis of gas phase
chemical kinetics, Sandia National Laboratories Report
No. 89-8009B.
[26] T.J. Held, A.J. Marchese, F.L. Dryer, Combust. Sci.
Technol. 123 (1997) 107–146.
[27] G.P. Smith, D.M. Golden, M. Frenklach, N.W. Mori-
arty, B. Eiteneer, M. Goldenberg, C.T. Bowman, R.K.
Hanson, S. Song, W.C. Gardiner Jr., V.V. Lissianski,
Z. Qin, GRI Mech-3.0, http://www.me.berkeley.edu/
grimech/.
[28] C.J. Sung, C.K. Law, J.Y. Chen, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 27 (1998) 295–304.
[29] C.J. Montgomery, M.A. Cremer, M.P. Heap, J.Y. Chen,
C.K. Westbrook, L.Q. Maurice, Reduced chemical
kinetic mechanisms for hydrocarbon fuels, in: 35th
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference
and Exhibit, Los Angeles, California, 1999.
[30] S.G. Davis, C.K. Law, Proc. Combust. Inst. 27 (1998)
521–527.
[31] R. Seiser, L. Truett, D. Trees, K. Seshadri, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 27 (1998) 649–657.
[32] E. Ranzi, M. Dente, G. Bozanno, A. Goldaniga, T. Far-
avelli, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 27 (2001) 99–139.
[33] H. Xue, S.K. Aggarwal, AIAA J. 39 (2001) 637–648.
[34] S.C. Li, F.A. Williams, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28 (2000)
1031.
[35] Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for methane
(CH4), Voltaix, Inc., Post Ofﬁce Box 5357, North
Branch, NJ 08876-5357, USA, 1994 (Revised 1996).
[36] Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for heptane, Math-
eson Tri-Gas, Inc., 959 Route 46 East Chemtrec 1-
800-424-9300, Parsippany, NJ 07054-0624, USA, 1989
(Revised 2002).
[37] D.C. Horning, D.F. Davidson, R.K. Hanson, J. Propul.
Power 18 (2) (2002) 363–371.
[38] Y. Hidaka, K. Sato, Y. Henmi, H. Tanaka, K. Inami,
Combust. Flame 118 (1999) 340–358.
[39] T. Turanyi, Kinalc homepage, http://www.chem.leeds.
ac.uk/Combustion/kinalc.html.
[40] M. Nishioka, S. Nakagawa, Y. Ishikawa, T. Takeno,
Combust. Flame 98 (1994) 127–138.
