
--- Page 1 ---

Clifford A. Moses
Southwest Research Institute,
San Antonio, TX 78228
Petrus N. J. Roets
Sasol Technology Fuels Research,
Houston, TX 77224
Properties, Characteristics, and
Combustion Performance of
Sasol Fully Synthetic Jet Fuel
In 1999, as the only inland petroleum reﬁnery in South Africa was reaching capacity,
Sasol gained approval of a semisynthetic jet fuel (SSJF) for civil aviation to augment
production and meet the growing demand for jet fuel at the airport in Johannesburg.
Prior to this, all jet fuel had to be reﬁned from petroleum sources. SSJF consists of up to
50% of an isoparafﬁnic kerosene produced from coal using Fischer–Tropsch processes.
The production of SSJF remains vulnerable to the production capacity of conventional jet
fuel, however. To ensure supply, Sasol has proposed producing a fully synthetic jet fuel
(FSJF) using synthetic kerosene streams that contain aromatics and satisfy all the prop-
erty requirements of international speciﬁcations for jet fuel. Being fully synthetic, it was
necessary to demonstrate that the fuel is “ﬁt-for-purpose” as jet fuel, i.e., behaves like
conventional jet fuel in all aspects of storage and handling as well as air worthiness and
ﬂight safety. Four sample blends were developed, covering the practical range of pro-
duction. Extensive tests on chemistry and physical properties and characteristics demon-
strated that Sasol FSJF will be typical of conventional jet fuel. As a ﬁnal demonstration,
the engine manufacturers requested a series of engine and combustor tests to evaluate
combustion characteristics, emissions, engine durability, and performance. The perfor-
mance of the synthetic test fuel was typical of conventional jet fuel. This paper identiﬁes
the tests and presents the results demonstrating that Sasol fully synthetic jet fuel is
ﬁt-for-purpose as jet fuel for civilian aviation. Sasol FSJF is the ﬁrst fully synthetic jet
fuel approved for unrestricted use. DOI: 10.1115/1.3028234
1
Introduction
Prior to the introduction of Sasol’s semisynthetic jet fuel SSJF
at Johannesburg International Airport, now named OR Thambo
International Airport ORTIA, in July 1999, all commercial avia-
tion fuel had been derived solely from petroleum sources. The
speciﬁcations controlling the quality of jet fuel has evolved
around the historical characteristics and properties of jet fuels,
assuming a relatively constant, or slowly evolving, range of crude
resource and reﬁning techniques. The Sasol request for the use of
synthetic hydrocarbons derived from coal through their Fischer–
Tropsch FT processing was a signiﬁcant departure from experi-
ence. Since many of the inherent properties of kerosenes that
make them “ﬁt-for-purpose” as jet fuels are not a part of the
speciﬁcation and quality control system, and are rarely measured,
the British Aviation Fuels Committee AFC, which guides the
Defense Standard DEF STAN 91-91 1 fuel speciﬁcation for Jet
A-1, developed a new set of guidelines for fuels containing syn-
thetic products as blending stocks. The concept of ﬁt-for-purpose
will be discussed later in this paper.
If accepted under DEF STAN 91-91, speciﬁc synthetic kero-
senes can now be used in civil aviation in concentrations up to
50%, providing the fuel has adequate lubricity and there are at
least 8% aromatics in the ﬁnal blend, all of which must come from
the petroleum-derived blending stream 1.
Initially SSJF was deﬁned as a blend of the synthetic isoparaf-
ﬁnic kerosene IPK with a Merox-treated kerosene from petro-
leum 2. At that time, this Merox-treated kerosene was one of
three kerosene streams used by Sasol in the production of conven-
tional Jet A-1 along with a mild hydrotreated kerosene and a hy-
drocracked kerosene. It was recognized that should something
happen to the Merox unit, not only would the production of
petroleum-derived Jet A-1 be severely curtailed, but the shortfall
could not be made up by SSJF. Sasol then demonstrated the ability
to successfully incorporate the hydrotreated and hydrocracked
kerosenes into the production of SSJF. The use of these blending
streams for semisynthetic jet fuel was approved in DEF STAN
91-91 Issue 4, dated June 14, 2002.
In 2002, the government of South Africa issued new regulations
for low-sulfur diesel fuel. To meet this requirement, Sasol has had
to use much of the output from the hydrotreater for diesel fuel so
that the hydrotreated product is no longer available for jet fuel.
This means that the Merox-treated kerosene is once again the
critical stream in producing both conventional Jet A-1 and semi-
synthetic Jet A-1.
In order to ensure a reliable supply of jet fuel to Johannesburg
International Airport JIA, in the event of a disruption in the
Merox process stream, Sasol then proposed to use its reﬁnery at
Secunda to provide a second reﬁnery source in the Johannesburg
area. This reﬁnery makes synthetic gasoline and diesel fuel, lubri-
cants, and other hydrocarbons from coal via a Fisher–Tropsch
process and is the source of the IPK currently used in making
semisynthetic jet fuel. While IPK does not contain the necessary
aromatics to be considered ﬁt-for-purpose as a jet fuel, the reﬁnery
has four other synthetic kerosene streams that do contain single-
ring aromatics in the jet fuel boiling range. These are mature
reﬁnery streams currently used in the production of gasoline and
diesel fuel and will be discussed later in regard to the new fully
synthetic jet fuel.
This paper describes the process for demonstrating that the Sa-
sol fully synthetic jet fuel is ﬁt-for-purpose as jet fuel for civil
aviation and presents results of both the properties and character-
istics of the fuel as well as performance characteristics in engine
and combustor tests. As the world’s ﬁrst fully synthetic jet fuel,
this approval process will be the basis for the approval of future
synthetic jet fuels.
Manuscript received May 7, 2008; ﬁnal manuscript received May 25, 2008; pub-
lished online April 16, 2009. Review conducted by Dilip R. Balla. Paper presented at
the ASME Turbo Expo 2008: Land, Sea and Air GT2008, June 9–13, Berlin, Ger-
many.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2009, Vol. 131 / 041502-1
Copyright © 2009 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

2
Fuel Processing
Sasol makes synthetic hydrocarbons from a synthesis gas, i.e.,
carbon monoxide and hydrogen, using a high-temperature FT pro-
cess with an iron catalyst. The synthesis gas is derived from the
coal resources in South Africa. The Sasol process is unique in that
distillate fractions are produced which contain aromatic hydrocar-
bons. This difference is due to the historical need by Sasol to
produce gasoline and diesel fuel from their coal resource. Hence,
the catalysts and operating conditions have a different focus than
other plants currently online and/or being developed.
Other reﬁners, e.g., Shell, Exxon-Mobil, Chevron-Texaco, and
Syntroleum, have developed, or are in the process of developing,
FT plants to make synthetic hydrocarbons from synthesis gas de-
rived from natural gas. The latter are commonly known as “gas-
to-liquid” GTL fuels. A low-temperature FT process with a co-
balt catalyst is used and the resulting distillate fractions are
comprised of normal parafﬁns and isoparafﬁns. Because they con-
tain no aromatic hydrocarbons, under the current understanding of
ﬁt-for-purpose, these fuels would not be appropriate as jet fuels
but would be excellent blending streams in the same way that
Sasol uses IPK to make semisynthetic jet fuel.
Figure 1 illustrates the production scheme of the Sasol FSJF. In
addition to IPK, there are four distillate streams from which kero-
sene fractions can be distilled. The initial step, of course, is the
gasiﬁcation of coal to synthesis gas, hydrogen H2, and carbon
monoxide CO. The synthesis gas is then passed over an iron-
based catalyst according to the Fischer–Tropsch process to yield a
wide-boiling-range synthetic crude oil.
The IPK stream in the middle of the schematic is the kerosene
that is used for making semisynthetic jet fuel. It is the dominant
stream in making fully synthetic jet fuel. The other streams are
either the heavier fractions of a naphtha stream normally used for
making gasoline or the lighter fractions of a distillate stream nor-
mally used for making diesel fuel. One set of each comes from the
FT crude oil on the right or from the by-product of the coal gas-
iﬁcation process shown on the left of the diagram. These are all
mature streams used for making gasoline, diesel fuel, or illumi-
nating kerosene.
Four sample blends of synthetic jet fuel were blended to em-
phasize different combinations of the synthetic kerosenes and to
cover a practical range of aromatics from about 8% to 17%.
Note: Only four of the ﬁve blend streams were used as the light
naphtha 2 was not available at the time. The blend ratios and
aromatic analyses are summarized in Table 1; the petroleum-
derived Jet A-1 from Sasol’s Natref reﬁnery is included for com-
parison. Figure 2 presents the results of an analysis by two-
dimensional
gas
chromatography
2D
GC.
These
ﬁgures
demonstrate that the synthetic fuels are made up of a large number
of hydrocarbons that are well-distributed across the jet-fuel boil-
ing range. They are not made by simply blending together a few
pure compounds or solvents.
These four fuels demonstrate that there is considerable ﬂexibil-
ity in using the four synthetic kerosenes to produce candidate jet
fuels. All four of these fuels were certiﬁed by Sasol as meeting the
property requirements of Table 1 in DEF STAN 91-91 for Jet A-1
fuel.
3
Concept of Fit-For-Purpose
Fuel speciﬁcations are merely controls on fuel quality for the
purpose of purchase. They do not deﬁne all the properties and
characteristics that are important for the design and function of
aircraft, engine, and ground-handling fuel systems. Many of these
Fig. 1
Production schematic for Sasol fully synthetic jet fuel
Table 1
Sample blends of Sasol synthetic kerosene
Synthetic
kerosene stream
FSJF
Blend 1
FSJF
Blend
2
FSJF
Blend
3
FSJF
Blend
4
Natref
Jet A-1
Heavy naphtha 1
15
15
13
59
—
Light distillate 1
18
—
10
—
—
Light distillate 2
—
30
20
36
—
Isoparafﬁnic
kerosene
67
55
57
5
—
Chemistry
FSJF
Blend 1
FSJF
Blend
2
FSJF
Blend
3
FSJF
Blend
4
Natref
Jet A-1
Aromatics, v %
7.2
13.6
12.5
16.9
22.9
Saturates, v %
92.8
86.4
8705
83.1
77.1
041502-2 / Vol. 131, JULY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

properties and characteristics are not a part of the speciﬁcation
and quality control system and are, therefore, rarely measured.
The issues and concerns used in this project were based on the
criteria deﬁned in DEF STAN 91-91: Annex D entitled “Addi-
tional Requirements Applicable to Fuels Containing Synthetic
Compounds.” These requirements were ﬁrst deﬁned by the AFC
in the UK to ensure that SSJF using the synthetic IPK was ﬁt-for-
purpose. This Committee includes engine and airframe manufac-
turers, reﬁners, and other stakeholders in the use of aviation fuels.
Table 2 provides a general overview of these critical issues. All of
the elements except the chemistry apply to the ﬁnal fuel. The
results of this evaluation on the four blends are presented in Sec.
4.
4
Properties and Characteristics of Sasol FSJF
Three of the most important characteristics to engine manufac-
turers are the thermal stability, lubricity, and material compatibil-
ity. The results of these evaluations are presented along with rep-
resentative bulk physical properties.
4.1
Thermal Stability. The thermal stability of jet fuel is
rated by the color of the deposit after the fuel has passed over a
heated tube for 2.5 h using the Jet Fuel Thermal Oxidation Test
JFTOT according to ASTM D 3241 3. The standard tube tem-
perature for this test is 260°C 500°F. To pass the test, the
deposit must have a color rating less than 3. Darker deposits have
a higher number. The Sasol synthetic blends not only passed the
test at the standard temperature but also demonstrated superior
thermal stability by easily passing the test at 300°C 572°F, a
signiﬁcantly higher temperature.
The possibility that the synthetic fuels might generate deposits
that have a different color than conventional fuels was considered.
As a precaution, the deposit thickness was measured using the
Phillips Analytical Fuel Qualiﬁer, formerly known as the Ellipso-
metric Tube Analyzer ETA. Figures 3 and 4 compare deposit
maps for one of the Sasol blends and a Code 3 deposit from a
petroleum-derived fuel. The deposit from the Sasol fuel was uni-
Fig. 2
Distribution of saturates and aromatics in Sasol synthetic kerosene blends
Table 2
General areas of issues and concerns
Chemistry of synthetic components
Hydrocarbons
Organics
Metals
Bulk physical properties versus temperature
Boiling point distribution
Lubricity
Water separation
Compatibility
Fuels
Additives
Materials
Stability
Thermal
Storage
Fig. 3
JFTOT deposit map for Sasol FSJF with Code 1 deposit
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2009, Vol. 131 / 041502-3
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

form around the tube and had a maximum thickness just under
20 nm. This is consistent with the thickness of Code 1 deposits
generated by conventional fuels. The Code 3 deposit was also
very uniform around the tube and had a maximum thickness of
about 120 nm. Experience with conventional fuels shows that
Code 3 deposits start around 100 nm. Therefore, it was concluded
that the JFTOT deposits from Sasol FSJF will be just like those of
conventional fuels, and the current rating system is valid.
4.2
Evaluation of Elastomer Compatibility. Elastomer com-
patibility is considered one of the key areas for demonstrating that
any alternative fuel is ﬁt-for-purpose because the chemistry is
potentially somewhat different and could affect the response and
durability of some elastomeric compounds that are sensitive to
fuel chemistry.
4.2.1
Selection of Test Materials. There are three basic mate-
rials used in fabricating sealing items, such as O-rings, gaskets,
diaphragms, bladders, and hose linings, used in aviation fuel sys-
tems:
1. nitrile Buna-N
2. ﬂuorocarbon Viton
3. ﬂuorosilicone
Of these three materials, only nitrile materials exhibit any signiﬁ-
cant sensitivity to fuel chemistry. This is due to the solvent activ-
ity of aromatics on the acrilonitrile plasticizer that is used in this
class of materials. The amount of acrilonitrile used in the formu-
lation is a balance between fuel sensitivity and low-temperature
capability. One of the major reasons aromatics are limited to
25 vol % in jet fuel is to prevent the fuel from being too strong a
solvent on nitrile elastomers.
On the other hand, some consistent level of aromatics is
thought to be necessary in jet fuel. Nitrile elastomers can swell
and shrink as the aromatic content changes. For this reason a
minimum aromatic level of 8 vol % was placed on semisynthetic
jet fuel in DEF STAN 91-91. The aviation community does not
agree on whether a minimum aromatic level is required or what it
should be; there is a lack of data in this area. The choice of 8%
was considered a conservative safeguard.
It was shown in Fig. 2 that the aromatics in FSJF blends are in
the jet-fuel boiling range. There really is limited variability in the
molecular structures available in this range. Thus, the real issue is
to demonstrate that the Sasol synthetic fuels behave like
petroleum-derived fuels when in contact with these three elas-
tomer types.
4.2.2
Elastomer Property Tests for Fuel Compatibility. Three
properties were tested as indicators or measures of fuel effects.
Reference 4 discusses the relevance of these tests to fuel resis-
tance.
1. Volume change: Excessive volume shrinkage can cause
leakage; swell is usually accompanied by a decrease in hard-
ness. For static O-ring applications, a 50% increase in vol-
ume can usually be tolerated. For dynamic applications, 15–
20% is considered a reasonable maximum.
2. Hardness: Hardness relates to the ability of the material to
ﬂow, and the desired level varies with the application. In
static applications, a softer material ﬁlls in the microgrooves
more easily to generate a seal; on the other hand, the mate-
rial can extrude out of the cavity more easily. In dynamic
applications, a harder compound may allow some leakage
but will reduce sliding friction; softer compounds may tend
to abrade, wear, and extrude. It is important that contact with
fuel does not alter the hardness too much.
3. Tensile strength: This property is primarily used for produc-
tion quality control; it also is useful as an indicator of dete-
rioration after fuel contact.
These tests were conducted on four new O-rings of each material
according to the appropriate ASTM standards following a 14-day
soak in the test fuel at 23.92.8°C 755°F. The results re-
ported are the averages for the four samples.
4.2.3
Test Results. In the graphical presentations of the results,
the effects of the synthetic fuels are compared to that of the
petroleum-derived Jet A-1 from Sasol’s Natref reﬁnery; the results
are ordered according to increasing aromatic content in the fuel.
Figure 5 compares the fuel effects on the swell of the O-rings
expressed as the percentage change in volume according to ASTM
D 471 5. As expected, the ﬂuorosilicone and ﬂuorocarbon
O-rings were relatively insensitive to the various fuels as the dif-
ferences are only a percent or so and of the same order of mag-
nitude as the Natref Jet A-1. The nitrile tests, however, showed the
expected increase in volume that was directly related to the aro-
Fig. 4
JFTOT deposit map for conventional fuel with Code 3 deposit
041502-4 / Vol. 131, JULY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

matic content. Also shown in this graph are the limits of allowable
swell for static and dynamic applications 4. These results show
that the swell produced by the Sasol synthetic fuels is both accept-
able and typical.
Figure 6 presents data on the fuel effects on the hardness of the
elastomers according to ASTM D 2240 6. It is important to note
that the hardness rating is only good to 5 durometer numbers.
The hardness ratings of the ﬂuorosilicone and ﬂuorocarbon
O-rings were essentially unaffected by fuel soaking. The nitrile
O-rings were slightly softer following fuel soaking than their
original values in air; although small, the effect was directly re-
lated to increasing aromatic content. The effects of the Sasol syn-
thetic fuels are no different than the effect of the Natref fuel.
Tensile strength is important in dynamic seals where a mini-
mum tensile strength of 6900 kPa 1000 psi is considered neces-
sary 4. Tensile strength was determined according to ASTM D
412 7. Figure 7 shows that all of the nitrile and ﬂuorocarbon
elastomers had tensile strengths well over this minimum before
and after the soakings in the synthetic fuels; ﬂuorosilicone elas-
tomers are not used for dynamic seals, so this minimum does not
apply. After the soakings in the synthetic fuels, the tensile strength
of the ﬂuorosilicone elastomers are essentially the same as the
Natref Jet A-1. The nitrile elastomers exhibited a decrease in ten-
Fig. 5
Effect of Sasol synthetic jet fuel on swell of common fuel-system elastomers
Fig. 6
Effect of Sasol synthetic jet fuel on hardness of common fuel-system elastomers
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2009, Vol. 131 / 041502-5
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

sile strength with increasing aromatic content that was consistent
with the Natref fuel.
While there were some minor changes in these properties with
the ﬂuorocarbon Viton and ﬂuorosilicone materials, the response
to the synthetic fuels was essentially the same as the response for
the petroleum-derived Jet A-1 from the Natref reﬁnery.
As expected, the nitrile Buna-N elastomers were more fuel
sensitive then the other two materials, and the changes were in
direct proportion to the aromatic content of the fuel. The variation
in swell with aromatic content was shown to be in line with pre-
vious data. Limited tests with used nitrile O-rings showed the
same sensitivity to the aromatic content as the new O-rings. Swell
with both new and used nitrile O-rings was well within the design
guidelines for both static and dynamic applications.
4.3
Lubricity. It is important to demonstrate that the Sasol
synthetic fuels either have good inherent lubricity or respond to
lubricity improving additives LIA. This issue comes from a gen-
eral concern for lubricity in fuels of low-sulfur and aromatic con-
tent. Severely hydrotreated fuels and synthetic fuels may not have
the trace organic species that provide lubricity. In the case of
Sasol’s semisynthetic jet fuel, the lubricity is derived from the
conventional Natref Jet A-1.
Lubricity for jet fuel is evaluated with the Ball-on-Cylinder
Lubricity Evaluator BOCLE in accordance with ASTM D 5001
8. A wear scan is generated on the ball during the test. A wear
scar diameter of less than 0.85 mm is required 1.
Figure 8 compares the BOCLE lubricity ratings of the four
synthetic blends with that of the Natref Jet A-1. The lubricity
ratings of all four synthetic blends are signiﬁcantly less than the
limit of 0.85 mm. This suggests that there are some natural lubric-
ity improvers in one or more of the synthetic kerosene streams
and that lubricity additives may not be necessary with the Sasol
synthetic jet fuels. It was shown, however, that the FSJF blends
respond to lubricity additives, and they could be used if necessary.
4.4
Bulk Physical Properties. The following fuel properties
are important to aircraft/engine design:
•
viscosity
•
density
•
bulk modulus
•
speciﬁc heat
•
thermal conductivity
Viscosity and density are part of the fuel speciﬁcation, but only at
a single temperature as a control. For design considerations, it is
necessary to consider the variations in these properties with tem-
perature or pressure, as appropriate. Data are presented and com-
pared with data from Refs. 9,10, where data exist.
4.4.1
Viscosity Versus Temperature. The most important as-
pect of viscosity is that it is the fuel property that controls atomi-
zation; density and surface tension are also important, but they do
not vary with temperature as much as viscosity does. Viscosity is
also used in calculating pressure drops when designing fuel
systems.
Turbine engines are required to cold start on fuels with viscos-
ity of 12 cS. Therefore, the fuel viscosity must be less than 12 cS
as the fuel temperature approaches the freezing point, which is
−40°C for Jet A and −47°C for Jet A-1. It is difﬁcult to measure
the viscosity close to the freezing point, so it is measured at
−20°C with a maximum of 8 cS. It was therefore necessary to
demonstrate that the viscosity-temperature function of the Sasol
fuels was the same as that of conventional fuel to verify the suf-
ﬁciency of the single viscosity data point in the speciﬁcation.
The viscosity of the synthetic blends was measured at ﬁve tem-
peratures from −40°C to 100°C. These results are graphed on the
standard ASTM viscosity-temperature chart in Fig. 9. For refer-
ence, the characteristics for the fuels with the highest and lowest
viscosities from Ref. 10 are included along with the character-
istics for a “typical Jet A-1” from Ref. 9. The viscosity-
temperature characteristics of the synthetic blends are seen to be
very linear on this transformed graph, verifying that the viscosity
characteristics of the Sasol synthetic jet fuels are normal regard-
less of the actual blending ratios of the synthetic streams.
It is concluded that the Sasol synthetic fuels have viscosity
characteristics that are identical to conventional fuels. As such, the
Fig. 7
Effect of Sasol synthetic jet fuel on the tensile strength of common fuel-system elastomers
041502-6 / Vol. 131, JULY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

use of these fuels will not cause any deterioration in ignition or
relight limits and will not increase pumping losses in the fuel
system.
4.4.2
Density Versus Temperature. Density is important to the
design and operations of aircraft because it can determine loaded
fuel weight and range. Density is also used in ﬂow calculations,
tank gauging, fuel metering devices, and structural design of fuel
tanks.
As discussed earlier, most FT jet fuels are comprised of normal
and isoparafﬁns with no aromatics. The lack of aromatics results
Fig. 8
Lubricity of Sasol FSJF blends
Fig. 9
Viscosity characteristics of Sasol FSJF blends
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2009, Vol. 131 / 041502-7
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

in a fuel that cannot meet the minimum speciﬁcation requirement
for a density of 775 kg/m3 at 15°C. This results in a lower energy
density of the fuel as well. It is also important that the density-
temperature function be typical for operations throughout the
ﬂight.
Figure 10 compares the density-temperature data of the FSJF
blends with that of Ref. 10. The test fuels are all seen to lie
within the fuel speciﬁcation limits; however, Blend 1 is right at
the minimum. The other three blends fall well within the results of
the Boeing survey. These results also demonstrate that increasing
the aromatic content increases the fuel density.
Although the energy density, MJ/m3, is lower for the blends,
the speciﬁc energy, MJ/kg, is virtually unchanged. These are sum-
marized in Table 3.
4.4.3
Bulk Modulus Versus Pressure. In many modern aircraft
engines, the fuel is used to activate hydraulic equipment. In order
to make the system responsive, it is desirable to have a fuel that is
difﬁcult to compress. Such a ﬂuid will have a high bulk modulus.
Currently there is no standardized method for determining bulk
modulus for jet fuels. The test fuels were submitted to the Phoenix
Laboratories, Inc. Chicago, IL for the determination of bulk
modulus using a procedure that is under consideration as a new
ASTM standard. The results are presented in Fig. 11. The bulk
modulus characteristics of the Sasol synthetic fuels are essentially
identical to each other and to that of the Natref Jet A-1. These data
Fig. 10
Density characteristics of Sasol FSJF blends
Table 3
Summary of energy density and speciﬁc energy
Fuel
Energy density
MJ/m3
Speciﬁc energy
MJ/kg
CRC WFS avga
34,736
43.26
Blend 1
33,865
43.81
Blend 2
34,558
43.36
Blend 3
34,373
43.51
Blend 4
34,437
43.10
NATREF Jet A-1
34,317
43.22
aCRC World Fuel Survey.
Fig. 11
Bulk modulus of Sasol FSJF blends
041502-8 / Vol. 131, JULY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

demonstrate that the bulk modulus and, therefore, the compress-
ibility characteristics of the Sasol synthetic jet fuel are the same as
those of conventional jet fuel.
4.4.4
Speciﬁc Heat Versus Temperature. Speciﬁc heat is espe-
cially important in the design of modern engines as the fuel is
increasingly used as a coolant or heat sink.. The speciﬁc heats of
the ﬁve Sasol test fuels were determined using ASTM E 1269 11
over the temperature range of −40°C to 100°C. The results are
compared in Fig. 12 with data from Refs. 9,10.
The Sasol synthetic fuels all have the same temperature sensi-
tivity as the other fuels and lie totally within the data band of the
world survey. The data from Ref. 9 is signiﬁcantly higher than
most fuels. If the values from Ref. 9 were used in the design of
a fuel-cooled heat exchanger, the result would be higher fuel tem-
peratures than predicted; however, this is the fault of Ref. 9 not
a shortcoming of the Sasol fuels, and will be true for all jet fuels.
The thermal conductivity data showed similar results, and it was
concluded that the Sasol FSJF will have thermodynamic and
transport properties that are typical of conventional jet fuels.
4.5
Summary of Fit-for-Purpose Tests. The four sample
blends of synthetic jet fuel prepared by Sasol had excellent quali-
ties as jet fuels and were very similar in nature to the petroleum-
derived Jet A-1 from Sasol’s Natref reﬁnery. The fuels were
blended from four mature synthetic distillate streams in the jet-
fuel boiling range; they were not streams from pilot plants. The
data demonstrated that Sasol synthetic jet fuels will have physical
and chemical properties and characteristics that are indistinguish-
able from conventional fuels reﬁned from petroleum crude oils.
Since the thermodynamic and transport properties of the
samples were typical of conventional fuels to the extent that data
were available, it was concluded that parameters that provide
guidance on ﬂuid mechanics and heat transfer regimes, e.g., Rey-
nold’s number, Prandtl number, and Weber number, will also be
typical of conventional fuels. These conclusions are independent
of the blending ratio of the four synthetic distillates.
5
Engine and Combustor Performance Testing
5.1
Overview. Although satisﬁed with the demonstrated
properties and characteristics of the Sasol synthetic kerosenes, the
engine original equipment manufacturers OEMs requested the
following component tests to demonstrate that Sasol synthetic jet
fuel would have no adverse effect on engine performance and
operation as an essential precondition of approval and certiﬁcation
of Sasol synthetic jet fuel under DEF STAN 91-91:
•
engine endurance
•
low-temperature atomization
•
cold-day ignition and altitude relight
•
exhaust emissions
•
lean blowout LBO
These tests were mutually deﬁned by the engine OEMs and con-
ducted at their facilities as appropriate. Individual test reports
12–15 were written by the performing organization for review
by all the OEMs as part of the approval process. A single fuel was
produced by Sasol and was provided for all of the tests. The
results presented here are normalized for proprietary reasons to
the engine companies.
5.2
Test Fuel. The volume requirements for the requested
tests totaled 1000 m3 250,000 gal. As the reﬁnery would not be
reconﬁgured to make jet fuel until the approval is granted, it was
necessary to use streams that were available in suitable quantities.
Also it was necessary to use the existing conﬁguration of the
distillation columns rather than optimize them for kerosene
production.
The test fuel was a blend of approximately 70% IPK and 30%
heavy naphtha 2, as indicated in Fig. 1. The two light distillate
streams were not available for use in making the test fuel as the
entire production was needed for making low-sulfur diesel. The
properties and characteristics most important to the engine and
combustor tests are summarized in Table 4.
The boiling point distribution is shown in Fig. 13. It was sig-
niﬁcantly “ﬂatter” than the petroleum-derived Jet A-1 that Sasol
produces at the Natref reﬁnery. This is primarily due to the lack of
heavier fractions that would have come from the light distillate if
it had been available. This will have implications in the results of
the ignition and altitude relight test Sec. 5.6. It must be noted,
however, that the boiling point distribution was within the range
of commercial jet fuels on the market today.
5.3
Engine Endurance Test
5.3.1
Objective. The engine endurance test was to evaluate the
effect of the Sasol synthetic jet fuel on the overall performance
Fig. 12
Speciﬁc heat characteristics of Sasol FSJF blends
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2009, Vol. 131 / 041502-9
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 10 ---

and operation of a commercial jet engine 12. The test was con-
ducted at the engine overhaul facilities of South African Airways
SAA at OR Thambo International Airport in Johannesburg,
South Africa using a completely refurbished Pratt & Whitney
P&W, East Hartford, CT JT-9D engine. The test was conducted
by SAA personnel and monitored by a ﬁeld representative of Pratt
& Whitney P&W and the local regulating authority. The engine
selection was agreed upon by the engine OEMs as representing a
high-pressure-ratio fan engine with an annular combustor 12.
Conducting the tests at the SAA facilities in Johannesburg signiﬁ-
cantly reduced the logistic problems of transporting 950 m3
250,000 gal of fuel to the test site.
5.3.2
Test Description. The test was developed by the engine
OEMs. The test was cyclic, consisting of 500 modiﬁed landing
and takeoff cycles as illustrated in Fig. 14 with shutdown and
ignition events every 25 cycles. Prior to the endurance test, a per-
formance test was run on the test engine using a petroleum-
derived Jet A-1 fuel. This was followed by a performance test
using Sasol FSJF. Following the endurance test, performance tests
were repeated using the same two fuels to determine if any deg-
radation of performance as a result of the cyclic test on the syn-
thetic fuel. At intervals during the test, videos of the hot section
were made using a boroscope; special attention was given to the
fuel nozzles and air swirlers. There was also a periodic removal of
the fuel control to inspection selected O-ring seals.
5.3.3
Results. The performance tests prior to the cyclic test
showed no differences between the two fuels; furthermore, the
post-cyclic-test performance evaluations showed no degradation
in performance as a result of the test on the Sasol fuel. The engine
performed satisfactorily during the cyclic test. The boroscope in-
spections showed no unusual changes in the fuel nozzles, swirlers,
and hot-section components, and there was no deterioration of the
O-rings inspected from the fuel control. The test results were re-
viewed by P&W chief engineers, discipline chiefs, and perfor-
mance system analysis, combustion, and turbine groups. The con-
sensus was that there was no discernible difference between the
baseline petroleum Jet A-1 and Sasol 100% synthetic Jet A-1.
5.4
Low-Temperature Atomization Tests
5.4.1
General Comments. Onboard auxiliary power units
APUs are required to start immediately if there is an in-ﬂight
shutdown of a main engine. The environment during APU altitude
starting is different from that of the main engines, however, be-
Table 4
Selected properties and characteristics of the test fuel
Fuel property
Speciﬁcation limits
Value
Aromatics, vol %
8.0–25.0
10.9
Sulfur, wt %
0.3 max
0.01
Smoke point, mm
25.0 min
28
Viscosity, cS
8.0 max
4.09
Density, kg/m3
771.0–836.0
781.2
Freezing point, °C
–47.0 max
−55.0
Flash point, °C
38.0 min
51.0
Heat of combustion, kJ/kg
42.8
43.7
Fig. 13
Boiling point distribution of test fuel
Fig. 14
Test cycle for JT-9D performance/endurance test of SSJF
041502-10 / Vol. 131, JULY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 11 ---

cause the APU and its fuel supply are cold soaked. Therefore, it
was considered necessary to demonstrate that the Sasol fuel would
not affect low-temperature starting characteristics of APU 13.
This demonstration was conducted by Honeywell Aerospace
Phoenix, AZ , a major manufacturer of APUs, using atomizer
bench tests with cold Sasol synthetic fuel to verify if the fuel
would have no adverse effect on atomization or spray quality, and
by inference, on low-temperature ignition. Pressure atomizers
typical of those used on APUs and an air blast atomizer typical of
those used on small propulsion engines were selected for testing.
Atomizer performance parameters, including ﬂow number and
spray characteristics, were measured over a range of conditions.
5.4.2
Test Atomizers. Atomizer A had a low ﬂow number FN
typical of the primary atomizers used on newer transport and mili-
tary APUs. Atomizer B was a larger FN atomizer typical of pri-
mary atomizers used on older commercial and military transport
APUs and smaller APUs used on a regional aircraft. Atomizer C
was a small thin-sheet-type air blast atomizer, typical of those
used on small propulsion engines.
5.4.3
Test Fuels/Fluids. Four ﬂuids were used for the atomi-
zation tests:
•
Jet A ASTM D 1655
•
Sasol FSJF DEF STAN 91-91
•
standard calibrating ﬂuid MIL-PRF-7024 Type II
•
a 12 cS calibrating ﬂuid Viscor
The last ﬂuid is a special test ﬂuid that allows Honeywell to evalu-
ate atomization quality at the 12 cS limit at ambient temperatures,
thus avoiding subzero test conditions.
Table 5 lists the physical properties important to atomization for
the four test ﬂuids. At the test conditions, the Weber number for
the Sasol FSJF and Jet A differed by about 3%; the Weber num-
bers of the other two ﬂuids were about 20% higher.
5.4.4
Test Conditions. Each atomizer was tested over a range
of conditions representative of an APU during typical engine start
conditions. For the pressure atomizers, this required a range of
inlet fuel pressures. The air blast atomizer was tested over a range
of fuel ﬂows and air pressure drops representative of light-off and
acceleration conditions. The performance evaluation was based on
the Sauter mean diameter SMD as a measure of atomization and
the spray angle.
5.4.5
Results. For the pressure atomizers, the Sasol FSJF and
Jet A had similar spray opening pressures, spray angles, and spray
quality. This is illustrated in Fig. 15 for Atomizer B showing that
at −40°C −40°F, the Sasol fuel produced a smaller drop-size
distribution than the Jet A at all ﬂow rates. Similar results were
produced for the other pressure atomizer. Figure 16 compares the
sprays for cold Jet A and Sasol FSJF at 50 psi gauge. The pic-
tures show that the sprays are both fully developed with similar
spray angles. The spray of the Sasol fuel appears denser than that
of the Jet A fuel, suggesting many more small droplets; the spray
of the Jet A fuel appears to contain numerous large drops.
For air blast Atomizer C, the SMD for cold FSJF was similar to
that of cold Jet A and Viscor with very little fuel effect. The FSJF
and Jet A fuel had similar spray angles and spray quality at all test
conditions. Figure 17 shows the correlation of SMD with the fol-
lowing parameter for air blast atomizers from Lefebvre 16:
XPAR = 1 + Wf/Wa/aVa
where Wf/Wa is the atomizer fuel/air ratio, a is the air density,
Table 5
Physical properties of test ﬂuids for atomization
Test
fuel
Speciﬁc gravity
Viscosity
Surface tension
At 25°C
At test
temp.a
At 25°C
Test
temp.a
At 25°C
At test
temp.a
7024-II
0.766
0.758
1.17
1.15
22.3
22.1
Viscor
0.878
0.878
12.2
12.2
24.7
24.7
Jet A
0.816
0.858
1.72
10.0
27.1
29.5
FSJF
0.782
0.824
1.56
7.9
25.0
27.4
aThe test temperature for FSJF and Jet A was −40°C; the temperature for Viscor and 1074-II was ambient.
Fig. 15
Atomization of Sasol FSJF compared with Jet A at −40°C „−40°F…
in a pressure atomizer
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2009, Vol. 131 / 041502-11
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 12 ---

and Va is the air velocity.
In summary, the atomization and spray characteristics using
cold FSJF were the same, or better than, for cold Jet A fuel due to
lower fuel speciﬁc gravity and viscosity. Honeywell concluded
that the FSJF fuel would provide a well-deﬁned spray and an
adequate spray droplet size for reliable cold starting.
5.5
Exhaust Emissions
5.5.1
Objective and Scope. The objective of the emission test
was to determine the effect of using Sasol synthetic jet fuel on the
exhaust emissions of a commercial combustor 14. The following
emissions were sampled and analyzed:
•
CO
•
unburned hydrocarbons UHCs
•
NOx
•
smoke number
5.5.2
Test Description. The emission test was conducted by
Pratt & Whitney at the United Technologies Research Center Jet
Burner Test Stand using an 80 deg, four-nozzle arc sector rig of a
commercial combustor. Exhaust samples were collected at the
combustor exit. The data reported were averages of the samples
from the center two sectors. The results were compared with emis-
sion data from a petroleum-derived Jet A fuel that were taken after
the synthetic fuel tests using the same procedures and conditions.
Both fuels were analyzed to ensure that they conformed to ASTM
D 1655.
The combustor was tested over a range of pressures, P3
=0.3–1.7 MPa 50–250 psi absolute, and inlet temperatures,
T3=200–480°C 460–890°F. Fuel/air ratios were varied, f /a
=0.005–0.035, at each of four pressure/temperature conditions
used to cover a range of operating conditions for an engine. Com-
bustor ﬂow parameter variations were also conducted for scaling
purposes. Emission data were collected at these conditions and
then scaled to ﬂight conditions representative of an engine with an
overall pressure ratio OPR of 30. Data are presented for idle,
cruise, approach, and sea-level takeoff SLTO.
5.5.3
Analysis and Results. When an engine is certiﬁed, it
must meet emission standards recommended by the International
Civil Aviation Organization ICAO Committee on Aviation En-
vironmental Protection CAEP. Therefore, Pratt & Whitney con-
sidered it important to determine the effect of a fuel change on the
standard emission parameter. The recommended parameter is the
total amount of pollutant created per unit of net thrust from the
engine F00 for a simulated landing takeoff LTO cycle consist-
ing of four operating modes: 0.7 min at SLTO, 2.2 min at climb,
4.0 min at approach, and 26.0 min at idle. The parameter is cal-
culated by
Emission for LTO cycle = EPAP = EIspecieswfueltmode/F00
For these tests, the parameter was calculated for a simulated LTO
cycle of an engine with an overall pressure ratio of 30.
The results of the emissions tests are illustrated in Figs. 18–20
for NOx, CO, and smoke number SN, respectively. In the LTO
cycle, the Sasol synthetic fuel produced 4% less NOx and 19%
less CO than the Jet-A fuel. These emission levels for both fuels
were lower than the limits of CAEP/6. At the individual power
points, the NOx emissions were virtually unchanged. The CO
emissions from the Sasol synthetic fuel were lower than that of
the conventional Jet A, especially at idle, in line with the lower
viscosity of the Sasol fuel, recalling from the Honeywell atomi-
zation tests that fuels of lower viscosity produce a ﬁner spray.
In Fig. 20, the data for smoke number, SN, are normalized to
the Jet A results. The Sasol synthetic fuel produced lower smoke
than the Jet A fuel as expected because of the higher hydrogen
content, i.e., lower aromatic content, of the Sasol fuel. The outlier
at SLTO at a fuel/air ratio of 0.018 was due to a low SN for the
Jet-A. The differences in CO2 emissions and combustion efﬁ-
ciency were negligible.
UHCs were only reported for the idle condition. At approach,
climb, and takeoff, the levels on both fuels were very low and
within the uncertainty of the measurement technique. The UHC
results at the idle condition are presented in Table 6 showing that
there was no signiﬁcant difference in the amount of unburned
hydrocarbons.
Fig. 16
Comparison of fuel sprays at −40°C „−40°F… and
50 psi „gauge… for Sasol fuel and jet a
Fig. 17
Spray characteristics of Sasol FSJF in an air blast atomizer
041502-12 / Vol. 131, JULY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 13 ---

5.5.4
Summary of Emission Tests. The Pratt & Whitney engi-
neers concluded that the use of synthetic Jet-A instead of
petroleum-derived Jet-A did not adversely affect the combustion
efﬁciency and emissions of the test combustor. They concluded
that the combustor would operate at the same fuel-air ratio on the
synthetic fuel as on the conventional Jet-A.
5.6
Cold-Day Ignition and Altitude Relight Test
5.6.1
Objective. The objective of these tests was to compare
the cold-day ignition and altitude relight performance of the Sasol
fully synthetic jet fuel with a conventional fuel in a state-of-the-art
combustor 15.
5.6.2
Test Description. The ignition and altitude relight tests
were conducted by Rolls-Royce Derby, UK using a full-annular
Trent combustor, which has air blast atomizers. The other OEMs
agreed that the results should be translatable to other engines.
Figure 21 is a map of the test points for ignition and extinction,
both cold-day ground and altitude relight. Ground ignition testing
was conducted at −40°C −40°F. Altitude relight tests were con-
ducted over altitudes ranging from about 8.5 km to 11 km
28,000–35,000 ft over a range of Mach numbers from 0.6 to 1
to cover the windmill envelope. Some additional points at higher
altitude and Mach number were added for blowout tests. Overall,
tests were conducted at more than 200 operating conditions.
The fuel of reference was a Jet A-1 AVTUR fuel in compli-
ance with DEF STAN 91-91. Flash point and energy density were
very comparable for the two fuels; however, there was a signiﬁ-
cant difference in the boiling point distribution of the two fuels, as
shown in Fig. 22. The slope of the Jet A-1 line was quite typical of
jet fuels in the UK and elsewhere while that of the Sasol FSJF was
much ﬂatter.
5.6.3
Results. All baseline testing with Jet A-1 fuel, including
both the simulated high altitude and the ground ambient cold-day
conditions, agreed with the expectations based on previous Rolls-
Royce engines and combustor tests.
Figure 23 is a schematic representation of the results of the
cold-day ground ignition and extinction limits showing that there
were no signiﬁcant differences between the performance limits of
the Sasol FSJF and the Jet A-1 fuels. The difference between the
extinction limits and the fueling line is the available margin for
sudden throttle maneuvers. Similarly, Fig. 24 illustrates the results
for the altitude ignition limits of the two test fuels. There are no
Fig. 18
Comparison of NOx production for Sasol fuel and conventional Jet
A
Fig. 19
Comparison of CO production for Sasol fuel and conventional Jet A
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2009, Vol. 131 / 041502-13
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 14 ---

values given on these ﬁgures for proprietary reasons.
The weak and rich extinction limits at altitude were also satis-
factory; however, close to the blowout limit at higher altitude
condition, the difference began to increase. The blowout charac-
teristic was worse for the Sasol fuel; i.e., the blowout point was at
a lower combustor mass ﬂow compared to the Jet A-1 fuel. Since
lean blowout is considered to be evaporation limited 16, it was
thought that this last result was due to differences in boiling point
distribution, as noted in Fig. 20. However, the possibility had to
be considered that the difference in lean blowout limit might be
due to changes in fuel chemistry. As a result, further testing was
requested by the engine manufacturers to resolve the issue.
5.6.4
Summary of Ignition and Relight Tests. Other than the
issue of extinction at high altitude, Rolls-Royce concluded that the
Sasol fuel met the expectations of an aviation kerosene fuel.
Based on the differences in the lean blowout characteristics at the
high-altitude condition, LBO tests were then conducted at condi-
tions more relevant to descent where throttle maneuvers are more
likely to cause lean combustion.
5.7
Lean Blowout Test
5.7.1
Objective. Lean blowout tests were conducted by Hon-
eywell to resolve the question of the blowout characteristics found
in the altitude extinction tests described in Sec. 5.6 13. The goal
was to verify that lean blowout characteristics of the Sasol syn-
thetic jet fuel are due to the particular boiling point distribution of
the test fuel and its effect on evaporation.
Fig. 20
Comparison of smoke number for Sasol fuel and conventional Jet
A
Table 6
Comparison of unburned hydrocarbons at idle
Fuel
UHC, ppm
Sasol FSJF
11.8
Jet A
16.0
Fig. 21
Map of test conditions for ignition and extinction tests
041502-14 / Vol. 131, JULY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 15 ---

5.7.2
Combustor Description. The lean stability tests were
conducted with a full-scale annular combustor rig from a small
turboshaft helicopter engine. The combustion system features a
reverse-ﬂow annular combustor and axially inserted dual-oriﬁce
fuel atomizers. The engine pressure ratio at SLTO conditions is
approximately 10.
5.7.3
Test Fuels. Three test fuels were used in this evaluation:
•
Sasol synthetic jet fuel DEF STAN 91-91
•
Jet A ASTM D 1655
•
JP-5 MIL-DTL-5624
The Jet A and JP-5 test fuels were selected on the basis of their
boiling point distribution to speciﬁcally address the question
raised in the Rolls-Royce altitude tests. JP-5 had “weathered” and
lost some of its lighter fractions; as a result it had a ﬂat boiling
point distribution like the Sasol fuel, but a higher ﬂash point. Jet A
had the same ﬂash point as the Sasol fuel, but the slope of the
boiling point distribution was similar to the AVTUR used by
Rolls-Royce. The ﬂash points of the test fuels are compared in
Table 7, and the boiling point distributions are compared in Fig.
25.
5.7.4
Test Conditions. The LBO tests were conducted at four
deceleration conditions from the sea level to a 7.6 km 25,000 ft
altitude and from a standard day to −40°C −40°F. The tests
were conducted with conditioned, nonvitiated air to the rig inlet at
actual engine operating conditions not scaled.
5.7.5
Results. The test results showed that the Sasol FSJF had
no adverse effect on lean stability lean blowout. The lean stabil-
ity test results are presented in Fig. 26, with test fuel data normal-
ized to the baseline Jet A data. The data are very tightly grouped,
indicating very little differences among the fuels. At higher alti-
tude conditions, there was some limited fuel effect noted, with
FSJF results between the Jet A and JP-5 results in accordance with
the differences in the boiling point distributions. The ﬂash point
and front end distillation temperatures of FSJF were between the
Jet A and JP-5 fuels. Previous testing at Honeywell on other en-
gines has shown combustor lean stability characteristics to corre-
late with these fuel properties.
5.7.6
Conclusions on LBO Tests. These results demonstrate
that the Sasol FSJF had no adverse effect on the lean stability
characteristics. The lean stability characteristics of the FSJF were
Fig. 22
Boiling point distributions of test fuels for ignition and altitude
relight tests
Fig. 23
Schematic representation of the extinction and ignition perfor-
mance for a ground ambient cold-day „−40°C… condition
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2009, Vol. 131 / 041502-15
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 16 ---

similar to the Jet A and JP-5 fuels. Differences at the higher alti-
tude conditions were due to the particular boiling point distribu-
tions of the test fuel and not to chemistry.
6
Summary and Conclusions
The Sasol synthetic kerosene is unique among distillates from
Fischer–Tropsch processes in that it contains aromatic hydrocar-
bons. Within the current understanding, the presence of the aro-
matics makes the Sasol FT kerosene more suitable as a complete
jet fuel than the more common FT distillates, which are comprised
of normal parafﬁns and isoparafﬁns and contain no aromatics.
Nevertheless, this fuel is a radical departure from experience as
this is the ﬁrst completely synthetic jet fuel to be approved. It was,
therefore, necessary to demonstrate that the fuel is ﬁt-for-purpose
as jet fuel and will have no adverse impact on performance, du-
rability, and safety. This paper has documented the process of
demonstrating that an alternative fuel is ﬁt-for-purpose as a fuel
for commercial aviation. The methodology used to demonstrate
that the Sasol FSJF is ﬁt-for-purpose was the same as that used to
evaluate the original Sasol semisynthetic fuel except for the addi-
tion of the engine and combustor tests. The process is now being
reﬁned and codiﬁed by the major speciﬁcation-writing bodies to
produce an approval protocol for alternative aviation fuels in the
future.
Four samples of the fuel representing practical extremes of pro-
duction were given a thorough evaluation to demonstrate that the
Sasol FSJF will have properties and characteristics that fall within
the experience of conventional jet fuels from petroleum. Not all of
the tests for physical properties and characteristics are presented
in this paper.
Sasol then produced a large volume of synthetic kerosene for
Fig. 24
Schematic representation of the altitude ignition results
Table 7
Flash point comparison of fuels for honeywell LBO
tests
Test fuel
Flash point
Jet A
47°C 117°F
Sasol FSJF
47°C 117°F
JP-5
56°C 133°F
Fig. 25
Comparison of boiling point distributions of the test fuels used in
the Honeywell LBO tests
041502-16 / Vol. 131, JULY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 17 ---

engine and combustor tests to evaluate the effects on performance,
emissions, and operability. The combustion characteristics of Sa-
sol FSJF were found to be the same as that of petroleum-derived
jet fuel having the same properties. Differences were within the
normal variations found in jet fuel. These engine and combustor
tests also served to validate the conclusions from the tests on the
properties and characteristics of the fuels.
The results of these tests have been presented to the aviation
community at technical meetings and industry forums and in for-
mal reports 17,18. The engine manufacturers have critically re-
viewed the data and have concluded that the Sasol synthetic jet
fuel will have no adverse impact on air-worthiness and safety and
is ﬁt-for-purpose as jet fuel for civilian aviation.
Based on the results of this evaluation and the recommenda-
tions of the aircraft engine manufacturers, the UK Aviation Fuels
Committee approved the acceptance of Sasol FSJF in DEF STAN
91-91, Issue 6 in April 2008 1. Sasol FSJF is the ﬁrst fully
synthetic jet fuel approved for unrestricted use in aviation.
References
1 Defense Standard 91-91, Turbine Fuel, Aviation Kerosene Type, Jet A-1 NATO
Code: F-35 Joint Service Designation: AVTUR, www.dstan.gov.uk
2 Moses, C. A., and Stavinoha, L. L., 1997, “Qualiﬁcation of Sasol Semi-
Synthetic Jet A-1 As Commercial Jet Fuel,” Southwest Research Institute,
Report No. 8531.
3 ASTM D 3241, “Standard Test Method for Thermal Oxidation Stability of
Aviation Turbine Fuels JFTOT Procedure,” ASTM International, 100 Barr
Harbor Drive, P.O. Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA.
4 Parker Seal Company, 1992, Parker O-Ring Handbook, O-Ring Division, Lex-
ington, KT, pp. A3-7 and A3-8.
5 ASTM D 471, “Standard Test Method for Rubber Property—Effect of Liq-
uids,” ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, P.O. Box C700, West
Conshohocken, PA.
6 ASTM D 2240, “Standard Test Method for Rubber Property—Durometer
Hardness,” ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, P.O. Box C700, West
Conshohocken, PA.
7 ASTM D 412, “Standard Test Methods for Vulcanized Rubber and Thermo-
plastic Elastomers-Tension,” ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, P.O.
Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA.
8 ASTM D 5001, “Standard Test Method for Measurement of Lubricity of Avia-
tion Turbine Fuels by the Ball-on-Cylinder Lubricity Evaluator BOCLE,”
ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, P.O. Box C700, West Consho-
hocken, PA.
9 Coordinating Research Council, Inc., 2004, Handbook of Aviation Fuel Prop-
erties, 3rd ed., Alpharetta, GA.
10 Hadaller, O. J., and Johnson, J. M., 2006, “World Fuel Sampling Program,”
Coordinating Research Council, Inc., CRC Report No. 647.
11 ASTM E 1269, “Standard Test Method for Determining Speciﬁc Heat Capac-
ity by Differential Scanning Calorimetry,” ASTM International, 100 Barr Har-
bor Drive, P.O. Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA.
12 Biddle, T., 2007, “JT9D Engine Endurance Test for Investigating Impact of
Sasol Synthetic Fuel on Engine Performance, P&W Review and Conclusions,”
Pratt & Whitney, East Hartford, CT.
13 Williams, R., 2007, “Final Report Evaluation of Sasol Fully Synthetic Jet Fuel
for Approval for Use as Jet A-1 Fuel,” Honeywell Aerospace, Report No.
21-13781.
14 Biddle, T., 2007, “Pratt & Whitney Emissions Test to Determine the Effect of
Sasol Fully Synthetic Jet-A Fuel on the Emissions of a Commercial Combus-
tor,” Southwest Research Institute, Pratt & Whitney, Final Report.
15 Herman, F., 2007, “Cold Day Ignition and Altitude Relight Testing of SASOL
Fully Synthetic Aviation Kerosene—External Report,” to Southwest Research
Institute, Rolls-Royce PLC, Report No. DNS 126274.
16 Lefebvre, A. H., 1983, Gas Turbine Combustion, Hemisphere Publishing, New
York.
17 Moses, C., Wilson, G., and Roets, P., 2003, “Evaluation of Sasol Synthetic
Kerosene for Suitability as Jet Fuel,” Southwest Research Institute, Report No.
04438-1.
18 Moses, C., 2007, “Evaluation of Sasol Synthetic Kerosene for Suitability as Jet
Fuel—Phase II: Engine and Combustor Tests,” Southwest Research Institute,
Report No. 04438-2.
Fig. 26
Comparison of fuel effects on lean blowout characteristics
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2009, Vol. 131 / 041502-17
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
