
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion Dynamics of Turbulent Swirling Flames
C. KU┬©LSHEIMER* and H. BU┬©CHNER
Lehrstuhl und Bereich Verbrennungstechnik am Engler-Bunte-Institut, Universita┬©t Karlsruhe (TH),
Karlsruhe, Germany
In the present paper the in’¼éuence of a periodic excitation of the mass ’¼éow rate, varied in frequency and in
amplitude, on the isothermal ’¼éow ’¼üeld and on the ’¼éame characteristics of swirl burners with different swirl
intensities S0,th is investigated. At ’¼ürst the ’¼éuid dynamical conditions for the formation of ring-vortex structures
in the burner near ’¼éow ’¼üeld are determined. The results indicate that the minimum level of excitation of the
mass ’¼éow rate for vortex formation decreases hyperbolically with increasing frequency of pulsation and
characteristic Strouhal number, respectively. In further studies, the dynamical behavior of lean-premixed swirl
’¼éames is investigated, whereas the fuel gas/air mixture mass ’¼éow rate at the burner exit was modulated
sinusoidally. The dynamical behavior of the investigated ’¼éames is found to be dominated by two different
effects in certain frequency ranges: For moderate pulsation frequencies (fpuls  50 Hz) the detected periodic
heat release rate of pulsated, premixed swirl ’¼éames is dominated by an effect that inhibits the strong
entrainment of ambient medium in comparison with the corresponding quasi steady-state swirl ’¼éames. With
increasing frequency (fpuls  50 Hz) this effect will be overlaid by the periodical formation of ring-vortices
entraining additional ambient medium and interfering with the combustion process. The physical understanding
of the frequency-dependent ’¼éame dynamics (’¼éame transfer function) on periodic disturbances is indispensable
for the prediction of the formation of combustion-driven oscillations that occur in technical combustion systems
(e.g., gas turbines, industrial combustors). It is also evident for the development of methods to prevent or
suppress periodic combustion instabilities. The results of the ’¼éame transfer measurements presented in this
paper will lead to a basic understanding of the formation and reaction of large-scale coherent vortex structures
in turbulent ’¼éames, that are well known as drivers of combustion instabilities.
┬® 2002 by The Combustion
Institute
NOMENCLATURE
d
diameter
f
frequency
F
amplitude response of the ’¼éame
transfer function
m╦Ö
mass ’¼éow rate
p
pressure
Pu
pulsation level, degree of excitation
Q╦Ö th
thermal load of the ’¼éame
Re
Reynolds number
Str
Strouhal number
S
swirl intensity
t
time
u
velocity
U
photomultiplier voltage as a
measure of OH*-radiation intensity
V╦Ö
volume ’¼éow rate
x
axial position
Greek Symbols

vane angle of the swirl generator

interval

phase angle function of the ’¼éame
transfer function

(1/) air equivalence ratio

wavelength

(fuel-air) equivalence ratio

(2    fpuls) angular frequency
Subscript
0,th
theoretical value at the burner exit
b
at the burner exit
cc
combustion chamber
d
delay
dis
disturbance
eff
effective, in the main ’¼éow direction
eq
equivalent
’¼é
’¼éame
mix
fuel gas/air mixture
n
at normal conditions (Tn  273 K,
pn  1013 mbar)
OH,max
maximum of the OH*-radiation
intensity
p
period of pulsation
pm
photomultiplier
*Corresponding author. E-mail: christian.kuelsheimer@vbt.
uni-karlsruhe.de
COMBUSTION AND FLAME 131:70ŌĆō84 (2002)
0010-2180/02/$ŌĆōsee front matter
┬® 2002 by The Combustion Institute
PII S0010-2180(02)00394-2
Published by Elsevier Science Inc.


--- Page 2 ---

premix
the fuel gas/air mixture at the
burner exit
puls
pulsation
ref
reference value
rms
rms-value, containing periodical and
turbulent contributions
tr
trigger
x
in axial direction
Superscripts

mean value

periodic ’¼éuctuations
╦å
amplitude
*
excited state
INTRODUCTION
The development of combustion systems to
minimize the ’¼éue gas emissions (NOx, CO, HC,
etc.) and to increase the systemŌĆÖs ef’¼üciency (e.g.,
gas turbine) is combined with technical modi’¼ü-
cations or new combustor design. This also
includes modi’¼ücations of the combustion pro-
cess using premixed systems and highly turbu-
lent swirl stabilized ’¼éames. The application of
these modi’¼ücations makes high-intensity com-
bustion and therewith, combustion systems with
higher reaction densities possible. Increasing
stability problems caused by the appearance of
combustion-driven oscillations are observed to
be linked with these improvements. The in-
duced pressure oscillations can lead to the total
damage of the installations and therefore, the
manufacturers are forced to operate these com-
bustors under not acceptable conditions. The
best way to develop measures to suppress or to
eliminate these combustion driven oscillations
is, in contrast to time- and cost-intensive trial
and error solutions, to realize and to understand
the relevant feedback mechanism, that is neces-
sary to sustain the periodic pressure oscillations
in the combustion chamber.
Possible feedback mechanisms for the sus-
tainment of combustion driven oscillations in
highly turbulent, premixed combustion systems
are schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. As a very
important mechanism driving these combustion
instabilities the in-phase formation and combus-
tion of large-scale coherent vortical structures
were identi’¼üed [1ŌĆō5]. Another important mech-
anism considers the role of equivalence ratio
’¼éuctuations caused by the pressure oscillations
coupling with the mixing unit in industrial com-
bustion systems. For a detailed description of
that mechanism we refer to literature [6ŌĆō8].
This mechanism doesnŌĆÖt play a role in the
current experiments, as the equivalence ratio
was kept constant, ensuring a homogeneous,
perfect mixture during the ’¼éame experiments.
The formation of ring-vortex structures is a
fundamental ’¼éuid dynamical phenomenon, that
can always be observed together with the occur-
rence of technical relevant, not tolerable pres-
sure oscillations in highly turbulent combustors.
The appearance of these ring-vortices was
found for non-premixed as well as for premixed
combustion systems and is also independent of
the applied ’¼éame type (jet-, bluff body-, or swirl
stabilized ’¼éames). At a particular combination
of amplitude and frequency of the pressure
’¼éuctuations (p╦ådis, fdis) these toroidal vortices are
formed, rolling-up the outer regions of the fuel
gas/air mixture ’¼éow together with additional
entrained ambient medium [2, 9ŌĆō11]. There-
fore, the mixing and reaction ’¼üelds of the
steady-state ’¼éame are changing totally. The
reaction of the fuel in the vortex causes a
’¼éuctuation of the heat release rate of the ’¼éame.
The resulting ’¼éuctuation of the ’¼éue gas produc-
tion rate leads to a ’¼éuctuation of the static
pressure in the combustion chamber (Fig. 1). In
the case that the pressure ’¼éuctuations p╦£cc(t) in
the combustion chamber are in-phase with the
’¼éuctuations of the heat release rate of the
’¼éame, ful’¼ülling RayleighŌĆÖs criterion [12], and
are large enough to cover friction losses of the
combustor, the ’¼éuctuation of mass ’¼éow rate at
the burner exit ╦£m╦Ö mix can be ampli’¼üed. This
ampli’¼ücation of the ’¼éow rate oscillation can
cause a next larger ring-vortex generation, con-
taining a larger share of the fuel gas/air mixture
(feedback loop), which in turn ampli’¼ües the
’¼éuctuation of the heat release rate and of the
static pressure in the combustion chamber. This
feedback loop clearly explains a mechanism for
the ampli’¼ücation of initial small disturbances to
high-amplitude pressure oscillations at proper
timing conditions.
Hence, the understanding of the interaction
of the periodic ’¼éow ’¼üeld, forced by the pressure
’¼éuctuations in the combustion chamber, and the
71
DYNAMICS OF TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES


--- Page 3 ---

’¼éame response is one of the keys to ’¼ünd meth-
ods to control self-excited combustion instabil-
ities sustained by this mechanism. Investigations
to determine the transfer functions of ’¼éames
are based on two important aspects, that have
direct in’¼éuence on the appearance of periodic
combustion instabilities in a burner-’¼éame-com-
bustion chamber assembly (Fig. 1):
1. The ’¼éame provides the energy for the ampli-
’¼ücation of initial small disturbances in the
combustion system and for the sustainment
of the pressure ’¼éuctuations, while it covers
the friction losses of the ’¼éue gas oscillation in
the combustion chamber.
2. The effective time delay between the distur-
bance of the mass ’¼éow through the burner
nozzle and the ’¼éuctuation of the resulting
heat release rate of the ’¼éame varies in de-
pendence on numerous operation parame-
ters of the ’¼éame (e.g., thermal power, air
equivalence ratio, air-preheating). Whereas,
in a de’¼üned burner and combustion chamber
geometry, the time delay between heat re-
lease rate and pressure ’¼éuctuation and be-
tween pressure and mass ’¼éow modulation
are more or less ’¼üxed at a given geometry of
the components. Therefore, the ’¼éame is the
most variable component with regard to its
’¼éexibility in closing the feedback loop.
In the present paper the formation of the
large-scale toroidal vortices in isothermal swirl
’¼éows is determined in dependence of frequency
and amplitude of a harmonically modulated
mass ’¼éow rate at the nozzle exit. The in’¼éuence
of the vortical structures on the combustion
process is discussed by means of measuring
’¼éame transfer functions as it was done in pre-
vious papers [4, 5]. In analogy to control theory
[13] the ’¼éame transfer function describes the
dynamic response characteristics of the ’¼éame in
form of an amplitude response F’¼é(fpuls) and a
phase angle function ’¼é(fpuls). Therefore, the
time functions of the ’¼éame excitation and of the
resulting ’¼éame response have to be determined.
In this paper the time signals correlated with the
mixture mass ’¼éow rate at the burner exit (’¼éame
excitation) and with the heat release rate of the
entire ’¼éame (’¼éame response) were recorded
simultaneously and analyzed to calculate the
’¼éame transfer function.
Fig. 1. Feedback mechanisms in technical combustion systems.
72
C. KU┬© LSHEIMER AND H. BU┬© CHNER


--- Page 4 ---

The amplitude response F’¼é(fpuls) is given by
the ratio of the rms-value of the total heat
release rate and the rms-value of the mixture
mass ’¼éow rate at the burner exit at the adjusted
frequency of pulsation fpuls, normalized by their
respective rms-values of the corresponding qua-
si-steady ’¼éame (here: at fpuls  fref  5 Hz). The
phase angle function Fl(fpuls) is related to the
overall time delay td,’¼é(fpuls) between the peri-
odic ’¼éuctuations of the fuel gas/air mixture ’¼éow
at the nozzle exit and the resulting periodic
’¼éuctuation of the reaction rate of the entire
turbulent ’¼éame.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND
MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES
The investigations of pulsated isothermal ’¼éow
’¼üelds and natural gas-’¼üred, premixed swirl
’¼éames were carried out by using swirl burners
with different swirl intensities S0,th  0.21, 0.45
and 0.79. The swirl intensities S0,th were calcu-
lated from the geometric data of the axial vane
swirlers (db  57 mm, dbluff-body  35 mm) with
different vane angles (vane  15, 30, and 45
degree). The calculation equation for S0,th is
given in [14]. Figure 2 shows schematically the
experimental setup and the applied measure-
ment techniques.
An adjustable part of the total fuel gas/air
mixture mass ’¼éow was modulated nearly sinu-
soidally in time using a pulsating unit. This
pulsating unit can generate periodic oscillations
of the mass ’¼éow rate at the burner nozzle exit
within a frequency range between 1 to 350 Hz
with continuously adjustable amplitudes up to
70% of the mean mass ’¼éow rate. A detailed
description of this pulsating unit is given in
previous papers [4ŌĆō6, 10]. The pulsation fre-
quency can be chosen by adjusting the rotation
of the stepping motor with an accuracy of 0.01
Hz. In the case of ’¼éame investigations a decou-
pling chamber was positioned between the pul-
sating unit and the mixing section of the reac-
tants. This decoupling chamber prevents the
periodic pressure oscillations, generated by the
Fig. 2. Scheme of the experimental set-up and the applied measuring techniques.
73
DYNAMICS OF TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES


--- Page 5 ---

pulsating unit, from in’¼éuencing the mass ’¼éow
adjustment with the ’¼éow meters and the fuel
gas/air mixing process [6]. Therewith, the equiv-
alence ratio of the fuel gas/air mixture mass ’¼éow
through the burner was kept constant during all
’¼éame experiments.
The applied measurement techniques were:
ŌŚÅHot-wire anemometry to determine the peri-
odic mass ’¼éow ’¼éuctuation at the burner exit
(’¼éame excitation).
ŌŚÅA photomultiplier detecting the overall radi-
ation intensity of the ’¼éame (’¼éame response)
at a wavelength   306.7 nm, emitted by
excited OH*-radicals from the reaction zone
of the ’¼éame. This wavelength corresponds to
the (0, 0) band of the 2  2 electronic state
transition of the diatomic OH molecule [15].
ŌŚÅPhase-correlated picture-taking of the period-
ically changing ’¼éow ’¼üeld or ’¼éame structures.
Using a trigger signal, generated by an induc-
tive sensor, which is mounted in the pulsating
unit, phase-locked picture-taking at a ’¼üxed
relative time ttr/tp within the period of excita-
tion is possible. An additional time delay unit
allows to observe the time history of the
periodically disturbed ’¼éow ’¼üeld and ’¼éame
structure at different moments t/tp within the
period of excitation. To realize short exposure
times (texp  10ŌĆō100 	s), that are necessary
for watching the ’¼éow ’¼üeld or the ’¼éame struc-
ture at particular moments, an intensi’¼üed
CCD-Camera (512  512 Pixel up to 16 bit
A/D at 1 MHz) was used (Fig. 2).
Determination of Fluid Dynamical Conditions
for Vortex Formation
The determination of the ’¼éuid dynamical con-
ditions to generate ’¼ürst-time coherent vortex
structures in a periodically modulated isother-
mal ’¼éow ’¼üeld was carried out by using an in situ
calibrated single tungsten hot-wire sensor (2
mm in length and 5 	m in diameter) located
between two vanes of the swirler at the burner
exit. With the help of the measured time-
dependent hot-wire signal voltage Uhw(t) the
mean value m╦Ö b and the rms-value m╦Ö b,rms of the
mass ’¼éow rate m╦Ö b(t) at the burner exit can be
calculated. It has to be mentioned that this
calculation is based on some assumptions: con-
stant velocity pro’¼üle in radial direction at any
moment within the period of excitation, rota-
tional symmetry, incompressible ’¼éow. Addition-
ally the rms-value includes to a small extent also
turbulent ’¼éuctuations. The level of excitation
Pu, which is together with the pulsating fre-
quency fpuls the dominating parameter to de-
scribe the formation of coherent vortex struc-
tures in periodically disturbed ’¼éow ’¼üelds, can be
calculated using Eq. 1 [4ŌĆō6]:
Pu 
 m╦Ö b,rms
m╦Ö b
(1)
At the beginning of the investigations the mean
mass ’¼éow rate m╦Ö b and the frequency fpuls were
adjusted. The rectangular part of the exit area
of the pulsating unit (bypass ’¼éow) [4ŌĆō6, 10] was
opened completely, whereas the amplitude of
the periodic excitation of the mixture mass ’¼éow
was set to minimum. After that, the pulsation
level Pu was increased continuously by closing
the bypass area of the pulsating unit while the
frequency of pulsation fpuls was kept constant.
At the same time the ’¼éow ’¼üeld of the burner
near region (120ŌĆō150 mm), visualized by the
means of a tracer medium and laser light-sheet
technique, has been observed. The critical pul-
sation level Pucrit was reached in the case that a
’¼ürst-time coherent vortex ring structure was
formed at any moment within the period of
disturbance. In this way the critical pulsation
level Pucrit, characterizing the appearance of
these toroidal structures, was determined for
different pulsation frequencies fpuls at burners
with different swirl intensities and at different
mean ’¼éow rates m╦Ö b [16].
Determination of the Flame Transfer
Function
For the measurements of ’¼éame transfer func-
tions (Fig. 2) the determination of the mean-
and rms-value of the pulsated ’¼éow rate (’¼éame
excitation) was conducted again by hot-wire
anemometry. The position of the hot-wire was
located 15 mm upstream of the burner exit
between two vanes of the swirler. This was
necessary to protect the hot-wire sensor from
destruction caused by a ’¼éame ’¼éashback during
the pulsated ’¼éame investigations. For the cap-
74
C. KU┬© LSHEIMER AND H. BU┬© CHNER


--- Page 6 ---

ture of the ’¼éame response a photomultiplier
detecting the overall radiation of the excited
OH*-radicals at 306.7 nm was used. Because of
the strong dependence of this radiation inten-
sity Upm on the reaction rate Q╦Ö th and on the
air equivalence ratio premix (1/), because of
their in’¼éuence on ’¼éame geometry and ’¼éame
temperature, respectively, their correlation was
calibrated using steady-state non-enclosed pre-
mixed swirl ’¼éames.
In Fig. 3a the non-linear dependence of the
radiation intensity on the air equivalence ratio
premix is shown. The individual data were nor-
malized with the corresponding maximum value
of radiation intensity at stoichiometric mixture
of each thermal load level Q╦Ö th. The correlation
between the heat release rate and the air equiv-
alence ratio for different swirl intensities is
shown in Fig. 3b. The radiation intensity is
obviously lower for increasing swirl intensities.
This is caused by the strongly intensi’¼üed en-
trainment of ambient air with increasing swirl
[14]. Therefore, the OH*-radiation intensities
measured for the swirl intensity S0,th  0.0 (vane
angle of the swirl generator equals zero) is the
maximum level of OH*-radiation of steady-
state ŌĆ£swirlŌĆØ ’¼éames with corresponding thermal
load and air equivalence ratio values. These
correlations are used later on for the physical
interpretation of the frequency-dependent reac-
tion behavior of pulsated swirl ’¼éames.
The de’¼ünition of the amplitude response of
the ’¼éame F’¼é(fpuls) for periodical excitation is
given in Eq. 2 [4, 5]:
F’¼é(fpuls) 
 20  log
Upm,rms(fpuls)
Upm,rms(fref)
ub,rms(fpuls)
ub,rms(fref)
(2)
The frequency-dependent rms-values of the si-
multaneously measured time functions of the
mass ’¼éow ub,rms(fpuls) and the UV-radiation
Upm,rms(fpuls) are normalized with their refer-
ence values ub,rms(fref) and Upm,rms(fref), taken
at a frequency fref. At this reference frequency
(fref  5 Hz) the slowly pulsated ’¼éame behaves
in every moment within the period of excitation
as a steady-state swirl ’¼éame with the corre-
sponding mean thermal load and air equiva-
lence ratio with regard to the mean OH*-
radiation intensity of the entire ’¼éame.
The phase angle function ’¼é(fpuls) between
the two periodical signals was calculated using
Eq. 3 [4, 5]:
’¼é(fpuls) 
 td,’¼é(fPuls)  fPuls  360┬░
(3)
The frequency-dependent time delay td,’¼é(fpuls)
was determined directly by measuring the cross
correlation function of the hot-wire bridge volt-
age and the photomultiplier signal (see Fig. 2).
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND
DISCUSSION
Investigations of the Fluid Dynamical
Conditions for Ring-Vortex Formation in
Pulsated Isothermal Swirl Flows
The results found for periodically excited iso-
thermal ’¼éow ’¼üelds of swirl burners with differ-
ent swirl intensity and various mass ’¼éow rate are
shown in Fig. 4. The pulsating level Pucrit, that is
necessary
to
generate
periodically
toroidal
Fig.
3. Normalized
OH*-radiation
intensities
of
swirl
’¼éames with different thermal load (a). OH*-radiation in-
tensities of swirl ’¼éames with different swirl intensities (b).
75
DYNAMICS OF TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES


--- Page 7 ---

structures at a given pulsation frequency fpuls,
decreases hyperbolically for all investigated
’¼éows
with
increasing
frequency
fpuls.
The
changes of the parameter combination (Pu,
fpuls)crit for different swirl intensities (S0,th) and
mass ’¼éow rates ( m╦Ö  V╦Ö N) can be normalized,
transforming the frequency fpuls into the dimen-
sionless characteristic Strouhal number (Fig. 4)
de’¼üned in Eq. 4:
Str 
 fpuls  deq
u b,x
(4)
The equivalent diameter deq is obtained from
the free ’¼éow area, perpendicular to the main
’¼éow direction, and u b,x represents the mean
volumetric velocity in axial direction at the
burner exit. Their calculated values are given in
Table 1.
For the investigated swirl burner types, the
limit for the formation of coherent vortex struc-
tures is given by nearly constant combinations of
Pu and Str. These critical parameter combina-
tions Pucrit and Str, found in the isothermal ’¼éow
experiments, characterize the ’¼éuid dynamical
conditions for the formation of a ’¼ürst-time
ring-vortex structure in the burner near region.
The hyperbolically decline can be derived from
the idea that the ring-vortex formation is related
to ’¼éow acceleration (du/dt) and the inertia of
the ’¼éow (u 2). The maximum acceleration (du/
dt)max of a sinousoidally in time forced velocity
’¼éuctuation
is
given
by:
u╦å  puls

2  urms  2fpuls. The product of the dimen-
sionless parameters Pucrit and Str comprises
both effects on vortex formation, the ’¼éow accel-
eration and the inertia of the ’¼éow:
Pucrit  Str 
 urms  fpuls  deq
u b,x
2
With the help of this correlation the hyperbol-
ically decline of Pucrit with increasing Str (Pu-
crit  1/Str) can be understood. In previous work
[10], this critical parameter combination for
vortex formation (Pucrit  Str  const, with xrw/
db  const) was obtained, too.
These results are very interesting for techni-
cal combustor applications, particularly with
regard to periodic disturbances of the mass ’¼éow
rate created by the burner construction itself
(isothermal self-excited ’¼éow instabilities, e.g.,
vortex shedding) [17]. If the level of disturbance
at the frequency given by the burner geometry
and the ’¼éow rate is large enough (	Pucrit),
periodic coherent vortex rings close to the
burner exit can be generated. A certain part of
the mass ’¼éow rate through the burner, under
premixed combustion conditions fuel gas/air
mixture, will be rolled up in the vortex structure
together with ambient medium. The reaction of
the fuel in the vortex produces a ’¼éuctuation of
the heat release and the ’¼éue gas production
Fig. 4. Dynamical ’¼éow conditions (Pu, Str) characterizing
the formation of large-scale coherent vortices in periodically
pulsated swirl ’¼éows.
TABLE 1
Data of the Investigations of Pulsated Isothermal Swirl Flows
S0,th [/]
 [degree]
V╦Ö n [m3/h]
deq [mm]
u eff [m/s]
u b,x [m/s]
Re(u eff, deq) [/]
0.21
15
45.0
40.88
10.64
10.27
25187
0.21
15
90.0
40.88
21.76
21.02
46169
0.45
30
45.0
38.41
12.05
10.43
28387
0.45
30
90.0
38.41
24.66
21.35
54864
0.79
45
45.0
34.43
14.99
10.60
31665
0.79
45
90.0
34.43
14.99
10.60
31665
0.79
45
90.0
34.43
30.68
21.69
61199
76
C. KU┬© LSHEIMER AND H. BU┬© CHNER


--- Page 8 ---

rate, which could be seen as the starter of
combustion driven oscillations (Fig. 1).
Investigations of the Flame Dynamics (Flame
Transfer Function)
Flame Transfer Functions of Axial Jet
Flames
For a better understanding of the ’¼éame re-
sponse of premixed swirl ’¼éames, the ’¼éame
characteristics of pulsated premixed axial jet
’¼éames (no swirl) are discussed ’¼ürst. In Fig. 5 the
amplitude response (Fig. 5a) and the phase
angle function (Fig. 5b) of turbulent, premixed
jet ’¼éames are shown. These results are taken
from previous investigations [4, 5]. Introducing
a characteristic Strouhal number [4, 5] the dy-
namic jet ’¼éame characteristics could be de-
scribed independent of mean thermal load
Q╦Ö th(Re) and encosure conditions. The ampli-
tude responses show that the dynamic jet ’¼éame
characteristics can be divided into two signi’¼ü-
cantly different regions. Up to a certain Strou-
hal number (Str  0.33 [4, 5]) the normalized
amplitude response F remains zero. This
means that the pulsated ’¼éame behaves in every
moment within the period of excitation as the
steady-state ’¼éame with the corresponding mean
thermal load Q╦Ö th and air equivalence ratio
premix, with regard to the OH*-radiation inten-
sity of the entire ’¼éame. Therefore, this region of
Strouhal number (Str 
 0.33) is called ŌĆ£quasi
steady-state ’¼éameŌĆØ behavior, with regard to the
mixing ’¼üeld and the reaction.
With increasing Strouhal number (Str 	 0.33)
the amplitude response decreases because of
the formation and reaction of coherent ring-
vortex structures [4, 5]. During their formation
the ring-vortices strongly mix in additional am-
bient medium. Therefore, the fuel gas rolled up
in the vortex is stronger diluted compared with
the fuel gas concentration in the corresponding
steady-state ’¼éame. In the non-enclosed case the
dilution of the fuel gas share in the vortex with
additional ambient air causes an increase of the
local air equivalence ratio . Because of the
strong dependence of the OH*-radiation inten-
sity on the air equivalence ratio or ’¼éame tem-
perature, as shown in Fig. 3a, this dilution leads
to a decrease of the measured photomultiplier
voltage Upm(t) during the vortex combustion in
comparison to the corresponding steady-state
’¼éame. Therewith, the rms-value of the ’¼éame
response Upm,rms(fpuls) and the amplitude re-
sponse F(fpuls) (see Eq. 2) decrease [4, 5].
In Fig. 5a and b the ’¼éame transfer functions
are compared with the theoretical model of an
ideal idle-time model, well known in control
theory [13]. This simple model is characterized
by the absence of any damping or ampli’¼ücation
in the amplitude response F (here: Upm,rms
(fref)  Upm,rms(fpuls); ub,rms(fpuls)  const.) and
by a constant time delay for the phase angle
(td(fpuls)  const.). Up to the Strouhal number
of about 0.33, characterized by quasi steady-
state ’¼éame behavior, a good agreement can be
observed between the measured amplitude re-
sponse and the model. The measured phase
angles show a smooth frequency dependence.
Their course is in a good agreement with the
theoretical model even for higher Strouhal
numbers. This agreement demonstrates that the
frequency-dependent phase angle of a jet ’¼éame
Fig. 5. Amplitude response F’¼é(Str) (a) and phase angle
’¼é(Str) (b) of premixed axial jet ’¼éames.
77
DYNAMICS OF TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES


--- Page 9 ---

can be calculated with a corresponding, fre-
quency-independent time delay. This time delay
of a jet ’¼éame can be derived by the mean
convective time delay for the transport of the
mixture (u b) from the burner nozzle to the main
reaction zone of the ’¼éame (xOH,max) [4, 5]. With
the help of this time delay of a given steady-
state jet ’¼éame the dimensionless characteristic
Strouhal number, used in Figs. 5a and b, was
de’¼üned: Str  fpuls  xOH,max/u b) [4, 5].
Flame Transfer Functions of Swirl Flames
The dynamic ’¼éame characteristics of pulsated
non-enclosed, premixed swirl ’¼éames with differ-
ent swirl intensities and different pulsation lev-
els are shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, respectively.
The ’¼éame transfer functions of the swirl ’¼éames
are again compared with the theoretical model
of an ideal idle-time model, described above.
The measured amplitude responses (Figs. 6a
and 7a) display signi’¼ücant differences from this
ideal idle-time model and therefore, from the
dynamic jet ’¼éame characteristics. Up to a par-
ticular frequency the normalized ’¼éuctuations of
the OH*-radiation intensities increase in com-
parison to the normalized ’¼éuctuations of the
mass ’¼éow rate (see Eq. 2). With further increase
of the frequency the measured amplitude fre-
quency response decreases, so that the ampli-
tude response of the ’¼éame transfer function for
all measured premixed swirl ’¼éames is character-
ized by a maximum (F’¼é(fpuls) 	 0 dB) at a
particular frequency depending on two contrary
effects, interpreted as follows:
1. The decrease of the measured amplitude re-
sponse, which appears at higher frequencies,
is caused by the formation and reaction of
large-scale, coherent vortex structures. This
effect was also observed at pulsated pre-
mixed axial jet ’¼éames [4, 5]. The detailed
explanation for the decline in the amplitude
response caused by the ring-vortex formation
Fig. 6. Amplitude response F’¼é(fpuls) (a) and phase angle
’¼é(fpuls) (b) of swirl ’¼éames with different swirl intensities
S0,th.
Fig. 7. Amplitude response F’¼é(fpuls) (a) and phase angle
’¼é(fpuls) (b) of swirl ’¼éames with different pulsation levels
Pu.
78
C. KU┬© LSHEIMER AND H. BU┬© CHNER


--- Page 10 ---

and reaction is already given in the previous
section.
The existence of periodically formed and
reacting toroidal vortices was also proved by
phase-correlated image recording of the
OH*radiation distribution in the ’¼éame as
shown in Fig. 8b. Figure 8a displays different
moments within a period of pulsation of a
quasi steady-state swirl ’¼éame (S0,th  0.21;
Q╦Ö th  60 kW; premix  1.2), modulated at a
frequency of fpuls  fref  5 Hz and with a
pulsation level of 15%. In every moment the
’¼éame geometry corresponds to a steady-state
’¼éame geometry with corresponding mean
thermal load and air equivalence ratio. In-
creasing of the pulsation frequency fpuls,
while keeping all the other operation param-
eters constant, the formation of large-scale
vortices occurs (see Fig. 4). The formation of
the toroidal vortices combined with a notice-
able in’¼éuence of the combustion process is
illustrated in Fig. 8b for a frequency of
pulsation of fpuls  100 Hz.
The pulsation level Pu causes a signi’¼ücant
in’¼éuence on the frequency, at which the
decrease of the amplitude response is detect-
able (Fig. 7a). With higher Pu values the
formation
of
coherent
vortex
structures
starts at lower frequencies of pulsation. This
was found and discussed in the isothermal
pulsated ’¼éow investigations (see Fig. 4).
Therewith, the decline of the amplitude re-
sponse starts at lower frequencies. The criti-
cal parameter combinations (Pucrit, fpuls)’¼éame
(or
with
normalized
frequency
(Pucrit,
Str)’¼éame), obtained by the ’¼éame transfer
measurements, characterizeŌĆöin contrast to
the critical parameters found in the isother-
mal swirl ’¼éow experiments (see Fig. 4)ŌĆöthe
beginning interaction of the ’¼éuid dynami-
cally controlled vortex formation with the
combustion process.
2. The increase of the amplitude response found
for premixed swirl ’¼éames at moderate pulsa-
tion frequencies could not be detected for jet
’¼éames [4, 5]. Therefore, this difference in the
’¼éame behavior can be explained by the ob-
vious differences of the entrainment charac-
teristics between turbulent swirl ’¼éows and
turbulent axial jet ’¼éows. It is well known that
Fig. 8. Phase-correlated image-recording of a premixed swirl ’¼éame (swirl intensity: S0,th  0.21; mean thermal load: Q╦Ö th 
60 kW; air equivalence ratio: premix  1.2; pulsation level Pu  15%; exposure time ICCD-Camera: texp  100 	s; 100
accumulations): (a) fpuls  5 Hz, quasi steady-state swirl ’¼éame, (b) fpuls  100 Hz, fully unsteady swirl ’¼éame with ring-vortex
formation.
79
DYNAMICS OF TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES


--- Page 11 ---

steady-state swirl ’¼éames entrain signi’¼ücantly
more ambient medium than jet ’¼éames [14].
This additional entrainment of ambient air
leads to an increase of the local air equiva-
lence ratio of the combustion process com-
bined with a decrease of the local combus-
tion
temperature.
Therefore,
the
OH*-
radiation intensity decreases with increasing
swirl intensity of non-enclosed swirl ’¼éames
(see Fig. 3b). An effect, that inhibits the
additional entrainment of swirl ’¼éames during
certain moments within the period of excita-
tion, would cause the reaction of a particular
amount of fuel gas at lower local air equiva-
lence ratio than in the corresponding steady-
state ’¼éame. This causes an increase of the
’¼éuctuation of the OH*-radiation intensities
compared with the quasi steady-state ’¼éame
(Upm,rms(fpuls) 	 Upm,rms(fref)) and there-
with, the amplitude response increases (see
Eq. 2).
Furthermore, this interpretation model is
underlined by the results shown in Fig. 6a:
Increasing swirl intensity is correlated with
an increase of entrainment of ambient air in
the steady-state swirl ’¼éame [14] and so, as
discussed above, with a decrease of the OH*-
radiation intensities (see Fig. 3b). A restric-
tion of entrainment in the pulsated case can
result in a further increase of the OH*-
radiation intensities related to the steady-
state OH*-emissions with increasing swirl
intensity. This is in good agreement with the
higher values of the amplitude response
measured at the pulsated swirl ’¼éames with
higher swirl intensity.
An additional indication of the reaction of
a part of the fuel gas at lower local air
equivalence ratio than in the corresponding
steady-state ’¼éames was found, analyzing the
phase-correlated image recording of the pul-
sated swirl ’¼éame (S0,th  0.79, fpuls  50 Hz),
as shown in Fig. 9b. Figure 9a displays again
the corresponding quasi steady-state swirl
’¼éame at a frequency of fref  5 Hz. A
moderate increase of the pulsation frequency
up to fpuls  50 Hz, while keeping all the
other operation parameters constant, causes
Fig. 9. Phase-correlated image-recording of a premixed swirl ’¼éame (swirl intensity: S0,th  0.79; mean thermal load: Q╦Ö th 
60 kW; air equivalence ratio: premix  1.0; pulsation level Pu  15%; exposure time ICCD-Camera: texp  100 	s; 100
accumulations): (a) fpuls  5 Hz, quasi steady-state swirl ’¼éame, (b) fpuls  50 Hz, fully unsteady swirl ’¼éame with inward curved
’¼éame front.
80
C. KU┬© LSHEIMER AND H. BU┬© CHNER


--- Page 12 ---

an increase of the amplitude response (see
Fig. 6a). Parallel to this increase of the
amplitude response the phase-correlated im-
ages show at particular moments within the
period of excitation a thickened ’¼éame front,
inward curved (Fig. 9b, t/tp  0.25). This
means, that the reaction of a part of the fuel
gas takes place in the region of the inner
recirculation zone. This inward curved part
of the fuel gas/air mixture, reacting in a
region of hot temperature, could not ob-
served in the quasi steady-state case (Fig.
9a). This reaction at higher temperature and
possibly lower air equivalence ratio as in the
quasi steady-state ’¼éame can therewith ex-
plain an increase of the amplitude response.
To strengthen the importance of this ef-
fect, described with the help of phase-corre-
lated images, we measured the ’¼éame transfer
function of an enclosed pulsated swirl ’¼éame.
The results are shown in Fig. 10. The ampli-
tude response of the enclosed case shows a
nearly quasi steady-state ’¼éame characteristic
in the moderate frequency range (fpuls  50
Hz). This signi’¼ücant difference between the
amplitude responses of non-enclosed and
enclosed pulsated swirl ’¼éames can be ex-
plained with the reaction of a fuel gas share
in the region of the inner recirculation zone.
In contrast to the non-enclosed case the
reaction of the entire fuel gas of the enclosed
pulsated swirl ’¼éame takes place in regions
with hot temperature (inner and outer recir-
culation zone) at any frequency of pulsation.
Therefore, the reaction of the particular
amount of fuel gas in the inner recirculation
zone (fpuls  50 Hz) does not amplify the
’¼éuctuation of the OH-radiation intensity in
comparison to the corresponding enclosed
quasi steady-state ’¼éame (fref  5 Hz). The
measured small increase of the amplitude
response of the enclosed pulsated swirl ’¼éame
could be caused by the fact, that the combus-
tion chamber was not perfectly insulated
(non-adiabatic). Therefore, temperature of
the outer recirculation zone has to be lower
than the temperature of the inner recircula-
tion zone.
The effect of pulsation on the entrainment
characteristics of swirl ’¼éows has been proved
independently in previous investigations by
isothermal time-resolved concentration mea-
surements [18]. Within that work periodical
’¼éuctuations of the tracergas concentration in
the inner recirculation zone of pulsated swirl
’¼éows, oscillating with the frequency of pul-
sation, were detected, while the ratio of the
tracergas/air mixture mass ’¼éow through the
burner was kept constant. For several mo-
ments within the period of excitation the
tracergas concentration in the inner recircu-
lation zone is higher than in the correspond-
ing steady-state swirl ’¼éow. These results,
discussed in detail in this previous paper [18]
’¼üt very well to the explanation of the effect,
that increases the amplitude response of
pulsated swirl ’¼éames as described above.
The superposition of these two effects, de-
scribed in the two sections above, explains the
frequency-dependent characteristics of the in-
vestigated
pulsated,
premixed
swirl
’¼éames
marked by a maximum value of the amplitude
Fig. 10. Amplitude response F’¼é(fpuls) (a) and phase angle
’¼é(fpuls) (b) of enclosed and non-enclosed swirl ’¼éames.
81
DYNAMICS OF TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES


--- Page 13 ---

response at a certain frequency fmax (F’¼é(fmax)
 F’¼é(fpuls)max). At this frequency the in’¼éuence
of periodically formed toroidal vortices on the
combustion process exceeds the contrary, en-
trainment-restricting effect (3fmax  fcrit).
The phase angle functions ’¼é(fpuls) of pulsated
premixed swirl ’¼éames, displayed in Fig. 6b and
7b, differ considerably from the phase angle of
the ideal idle-time model. As mentioned before,
this model describes very well the phase angle
functions of pulsated premixed axial jet ’¼éames
[4, 5] and is characterized by a frequency-
independent time delay (td,’¼é(fpuls)  const.).
This means (see Eq. 3), that for pulsated pre-
mixed swirl ’¼éames the time delay between the
’¼éuctuation of the mass ’¼éow rate at the burner
exit and the resulting ’¼éuctuation of the heat
release rate of the ’¼éame is strongly frequency-
dependent (td,’¼é(fpuls)  const.), mainly in the
low frequency range (fpuls 
 50 Hz). The devi-
ation from the ideal idle-time model seems to
be caused by the same effect that increases the
amplitude response of non-enclosed premixed
swirl ’¼éames. This idea is underlined by the
results shown in Fig. 10. In the case of the
enclosed swirl ’¼éame the phase angle shows a
very good agreement with the model for the low
frequency range (fpuls 
 50 Hz) in contrast to
the non-enclosed swirl ’¼éame (Fig. 10b). In this
range of moderate pulsation frequency the am-
plitude response of the non-enclosed swirl ’¼éame
increases signi’¼ücantly, whereas the amplitude
response of the enclosed swirl ’¼éame remains
nearly constant (Fig. 10a).
For higher swirl intensities the phase angles
decrease with a modest gradient and therewith,
the swirl ’¼éame reacts on periodic excitation with
a shorter time delay than in the case of lower
swirl intensities (Fig. 6b). This dependency of
the phase angle on swirl intensity can be ex-
plained by the increasing of the reaction density,
resulting in a shorter ’¼éame length with higher
swirl. Therefore, the mean convective time de-
lay for the transport of the mixture from the
burner nozzle to the main reaction zone of the
’¼éame is decreased with increasing swirl inten-
sity. Assuming that the convective time delay
dominates the total time delay occuring in this
premixed ’¼éame system, the phase angle of a
pulsated premixed ’¼éame decreases with increas-
ing swirl intensity.
For different pulsation levels the phase angle
functions ’¼é(fpuls) (Fig. 7b) show the same
frequency-dependent
behavior
of
premixed
non-enclosed swirl ’¼éames (td,’¼é(fpuls)  const.).
Though, there is no in’¼éuence of the pulsation
level on the time delay and phase angle, respec-
tively. This result is very important for the
physical understanding of the formation and
ampli’¼ücation mechanism of self-excited com-
bustion oscillations (see Fig. 1). The formation
and reaction of an initial small ring-vortex co-
herent to the pressure ’¼éuctuation in the com-
bustion chamber can cause the growing of the
vortex and of the periodic part of the heat
release rate and therewith, the pressure oscilla-
tions will be ampli’¼üed. At the same time the
phase angle between the oscillation of the mix-
ture mass ’¼éow through the burner and the
oscillation of the heat release rate of the ’¼éame
(’¼é) remains constant. This is essential for the
in-phase interaction of the periodical distur-
bances inside the feedback cycle burnerŌĆō’¼éame-
combustion chamber during the origin and
ampli’¼ücation of self-sustained pulsating com-
bustion. If the ’¼éame would change its phase
angle ’¼éwith increasing pulsation level Pu, the
growth of combustion-driven pressure oscilla-
tions would inhibit itself.
CONCLUSIONS
The periodic formation and reaction of ring-
vortex structures is a fundamental phenomenon
combined with the appearance of self-excited
’¼éame-/pressure oscillations in technical com-
bustion systems. Therefore, it is very important
to get to know more details about the ’¼éuid
dynamical conditions (fpuls, Pu, m╦Ö b) of the ring-
vortex formation in the isothermal ’¼éow ’¼üeld as
well as under combustion conditions. Further-
more, a better understanding of the ring-vortex
in’¼éuence on the combustion process itself is
necessary. In the present paper the ’¼éuid dynam-
ical conditions for the formation of coherent
ring-vortex structures in periodic modulated
isothermal swirl ’¼éows are found to be deter-
mined by the combination of the dimensionless
parameters Pu (pulsating level) and Str (nor-
malized excitation frequency). The minimum
excitation level for vortex formation decreases
82
C. KU┬© LSHEIMER AND H. BU┬© CHNER


--- Page 14 ---

with increasing Strouhal number Str (hyperboli-
cal decline: Pucrit  1/Str).
Investigations of the frequency response of
pulsated premixed swirl ’¼éames show two signif-
icant effects on their combustion process: The
increase of the amplitude response (’¼ürst effect)
of pulsated swirl ’¼éames at moderate pulsation
frequencies, that was not observed in pulsated
premixed axial jet ’¼éames, can be explained by
an effect, that inhibits the additional entrain-
ment of ambient medium in comparison with
the quasi steady-state premixed swirl ’¼éames at
the same thermal load and air equivalence ratio.
Therefore, the dynamic characteristics of non-
enclosed premixed swirl ’¼éames show obvious
differences to the jet ’¼éame behavior. The de-
creasing amplitude response with further in-
creasing pulsation frequency represents the be-
ginning
in’¼éuence
of
periodically
formed
toroidal vortices on the combustion process
(second effect). Therefore, the amplitude re-
sponses of the investigated non-enclosed pre-
mixed swirl ’¼éames are characterized by maxima
with positive values at a particular frequency.
In analogy to the results found by isothermal
’¼éow investigations, the increase of the distur-
bance level Pu causes the formation of ring-
vortices at lower frequencies. Therewith, the
interfering of coherent vortex structures on the
combustion process starts at considerable lower
frequencies. However, the critical frequencies
for vortex formation in the isothermal swirl
’¼éows (Fig. 4) and for ’¼éame-vortex interaction in
the ’¼éame measurements (Fig. 6a and 7a) at a
constant pulsation level Pu are different. For
the isothermal swirl ’¼éows the critical frequency
and Strouhal number, respectively, character-
izes the onset of vortex formation in the pul-
sated isothermal swirl ’¼éows close to the burner
exit. In the ’¼éame investigations the critical
frequency (maximum of the amplitude re-
sponse) characterizes the beginning of a notice-
able interaction of the ’¼éuid dynamically con-
trolled vortex formation with the combustion
process.
The obtained phase angles represent fre-
quency-dependent time delays td,’¼é(fpuls) of the
investigated swirl ’¼éames on periodic excitation.
This characteristic time delay of the ’¼éame con-
siderably in’¼éuences the in-phase interaction of
periodical disturbances inside the feedback cy-
cle ŌĆ£burner-’¼éame-combustion chamberŌĆØ (Fig.
1), which is necessary for coupling self-sustained
pulsating combustion. Therefore, the knowl-
edge of the phase angles of ’¼éames in depen-
dence of Q╦Ö th, premix, S0,th, and so forth is
important for prediction models of the stability
limits (feedback coupling) of premixed combus-
tion systems.
The measured ’¼éame transfer functions of
pulsated swirl ’¼éames can be used to check and
to validate numerical simulations of the ’¼éame
behavior for different excitation frequencies
and amplitudes. Additionally, the determina-
tion of the ’¼éame dynamics is essential to im-
prove prediction models for the formation of
self-sustained combustion instabilities. Men-
tion, that there are no other experimental data
of periodically excited swirl ’¼éames in literature
yet. Furthermore, the results obtained from the
’¼éame
response
measurements
of
pulsated
’¼éames (formation of large-scale vortices and
their in’¼éuence on combustion process and
phase angles of the ’¼éame) enabled the develop-
ment of measures to suppress the reactive ring-
vortices and therewith, to control the formation
of self-sustained combustion instabilities [19].
REFERENCES
1.
Schadow, K. C., Gutmark, E., Parr, T. P., Parr, D. M.,
Wilson, K. J., and Crump, J. E., Combust. Sci. Technol.
64:167 (1989).
2.
Candel, S., Twenty-Fourth Symposium (International)
on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh,
1992, p. 1277.
3.
Schadow, K. C., and Gutmark, E., Prog. in Energy
Combust. Sci. 18(2):117 (1992).
4.
Bu┬©chner, H., Experimentelle und theoretische Untersu-
chungen
der
Entstehungsmechanismen
selbsterregter
Druckschwingungen in technischen Vormisch-Verbren-
nungssystemen.
Dissertation
an
der
Universita┬©t
Karlsruhe (TH), Verlag Shaker, Aachen, 1992.
5.
Bu┬©chner, H., Hirsch, C., and Leuckel, W., Combust.
Sci. Tech. 94:219 (1993).
6.
Bu┬©chner, H., and Leuckel, W., in Unsteady Combus-
tion (F. Culick, M. V. Heitor, and J. H. Whitelaw,
Eds.).
Kluwer
Academic
Publishers,
Dordrecht,
1996, p. 71.
7.
Richards, G. A., and Janus, M. C., Characterization of
oscillations during premix gas turbine combustion,
IGTI Paper 97-GT-244, 1997.
8.
Lieuwen, T., and Zinn, B. T., Theoretical investigation
of combustion instability mechanisms in lean premixed
gas turbines. AIAA Paper, AIAA 98-0641, 1998.
83
DYNAMICS OF TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES


--- Page 15 ---

9.
Keller, J. O., and Barr, P. K., in Unsteady Combustion
(F. Culick, M. V. Heitor, and J. H. Whitelaw, Eds.).
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1996, p. 17.
10.
Hirsch, Chr., Bu┬©chner, H., and Leuckel, W. Thirteenth
Symposium on Turbulence. University of Missouri-
Rolla, 1992.
11.
Lovett, J. A., Turns, S. R., AIAA J. 28(1):38 (1989).
12.
Rayleigh, J. W. S., Nature 18:319 (1878).
13.
Schmidt, G. Grundlagen der Regelungstechnik. Spring-
er-Verlag, Berlin, 1987 (2. Au’¼é.).
14.
Gupta, A. K., Lilley, D. G., and Syred, N. Swirl Flows.
ABACUS Press, Tunbridge Wells, 1984.
15.
Gaydon, A. G. Spectroscopy and Combustion Theory.
Chapman and Hall, London, 1948.
16.
Ku┬©lsheimer, C., Bu┬©chner, H., Leuckel, W., Bockhorn,
H., and Hoffmann, S., 19. Dt. Flammentag. VDI-
Berichte 1492, 1999, S. 463.
17.
Bu┬©chner, H., and Leuckel, W., Proceedings of the Third
Asian-Paci’¼üc International Symposium on Combustion
and Energy Utilization, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong, 1995, p. 205.
18.
Bu┬©chner, H., and Ku┬©lsheimer, C., Gaswa┬©rme Interna-
tional 46(2):122, 1997.
19.
Bu┬©chner, H., Bockhorn, H., and Hoffmann, S., Pro-
ceedings of the Symposium on Energy Engineering in the
21st Century (SEE2000), Begell House, New York,
2000, p. 1573.
Received 5 May 2001; revised 30 November 2001; accepted 2
April 2002
84
C. KU┬© LSHEIMER AND H. BU┬© CHNER
