
--- Page 1 ---

Felix Güthe1
e-mail: felix.guethe@power.alstom.com
Jaan Hellat
Peter Flohr
Alstom,
Brown-Boveri-Strasse 7,
CH-5400 Baden, Switzerland
The Reheat Concept: The Proven
Pathway to Ultralow Emissions
and High Efﬁciency and Flexibility
Reheat combustion has been proven now in over 80 units to be a robust and highly
ﬂexible gas turbine concept for power generation. This paper covers three key topics to
explain the intrinsic advantage of reheat combustion to achieve ultralow emission levels.
First, the fundamental kinetic and thermodynamic emission advantage of reheat combus-
tion is discussed, analyzing in detail the emission levels of the ﬁrst and second combustor
stages, optimal ﬁring temperatures for minimal emission levels, as well as benchmarking
against single-stage combustion concepts. Second, the generic operational and fuel ﬂex-
ibility of the reheat system is emphasized, which is based on the presence of two funda-
mentally different ﬂame stabilization mechanisms, namely, ﬂame propagation in the ﬁrst
combustor stage and autoignition in the second combustor stage. This is shown using
simple reasoning on generic kinetic models. Finally, the present ﬂeet status is reported by
highlighting the latest combustor hardware upgrade and its emission performance.
DOI: 10.1115/1.2836613
1
Introduction
In the mid 1990s, Alstom introduced two similar sequential
combustion gas turbines: the GT24 for the 60 Hz market and the
GT26 for the 50 Hz market. Since its ﬁrst launching in 1995 1,
the advanced class GT24/GT26 engines have demonstrated that
this technology platform does offer superior operating ﬂexibility,
low emissions, and high part-load efﬁciency with world-class lev-
els of reliability and availability.
The main technology differentiator of Alstom’s GT24/GT26
Fig. 1 gas turbines is the sequential combustion principle, which
was already introduced in 1948 into the market as a way of in-
creasing efﬁciency at low turbine inlet temperature levels. The
GT24/GT26 combustion system is based on a well-proven Alstom
combustion concept using the environmental EV burner in an
annular combustor followed by the SEV sequential environmen-
tal burner in the second combustion stage see Fig. 1. This dry
low NOx EV burner has a long operating history and is used in the
whole Alstom gas turbine range. Sequential combustion, “the re-
heat principle for gas turbines,” had already been applied to ear-
lier Brown Boveri engines but using two side-mounted silo com-
bustors. Integrating the concept of dry low NOx EV burner and
sequential combustion into a one shaft engine resulted in the
GT24/GT26—a machine with a high power density and a small
footprint. With a pressure ratio of 30:1, the compressor delivers
nearly double the pressure ratio of a conventional compressor.
The compressed air is heated in a ﬁrst combustion chamber EV
combustor by adding about 50% of the total fuel at base load.
After this, the combustion gas expands through the high-pressure
HP turbine, which lowers the pressure by approximately a factor
of 2. The remaining fuel is added together with some additional
cooling air in the second combustion chamber SEV combustor,
where the combustion gas is heated a second time to the maxi-
mum turbine inlet temperature and ﬁnally expanded in the four-
stage low-pressure LP turbine.
Relative to a conventional nonreheat cycle, the same speciﬁc
power output is achieved at lower turbine inlet temperature. This
is illustrated in Fig. 2.
2
Basic Reheat Features for Low Emissions
The low emission levels, which can be achieved with a reheat
system, are the combined effect of three key mechanisms: First, a
reheat combustor makes a more efﬁcient use of the oxygen by
burning twice in the lean premix mode. Second, there exists a
chemical advantage of reheat combustion, which can be exploited.
Third, the ﬂame stabilization by autoignition leads to increased
ﬂexibility, which allows operating in low emission mode at a wide
load range by avoiding high peak ﬂame temperatures Tflame, which
lead to exponential increase in NOx, for both combustors. We
explain these effects in detail below.
2.1
Impact of Lower O2 Level. The reheat concept also
makes very efﬁcient use of the O2 from the air by operating the
second stage at approximately 15% O2 at the inlet. Overall this
leads to very high power densities. The O2 content in the exhaust
is in the order of 10%, yielding a beneﬁcial normalization factor
for 15% O2 of 21–15%/21–10%- 0.55 for the absolute
NOx, as shown in Fig. 3 on the right hand axis. The correction
factor decreases with higher temperature  consumed fuel O2
and is lower for the reheat engines due to its increased O2
consumption.
This leads to varying absolute levels for a ﬁxed “15%” guaran-
tee value depending on reheat or nonreheat combustion and Tflame
and allows higher absolute emission values after two combustion
chambers. This correction has been introduced to make a fair
comparison of power plants based on their emissions relative to
consumed air or fuel. Emissions quantiﬁed in the widely used
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received May 30, 2007; ﬁnal manuscript received October 8, 2007;
published online December 24, 2008. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal.
Fig. 1
GT24/GT26 sequential combustion system
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2009, Vol. 131 / 021503-1
Copyright © 2009 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

emission index deﬁned as atmospherically produced gNO2/kg
fuel are reduced accordingly.
2.2
NOx Characteristics of Reheat Combustion. A second
reason for the low NOx emission is the combustion in the SEV at
reduced O2 levels and increased H2O contents from the ﬁrst com-
bustor 5%. This allows the SEV combustor to operate at
higher ﬁring temperatures and produce less NOx than an EV com-
bustor would produce at the same temperature.
Results of CHEMKIN 2 simulations using the GRI-MECH 3 for
the different ﬂame types are shown in Fig. 3, where the laminar
ﬂame speed module PREMIX has been used for the EV 4 and the
plug ﬂow reactor PFR module for SEV. A detailed network
model based on PREMIX and PFR has been developed for an ac-
curate emission prediction for realistic engine conditions, but its
details are out of the scope of this paper.
A simple CHEMKIN calculation shows that NOx produced in the
second combustor is essentially unaffected by NOx levels arising
from the EV combustor as long as they are of moderate magni-
tude. The SEV calculation seems simply to be offset by the
amount of EV NOx given at the start. Therefore, a chemical model
of the engine treats both combustors as independent NOx produc-
ers. Although the GRI is assumed to describe the SEV combustion
sufﬁciently, further efforts are taken to investigate possible effects
of NOx and water as well as reduced O2 content in ongoing
projects in connection with shock tube studies.
Shown in Fig. 3 are the NOx contributions versus Tflame of a
single combustor EV at approximately 30 bars and of a SEV-
type combustor at approximately 15 bars, as well as a combina-
tion of the two with ﬁxed Tflame for the ﬁrst combustor EV for
the idealized situation of perfect mixing without heat losses. NOx
emissions are given on an absolute scale normalized to the value
for a single combustor EV at Tref. This allows the SEV contri-
bution at reduced O2 to be shown on the same plot. The curves
are analytical ﬁts to CHEMKIN II results of the GRI3.0. The reheat
engine results in lower emissions at the same Tflame. The calibra-
tion factor for 15% O2 refers to the right hand scale. The NOx
emissions of the full reheat engine are taken as the sum of the
absolute emissions of the two combustors assuming no interaction
of NOx from the ﬁrst combustor on the second.
The reduced NOx production of the reheat combustor is among
other possible factors due to the decreased concentration of O
radicals, which is inﬂuenced by the reduced O2 and the increased
Fig. 2
Principle of the reheat cycle compared to a standard GT cycle
Fig. 3
NOx emissions on log scale „normalized, noncalibrated… for a single
combustor „EV…, the SEV combustor, and a reheat combustion system. The
factors calibrating to 15% O2 depend on Tflame and are shown in green and refer
to the right hand scale.
021503-2 / Vol. 131, MARCH 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

H2O content. The O radicals are an essential part of the main
route to produce NOx by oxidizing the otherwise stable N2 mol-
ecule according to the kinetic rate law:
dNO
dt
= kT,pN2O
1
NO = kT,pN2tO
2
Since k and the N2 concentration do not vary much for given
temperatures and pressures, the NOx formation depends mainly on
the time t and the concentration O radicals. The time proﬁles of
this species are plotted in Fig. 4, revealing the integral to be ap-
proximately three times smaller, which is the combination of short
residence times and low O concentration due to H2O and O2
contents of the vitiated air as explained above. For such laminar
cases, the prompt NOx formation due to the O radicals is esti-
mated to be approximately three to six times smaller at given
Tflame considering O-concentration proﬁles. To invoke the often
invoked reburn chemistry to explain the low NOx emissions
seems not to be necessary and is believed to be unlikely since the
heat release is occurring entirely in fuel lean conditions.
Another factor reducing SEV-NOx emissions is the signiﬁ-
cantly reduced residence time in the SEV compared to the EV.
Some additional beneﬁt might arise from the fact that the fast
SEV gas velocities of part of the rich combustion products in the
SEV result in faster quenching of this hot pockets and subse-
quently less time to produce NOx. It can be summarized that the
NOx production in the SEV starts at a signiﬁcantly lower value.
2.3
Reheat Combustion With Autoignition. The reheat con-
cept allows a very ﬂexible operation of the engine, enabling us to
ﬁnd an optimized operating range for the given conditions and
fuel compositions. The reason for that is described in the follow-
ing section.
While the EV inlet temperature TinletEV is determined by the
high-pressure compressor, in the SEV the inlet temperature
TinletSEV is governed by the outlet temperature of the HP turbine.
The SEV ﬂame temperature, TflameSEV, determines the inlet tem-
perature of the LP turbine. Accordingly, the HP-turbine inlet tem-
perature and, along with it, TinletSEV is controlled by the EV
ﬂame temperature, TflameEV.
The reactor inlet temperature Tinlet in the chemical model is
derived from mixing cold fuel and hot combustion air before the
reaction, yielding an effective Tmix as Tinlet. The shorter residence
time of the products in the combustor is accounted for in the
model.
Fig. 4
O-radical concentration proﬁles for EV and SEV ﬂames
„taken from PREMIX and PFR calculations… for similar Tflame. The
arbitrary time scale extends over 4 ms. The shaded area in the
integral t†O‡dt determines the most important NOx formation
routes and is approximately three times higher in the EV than
in the SEV.
Fig. 5
Schematic diagram explaining the physics and chemistry of the EV ﬂame „left… and the SEV
ﬂame „right… for natural gas. The intermediates indicating preﬂame zones „CH2O… are displayed in the
upper graphs. The shaded areas indicate the most relevant regions of reactivity. The different time
axes were given in reverence to the typical mixing times.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2009, Vol. 131 / 021503-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

The higher TinletSEV results in a much higher reactivity of the
fresh gases, a different mechanism being important for the de-
scription of the ﬂame. This higher reactivity is partly compensated
by higher burner velocity leading to shorter characteristic mixing
times mixSEV  ignition time igntion1–2 ms available for
mixing for the SEV combustor, leaving some residual unmixed-
ness in the ﬂame region compared to the EV ﬂame, where a char-
acteristic mixing time mixEV 5–10 ms is given by the travel-
ing time from fuel injection to ﬂame front.
It should be pointed out that Fig. 3 indicates ideal conditions.
For a real system, effects of local unmixedness and heat losses
need additional consideration.
This high reactivity at high combustor inlet temperatures in the
SEV has the consequence that ﬂame stabilization occurs always
under premixed conditions by autoignition, and no piloting is
needed to stabilize the SEV ﬂame. The Tflame of the two combus-
tors are ideally optimized primarily with respect to performance
and turbine lifetime, but also at a given load for equal amounts of
NOx produced, deriving an absolute minimum in engine emis-
sions.
2.4
Optimal Firing of Combustor for Minimal Emissions
and Maximum Flexibility. The reheat concept enables us to op-
erate the two combustors at different temperatures with only little
impact on the overall power output. This increases the ﬂexibility
of the combustion system, allowing us to burn more or less reac-
tive fuels in the same engine by adjusting the relative load be-
tween the two combustors and to mitigate ranges where operation
would become difﬁcult. This can be utilized for different fuels
C2+ or even H2 containing fuels, exhaust gas recirculation, or
changes in ambient conditions.
In general, the engines are adjusted so that the ﬁrst combustor
runs at low ﬁring temperatures, keeping the emissions as low as
possible for conventional premix combustion, while the second
combustor is operated at higher temperatures, producing similar
emissions on absolute scale due to the reasons mentioned above.
Note that while the EV runs more or less at constant conditions
see Fig. 10, keeping low NOx even at very low loads, the load-
ing is achieved by varying the fuel input in the SEV starting at as
low as 25% GT load as well as increasing the mass ﬂow of air.
The high TinletSEV allows operation without piloting for the entire
operation range, entirely relying on autoignition for the SEV
ﬂame.
The conceptual difference between EV and SEV ﬂames is pre-
sented in Fig. 5. The ﬂame has to be stabilized between limits for
ﬂashback FB and lean blowoff LBO determined by the laminar
ﬂame speed SL for the EV ﬂame, which depends on conditions
around the adiabatic Tflame and less on Tinlet. The SEV ﬂame is
dominated by the chemistry occurring in the preﬂame zone at
Tinlet. This includes the buildup of a radical pool up to a critical
threshold. The ﬂame position is here determined by the ignition
time. To compare the two different combustion regimes, the time
has been scaled to zero for the region of maximum heat release
and normalized to the characteristic mixing times as deﬁned
before.
For the inlet conditions of the EV, autoignition times are much
too long to play a role even for the most reactive fuels. Flame
propagation is the leading mechanism for a stationary reaction
zone stabilization, as can be calculated with PREMIX for the lami-
nar case laminar ﬂame speed SL. The description of the turbulent
ﬂame propagation is derived from that concept. As for every con-
ventional premix burner, the EV ﬂame stabilization happens
within the boundaries of ﬂame blowoff at a low ﬂame temperature
limit and ﬂame FB at a high ﬂame temperature limit. These ﬂame
propagation limits are sketched on the left side of Fig. 5. The
reactivity is controlled by transport across the ﬂame front and
determined by the kinetic rates at high temperatures close to the
adiabatic one. Intermediates are abundant only close to the ﬂame
front. The reactivity Fig. 6 depends on the kinetics of the fuel
and its transport properties at high temperatures close to the ﬁnal
TflameEV and only slightly on pressure and TinletEV. For the EV,
the relative reactivity RREV is deﬁned with reference to one op-
erating point as the ratio of laminar ﬂame speeds in
RREV = SL/SL−ref
3
This ﬂame stabilization is fundamentally different for the SEV
ﬂame, which is controlled by autoignition calculated with PFR
arising from reactive intermediates forming and accumulating up
to a critical threshold before the ﬂame front. The chemistry at
lower temperatures TinletSEV is responsible for the reactivity.
This means that in the engine the SEV ﬂame is controlled and
governed by the TflameEV, while TflameSEV has only little inﬂuence
on the ﬂame position. The relative reactivity RRSEV is deﬁned in
Eq. 4 from the ignition times as
RRSEV = igref/ig
4
These reactivity deﬁnitions enable comparing combustor speciﬁc
deﬁnitions on one scale Figs. 6–8.
Plotting RR over Tflame 1/ for lean conditions in Fig. 6
leads to the contrary effects: For this laminar approximations, the
EV ﬂame becomes more reactive with Tflame, but the SEV ﬂame
becomes less reactive because the cooling effect of adding more
cold fuel to the heated air from the ﬁrst combustor controls the
reactivity while the reactivity toward ignition is not increased by
a higher concentration of fuel. In the very lean region, an increase
Fig. 6
EV and SEV reactivities as deﬁned by Eqs. „3… and „4…
for varied fuel contents and constant Tinlet „compare with Fig.
8…. The shaded area deﬁnes an operational range.
021503-4 / Vol. 131, MARCH 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

of fuel molecules can increase RRSEV slightly. Taken together,
these effects counterbalance to give a reactivity maximum and,
overall, very small dependence on Tflame. The small variation for
the SEV reactivity with fuel is the cause for the high ﬂexibility of
the reheat concept. The reactivity increases with fuel only for very
lean conditions. The chemical acceleration of rich mixtures levels
off at intermediate levels, and the reduction of Tmix due to the
mixing with cold fuel outruns this effect, slowing down the reac-
tivity toward rich mixtures.
The EV reactivity RREV varies much more with fuel; therefore,
the EV ﬂame position has to be controlled aerodynamically by
attaching it to a ﬂame anchoring point, in this case a stagnation
point in the ﬂow ﬁeld vortex breakdown of the swirled EV
burner. Effects of autoignition in the EV combustor or ﬂame
propagation in the SEV are assumed to be minor and are neglected
here.
The operating range of a burner is limited by a minimum reac-
tivity SL for the EV, causing a LBO of the ﬂame and a maxi-
mum acceptable reactivity preventing the ﬂame to ﬂash back. The
EV is governed by the aerodynamic stabilization, allowing this
combustor to hold the ﬂame at the same positions over a wide
range of reactivity.
The reheat combustion system has the particular property that
the ﬂame stabilization in both premix combustors, EV and SEV, is
controlled by a single physical quantity—the ﬂame temperature of
the ﬁrst EV combustor. This way, the high ﬂexibility of the engine
can be maintained by being able to operate the EV over a range of
Tflame, therefore enabling us to ﬁnd an optimum HP-turbine outlet
temperature for SEV operation. This optimization can be used for
the lowest emissions as well as to handle a variety of fuels and
inlet conditions.
The SEV ﬂame position is mainly controlled by its chemical
reactivity, which is mainly inﬂuenced by TinletSEV and the fuel
composition. The different control mechanisms of ﬂame positions
are utilized in the ALSTOM gas turbine design by attaching the
EV ﬂame aerodynamically and by controlling the SEV ﬂame
through TinletSEV. The fact that the SEV ﬂame is relatively insen-
sitive to Tflame leads to a high operational range: SEV load can be
increased without increasing FB risk emissions and pulsations
still have to be considered, of course.
This leads to an interesting effect for not perfectly mixed
ﬂames. The reactivity probabilities resulting from a given fuel-air
unmixedness are plotted in Fig. 7. The same variance in the upper
and lower graph lead to a wider distribution of ﬂame speeds for
the EV and a very narrow distribution for the SEV at given HP-
turbine outlet temperature. Here the different mechanisms be-
come clear once more by spreading out over a wide range of
Fig. 7
Probability of reactivity derived from a distribution of
fuel for EV and SEV combustors at ﬁxed inlet conditions. The
histograms show the probability for a given reactivity, while the
bubbles are calculated reactivities for a given fuel-mass ratio.
Fig. 8
EV reactivity for varied TflameEV „upper graph… for two
different fuels on logarithmic scale. In the lower graph, the re-
activity of the SEV for varied inlet conditions „TinletSEV… is pre-
sented, referenced to a standard inlet temperature Tinref. A re-
activity increase due to the fuel is compensated by reduced
TinletSEV. Note that the RRSEV is plotted versus TflameSEV in Fig. 6.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2009, Vol. 131 / 021503-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

reactivities for the EV ﬂame but only a very narrow range for the
SEV-ﬂame.
3
Generic Operational and Fuel Flexibility
3.1
Fuel Flexibility for Highly Reactive Fuels. While the
reactivity for the EV is controlled by TflameEV, the SEV reactivity
is mostly controlled by the inlet conditions and TinletSEV. This has
some interesting conclusions for the engine operation.
1. The SEV can be varied in TflameSEV without changing its
ﬂame position much.
2. An increased reactivity due to a more reactive fuel can be
easily compensated by reducing the TflameEV and, therefore,
TinletSEV.
This is also illustrated in Fig. 8, which demonstrates the fuel
ﬂexibility achievable by varying TflameEV. The increase in reac-
tivity vertical arrow due to a more reactive fuel can be compen-
sated by reducing TflameEV horizontal arrow. The reduction of
the EV fuel leads to a TinletSEV reduction, which simultaneously
reduces the SEV reactivity. In the SEV, a reactivity increase due to
the fuel is compensated by reduced TinletSEV.
The described insensitivity of ﬂame reactivity to TflameSEV al-
lows the inlet temperature of the LP turbine to be constant in
terms of protection for the combustor. Therefore, only little loss
in overall power and efﬁciency due to derating the EV since the
power output is largely recovered by adding more fuel to the SEV.
This is in contrast to the nonreheat engines, where a derating due
to increased fuel reactivity leads to decreased turbine inlet tem-
perature resulting in severe loss of overall power and efﬁciency.
This key feature can be used to operate the engine 5 such that
changes in fuel composition do not impact emission performance
and reliability signiﬁcantly. For example, if for given Tflame higher
hydrocarbons “C2+ ” or even H2 or CO are added to the fuel,
reactivity will increase i.e., ﬂame speed will increase and ignition
time will decrease and, as a result, the EV combustor will likely
produce higher NOx. Likewise, the SEV combustor may encoun-
ter FB risk due to shorter ignition times if no adjustment is
foreseen.
For highly reactive fuels, the fuel input in the EV combustor is
reduced, which leads to lower SEV burner inlet temperature, to
stay below the burner protection limit. This is feasible because the
EV burner lean extinction limit is also reduced for increased re-
activity in the fuel.
However, a simple adjustment by decreasing the fuel input in
the EV combustor and simultaneously increasing the fuel input in
the SEV combustor to keep the total fuel ﬂow constant will
stabilize combustion performance: EV emissions remain low, and
SEV ﬂame stabilization is back at its design point. Due to the
inherently low emissions of the SEV combustor, the emission pen-
alty will be negligible if the engine is operated in such a way as
schematically shown in Fig. 9.
3.2
Dual Fuel Capability. The primary fuel of the GT24/
GT26 ﬂeet is gaseous fuel, while fuel oil is often needed as a
backup. The sequential combustion system can also be operated
with fuel oil, engines in this case being delivered with dual fuel
EV and SEV lances instead of the normal gas-only lances. As is
normal practice, demineralized water is used for NOx control, this
being combined with the fuel oil in a mixing block before being
fed to the lance as an emulsion. The GT24/GT26 engines also
have the ability to switch between the two fuels while remaining
synchronized to the grid and so providing the operator with arbi-
tration capabilities and full backup security.
3.3
Part-Load Flexibility. The sequential combustion system
offers the intrinsic advantage that premix combustion can be ap-
plied across the entire load range because the EV combustor is
operated at a constant ﬂame temperature through the entire load
range, while the premix SEV combustor is used to vary loads
from approximately 12–100%. This is schematically shown in
Fig. 10.
The so-called “low load operation concept” utilizes the possi-
bility of shutting down the sequential SEV combustor at low part
loads and is therefore a unique feature of the GT24/GT26 tech-
nology. This concept allows the plant to be operated in a com-
bined cycle mode at a very low combined cycle load about 15–
25% with the EV combustor operating in the lean premix mode,
giving low emission levels as well as a homogenous HP-turbine
inlet temperature distribution while keeping the water-steam cycle
up and running. The result is a concept that has a number of
advantages to the operator because it avoids start-stop cycles and
the related cyclic thermal stress to the top and bottom cycle equip-
ment. It enables the operation at low emission levels close to base
load levels and reduces cumulative emissions compared to park-
ing a plant at a higher partial load. Also, it assures a homogenous
turbine inlet temperature distribution, which is more difﬁcult to
achieve for nonreheat engines due to burner piloting at part load.
4
Engine Experience
4.1
Combustor Hardware Status. The continuous drive 6
toward higher performance and lower emissions motivated an up-
grade of the EV combustor. The combustor upgrade development,
based on the so-called “staged EV burner” is described in detail in
a recent paper 7. Its main feature is the replacement of the cen-
tral pilot injector by a premix injector. This leads to a burner
system with two fuel stages, which can be operated both in the
premix mode to vary the fuel proﬁle. In the premix mode, the
Fig. 9
GT26/GT24 operation concept as a function of fuel re-
activity, here given by the content of higher hydrocarbon con-
tent „C2+… in the fuel
Fig. 10
Schematic of the operating concept of the GT24/GT26
with load variation done through the SEV combustor fuel ﬂow
021503-6 / Vol. 131, MARCH 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

proﬁle is optimized for minimal emission performance, while in
the startup mode, the staging is optimized for maximal stability
see Fig. 11. As a result, this burner has much reduced emission
levels in part-load operation, as well as in the base load where the
fuel staging between the two stages can always be chosen to be
optimal to the base load adjustment point of the engine.
4.2
Emission Characteristics. The emission performance of
the staged EV combustor against the standard EV combustor is
shown in Fig. 12. This graph shows two effects: First, emission
levels are reduced and thus conﬁrm the expected improvement of
the staged EV burner. Second, the emission gradient is changed
over a wide load range in this plot between the measured points
between 65% and 100% loads. This change in gradient is inter-
esting because it is a direct consequence of the optimization of the
EV combustor.
The emission levels of the EV combustor are now so low that
the total emissions of the engine start to become dominated by the
SEV combustor. As was shown in Fig. 10, the fuel input in the
SEV is increased with load and, as a result, now visible in the
engine emission performance even if absolute values are very low.
Indeed, a more detailed analysis of the combustion system, which
includes effects of heat losses and burner imperfections, shows
that the relative emission contribution of the SEV combustor in-
creases.
5
Summary
In this paper, the key advantages of the reheat system as imple-
mented in the GT24/GT26 engines have been highlighted, namely,
its inherently low emission levels as well as its operational ﬂex-
ibility. The contribution of the two combustors to overall emission
levels has been discussed in detail and highlights how the latest
EV combustor upgrade has improved the overall engine emission
performance. Also, it has been explained how the proven opera-
tional ﬂexibility of these engines are inherently linked to the
complementary combustion kinetics in the two combustion sys-
tems.
The achievement of ultralow emission levels while keeping
maximal operational ﬂexibility both in load variation and fuel
composition changes and reliability will remain the key driver for
ALSTOM’s combustor development. The sequential combustion
system is suited very well for this challenge, both today and for
the future.
Acknowledgment
The support of Reaction Design in using the CHEMKIN code is
gratefully acknowledged.
References
1 Joos, F., Brunner, P., Schulte-Wenning, B., Syed, K., and Eroglu, A., 1996,
“Development of the Sequential Combustion System for the ABB GT24/26
Gas Turbine Family,” ASME Paper No. 1996-GT-315.
2 Kee, R. J., Rupley, F. M., Miller, J. A., Coltrin, M. E., Grcar, J. F., Meeks, E.,
Moffat, H. K., Lutz, A. E., Dixon-Lewis, G., Smooke, M. D., Warnatz, J.,
Evans, G. H., Larson, R. S., Mitchell, R. E., Petzold, L. R., Reynolds, W. C.,
Caracotsios, M., Stewart, W. E., and Glarborg, P., 1999, CHEMKIN Collection,
Reaction Design, Inc., San Diego, CA.
3 GRI-MECH http://www.me.berkeley.edu/grimech.
4 Biagioli, F., and Güthe, F., 2007, “Effect of Pressure and Fuel-Air Unmixed-
ness on NOx Emissions From Industrial Gas Turbine Burners,” Combust.
Flame, 151, pp. 274–288.
5 Riccius, O., Smith, R., Güthe, F., and Flohr, P., 2005, “The GT24/GT26 Com-
bustion Technology and High Hydrocarbon C2+ Fuels,” ASME Paper No.
GT2005-68799.
6 Philipson, S., Ladwig, M., Lindvall, K., and Schmidli, J., 2006, “A Further
Uprate for Alstom’s Sequential Combustion GT26 Gas Turbine,” Power Gen
Europe 2006, Cologne, Germany.
7 Zajadatz, M., Lachner, R., Bernero, S., Motz, C., and Flohr, P., 2007, “Devel-
opment and Design of ALSTOM’s Stage Fuel Gas Injection EV Burner for
NOx Reduction,” ASME Paper No. GT2007-27775.
Fig. 11
Staged EV-burner principle. Details of its development are described
in Ref. †7‡.
Fig. 12
Emission levels achieved with the staged EV burner
on logarithmic scale
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2009, Vol. 131 / 021503-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
