
--- Page 1 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
1
Simultaneous Combustion Instability and Emissions Control Using Air and Fuel 
Modulation
Adam Wachsman∗, Sungbae Park∗, Ziaieh C. Sobhani∗, Anuradha M. Annaswamy†
and Ahmed F. Ghoniem‡
Department of Mechanical Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
Abstract
We study experimentally the impact of static and 
modulated transverse jet injected near the flame 
anchoring zone on the stability and emissions in a 
premixed backward facing step combustor. The 
combustor shows strong pressure oscillations at 38 Hz. 
Parametric studies using multiple sensors indicate that 
flame-vortex interactions are responsible for the heat 
release dynamics under unstable conditions. We 
demonstrate that with sufficient momentum, a static air 
jet injected perpendicular to the incoming flow near the 
step favorably modifies the flame-vortex interactions 
and reduces the pressure oscillations by up to 14 dB 
(OASPL), and the NOx emission by an order of 
magnitude. Adding small amount of hydrogen to the 
primary fuel further reduces the pressure oscillations. 
We also investigate the impact of the transverse jet 
modulation. Result shows that one can reduce the 
amount of air necessary for stabilization by 50% from 
the static case by using closed-loop control and jet 
modulation.
1.
Introduction
Continuous combustion systems common in propulsion 
and power generation applications are susceptible to 
thermoacoustic instability, which occurs under lean 
burn conditions close to the flammability where most 
emissions and efficiency benefits are achieved, and near 
stoichiometry where high power density is the 
objective. Resonance between the acoustic field of the 
combustion chamber and the heat-release rate has been 
shown under these conditions. Pressure oscillations 
inside the combustor cause fluctuations in the heat-
release rate through several mechanisms, including
∗ Graduate research assistant.
† Principal Research Scientist and Lecturer.
‡ Professor, Associate fellow, AIAA.
equivalence ratio fluctuations [1,2], flame surface 
oscillation [3], flame-vortex interactions [4-8], either 
individually or simultaneously [9]. Under certain 
conditions the pressure and heat-release fluctuations are 
in phase, causing an unstable feedback between the 
hear release and the acoustics [10].  
Active control of combustion dynamics is an attractive 
approach for achieving desired performance goals, such 
as reduced overall sound pressure level, reduced 
emissions, and increased efficiency. Typically, active 
combustion control has been implemented using 
pressure or heat release rate sensors, and an actuator 
that modulates the fuel [11-14] or air streams [15].  
Fuel modulation suffers from a possible emission’s 
penalty associated with fuel injection into the 
combustion zone, where maximum authority is 
expected.  Moreover, modulating the primary fuel in the 
upstream may be ineffective if the heat-release 
dynamics are governed by flame-vortex interactions 
rather than equivalence ratio oscillations.
In this paper, we first investigate the thermoacoustic 
instability mechanism in an 80 kW premixed backward-
facing step combustor in order to determine the 
appropriate actuation technique. Parametric studies and 
flame images from various sensors confirm that the 
dominant mechanism is flame-vortex interactions 
throughout the entire range of operating conditions.
Secondly, we examine the use of steady and modulated 
transverse jets, injected near the combustion zone, as 
means of simultaneously suppressing the pressure 
oscillations and reducing NOx. We show that the 
transverse jet, under certain conditions, favorably 
modifies 
flame-vortex 
interactions, 
suppressing 
pressure fluctuations by up to 14 dB with an order of 
magnitude reduction in NO emissions. Under different 
conditions, using a transverse air jet near the lean 
flammability limit makes the flame more susceptible to 
blow out. Next, we experiment with the addition of 
small amounts of hydrogen in the primary fuel and in 
the air jet. It has been shown that adding a small 
amount of hydrogen to other hydrocarbons can extend 
42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit
5 - 8 January 2004, Reno, Nevada
AIAA 2004-633
Copyright © 2004 by A. Wachsnam, S. Park, Z. C. Sobhani, A.M. Annaswamy and A.F. Ghoniem. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.


--- Page 2 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
their flammability limit and increase their resistance to 
flame extinction [16-21].
In Section 2, the experimental apparatus, the sensors 
and actuators are described.  In Section 3, we discuss an 
overall combustion dynamics model that describes the 
interactions between the heat-release dynamics, the 
acoustics, and the hydrodynamics.
A preliminary 
parametric study that sheds light on the flame-vortex 
interactions and their impact on instability is presented 
in this section. We conclude with open-loop and closed-
loop control results using air jet injection and H2 
addition in Section 4. 
2.
Combustor Description
The experimental tests are conducted in a backward-
facing step combustor, in which a sudden expansion is 
used to anchor the flame, as shown in Fig. 1. The 
combustor consists of a stainless steel duct with a 
rectangular cross section.  The duct is 160 mm wide. At 
the test section, its height expands suddenly from 20 
mm to 40 mm forming a backward-facing step. The 
overall length of the combustor is 1.9 m, with the step 
located at the middle. The test section is equipped with 
quartz viewing windows for optical access. The air inlet 
is choked. The exhaust goes through a sudden 
expansion at the end of the tunnel with an expansion 
ratio of 1 to 5. For more detail, we refer the reader to 
Ref. [22]. The sensors and actuators are positioned as 
indicated in Fig. 1, where p′  is pressure fluctuations 
measured at 74 cm upstream of the step, U  is the mean 
air velocity in the upstream section, 
′
1u  and 
′
2
u
 are the 
velocity fluctuations at the point of fuel injection and 
the step, respectively, Q′ is the fluctuation in the heat 
release rate, ω′  is vorticity fluctuations downstream 
the step, φ ′ is equivalence ratio fluctuations measured 
at 12 cm upstream of the step, and NOx is measured 62 
cm downstream the step. Afuel and Aair are the locations 
for fuel and air forcing used. AH2f and AH2a are the 
locations for H2 forcing in the upstream and at the air 
injection slot, all used for control. Figure 2 is a 
photograph of the test section of the combustor with 
key sensors and actuators identified by the symbols 
defined above.
2.1 Sensors 
Here, we describe the sensors used to identify the state. 
Pressure fluctuation is measured using a Kistler 
pressure sensor (S1). CH* chemiluminescence, which 
can be related to heat-release fluctuation [23,24], is 
measured using a linear photodiode array (S2). The 2D 
flame structure is visualized using a high speed camera 
(S3). Equivalence ratio fluctuations are characterized 
using a He-Ne laser and an In-As detector arrangement 
(S4) [25]. The air mass flow is measured using a Sierra 
Instruments 780S-Flat-Trak (S5). NOx is measured 
using the Thermo Environmental Instruments Model 
42C High Level NO-NO2-NOX Analyzer (S6). The 
pressure, equivalence ratio, air mass flow and NOx 
measurements are logged at 500 Hz into a Pentium III 
computer equipped with a dSPACE data acquisition 
board. The linear photodiode array voltages are 
captured by a Pentium IV computer equipped with 
National Instruments data acquisition hardware. The 
overall sampling rate from the photodiodes is 64 kHz, 
and each snapshot is captured at 500 Hz.
Sensors
Variables
S1
Pressure Sensor (p′)
 p′
Pressure 
Fluctuations
S2
Linear Photodiode 
128-array (Q′)
Q′
Heat Release 
Fluctuations
S3
High Speed Camera
ω'
Vorticity
S4
Equivalence Ratio 
Sensor (φ ′)
φ ′
Equivalence Ratio 
Fluctuations
S5
Air Flow Meter (Ū)
Ū
Mean Air Flow 
Rate
S6
Emissions (NOX)
Actuators
u1'
Velocity 
Perturbations at 
the step
Aair
Air Forcing
Afuel
Fuel Forcing 
u2'
Velocity 
Perturbations at 
the fuel bar
AH2f
H2 Forcing with the 
Fuel
AH2a
H2 Forcing with Air
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of the backward-facing step 
combustor with various sensors and actuators


--- Page 3 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
3
Fig. 2 Photograph of the backward-facing step 
combustor and some of the sensors used.
2.2 Actuators 
As indicated in Fig. 1, the primary fuel injection occurs 
several step heights upstream of the step through a bar 
aligned in the spanwise direction, with multiple fuel jets 
pointing upstream to improve the streamwise mixing. 
While the primary fuel can be modulated at an order of 
magnitude higher than the fundamental unstable 
frequency, downstream mixing between the injection 
location and the flame anchoring position reduces the
fuel modulation authority. Moreover, actuation far 
upstream introduces a time delay between fuel 
modulation and the combustion event. Alternatively, air 
forcing through a spanwise slot located 12 mm
upstream of the step occurs much closer to the dump 
plane, and can deliver higher authority.  Furthermore, 
adding additional air through the slot near the step, 
besides its significant fluid dynamic effect, tends to 
decrease the local temperature, which is favorable for 
NOx reduction but may endanger flame stability.  To 
overcome this limitation, a small amount of hydrogen 
maybe introduced either with the primary fuel or at the 
air forcing location. The following provides detailed 
description of the air and fuel actuation. Control results
with air actuation will be shown in Section 4.
Air Forcing(Aair) The air jet, introduced through a 
spanwise 2 mm slot located 12 mm upstream the step, is 
actuated using four Dynamco D1B2204 Dash 1 direct 
solenoid poppet air valves. Each valve can supply 1.8 
g/s of air when driven by 689 kPa.  The valves are 
connected to a plenum beneath the slot.
Primary Fuel Forcing (Afuel) Propane modulation is 
accomplished using a Moog D633-7315 AIC Direct 
Drive Valve (DDV), which has its own built-in 
feedback loop to ensure the spool position using an 
LVDT with a bandwidth of 450Hz.  
H2 (AH2f & AH2a)  To extend the flammability limit and 
increase the resistance of the flame to extinction, 
hydrogen is delivered at 0-9 mg/s through a Sierra 
Instrument mass flow controller. Hydrogen is either
mixed with propane and introduced through the fuel 
bar, AH2f, or mixed with the air jet and introduced 
through the slot, AH2a.
3.
Modeling of the Combustion Dynamics
Figure 3 shows schematically how various flow, 
combustion and acoustics mechanisms interact, and 
their contributions to the combustion dynamics and 
emissions. This model features the following:
1.
The feedback mechanism that contributes to 
combustion dynamics, which couples heat-
release dynamics and acoustics.
2.
The heat-release perturbations that arise due to 
fluctuations in the equivalence ratio, φ′ , and 
hydrodynamic perturbations, ω′ .  
Optimal actuation for control depends on the 
mechanism leading to combustion instability. For 
example, if equivalence ratio fluctuations play a 
significant role, upstream fuel modulation may work 
best. On the other hand, if flame-vortex interaction is 
the 
governing 
mechanism, 
hydrodynamic-based 
actuation near the step, such as spanwise air injection, 
would be more effective.  A parametric study of the 
impact of the inlet conditions and the hydrodynamics
on the combustion instability is shown in the following 
sections.
Fig. 
3 
Schematic 
diagram 
of 
the 
acoustics, 
hydrodynamics and heat release dynamics and their 
interactions.
3.1 The Role of the Inlet Dynamics (Mixture 
Inhomogeneity)
We first examine the role of fuel/air mixture 
inhomogeneity, φ ′ , in the combustion dynamics. 
Equivalence ratio fluctuation occurs due to velocity
perturbations, 
1u′ , at the point of fuel injection 


--- Page 4 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
4
according to 
U
u '
1
1
1
+
=
′
φ
φ
 (if 
U
u /
1′
<1).  φ ′
appears at the burning zone following a convective 
transport time delay, 
tot
τ
, determined by the mean 
mixture velocity, U , and the distance from the point of 
fuel injection to the burning zone, L , 
U
L
tot =
τ
 [1,2].  
Fluctuations in fuel/air mixture produce heat release 
fluctuations,Q′, proportional to φ ′ .  
The convective delay from the point of fuel injection to 
the burning zone determines the phase between 
φ ′ and 
1u′  (and hence p′). The time delay can be 
modified by changing the fuel injection location.  To 
determine the impact of the mixture inhomogeneity, or 
φ ′  on stability, the location of the fuel bar was varied 
and the pressure was measured at various air and fuel 
flow rates. Moving the fuel injection further upstream 
has the following effects: 1) the convective time delay 
is increased, and 2) the amplitude of mixture 
inhomogeneity is decreased due to diffusion and 
reduction in 
1u′  (the fundamental acoustic mode in the 
combustor is a quarter-wave mode with a closed end 
upstream and an open end downstream). Note that the 
hydrodynamic characteristics do not change by 
changing the fuel injection location.
We now consider two cases: I and II, where the fuel bar 
was located 17.5 cm and 35 cm upstream from the step, 
respectively. In both cases, the uncontrolled combustor 
was operated at different air-flow rates.  The resulting 
stability maps are shown in Fig. 4, which depicts the 
effect of varying the equivalence ratio and Reynolds 
number on the overall sound pressure level (OASPL). 
In all these experiments, the excited acoustic mode 
frequency, 
ac
f
, was 38 Hz.  The convective time delay 
from the fuel injection point to the step, 
tot
τ
, is shown 
in the figure as multiples of τ ,  where τ  is the 
acoustic time scale, 
ac
f
/
1
 = 26.3 ms.  It is interesting 
to note that strong instability (over 160dB) occurs at or
near τ
n
 where n is an integer. If the instability was 
controlled by the mixture inhomogeneity only, a 
stability band should appear in these maps as the time 
delay is varied as follows: stable zones when the 
transport delay is between nτ  and (n+0.5)τ  and 
unstable zones when the delay is between (n+0.5)τ
and (n+1)τ  [1,2]. Changes in the pressure fluctuations 
were relatively small during these transitions, and data 
scatter was almost uniform in both regimes, indicating 
that the equivalence ratio oscillation is not the primary 
mechanism of heat release oscillations, although it may 
have a secondary role, as seen next. 
We further investigated the extent to which the mixture 
inhomogeneity contributes to combustion instability. 
Equivalence 
ratio 
oscillations 
(S4) 
and 
the 
corresponding pressure signal (S1) are compared in 
Cases I and II at two different operating conditions. 
First, at Re = 5300 and φ  = 0.85, as shown in Fig. 5a, 
negligible equivalence ratio fluctuations are observed in 
Case II due to streamwise diffusion, while significant 
equivalence ratio fluctuations are observed in Case I. 
The pressure amplitude is higher in Case I indicating 
that the equivalence ratio fluctuation increases the 
pressure oscillations at this operating condition. Note 
that Case I is in the band between (n+0.5)τ  and 
(n+1)τ . On the other hand, even without equivalence 
ratio fluctuations, pressure oscillations are still 
significant in Case II.
(a) Case I (fuel bar at 17.5 cm)
(b) Case II (fuel bar at 35 cm)
Fig. 4 Stability maps in Cases I and II. Values indicate 
the overall sound pressure level (OASPL)


--- Page 5 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
5
The power spectra obtained at a second operating 
condition, at Re = 6300 and φ  = 0.85, are shown in 
Fig. 5b. This condition corresponds to a band between 
nτ  and (n+0.5)τ  in both cases, where equivalence 
ratio oscillations may damp out pressure oscillations. 
While significant equivalence ratio fluctuations are 
present, Case II has lower values since the fuel bar is 
positioned further upstream, similar to the Re=5300 
experiment. Since the equivalence ratio fluctuations, 
under these conditions, provide negative feedback, Case 
I exhibits a lower pressure amplitude. However, both 
cases show significant pressure oscillations, indicating 
that the essential mechanism here is not mixture 
inhomogeneity.
(a) Re=5300, φ =0.85
(b) Re=6300, φ =0.85
Fig. 5 Pressure (S1) and equivalence ratio (S4) 
frequency spectra at (a) Re=5300 and φ =0.85 and (b) 
Re=6300, φ =0.85 in Cases I and II.
3.2 The Role of Hydrodynamics and Flame-
Vortex Interactions. 
Velocity perturbations can cause repeated shedding of 
vortical structures at the step. This, in turn, causes the 
flame shape to change, thereby generating large 
amplitude of heat release fluctuation. This vortex 
shedding has a preferred frequency quantified by a 
Strouhal number St = 
U
H
f H
/
= O(0.1) where H is 
the step height and fH is the frequency in Hz [5]. If the 
preferred vortex shedding frequency is near the acoustic 
mode frequency, 
ac
f
, the system is more prone to 
combustion instability. 
The strong dependency of combustion instability on the 
Reynolds number or the mean velocity described above 
suggests 
that 
the 
primary 
mechanism 
causing 
combustion instability is the hydrodynamics and its 
interaction 
with 
flame. 
As 
mentioned 
before, 
hydrodynamics has a preferred frequency around 
)
/
1.0
(
H
U
O
f H =
. Interestingly, strong instability 
occurs above Re=9500 in Case I, and Re=7400 in Case 
II, as shown in Fig. 4, in which the preferred frequency 
is 
H
f
=33Hz and 25Hz, respectively, both of which are 
close to the acoustic frequency, 
ac
f
=38Hz. High speed 
CCD images in Fig. 6, captured at 500 frames/s, show 
strong flame–vortex interactions with no noticeable 
difference in the flame structure between the two cases.  
These images confirm the role of flame-vortex 
interactions in the combustion instability mechanism. 
4.
Control of Combustion Instability and 
Emissions
In this section, we show open and closed-loop control 
results using the air jet and H2 addition, in order to 
simultaneously reduce pressure oscillations and NOx 
emissions. The fuel bar is located 35 cm upstream of 
the step. In Section 4.1, we consider a static air jet (Aair) 
near the step and H2 addition to the primary fuel (AH2f). 
In Section 4.2, we show the impact of modulating the 
air jet (Aair) when it is mixed with hydrogen (AH2a). 
Primary fuel modulations (Afuel) at the fuel bar were 
also attempted, but, as expected from the results of 
Section 3, its impact on combustion instability was 
negligible. 
4.1  Static Air (Aair) and H2 injection (AH2f)
The effect of a steady transverse air jet (Aair), 
introduced a short distance upstream of the step, on the 
pressure fluctuations, and the impact of hydrogen 
addition to the primary fuel (AH2f) in the presence of the 
transverse air jet as well are now examined. In these 
tests, the Reynolds number was 6300, with a 
corresponding average velocity, U = 4.4 m/s. The 
primary fuel supply was fixed. The transverse jet air 


--- Page 6 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
6
Case I (fuel bar at 17.5cm upstream)                             Case II (fuel bar at 35cm upstream)
        (a)
        (b)
        (c)
        (d)
Fig. 6 High speed CCD images of the flame (Blue) in the backward-facing step combustor (green) at Re=6300 and 
φ =0.85, in Cases I and II at different moments in the cycle. (a) p′=0 and dropping, (b) minimum p′, (c) p′=0 and 
rising, and (d) maximum p′.
velocity, 
j
u , was varied from 0-8.4 m/s. The hydrogen 
addition was at 1.6 and 3.2 % of the primary fuel, based 
on the lower heating value. The baseline equivalence 
ratio, φ =0.57. The overall equivalence ratio ranged 
from 0.58 to 0.47, depending on the amount of air jet 
and H2.
Figure 7 shows OASPL as a function of 
U
u j /
, at 
different H2 flow rates. For all cases, the pressure 
oscillations first increased for 
U
u j /
< 1, where they 
reached a maximum.  Above this value, the OASPL 
dropped rapidly. Without hydrogen, the flame blows 
out for 
U
u j /
<1.2, however, with 
U
u j /
>1.3 the 
flame became sustainable again, 
with pressure
reduction of up to 14 dB from the baseline case. With 
air addition, the overall equivalence ratio was mostly 
below the nominal flammability limit of propane/air 
mixture.  Moreover, a relatively large air flow rate in 
the transverse jet was necessary to reduce the pressure 
fluctuations and stabilize a flame near the step at yet 
lower equivalence ratio.  Thus, it appears that the 
impact of the transverse jet is aerodynamic.  Studies of 
simple jet in cross flow show that at small velocity 
ratios, the jet hardly penetrates into the stream, while as 
the jet velocity increases, the jet penetration is 
pronounced and its impact is sustained several jet 
widths downstream [26].  At high velocity ratios, the jet 
deflects the primary stream upwards, keeping it away 
from the lower walls.  We speculate that a similar 
mechanism is in action here.  By deflecting the stream 
away from the lower wall, less heat is lost to the lower 
wall and combustion is more adiabatic.  Since the 
transverse jet reduces heat loss, and lowering the heat 
loss promotes burning of lean to very lean mixtures 
[27], the air jet enables burning at a lower overall 
equivalence ratio.
Figure 7 shows that adding H2 to the primary air 
stream, in the presence of the transverse jet, has a weak 
impact on the pressure level before the point of 
maximum pressure oscillation is reached.  Beyond this 
point, the effect of H2 addition is to support a more 
stable flame, lowering pressure oscillation and 
preventing blowout.  Moreover, adding hydrogen 
enables burning over the entire range of the jet mass 
flow rate (we no longer see blowout around 


--- Page 7 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
7
U
u j /
=1). 
This 
is 
consistent 
with 
previous 
observations that doping hydrocarbons with small 
amounts of H2 extends their flammability limits and 
reduces their tendencies to extinguish under the 
influence of strong strains [16-21].  It is interesting to 
observe that while 1.6 % H2, measured as a percentage 
of the primary fuel based on the lower heating value, 
improves flame stability, doubling that amount did not 
prove to be more effective. 
Fig. 7 Dependence of the Overall Sound Pressure Level 
on the flow rate of the static air injected near the step, 
for primary air flow velocity of 4.4 m/s, and a fixed fuel 
flow. The overall equivalence ratio ranged from 0.58 to 
0.47 depending on the flow rate of the air jet and H2. 
Figure 8 shows that the introduction of an air jet 
generally reduces NO levels.  The data also show that 
the impact of the air jet may be non-monotonic when 
hydrogen is added to the primary fuel; only beyond the 
point of maximum pressure oscillations does a further 
increase of the air jet velocity guarantee substantial 
reduction in NOx.  Before that, there is a complex 
dependence of NOx on the transverse jet velocity, 
mostly because of the competing effects of the dynamic 
flame structure, the equivalence ratio and the 
temperature fluctuations. Stable combustion, associated 
with both leaner and more aerodynamically compact 
flame in the presence of a transverse air jet, leads to a 
faster drop in NO. As in the case of pressure 
fluctuations, it appears that high transverse jet velocity 
is necessary to achieve a measurable reduction in NO 
formation.  It is interesting to note that hydrogen 
addition under the same conditions boosts NO levels 
over the entire range, as the temperature rises in the 
combustion zone and in the products.  Thus, if H2 is to 
be used to lower NOx, it must be supplemented with 
additional air, to be introduced strategically into the 
burning zone so as not to jeopardize the flame stability. 
In Ref [28], we were able to extend the flammability 
limit by using an air jet and H2 addition to stabilize the 
flame, all the way down to φ  = 0.41.  Combustion 
remained stable, with sub ppm NOx and 145 dB
OASPL.  This is ideal for applications requiring low 
NOx and stable operation without much product after 
treatment.
Fig. 8 NO level dependence on the velocity of the static 
air jet near the step for primary air flow velocity of 4.4 
m/s, and a fixed fuel flow. The overall equivalence ratio 
ranged from 0.58 to 0.47 depending on the flow rate of 
air jet and H2. 
4.2 Modulating the Air Jet (Aair) and H2 
Injection (AH2a) at the Step
Next, we investigate the impact of the transverse jet 
modulation on the pressure fluctuations. We show that 
one advantage of using modulation is to minimize the 
mass flow rate of the jet by controlling the phase using 
pressure feedback. We use a phase-shift controller to 
modulate the mass flow rate of the transverse jet. In 
these tests, the Reynolds number was fixed at 6300 with 
a nominal equivalence ratio of 0.57.  The transverse jet 
to the primary air velocity ratios were 0.8, 1.25 and 1.7. 
Pure air, or an air-hydrogen mixture in which H2 
contributed 1.6 % of the total heat addition, were used 
in the transverse jet. Hydrogen was premixed with air 
and injected through the slot. With air jet modulation, 
adding H2 to the transverse jet at the slot was more 
effective than adding hydrogen to the primary fuel. 
Paradoxically, without modulation, the opposite was 
true, i.e., adding H2 to the primary fuel stream was 
more effective.
To examine the response of combustion dynamics to 
the transverse jet modulation, we used a simple phase-
shift controller with pressure feedback. A high pass 
filter with a cutoff-frequency at 5 Hz was incorporated 
to eliminate the drift in the pressure measurement and 
ensure that the duty cycle was always at 50%. 


--- Page 8 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
8
Figure 9 shows the OASPL as a function of 
U
u j /
and the phase, with pure air injected at the slot.  For
U
u j /
> 1.25 substantial reduction in OASPL could 
be achieved, but the performance is strongly dependent 
on the phase. Optimal phase angle in the phase-shift 
controller was found to be around 200 degrees. In the 
case with 
U
u j /
= 1.25 the flame blew out at 60 and 
120 degrees phase, as indicated by the dotted line in the 
Fig. 9.  This is similar to the results observed previously 
where a small amount of cross jet was detrimental to 
stability and caused flame blowout. With 
U
u j /
= 1.7 
a pressure reduction up to 14dB is realized at the same 
phase angle of 200. Increasing the air jet velocity to 
U
u j /
= 1.7 reduced pressure fluctuations throughout 
the entire range of phase angles, widened the stability 
band around 250 degrees and eliminated the flame 
blowout observed at lower velocities. It is interesting to 
observe that the maximum pressure reduction is 
comparable to that obtained with a static transverse air 
jet, showing some saturation effect. This was also 
observed in Fig. 7, where at high velocity ratios, the 
pressure level reached a plateau. Thus, regardless of the 
flow rate of the transverse jet, whether it is static or 
modulated, there appears to be limit on performance.
Fig. 9 Dependence of the Overall Sound Pressure Level 
on the flow rate of the modulated air jet without H2 
addition injected near the step and the phase angle, for 
primary air flow rates of 4.4 m/s, and a fixed fuel flow. 
The overall equivalence ratio ranged from 0.52 to 0.48 
depending on the flow rate of the air jet. 
Adding H2 in the transverse jet significantly increases 
the effectiveness of control, as shown in Fig. 10. With 
H2 addition, the transverse jet velocity required for 
flame stabilization dropped by one half. By adding H2 
at 1.6 % of the total heat release, the flame was 
stabilized at a velocity ratio of only 0.8, with a pressure 
drop up to 13 dB from the unstable case.  Note that the 
optimal phase angle is now 300 degree. While a pure 
air jet reduces the burning velocity, the jet with H2 
increases it, and we observed that H2 addition moves 
the burning zone closer to the step [28]. 
Fig. 10 Dependence of the Overall Sound Pressure 
Level on the flow rate of the modulated air jet with H2 
addition injected near the step and the phase angle, for 
primary air flow rates of 4.4 m/s, and a fixed fuel flow 
rate. The overall equivalence ratio ranged from 0.52 to 
0.49 depending on the flow rate of the air jet.
Fig. 11 Dependence of the mean CH* distributions on 
the phase angle of the controller for 
U
u j /
= 1.7 with 
the overall equivalence ratio of 0.48 and without H2 
addition. 
Figure 11 shows the mean CH* distribution for the case 
of 
U
u j /
= 1.7, over a range of the controller phase 
angles. Clearly, the burning characteristics change 
significantly with the phase-shift controller. At the 
optimal phase angles of 180 and 240 degrees, the 
burning zone is closest to the step and the burning rate 
Higher 
U
u j /
Higher 
U
u j /


--- Page 9 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
9
falls rapidly further downstream. In the most unstable 
case at 60 degree lag, burning extends much further 
downstream, the peak drops by one half and is located 
about 2 step heights downstream of the step.
5.
Conclusion
In this paper, we address emission reduction in addition 
to instability suppression in a premixed backward-
facing step combustor using a transverse air jet near the 
burning zone, and H2 addition to the air jet.  We first 
develop an insight into the interactions between 
hydrodynamics, fuel/air mixture inhomogeneity and 
heat-release dynamics, and their impact on the 
instability of the combustion system. A parametric 
study was conducted to investigate the impact of flame-
vortex interactions and fuel/air mixture inhomogeneity 
on the combustion instability. The location of the fuel 
injection was varied, which changed the total 
convective time delay and the level of fuel/air mixture 
inhomogeneity. Results show that when the primary 
fuel injection is moved further upstream, the impact of 
fuel/air mixture inhomogeneity is negligible and 
amplitude 
of 
pressure 
oscillations 
increase 
monotonically with increasing the Reynolds number. 
High speed CCD images of the flame confirm that a 
strong flame-vortex interaction is the dominant 
mechanism for heat release dynamics in all cases. For 
this reason, we focus the control effort on modifying 
the flame-vortex interactions in the combustion zone 
using a transverse jet of pure air or air-hydrogen 
mixture near the step.
We study experimentally the impact of a static and 
modulated transverse jet on stability and emissions. We 
demonstrate that with sufficient momentum, a static air 
jet injected perpendicular to the incoming flow near the 
step favorably modifies flame-vortex interactions and 
reduces pressure oscillations by up to 14 dB, while 
reducing NOx emission by an order of magnitude.  We 
also investigate the impact of the transverse jet 
modulation using closed-loop control with pressure 
feedback.  We show that modulating the air jet can 
achieve the same level of pressure reduction with 50% 
of the air flow rate required in the static air jet case, but 
the control effectiveness is strongly dependent on the 
phase angle. In both cases, adding small amounts of H2 
leads to further reduction in OASPL.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Propulsion Program of 
the Office of Naval Research, grant No. N00014-99-
0448, 
and 
the 
Defense 
University 
Research 
Instrumentation Program of the Army Research Office, 
Grant No. DAAD19-01-1-0398.
References
[1] J.P.Hathout, M.Fleifil, A.M.Annaswamy, and 
A.F.Ghoniem, “Combustion instability and active 
control using periodic fuel injection,” AIAA Journal of 
Propulsion and Power, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp.390 -399, 
2002.
[2] T. Lieuwen, H. Torres, C. Johnson and B.T. Zinn, 
“A mechanism of combustion instability in lean 
premixed 
gas 
turbine 
combustors,” 
Journal 
of 
Engineering for Gas Turbine and Power, Vol. 123, No. 
1, pp. 182-189, 2001.
 [3]  M. Fleifil, A.M. Annaswamy, Z.A. Ghoneim, and 
A.F. Ghoniem, “Response of a laminar premixed flame 
to 
flow 
oscillations: 
A 
kinematic 
model 
and 
thermoacoustic instability results,” Combustion and 
Flame, Vol. 106, pp. 487-510, 1996.
[4] C.O. Paschereit, E. Gutmark and W. Weisenstein, 
“Structure and control of thermoacoustic instabilities in 
a gas-turbine combustor,” Combustion Science and 
Technology, Vol.138, No. 1-6, pp. 213-232, 1998.
[5] H. Najm and A. F. Ghoniem, “Modeling pulsating
combustion due to flow-flame interactions in vortex-
stabilized pre-mixed flames,” Combustion Science and 
Technology, Vol. 94, pp.259-278, 1993.
[6] C. Fureby, “A computational study of combustion 
instabilities due to vortex shedding,” Proceedings of the  
Combustion Institute, Vol.28, pp.783-791, 2000.
[7] W.H. Jou and S. Menon, “Numerical simulation of 
the vortex-acoustic wave interaction in a dump 
combustor,” AIAA 24th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, 
Reno, Nevada, 1986
[8] T.J. Poinsot, A. C. Trouve, D. P. Veynante, S. M. 
Candel and E. J. Esposito, “Vortex-driven acoustically 
coupled combustion instabilities,” Journal of Fluid 
Mechanics, Vol. 177, pp.265-292, 1987.
[9] K.K. Venkataraman, L.H. Preston, D.W. Simons, 
B.J. Lee, J.G. Lee, D.A. Santavicca, “Mechanism of 
combustion instability in a lean premixed dump 
combustor,” Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol.15, 
No.6, pp.909-918, 1999.
[10] J.W.S. Rayleigh, The theory of Sound, Vol. 2, 
Dover, New York, 1945.


--- Page 10 ---

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
10
[11] S. Sattinger, Y. Neumeier, A. Nabi, B. T. Zinn, D. 
Amos and D. Darling, “Sub-scale demonstration of the 
active feedback control of gas-turbine combustion 
instabilities,”  Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbine 
and Power,  Vol.122, No.2 , pp. 262-268, 2000.
[12] J.M. Cohen, J.H.  Stufflebeam and W. Proscia, 
“The effect of fuel/air mixing on actuation authority in 
an active combustion instability control system,” 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbine and Power, 
Vol. 123, No. 3 , pp.537-542, 2001.
[13] C.M. Jones, J.G. Lee and D.A. Santavicca, 
“Closed-loop active control of combustion instabilities 
using subharmonic secondary fuel injection,” Journal 
of Propulsion and Power, Vo.15, No.4, pp. 584-590, 
1999.
[14] K. H. Yu, K.J. Wilson, K.C. Shadow, “Active 
combustion 
control 
in 
a 
liquid-fueled 
dump 
combustor,” AIAA 97-0462, 35th Aerospace Sciences 
Meeting & Exhibit, Reno, NV, 1997.
[15] K.R. McManus, U. Vandsburger, C.T. Bowman, 
“Combustor performance enhancement through direct 
shear layer excitation,” Combustion and Flame, Vol. 
82, pp.75-92, 1990.
[16] J.-Y. Ren, W. Qin, F. N. Egolfopoulos and T.T. 
Tsotsis, “Strain-rate effects on hydrogen-enhanced lean 
premixed 
combustion,”
Combustion 
and 
Flame, 
Vol.124, pp.717-720, 2001.
[17] R. W. Schefer, “Hydrogen enrichment for 
improved lean flame stability,” International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy, Vol.23, pp.1131-1141, 2003.
[18] G.S. Jackson, R. Sai, J.M. Plaia, C.M. Boggs, K.T. 
Kiger, “Influence of H2 on the response of lean 
premixed CH4 flames to high strained flows,” 
Combustion and Flame, Vo.132, pp.503-511, 2003.
[19] G. J. Rortveit, K. Zepter, O. Skreiberg, M Fossum, 
J. E. Hustad, “A comparison of low-NOx burners for 
combustion of methane and hydrogen mixtures,” 
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute Vol.29, pp. 
1123-1129. 2002.
[20] J.R. Maughan, J.H. Bowen, D.H. Cooke and J.J. 
Tuzcon, “Reducing Gas Turbine Emissions Through 
Hydrogen-Enhanced 
Steam-Injected 
Combustion,” 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 
Vol.118, pp. 78-85, 1996.
[21] J.L. Gauducheau, B. Denet, G. Searby, “A 
Numerical Study of Lean CH4/H2/Air Premixed 
Flames at High Pressure,” Combustion Science and 
Technology, Vol.137, pp. 81-99, 1998.
[22] A. Wachsman, “Experimental verification of 
model-based control strategies using a backward-facing 
step combustor,” MS thesis, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 2003.
[23] B. Higgins, M. Q. McQuay, F. Lacas, and S. 
Candel, “An experimental study on the effect of 
pressure and strain rate on CH chemiluminescence of 
premixed fuel-lean methane/air flames,” Fuel, Vol.80, 
pp. 1583-1591, 2001.
[24] H.N. Najm, O.M. Kino, P.H. Paul and P.S. 
Wyckoff, “A study of flame observables in premixed 
methane-air 
flames,” 
Combustion 
Science 
and 
Technology , Vol.140, pp.369-403, 1998.
[25] J. G. Lee, K. Kim, and D. A. Santavicca, 
“Measurement of Equivalence Ratio Fluctuations and 
Its 
Effect 
on 
Heat 
Release 
During 
Unstable 
Combustion,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 
Vol. 28, 2000.
[26] S. H. Smith and M. G. Mungal, “Mixing, structure 
and scaling of the jet in crossflow,” Journal of Fluid 
Mechanics, Vol. 357, pp. 83-122, 1998
[27] K. Hanamura, K. Bohda and Y.Miyairi, “A study 
of 
super-adiabatic 
combustion 
engine,” 
Energy 
Conversion and Management, Vol. 38, No. 10-13, 
pp.1259-1266, 1997.
[28] A.F. Ghoniem, A.M. Annaswamy, S. Park, Z. C. 
Sobhani, “Stability and emissions control using air 
injection and H2 addition in premixed combustion,” 
Submitted to the 30th International Symposiumon 
Combustion, 2003.
