
--- Page 1 ---

Mattias E. G. Eck1
Chair of Fluid Dynamics,  
Technische Universit€at Berlin,  
Berlin 10623, Germany  
e-mail: m.eck@tu-berlin.de
Philipp zur Nedden
Chair of Fluid Dynamics,  
Technische Universit€at Berlin,  
Berlin 10623 Germany
Jakob G. R. von Saldern
Laboratory for Flow Instabilities and Dynamics,  
Technische Universit€at Berlin,  
Berlin 10623 Germany
Alessandro Orchini
Chair of Nonlinear Thermo-Fluid Mechanics,  
Technische Universit€at Berlin,  
Berlin 10623 Germany
Christian Oliver Paschereit
Chair of Fluid Dynamics,  
Technische Universit€at Berlin,  
Berlin 10623 Germany
Characterization of a Fluidically 
Variable Swirl Burner: Effects of 
the Imprinted Swirl on Flame 
Shapes and Emissions for 
Hydrogen–Methane Blends
Gas turbine combustors rely on swirling flows for flame stabilization. The flow’s swirl 
number is herein characterized by the burner’s swirler geometry. In addition to stability, 
swirl represents an important parameter affecting emissions, flame shapes, and flame 
dynamics. The swirl dependency is furthermore gaining importance with the progression of 
hydrogen-enriched fuels. Hydrogen flames are well stabilized by axial jets, whereas a stable 
methane combustion is optimally maintained by swirled flows. The active variation of swirl 
therefore plays a significant role and represents a cornerstone of this study. Here, the 
experimental characterization of a novel swirl-stabilized burner is presented. It allows for 
the variation of the swirl number through fluidic actuation, not employing geometry 
variations, and capable of creating a linearly controllable flow regime ranging from a 
nonswirled to a fully swirled flow. This concept is characterized under reacting conditions. 
For a broad range of hydrogen–methane gas mixtures, the characteristics of the burner and 
the stabilized flames are experimentally investigated. For each fuel blend, a wide span of 
operating points is created with different swirl regimes. The exhaust emissions are analyzed 
through a gas analyzing system, and the respective flame shapes are acquired through OH*- 
imaging. The characterization of the novel burner concept demonstrates its operational 
capability over a broad operational range. For each fuel composition, an optimal degree of 
swirl could be identified, allowing for a stable combustion, and minimizing the emissions. 
Stable conditions are mapped, quantifying the operational limits of the investigated burner. 
[DOI: 10.1115/1.4069726] 
Keywords: combustor design, fluidic actuation, hydrogen combustion 
1 Introduction
The operation of modern gas turbines strictly depends on the 
stability of the respective combustion process. To achieve flame 
stabilization, gas turbine combustors typically rely on swirling 
flows, which are generated through suitable swirlers, generally 
integrated in the burner geometry [1–3]. The effects of swirling 
flows on the combustion process are significant and, thus, are still 
focused upon by extensive research throughout academia and 
industry. In addition to mere flame stabilization and anchoring, the 
degree of imprinted swirl affects, among others, the air-fuel mixing 
efficiency, heat transfer mechanisms, and, especially, the static and 
dynamic stability of flames [1,3–7]. The multifaceted effect of swirl 
deserves particular interest since it is of great importance in the 
contemporary designation of decarbonizing the energy sector and, 
consequently, for the combustion of highly hydrogen-enriched fuel 
blends. For a stable and clean combustion, the degree of swirl is 
chosen based on the combusted fuel blend. Generally, the swirl is 
decreased with increasing hydrogen content, possibly combined 
with the use of pilot flames or steam and inert gas dilution [8,9].
The ability to vary the incited swirl, quantified by the 
dimensionless swirl number, provides a valuable research contri­
bution, particularly for studying flame dynamics, thermoacoustic 
instabilities, and their underlying effects [3]. Multiple approaches 
are known which allow for the variation of the swirl number of swirl- 
stabilized combustors, generally relying on physical flow interfer­
ence, mechanical actuation, or geometrical variation of the 
respective swirler segments (e.g., see Refs. [3,10–12]). Correspond­
ingly, the burner concept characterized in this work makes use of 
fluidic actuation, allowing for an active and continuous swirl 
number variation. Its operation solely relies on the controlled 
injection of a secondary air mass flow, thus allowing for the 
abrogation of any movable parts or geometry variations. The 
underlying working principle exploits the Coanda effect, and has 
been adopted from the field of aircraft propulsion systems where it is 
Turbo Expo: Turbomachinery Technical Conference & Exposition (GT2025) June 
16–20, 2025. GT2025.
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received June 30, 2025; final manuscript received July 21, 2025; 
published online December 4, 2025. Editor: Jerzy T. Sawicki.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
JANUARY 2026, Vol. 148 / 011024-1 
Copyright V
C 2026 by ASME; reuse license CC-BY 4.0
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 2 ---

studied as incorporation within thrust vectoring systems (e.g., see 
Refs. [13–16]). The burner concept and its geometry are discussed in 
more detail in Sec. 2.1.
The burner design, its working principle, and, particularly, its 
operational behavior have been assessed and investigated in 
previous studies. In this regard, its capability of varying the degree 
of swirl solely relying on fluidic actuation has been qualitatively 
ascertained in a numerical study [17], and subsequently demon­
strated and quantified experimentally under cold, i.e., nonreacting 
conditions, see Ref. [18]. Among others, a governing factor has been 
derived, controlling the magnitude of the imprinted swirl: the ratio 
between the injected secondary and the primary air mass flow, 
defined as the mass flow ratio (MFR). Figure 1 shows the 
dependency of the dimensionless swirl number S, acquired 
experimentally in nonreacting conditions, on the set MFR. This 
relation represents a summary of the cold characterization of the 
concept, more details of which are published in Ref. [18].
For low MFR values (MFR < 5%), the induced swirl is subjected 
to strong fluctuations and, depending on the operating conditions, is 
subjected to hysteretic behavior. However, at MFR0,cold ¼ 6%, a 
stable and reproducible condition is identified, at which no swirl is 
imparted, resulting in a swirl number of 0 (in the following, MFR 
values leading to a zero-swirl regime are denoted as MFR0). With 
further increasing MFR, a region with near-linear control over S is 
reached, terminating at MFR  32%, where no further increase of 
the swirl magnitude is achieved by further increasing the MFR. The 
near-linear control region, as well as the stable zero-swirl 
conditions, are found to yield significant relevance for advancing 
the development of the novel burner. This allows for the further 
comprehension of the heterogeneous effects of swirl on combustion 
and related technical applications.
The objective of this study is to examine whether the achievable 
swirl number range observed under nonreacting conditions can be 
effectively exploited to enable fuel flexibility in reacting conditions. 
To this end, different swirl regimes ranging from a pure axial jet to a 
fully swirled flow span a wide spectrum of operating conditions. 
Fuel flexibility is introduced by operating with different fuel 
mixtures of hydrogen and natural gas (NG). For each operating 
point, flame shape and stability are assessed through the evaluation 
of OH* images. For the operational map spanned by swirl and 
hydrogen–NG mixture, the flame flashback limits are identified. 
Additionally, the emissions are analyzed within the exhaust gas 
through a gas analyzing system. Results are discussed and compared 
to similar industrial burner concepts, highlighting the technical 
relevance of the presented fluidically variable swirl burner.
2 Experimental Investigation
This section describes the experimental investigation of the 
fluidically variable swirl burner. The burner model and the 
combustion test rig used to characterize it are presented, and the 
measurement techniques and the chosen operating range are 
illustrated.
2.1 Fluidically Variable Swirl Burner. The novel fluidically 
variable swirl-stabilized burner characterized in this work allows for 
the active and continuous variation of the degree of imprinted swirl. 
It solely relies on fluidic actuation, and does not comprise any 
moving parts nor features geometric variations. For the operational 
characterization under reacting conditions, a functional burner 
prototype has been developed based on the original concept, as 
schematically depicted in Fig. 2. It comprises fuel injection ports, 
located on the base plane of the swirler, a secondary air injection, 
and eight circumferentially arranged swirler segments, each of 
which features injection slits. The secondary air injection can be 
regulated to vary the flux of air through the thin slits, by which a wall 
jet can be created. The secondary air is fed into the segments through 
a common plenum, positioned upstream of the burner base. The 
segments are positioned and mounted between the burner base and a 
top plate. The primary air is fed into the burner radially, hence 
flowing through the eight channels between the aforementioned 
segments. The inflowing primary air is here impacted by the wall jets 
and is subjected to a directional change. The deflection magnitude 
and thus the efficiency of the fluidically-variable swirl concept rely 
on air entrainment and on the leverage on flow separation effects via 
the Coanda effect. By varying the secondary air mass flowrate ( _ms), 
while keeping the total mass flowrate of combustion air ( _mtot) 
constant, the MFR, defined as the ratio between primary ( _mp) and 
secondary mass flow rates, is varied: 
MFR  _ms
_mp
,
with
_mtot ¼ _mp þ _ms
(1)  
The MFR is found to be a governing parameter for the induced swirl 
and represents a key parameter affecting the operation of the 
fluidically variable swirl burner. Toward the center of the burner’s 
swirler segment, the air is directed toward the mixing tube and the 
burner’s outlet through a central cone, at the base of which the fuel 
injection is located.
2.2 Test Rig. The combustion test rig used in the experimental 
investigation is schematically depicted in Fig. 3. It consists of an 
open circular air duct in which the preheated primary air flow is 
injected. Through a separate air line, the nonpreheated secondary air 
mass flow is injected into the burner. The fuel is supplied through a 
main fuel line. Various fuel gas blends, produced in a fuel gas mixing 
Fig. 1 Original relation between swirl number S and MFR 
(nonreacting, adapted from Ref. [18])
Fig. 2 Section view of the burner prototype. Key-features, as air 
supply and fuel supply components, are highlighted (flow from 
bottom to top).
011024-2 / Vol. 148, JANUARY 2026                                                                                                       
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 3 ---

station, can be fed to the system, and the fuel composition can be 
varied during operation. Downstream the burner’s mixing tube 
outlet, a quartz glass combustion chamber with an inner diameter of 
200 mm and a length of 300 mm is mounted, providing optical 
access to the flame.
2.2.1 Measurement Equipment. In addition to temperature 
measurements at several positions along the entire test rig, the 
following diagnostic tools are used to characterize the flame 
response and combustion properties:
OH*-imaging: For monitoring the flame shapes and their 
stability, the OH* chemiluminescence images are recorded 
through an intensified camera,2 sensitive to the ultraviolet 
spectrum, and equipped with an optical bandpass filter allowing 
for the transmission of emitted light around a wavelength of k ¼
308 nm. The camera is setup to yield an image resolution of up to 
1200  1900 pixels at a constant frame rate of 161 frames per 
second. The OH* intensity can be assumed to relate to the local 
heat release rate of the flame [19,20], thus determining its 
qualitatively shape independently from the specific fuel blend 
choice. From the OH* chemiluminescence recording mean flame 
shapes are obtained by averaging the time series over 5 s 
(amounting to 805 frames).
Emissions analysis: As depicted in Fig. 3, at the test rig’s 
downstream termination, exhaust gases are probed through a 
specifically designed emissions probe that allows for the sampling 
of gaseous probes over the entire exhaust tube diameter. The 
sampled exhaust gas is led to the analyzing system3 through a 
heated hose pipe. Remaining condensate is removed and the 
sample directed to different analyzing stages, where, on a dry 
basis, concentrations of NOx, O2,4 CO,5 and CO2 (Footnote 5) are 
determined. NOx concentrations are herein quantified through 
chemiluminescence analysis within an apposite section, also 
distinguishing between NO and NO2,6 whereas CO and CO2 
concentrations are assessed through their specific absorption 
behavior. In order to obtain comparable results, the raw readings 
of the analyzing systems are normalized (see Sec. 3.2).
2.3 Operating Conditions. The employed atmospheric com­
bustion test facility allows for the generation of a wide range of 
operating conditions by allowing for variations of the fuel 
composition and set MFR values. While the total air mass flow 
participating in the combustion process is kept constant at _mtot ¼
175 kg/h, the MFR is varied, thus generating a variety of flow 
regimes characterized by different degrees of swirl. The used fuel 
gas is a blend between natural gas (NG, with a methane content of 
approx. 90% mol.) and hydrogen (H2), where the H2 content is 
quantified by the respective mass fraction XH2. The primary air flow 
_mp is preheated, while the secondary air mass flow _ms remains 
nonpreheated. In order to realize a constant air temperature of 
300 C at the outlet of the burner’s mixing tube, the preheating 
temperature of _mp is increased and adjusted to the respective MFR 
value to account for the variable mixing ratio between the hot _mp and 
cold _ms. The burner is characterized by two different thermal power 
outputs, Pth ¼ 80 kW and 100 kW, realized through the variation of 
the total mass of injected fuel, based on the lower heating value of 
the used fuel blend. This results in a range of equivalence ratios / 
between approximately 0.47 and 0.71, as depicted in Fig. 4. The air 
mass flow _mtot is kept constant. The parameter range investigated in 
this work is summarized in Table 1.
3 Experimental Results
This section summarizes and discusses selected experimental 
results. We start with presenting the acquired flame shapes based on 
the OH* chemiluminescence imaging. In the second part, emission 
levels are investigated as the operating conditions are varied.
3.1 Flame Shapes. Figure 5 exemplary shows flame images of 
the burner’s operation at a thermal power output of Pth ¼ 100 kW at a 
hydrogen content of XH2 ¼ 50% for two different swirling 
conditions, MFR ¼ 9% and 16.67%. The top row shows images 
within the visible spectrum, while the bottom row shows the 
Fig. 3 Schematic overview of the combustion test rig (flow from left to right) 
Fig. 4 Range of equivalence ratios 
Table 1 Varied operational parameters 
Parameter
Range
Combustion air
_mtot ¼ 175 kg/h with _mp preheated
Mass flow ratio
6%  MFR  36%
Thermal power
Pth ¼ 80 kW, 100 kW
H2 content (mass fraction)
0%  XH2  100%
Equivalence ratio
0:47  /  0:71
2Lambert Tricam, Lambert Instruments B.V, Groningen, The Netherlands.
3System by ABB Automation GmbH, Ratingen, Germany.
4ABB, Magnos 106.
5ABB, Uras 14.
6Knestel CLD dual Basic, KNESTEL Technologie & Elektronik GmbH, 
Hopferbach, Germany.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
JANUARY 2026, Vol. 148 / 011024-3 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 4 ---

corresponding time-averaged OH* images. It can be observed that 
the flame is of conical shape for the low MFR value and changes to a 
V-shaped flame for the higher MFR value. This demonstrates that 
the fluidically variable swirl burner can generate a sufficiently large 
range of swirl numbers to produce distinctly different flame shapes.
For a more detailed analysis, Fig. 6 presents the mean flame 
shapes for selected operating conditions at different MFR values. 
The flame shapes are exemplary shown for the operation at 100 kW 
of thermal power output, for three characteristic hydrogen mass 
fractions within the combusted fuel blend: XH2 ¼ 0%, 10%, and 
100%. A significant variety of different flame shapes can be 
observed, depending on the set MFR value and hydrogen content. In 
the following, the effect of individual parameter variations is 
discussed.
3.1.1 Zero-Swirl Regime. Particularly, the flame shapes 
acquired for the condition for MFR ¼ 9% is notable, as the 
combustion appears to take place in an axial jet flame, not 
comprising any swirl. In this respect, the flame lengths derived 
from OH* images recorded for MFR ¼ 9% amount to approx­
imately lfl=D  2 for pure hydrogen and lfl=D  10 for natural gas. 
These results agree well to the flame lengths measured by zur 
Nedden et al. for a geometrically similar single-jet burner without 
swirl, when considering the difference in total mass flowrate [9]. 
Consequently, the characterized fluidically variable-swirl burner is 
found to suitably realize nonswirled jet flames, namely, at a set MFR 
value of 9%. This effect is equally perceptible in the flame shapes 
derived from operating conditions at a lower thermal power output 
(at Pth ¼ 80 kW, not shown).
For nonreacting conditions, the zero-swirl MFR value was found 
at 6%, see Fig. 1 or Ref. [17]. This offset is caused by the higher 
temperature level of the preheated primary air compared to the 
secondary air, leading to a reduced flow momentum ratio. 
Additionally, the injection of fuel gas introduces an additional axial 
momentum, diminishing the maximum range of inducible swirl. A 
more detailed discussion of the concept’s different behavior 
between cold and reacting experiments is provided in Sec. 3.3.
3.1.2 Effects of Mass Flow Ratio on the Flame Shapes. Starting 
from the operating condition at MFR ¼ 9%, as discussed above, the 
MFR value is varied in the range specified in Table 1. As assessed in 
the development process of the burner, a higher MFR value 
corresponds to a stronger effect of the wall-adjacent jets within the 
burner’s swirler segment, consequently resulting in a more 
pronounced deflection of the primary air flow. This results in a 
higher degree of swirl, and becomes evident when discussing the 
flame shapes, as exemplified in Fig. 6. With increasing MFR, for all 
investigated hydrogen blends, the flame length is significantly 
reduced. This effect is especially visible within the transition 
between MFR ¼ 9% and 13%. At MFR ¼ 13%, the flame is 
subjected to a low level of swirl, significantly reducing its respective 
length, especially for low XH2 values. The swirl, however, does not 
invoke a vortex breakdown and thus does not yet result in a stabilized 
V-shaped flame. In contrast to the condition at MFR ¼ 9% without 
swirl, the operating point at MFR ¼ 13% yields more compact 
flames, stabilizing in a spherical shape. With further increasing 
MFR, the flame is increasingly stabilized and encompasses a 
pronounced V-shape, typical for swirl-stabilized flames. In this 
respect, for operating conditions with low hydrogen contents, the 
flame shape is comparable to results acquired for state-of-the-art 
swirl-stabilized burners, as, e.g., shown in Ref. [12] by Kuhn et al. 
for a burner comparable in geometry and operational range, at a swirl 
number of S  0:9. With increasing MFR, consequently increasing 
swirl, and thus an invigorated recirculation zone, the magnitude of 
the tip angle of the V-shaped cone is reduced. This effect, however, 
saturates for MFR values  25%.
Fig. 5 Exemplary visualization of an operating point at Pth 5 100 kW and XH2550% for two swirl cases: Axial 
jet (left) and swirled flow (right). Top row shows images within the visible spectrum, bottom row shows mean 
OH* images.
011024-4 / Vol. 148, JANUARY 2026                                                                                                       
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 5 ---

Similarly, for MFR values below MFR ¼ 9%, the flames undergo 
a change in shape, with the flame length shortening as MFR 
decreases. As assessed numerically and experimentally for non­
reacting conditions (see Refs. [17,18]), the operating region below 
MFR0 exhibits a counter-rotating swirl. The observed flame shapes 
in Fig. 6 suggest that this behavior persists under reacting 
conditions, as the flame shape changes in a similar manner with 
increasing and decreasing MFR around MFR ¼ 9%.
3.1.3 Effects of XH2 on the Flame Shapes. As expected, the 
flame shapes vary with the hydrogen share. With increasing 
hydrogen content, the flame shortens and stabilizes closer to the 
nozzle outlet. This is due to the increased reactivity and higher flame 
speed associated with hydrogen. This is in accordance with findings 
of studies investigating the effects of hydrogen content on flame 
shapes (e.g., see Ref. [21]). From Fig. 6, it becomes apparent that not 
every operating condition could be sufficiently stabilized to acquire 
the respective flame shapes. For the investigated operating 
conditions, the flame is susceptible to flame flash-back events for 
conditions combining a high degree of swirl and a high hydrogen 
content. This flash-back dependence limits the relevant operating 
range of the characterized burner, and is further discussed in 
Sec. 3.3.
3.1.4 Static Flame Stability. To evaluate the static stability of 
each operating point, the standard deviation of the mean emitted 
light intensity is calculated for each OH* image pixel, serving as an 
indicator to quantify and localize regions of flame fluctuations. 
While the line-of-sight integration in the OH* recording can cause 
some fluctuations to cancel out, axial variations that are uniform in 
the azimuthal direction are effectively captured. As variations in 
MFR influence the swirl number and, consequently, the axial flame 
extent, see Fig. 6, the computed standard deviation effectively 
captures the most critical fluctuations. Figure 7 exemplifies the 
standard deviation of the acquired OH* images for selected 
operating conditions at Pth ¼ 100 kW. The blue lines show the 
location at which the mean heat release is 50% of its respective 
maximum values, marking the location of the flame.
The largest spatial extent of fluctuations is observed at MFR ¼
7:5% and low hydrogen content. At MFR values below 9%, the 
operating point lies within the counterswirl region, previously 
identified under nonreacting conditions as a region of high 
unsteadiness, making it impractical for stable operation [17]. The 
significant spatial extent of OH* fluctuations in this operating range 
observed in Fig. 7 confirms this behavior.
At the zero-swirl point (MFR0 ¼ 9%), the flames are of conical 
shape. Under this operating condition, the spatial extent of 
fluctuations is high for natural gas but decreases significantly with 
increasing hydrogen content. This is because, at low hydrogen 
content, the flame is detached from the burner base plate and 
stabilizes in the free shear flow. As the hydrogen content increases, 
the flame anchors at the outlet of the burner nozzle, where it is less 
susceptible to flow fluctuations. This trend can also be recognized 
for MFR ¼ 7:5%. At MFR ¼ 16:67%, an increase in hydrogen 
initially reduces the spatial extent of fluctuations. With pure 
hydrogen, however, the fluctuations spread out again over a larger 
area. This behavior occurs because the MFR ¼ 16:67% pure 
hydrogen case operates near the flashback limit, resulting in 
increased unsteadiness.
At lower hydrogen contents and thus greater distance from the 
flashback limit (XH2 ¼ 0% and XH2 ¼ 10%), the spatial extent of 
OH* fluctuations decreases when increasing the MFR value from 
9% to 16.67%. The increasing MFR and thus the increasing air 
rotation reduce the axial flow velocity at the flame’s centerline, 
eventually inducing vortex-breakdown and stabilizing the flame in a 
V-shape. In this state, the spatial extent of the OH* disturbances is 
smaller, while the magnitude of the disturbance increases with the 
compactness of the V-flame. The high magnitude of heat release 
fluctuation is likely caused by unsteadiness of the reversed flow 
region in the center of the vortex breakdown region. This indicates 
that the swirl number is not high enough to create a sustained vortex 
breakdown and the flow field is subjected to intermittency. At even 
higher MFR values of  25%, however, the imprinted air rotation is 
sufficient to stabilize the vortex breakdown, leading to overall low 
fluctuations in heat release.
3.2 Emissions. As mentioned in Sec. 2.2.1, the raw emission 
data is corrected to render it quantitatively comparable between 
different fuel compositions. In this respect, the correction routine 
introduced by Garan et al. [22] is followed, which generalizes and 
expands the standard volumetric correction to a reference exhaust 
oxygen level, originally based on natural gas/methane fuels. This 
correction allows for the comparison of emission levels acquired for 
a multitude of differing combustion processes, including air or inert 
gas dilution, oxygen enrichment, fuel variations, and different 
thermal powers. The correction routine is exemplary shown for NOx 
Fig. 6 Flame shapes by means of averaged OH* Images for 
Pth 5 100 kW for XH2 5 0%, 10%, and 100% (mass fraction) over all 
investigated MFR values
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
JANUARY 2026, Vol. 148 / 011024-5 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 6 ---

emissions in the following. First, the raw dry concentrations, 
NOx,raw, are corrected to a customary reference oxygen level of 
O2,ref ¼ 15%: 
NOx,ref−O2 ¼ NOx,raw 
0:21 −O2,ref
0:21 −O2,meas:


(2)  
with O2,meas: denoting the measured oxygen level within the exhaust 
gas. The oxygen-corrected emissions NOx,ref−O2 are further 
corrected, accounting for the specific fuel gas composition in 
combination with the definition of a reference fuel gas (denoted with 
the subscript “ref”), chosen to be pure methane (CH4) in the present 
study. Assuming ideal gas behavior, the corrected emission levels 
NOx,corr: can be expressed as 
NOx ¼ NOx,corr: ¼ NOx,ref−O2 
a þ 1 −0:21
aref þ 1 −0:21



b0
b0
ref
 
!
(3)  
with a and b being fuel-specific constants (see superscript “f”), as 
defined in the following equation: 
a ¼ nf
C þ nf
S þ nf
N
b
and b ¼ nf
H −nf
Cl
4
−2 
nf
O þ nf
N


(4) 
Here, nf
i stands for the amount of element i within one fuel molecule. 
For the reference CH4 fuel reacting with air, the constants are found 
to be aref ¼ bref ¼ 1. Additionally, the resulting emission levels are 
translated into input-based quantities, based on the power output of 
the used fuel blend. This is accomplished by the introduction of the 
lower heating value of the specific fuel b0
i ¼ bi=LHVi. As also 
reported by Douglas et al. [23], the normalization by the thermal 
energy input of the utilized fuels compensates for the overestimation 
of emissions of high-hydrogen fuels, potentially occurring during 
the correction of dry emissions to a reference oxygen level.
3.2.1 Effects of XH2 on NOx Emissions. In order to assess the 
effect of a swirl variation on the combustion of different fuel blends, 
ranging from pure H2 to NG, emission levels are analyzed over a 
broad operating range. A special focus lies on the emission of NOx, 
quantified and discussed in this section, as well as compared to a 
reference burner. Figure 8 depicts the levels of emitted NOx over the 
hydrogen content XH2 and MFR range (i.e., swirl magnitudes) for the 
investigated operating range. The overall NOx emission levels are 
found to be generally lower for the cases featuring a lower thermal 
power output. For both investigated thermal power levels, however, 
a similar trend can be observed. The emitted NOx levels generally 
increase with increasing hydrogen content within the combusted 
fuel blend. In the present study, both the thermal power output and 
Fig. 7 Deviation of OH* images from the respective mean for selected operating conditions for Pth5100 kW. 
Contours of mean flame shapes (50% of max. intensity) are delineated.
011024-6 / Vol. 148, JANUARY 2026                                                                                                       
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 7 ---

the total amount of combustion air is kept constant. Consequently, 
the equivalence ratio decreases with increasing hydrogen content, as 
shown in Fig. 4. As a result, the respective adiabatic flame 
temperature is approximately kept at a constant level (at approx. 
1540 K for Pth ¼ 80 kW and 1770 K for Pth ¼ 100 kW), thus not 
accounting for the increase of NOx emissions with increasing XH2.
With increasing XH2, however, the respective flames become 
increasingly compact. The spatial temperature distribution in the 
reaction zone can be assumed to confine accordingly, analogously 
leading to more pronounced local temperature maxima. With other 
combustion parameters remaining approximately unaltered, this 
effect is likely to account for the steady increase of NOx emissions 
with increasing XH2.
The overall NOx emissions are comparable to emission levels 
acquired for state-of-the-art burners, not featuring the possibility of 
swirl variation. In Ref. [9], zur Nedden et al. investigated the effect 
of the hydrogen content on NOx emissions of a single-jet-burner, not 
featuring any swirl. The jet burner was operated at conditions 
comparable to those considered in the present study and yielded NOx 
emission levels between 4.5 ppm and 6.8 ppm, which is approx­
imately 30% lower than the levels measured in the present work. 
However, the jet burner features a mixing tube with a length of 
approximately ten nozzle diameters, allowing for a higher degree of 
fuel-air mixing, accounting for the observed offset. Furthermore, the 
NOx emission levels of the novel fluidically variable swirl burner are 
found to comply well with the results found in literature for swirl- 
stabilized burners. In Ref. [8], G€oke and Paschereit studied the 
influence of steam dilution on NOx emissions in a swirl-stabilized 
burner for different hydrogen–methane fuel blends. Again, the NOx 
emission levels are comparable to the present study, especially when 
comparing cases with a higher MFR, i.e., with elevated swirl. 
Consequently, over its entire envisaged operating range, the burner 
is found to exhibit comparable emission characteristics to state-of- 
the-art swirl-stabilized and jet burners.
What becomes evident, is that the level of emitted NOx is strongly 
linked to the MFR value, i.e., swirl. This effect is maximized toward 
higher hydrogen concentrations. For both thermal power outputs, at 
the same XH2, the amount of emitted NOx can differ up to 
Fig. 8 Corrected NOx values over investigated operating range. Interpolation based on acquired 
measurement conditions: For Pth580 kW (left) and Pth5100 kW (right).
Fig. 9 Corrected NOx (top row) and CO (bottom row) emission levels over the varied MFR: For Pth580 kW 
(left column) and Pth5100 kW (right column)
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
JANUARY 2026, Vol. 148 / 011024-7 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 8 ---

approximately 15 ppm and 17 ppm, respectively, between condi­
tions with a low and a high degree of swirl, amounting to a relative 
difference of over 60% of the acquired value range. Since the degree 
of swirl is observed to have a significant effect, the dependency of 
the MFR on NOx emissions is further discussed in the Sec. 3.2.2.
3.2.2 Effects of Mass Flow Ratio on NOx Emissions. The effect 
that the MFR, and thus the magnitude of swirl, has on the emitted 
NOx is shown in the top row of Fig. 9. Here, the experimental 
uncertainty in the acquisition of emission data is depicted as error 
bars. It represents the error introduced by the employed data 
acquisition and processing chain, including emission analysis and 
flow conditioning hardware. For all hydrogen mass fractions XH2, 
the operating condition at MFR0 ¼ 9%, denoting the nonswirled 
axial jet flame, stands out as the operational minimum of emitted 
NOx. The axial jet involves the highest axial velocity magnitudes at 
the flame’s centerline and, thus, reduces the residence time within 
the combustion region, especially when compared to conditions 
involving swirled flows. Based on the experimentally deduced flame 
length (see Fig. 7) and the jet velocity, residence times for the 
nonswirled (MFR ¼ 9%) flame with Pth ¼ 100 kW and XH2 ¼ 10%, 
combustion residence times amount to approx. 2 ms. The XH2 
dependency of NOx emissions is minimized at MFR0 and increases 
with the magnitude of swirl, including the unsteady conditions with 
counter-rotating swirl for MFR < 9%. With increasing MFR, NOx 
emissions are subjected to a significant increase, linked to the 
corresponding increase in swirl magnitude. Here, the reduced axial 
velocity augments the residence time within the flame, which, at the 
same time, is increasingly compacted. For comparison, reaction 
residence times for a geometrically similar burner with S  0:7, 
Pth ¼ 81 kW, / ¼ 0:56, and a total mass flow of 180 kg/h are 
identified in a range of 25 ms–35 ms [24,25]. This increase in NOx 
emissions, however, is mitigated after reaching an operational 
maximum. Here, due to the elevated degree of swirl, the induced 
vortex-breakdown and the respective recirculation zones maximize 
the reaction residence time. For further increasing MFR, NOx 
emissions decrease, which can be explained by the improving 
quality of air–fuel mixing. This effect appears to further decrease the 
emitted NOx for even further increased MFR values (MFR > 20%), 
until reaching MFR conditions at which the effect on NOx becomes 
negligible. Given the operational limits in terms of MFR, this region 
is only resolved for low hydrogen contents (XH2  5%). Here, 
however, the findings comply well with the acquired OH* flame 
shapes which, comparably, are not subjected to further changes for 
MFR  25%.
3.2.3 Effects of Mass Flow Ratio on CO Emissions. The bottom 
row within Fig. 9 exemplifies the corrected CO emission levels for 
Pth ¼ 80 and 100 kW. Within the experimental uncertainty, the 
emitted CO is negligible for XH2 ¼ 100%, as the combusted fuel 
does not include any fraction of carbon, and is therefore not shown. 
With decreasing XH2, the content of elemental carbon increases with 
increasing share of NG. Accordingly, the level of emitted CO 
increases. This increase, however, is found to be limited within the 
experimental uncertainty, as the overall levels of emitted CO are 
low. Especially for conditions at Pth ¼ 80 kW, with a comparably 
lower absolute share of carbon within the combustible fuel, the 
maximum CO levels amount to approx. one ppm, hampering the 
distinction of quantitative trends. The MFR value, on the other hand, 
appears to have a more pronounced influence on the emitted CO. 
Contrary to the emitted NOx, the acquired CO levels generally 
decrease with increasing MFR. At MFR  9%, i.e., in the low-swirl 
regime, the highest CO levels are acquired. The comparably low 
residence times are not sufficient for a complete carbon conversion, 
especially with regard to the prevailing flame temperatures. With 
further increasing MFR, and accordingly increasing residence 
times, the emission levels steadily decrease for all investigated fuel 
blends. Analogously to the trend observed for NOx emissions, for 
MFR  20%, the CO decrease as well as the effect of MFR are 
mitigated.
3.3 Operational Range. From the experimental results, a 
technically relevant operating range can be derived. In addition to 
the measured levels of NOx emissions, Fig. 8 includes the 
boundaries at which the operation is limited by flame flashback 
(blue dash-dotted lines). Notably, the resultant operational envelope 
is narrower for the operation at Pth ¼ 80 kW compared to the 
operation at 100 kW. More conditions with XH2  10% resulted in 
flashback events for MFR 6¼ MFR0, despite the comparably lower 
equivalence ratios. This effect originates from the reduced amount 
of fuel being axially injected at the base of the burner’s swirler 
segment for lower thermal power levels. This results in a lower bulk- 
flow velocity, and thus in a reduced axial centerline velocity. Figure 
10 shows the calculated bulk-flow velocity vbulk over the 
investigated XH2 range.
Especially for high-hydrogen contents, vbulk is considerably 
higher for the 100 kW case. For Pth ¼ 80 kW, the axial centerline 
velocity is accordingly reduced, increasing the risk of vortex- 
induced flash-back.
At conditions with MFR0 ¼ 9%, a nonswirled jet-stabilized flame 
can be observed (see Figs. 6 and 7), featuring a low level of spatial 
heat release fluctuation at high hydrogen contents and denoting an 
operational minimum of the measured NOx emissions. Here, for 
high levels of XH2, compact and stable flames can be observed. For 
flames combusting a higher share of NG (XH2 < 10%), however, the 
flame length and combustion region are increased, causing the flame 
to be affected by flow disturbances, which can cause slight offsets to 
the axial swirl distribution. On the other hand, for conditions with 
MFR  25%, fully swirl-stabilized flames are observed, charac­
terized by significant compactness and manifesting an expected V- 
shape. Here, especially for low hydrogen contents and higher MFR 
conditions, the heat release fluctuations are significantly reduced, 
indicating a stable combustion. For high-hydrogen cases 
(XH2  50%), however, increased NOx emissions are observed as 
well as a higher flashback probability.
From the cold characterization (see Fig. 1), an apparent difference 
lies in the offset of MFR0 with MFR0,cold ¼ 6% < 9% ¼ MFR0,hot. 
Here, the preheated primary air results in a reduced flow momentum 
ratio between secondary and primary air flow ð _Js= _JpÞhot 
 44%  ð _Js= _JpÞcold. For the same level of flow control, mathemati­
cally, an enhanced MFR would be needed, amounting to 
MFR0,hot ¼ 1=44%  MFR0,cold  13:7%. However, with MFR0,hot 
¼ 9%, the experimentally observed MFR0,hot is significantly lower. 
This offset is likely to be caused by the additional flow momentum of 
the axial fuel injection. For higher MFR, the additional axial 
momentum counteracts the swirl-inducing efficiency. However, due 
to the high injection velocity of the secondary air mass flow ms 
(determining the MFR), the maximum axial fuel momentum 
amounts to approx. 20% of _Js for MFR ¼ 9% and to approx. 2% 
for MFR ¼ 32%, limiting its effect. As a result, compared to the cold 
characterization, an MFR offset of DMFR  ð13:7% −6%Þ ¼ 7:7%
can be assumed. An accurate quantification of swirl numbers and 
their relation to MFR, however, requires the investigation of the 
reacting flow fields by means of suitable measurement techniques.
Consequently, for both thermal powers, conditions featuring a 
high degree of swirl are identified, advantageously stabilizing 
flames at low hydrogen levels (XH2  10% at MFR  25%). For 
Fig. 10 Bulk-flow velocity over XH2 
011024-8 / Vol. 148, JANUARY 2026                                                                                                       
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 9 ---

hydrogen contents XH2  10%, the operation at MFR0 ¼ 9% is 
found to be best suitable in terms of emissions and flame stability.
4 Conclusions
In this study, the experimental characterization of a fluidically 
variable-swirl-stabilized burner was presented. The working 
principle relies on fluidic thrust vectoring methods, studied in the 
field of aircraft propulsion systems. The concept’s capability has 
been experimentally assessed in reacting conditions. The experi­
mental investigation consisted of the acquisition of OH* images and 
exhaust emission data. The investigated operating range spanned 
thermal power outputs of 80 kW and 100 kW, NG-hydrogen fuel 
blends with hydrogen contents between 0% and 100% (by mass), 
and MFR between 6% and 36%.
The behavior and performance of the novel burner have been 
assessed and discussed. The observed span of characteristics 
resembles both the behavior of state-of-the-art swirl-stabilized and 
jet-stabilized burners in terms of flame shapes, emissions, and 
operational stability. Additionally, an operating range was exper­
imentally identified, allowing for a technically relevant operation of 
the characterized burner in terms of achievable swirl, its active 
control, and the applicability to a varying hydrogen content within 
the combusted fuel. Within the identified range, the investigated 
burner is capable of generating and stabilizing nonswirled jet flames, 
as well as fully swirl-stabilized flames. This variation of flow and 
combustion regime is found to affect the NOx and CO emissions. For 
all operating conditions, however, an operational optimum of NOx 
emissions could be identified, consisting of a suitable MFR, and 
hence of a specific degree of swirl. Based on the MFR, the swirl 
variation can be performed dynamically. Advantageously, the 
quality of the combustion process is not negatively affected by the 
MFR, thus, by the degree of swirl, as shown from the acquired low 
CO concentrations.
In summary, the experimental characterization of the presented 
burner demonstrated its swirl-varying capability within technically 
relevant limits. The concept has the potential to facilitate fuel 
flexibility of combustors within power generation systems as well as 
in academic research. Due to its stable operation, the possibility of 
dynamical swirl variation, and its resulting fuel flexibility, the 
concept advantageously offers multifaceted possibilities to further 
assess the effect of swirl on combustion efficiency, emissions, as 
well as on flame dynamics and stability.
Acknowledgment
The authors are grateful to Christoph Peisdersky, Katharina 
Schmidt, David L€uck, Andy G€ohrs, and Thorsten Dessin for their 
support in the completion of this work. Special acknowledgment is 
given to Markus Malcher and Professor Dr.-Ing. Dirk Oberschmidt, 
Chair of Micro-and Precision Devices at Technische Universit€at 
Berlin, for their outstanding expertise in manufacturing key burner 
components.
Funding Data
 European Research Council (ERC) as part of the Advanced 
Grant HYPOTHESis (Grant ID: 101019937; Funder ID: 
10.13039/501100000781).
Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated and supporting the findings of this article 
are obtainable from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request.
Nomenclature
D ¼ diameter of mixing tube/swirler outlet (m)
_J ¼ flow momentum rate (N)
l ¼ length (m)
_m ¼ mass flow (kg s−1, kg h−1)
MFR ¼ mass flow ratio (secondary to primary) (%)
n ¼ molar amount within one molecule
Pth ¼ thermal power (kW)
S ¼ swirl number
v ¼ velocity (m s−1)
X ¼ mass fraction (content) (%)
x, y, z ¼ Cartesian coordinate positions (m)
a, b, b0 ¼ chem. educt/product-specific constants
D ¼ difference
k ¼ wavelength (nm)
/ ¼ equivalence ratio
Abbreviations 
ERC ¼ European Research Council
LHV ¼ lower heating value
NG ¼ natural gas
UV ¼ ultraviolet
Superscripts and Subscripts 
bulk ¼ bulk flow
cold ¼ non-reacting
corr ¼ corrected
f ¼ fuel
fl ¼ flame
hot ¼ reacting
meas ¼ measured
p ¼ primary flow
s ¼ secondary flow
raw ¼ raw and dry
ref ¼ reference
tot ¼ total
0 ¼ non-swirled/axial
Chemical Terms 
C ¼ elementary carbon
CH4 ¼ methane; concentration (% mol.)
Cl ¼ elementary chlorine
CO ¼ carbon monoxide; concentration (ppm)
CO2 ¼ carbon dioxide; concentration (% mol.)
H ¼ elementary hydrogen
N ¼ elementary nitrogen
NOx, NO2, NO ¼ nitrogen oxides; concentration (ppm)
O ¼ elementary oxygen
OH* ¼ hydroxide radical; intensity (norm. %)
O2 ¼ oxygen; concentration (% mol.)
S ¼ elementary sulfur
References
0[1] Syred, N., and Beer, J. M., 1974, “Combustion in Swirling Flows: A Review,” 
Combust. Flame, 23(2), pp. 143–201.
0[2] Mattingly, J., Von Ohain, H., and Schetz, J., 2006, Elements of Propulsion: Gas 
Turbines and Rockets, 2nd ed., American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics, Inc., Reston, VA.
0[3] Durox, D., Moeck, J., Bourgouin, J.-F., Morenton, P., Viallon, M., Schuller, T., 
and Candel, S., 2013, “Flame Dynamics of a Variable Swirl Number System and 
Instability Control,” Combust. Flame, 160(9), pp. 1729–1742.
0[4] Chigier, N., and Chervinsky, A., 1967, “Experimental Investigation of Swirling 
Vortex Motion in Jets,” ASME J. Appl. Mech., 34(2), pp. 443–451.
0[5] Lilley, D., 1977, “Swirl Flows in Combustion: A Review,” AIAA J., 15(8), pp. 
1063–1078.
0[6] Feikema, D., Chen, R.-H., and Driscoll, J., 1990, “Enhancement of Flame Blowout 
Limits by the Use of Swirl,” Combust. Flame, 80(2), pp. 183–195.
0[7] St€ohr, M., Boxx, I., Carter, C., and Meier, W., 2011, “Dynamics of Lean Blowout 
of a Swirl-Stabilized Flame in a Gas Turbine Model Combustor,” Proc. Combust. 
Inst., 33(2), pp. 2953–2960.
0[8] G€oke, S., and Paschereit, C., 2013, “Influence of Steam Dilution on Nitrogen 
Oxide Formation in Premixed Methane/Hydrogen Flames,” J. Propul. Power, 29 
(1), pp. 249–260.
0[9] Zur Nedden, P., Eck, M., L€uckoff, F., Panek, L., Orchini, A., and Paschereit, C., 
2023, “Flame Transfer Function and Emissions of a Piloted Single Jet Burner: 
Influence of Hydrogen Content,” ASME Paper No. GT2023-103032.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
JANUARY 2026, Vol. 148 / 011024-9 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026


--- Page 10 ---

[10] Sheen, H., Chen, W., Jeng, S., and Huang, T., 1996, “Correlation of Swirl Number 
for a Radial-Type Swirl Generator,” Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 12(4), pp. 444–451.
[11] Gupta, A. K., Ramavajjala, M. S., Chomiak, J., and Marchionna, N., 1991, “Burner 
Geometry Effects on Combustion and NOx Emission Characteristics Using a 
Variable Geometry Swirl Combustor,” J. Propul. Power, 7(4), pp. 473–480.
[12] Kuhn, P., Terhaar, S., Reichel, T., and Paschereit, C., 2015, “Design and 
Assessment of a Fuel-Flexible Low Emission Combustor for Dry and Steam- 
Diluted Conditions,” ASME Paper No. GT2015-43375.
[13] Deere, K., 2003, “Summary of Fluidic Thrust Vectoring Research at NASA 
Langley Research Center,” AIAA Paper No. 2003-3800.
[14] Mason, M., and Crowther, W., 2002, “Fluidic Thrust Vectoring for Low 
Observable Aircraft,” CEAS Aerospace Aerodynamic Research Conference, 
Cambridge, UK, June 10–12, pp. 10–12.
[15] Mason, M., and Crowther, W., 2004, “Fluidic Thrust Vectoring for Low 
Observable Air Vehicles,” AIAA Paper No. 2004-2210.
[16] Banazadeh, A., Saghafi, F., Ghoreyshi, M., and Pilidis, P., 2008, “Experimental 
and Computational Investigation Into the Use of co-Flow Fluidic Thrust Vectoring 
on a Small Gas Turbine,” Aeronaut. J., 112(1127), pp. 17–25.
[17] Eck, M., Zur Nedden, P., von Saldern, J., Orchini, A., and Paschereit, C., 2023, 
“Design of a Swirl-Stabilized Burner With Fluidically Variable Swirl Number,” 
ASME Paper No. GT2023-103062.
[18] Eck, M., Zur Nedden, P., von Saldern, J., Peisdersky, C., Orchini, A., and 
Paschereit, C., 2025, “Experimental Design Validation of a Swirl-Stabilized 
Burner With Fluidically Variable Swirl Number,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines 
Power, 147(4), p. 041017.
[19] Guyot, D., Guethe, F., Schuermans, B., Lacarelle, A., and Paschereit, C., 
2010, “CH*/OH* Chemiluminescence Response of an Atmospheric Premixed 
Flame Under Varying Operating Conditions,” ASME Paper No. GT2010- 
23135.
[20] Guethe, F., Guyot, D., Singla, G., Noiray, N., and Schuermans, B., 2012, 
“Chemiluminescence as Diagnostic Tool in the Development of Gas Turbines,” 
Appl. Phys. B, 107(3), pp. 619–636.
[21] Beuth, J., Reumsch€ussel, J., von Saldern, J., C´ osic´, B., Paschereit, C., and 
Oberleithner, K., 2025, “Experimental Study of the Dynamics of Lean Premixed 
Hydrogen Flames in a Multi Jet Combustor,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 
147(3), p. 031013.
[22] Garan, N., Dybe, S., Paschereit, C., and Djordjevic, N., 2023, “Consistent 
Emission Correction Factors Applicable to Novel Energy Carriers and Conversion 
Concepts,” Fuel, 341, p. 127658.
[23] Douglas, C., Shaw, S., Martz, T., Steele, R., Noble, D., Emerson, B., and Lieuwen, 
T., 2022, “Pollutant Emissions Reporting and Performance Considerations for 
Hydrogen–Hydrocarbon Fuels in Gas Turbines,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines 
Power, 144(9), p. 091003.
[24] G€ockeler, K., Terhaar, S., and Paschereit, C., 2014, “Residence Time Distribution 
in a Swirling Flow at Nonreacting, Reacting, and Steam-Diluted Conditions,” 
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 136(4), p. 041505.
[25] G€oke, S., Schimek, S., Terhaar, S., Reichel, T., G€ockeler, K., Kr€uger, O., Fleck, J., 
Griebel, P., and Paschereit, C., 2014, “Influence of Pressure and Steam Dilution on 
NOx and CO Emissions in a Premixed Natural Gas Flame,” ASME J. Eng. Gas 
Turbines Power, 136(9), p. 091508.
011024-10 / Vol. 148, JANUARY 2026                                                                                                     
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/1/011024/7536570/gtp-25-1257.pdf by guest on 01 January 2026
