
--- Page 1 ---

Paris A. Fokaides
Chair of Combustion Technology
e-mail: Paris.Fokaides@vbt.uni-karlsruhe.de
Plamen Kasabov
Nikolaos Zarzalis
Engler-Bunte-Institute,
University of Karlsruhe (TH),
Kaiserstrasse 12,
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
Experimental Investigation of the
Stability Mechanism and
Emissions of a Lifted Swirl
Nonpremixed Flame
We report on the experimental investigation of a conﬁned lifted swirl nonpremixed ﬂame
by applying a novel Airblast nozzle (Zarzalis, N., et al., 2005, Fuel Injection Apparatus,
Patent No. DE 10 2005 022 772.4, EP 06 009 563.5). 3D-laser doppler anemometry, a
nonintrusive, laser-based measurement technique, is adapted for the measurement of all
three mean velocity components and of the six Reynolds stress components. The determi-
nation of the temperature and mixture ﬁeld occurs by employing in-ﬂame measurement
techniques. Valuable information concerning the mixing procedure, the temperature dis-
tribution, the turbulence level, and the velocity ﬁeld of the ﬂame is provided. The results
demonstrate that there is sufﬁcient residence time in the precombustion area of the lifted
ﬂame in order to achieve spatial and temporal uniformity of the mixture, leading to a
quasi-premixed state. It was also found that hot reaction products, carried upstream by
an annular zone of reverse ﬂow, react with fresh unburnt mixture in a re-ignition process.
The determination of the ﬂow pattern revealed the presence of an inner weak recircula-
tion zone in the nozzle vicinity and a dominant external recirculation zone. The exami-
nation of the probability density function of the velocity measurements was also found to
be a very useful tool in terms of the analysis of the turbulence structure of the ﬂow. The
bimodal distribution in the shear layer between the downstream ﬂow and the recirculated
gases yields the existence of large scale eddies. Finally, the signiﬁcant reduced NOx
emissions in the lean area were also shown by means of emission measurements for
elevated pressure conditions. DOI: 10.1115/1.2749279
Introduction
Partially premixed ﬂames represent a class of hybrid ﬂames
established when a quantity of oxidizer is molecularly mixed with
the fuel stream before entering the reaction zone, where additional
oxidizer is available for complete combustion. This model of
combustion can be used to exploit the advantages of both nonpre-
mixed and premixed ﬂames regarding operational safety, lower
pollutant emissions, and ﬂame stability. Lifted swirl ﬂames are a
representative application of partially premixed combustion, and
are considered to be the breakthrough that should enable high-
level reduction in NOx emissions. Despite their importance, many
aspects of lifted swirl ﬂames have not been adequately investi-
gated and consequently are not clearly understood. The present
work is motivated by the aspects of this promising art of combus-
tion, and it is designed to increase knowledge of the fundamental
factors governing the stability of the conﬁned lifted swirl nonpre-
mixed ﬂame.
Experimental Setup
The studied atomizer is an assembly based on the Airblast con-
cept Figs. 1 1,2. The applied conﬁguration is of the preﬁlming
type, in which the liquid is ﬁrst spread out in a thin, continuous
sheet by means of an annular gap 1 and then subjected to the
atomizing action. Two separate concentric swirled airﬂows 2,3
that ﬂow through a number of equispaced tangential ports 4,5,
allow the atomizing air to impact on both sides of the fuel sheet,
and ensure the thorough mixing of air and fuel. In case gaseous
fuels are applied, the atomizer lip is slightly modiﬁed, in order to
enable the feed of the gas through an annular gap within the
primary air ﬂow. Three different atomizers were tested for the
purpose of this investigation: one for the atmospheric experiments
and two for the elevated pressure experiments. The conﬁguration
for the atmospheric experiments resulted out of the experimental
work of the authors within previous research projects 3. The
high swirl number of the primary swirl body 4 results in the
breakdown of the vortex, whereas the construction of the second-
ary radial swirler 5 encounters the displacement of the ﬂame
further downstream and thus its lift-off. A very detailed descrip-
tion of this speciﬁc construction and the physics behind its con-
ﬁguration is provided in 1. The theoretical swirl numbers of the
inner as well as the outer airﬂow resulted according to Leuckel 4
only from the geometry data of the swirl generators, as the ratio of
the angular to the axial ﬂux momentum divided by the narrowest
radius of each inner and outer channel:
So,th = D˙ o
I˙oR
1
The swirl numbers, as well as the effective areas of the nozzles,
are provided to the readers in Table 1.
For the investigation under elevated pressure conditions, two
similar nozzles were used, both scaled down by a geometry factor
of 2. The ﬁrst one was identical to the described atomizer, and the
other one had a modiﬁed secondary swirl body, producing an
attached swirl diffusion ﬂame.
Two test facilities were utilized within the scope of this study:
one operating under atmospheric pressure conditions and an el-
evated pressure combustion rig. A schematic of the atmospheric
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received May
2, 2007; ﬁnal manuscript received May 8, 2007; published online January 11, 2008.
Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the ASME Turbo Expo
2007: Land, Sea and Air GT2007, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, May 14–17, 2007,
Paper No. GT2007-27126.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011508-1
Copyright © 2008 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

test facility is seen in Fig. 2. This test stand consists of two basic
segments: the nozzle holder in which the mounting and position-
ing of the studied nozzle occurs, and an optic accessible combus-
tion chamber where the measurement techniques are carried out.
In order to enable the performance of ﬁeld measurements, the
nozzle holder can be moved axially inside the combustion cham-
ber. Its concept allows the independent adjustment of the mass
ﬂow rate and the preheat temperature of the primary and the sec-
ondary ﬂow. The supply of the test facility with combustion air is
realized with a side channel compressor that can provide M˙
=0.05 kg/s of air with 550 mbar overpressure. The mass ﬂow of
the air is measured by variable area ﬂow meters and the air is
preheated by means of electric air preheaters. Within the nozzle
holder, the pipe that delivers the fuel to the nozzle atomizer is
water cooled in order to prevent fuel vaporization caused by the
preheated air in the case in which liquid fuel is combusted.
The combustion chamber is isolated and water cooled in order
to ensure the performance of reproducible measurements under
adiabatic conditions. Its diameter DCC is four times the throat
diameter of the nozzle diffuser DO, and its length LCC was limited
by an annular ring outlet at four-and-a-half times its diameter
DCC. This outlet geometry was chosen in order to ensure that no
backﬂow through the exit section occurs 5. Two properly
aligned silica-glass windows enable the optical access to the com-
bustion chamber so that the application of the LDA measurement
technique could be applied. Visualization of the ﬂame spontane-
ous emission by means of a CCD camera could be performed by
the use of a silica glass tube chamber, whereas in this case the
process is far away from the adiabatic operation point due to
signiﬁcant radiation heat losses Fig. 12.
A combustion pressurized rig was applied for the measurement
of the combustion emissions under elevated pressure conditions
6. The construction of the combustor allows the realization of
the RQL concept, whereas in terms of this study, this option was
not utilized. The test bench is designed to host experiments up to
20 bar. It consists of ﬁve adiabatic elements, namely, the compen-
sating vessel, the rich stage chamber, the air diluter, the lean stage
chamber, and the exhaust cooling unit, all depicted in Fig. 3.
Compared to the atmospheric combustor, the pressurized combus-
tion unit is scaled down by a factor of 2. Two three-speed piston
compressors are employed to provide air with a maximum mass
ﬂow rate M˙ =0.125 kg/s. Fluctuations that may occur are com-
pensated by means of a pressurized storage vessel of 1000 l. The
Fig. 1
Investigated Airblast atomizer †1‡
Table 1
Investigated Airblast nozzle
So,th
Aeff,
mm2
Mi
MT
Inner
0.76
115
Outer
0
225
0.34
Total
0.3
340
Fig. 2
Schematic setup of the atmospheric combustion chamber
Fig. 3
Schematic setup of the pressurized combustion rig
011508-2 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

air is preheated by a pressurized electrical preheater, and its mass
ﬂow is adjusted with an oriﬁce ﬂow meter. The mass ﬂow of the
liquid fuel Jet-A1, supplied by a diaphragm metering pump with
a vibration damper, is adjusted by a Coriolis ﬂow meter.
The operating conditions of the performed measurements study
are summarized in Table 2.
As denoted in Table 2, methane was applied for the atmospheric
pressure investigation, whereas the high pressure tests were run
with liquid Jet-A1 fuel, the real design for this application. The
choice of the gaseous fuel under atmospheric conditions was
made in order to enable the detailed investigation of the ﬂame, by
neglecting secondary parameters that could have an impact on the
process and should have also been investigated, such as, for ex-
ample, the two-phase ﬂow within the ﬂow pattern. The liquid fuel,
on the other hand, does not affect the measurement techniques
applied for the combustion emissions under elevated pressure con-
ditions, and therefore was preferred in this case. Compared to the
methane lifted ﬂame, the lean blow-out limits of the Jet-A1 ﬂame
are shifted to slightly lower equivalence ratios  Fig. 4, whereas
the structure of the ﬂame and its lift-off height remain similar 3.
Results and Discussion
Flow Pattern. A measurement campaign employing a commer-
cial 3D-DANTEC LDA was conducted for the time-resolved de-
termination of all three velocity components. The applied conﬁgu-
ration was chosen at 30 deg off-axis forward scattering, in order
to ensure a high signal-to-noise ratio and support the performance
of high data rate measurements. The calculation of all three mean
velocity components and of the six Reynolds stress components
resulted from 20,000 to 50,000 samples measured at each grid
location. As light source, a multi-line argon ion laser COHER-
ENT - INNOVA 90 was used at a typical operating output power
of around 0.5 W. Magnesia oxide particles with diameter less than
1.2 m, brushed off from a massive cylinder, served as tracer
material for the combustion gas and air, in both air ﬂows. Nondi-
mensional coordinating of the system was performed based on the
throat radius Ro of the diffuser. Velocities are normalized by the
throat radius velocity UO. Reynolds stresses are normalized by UO
2
and the turbulent kinetic energy k by 1
2UO2.
Figure 5 shows the mass ﬂow stream function  contours for
the isothermal and the reactive ﬂow. In both cases, the presence of
an inner weak recirculation zone in the nozzle vicinity and a
dominant outer recirculation zone along the conﬁnement is re-
vealed. The size and the intensity of the outer recirculation zone
vary in terms of the density and thus of the temperature ﬁeld.
According to Thring and Newby 7, the entrained air in a turbu-
lent jet depends on the density ratio of the downstream propagat-
ing unburnt mixture to the surrounding burnout ﬂuid. In the case
of the reactive ﬂow, the increase of this ratio results in the weak-
ening of the outer recirculation zone.
As far as the turbulent kinetic energy k is concerned, Fig. 6
illustrates its contour for the isothermal and the reactive case. The
turbulent kinetic energy per unit mass can be expressed as
k = 1
2u¯2 + ¯2 + w¯2
2
As expected, the elevated temperature dampens the turbulent mix-
ing and thus postpones the completion of the procedure. Elevated
turbulence levels are observed further downstream, signifying the
shear layer between the upstream propagating jet and the down-
stream propagating hot gases. Compared to similar measurements
performed with the same infrastructure and similar boundary con-
ditions concerning an attached diffusion swirl ﬂame 5, the
reached levels of k seem to be much lower. This indicates the
impact of the lower swirl number S in the case of the lifted ﬂame.
Table 2
Operating conditions for selected test cases
Atmospheric pressure experiments methane
Isothermal lifted
Reactive lifted
TPR,A, K
323
373
PA, bar
1
1
M˙ A, kg/s
0.02
0.0185
Uo, m/s
42
40
Re
55,000
45,000
P, %
2
2

-
0.65
Elevated pressure experiments Jet-A1
Reactive attached
Reactive lifted
TPR,A, K
573
573
PA, bar
7; 9
7; 9
M˙ A, kg/s
0.02; 0.025
0.025; 0.031
Uo, m/s
45
65
Re
55,000; 70,000
85,000; 115,000
P, %
3
3

0.5–1.2
0.5–1.2
Fig. 4
Lean blow-out limits against temperature of preheated
air under atmospheric conditions for methane and Jet-A1 †3‡
Fig. 5
Reactive „right… and isothermal ﬂow „left…: mass ﬂow
stream function  and UV vector plot
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011508-3
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

Figure 7 compares the evolution of the mean axial velocity U
under isothermal and reactive conditions. In the nozzle vicinity,
negative velocities were measured on the axis in both cases, indi-
cating the existence of a weak inner recirculation zone, which
supports the mixing procedure in the precombustion zone, but
does not participate in the ﬂame stabilization process. As ex-
pected, in the reactive case, higher axial velocities are measured,
whereas this difference becomes greater near and in the combus-
tion zone. A better understanding of the impact of the combustion
on the axial momentum is provided by the evolution of the local
density of the axial momentum ﬂux U2/Io Fig. 8. A moderate
increase of the axial momentum ﬂux is observed within the ﬁrst
measurement planes; this effect becomes much more pronounced
further downstream of the nozzle exit.
The reduced turbulence exchange in the case of the lifted ﬂame
is also conﬁrmed from the measured turbulent shear stresses. In
Fig. 9, the measured correlation UV for the lifted ﬂame mea-
surements is depicted. As expected, no deviation occurs concern-
ing the turbulent transport across the axis, since the boundary
condition of rotationally symmetric ﬂows and thus UVr=0
=0 is satisﬁed. A quantitative comparison of UV for an attached
and a lifted ﬂame 5 reveals weaker turbulent exchange of axial
momentum ﬂux in radial direction in the case of the lifted ﬂame.
The examination of the probability density function of the ve-
locity measurements can be a very useful tool in terms of the
analysis of the turbulence structure of the ﬂow. Within the bound-
ary layer, bimodality of the axial velocity PDFs was revealed. A
bimodal distribution implies the existence, at different times, of
two dominant gas directions whose temperatures and velocities
vary widely and are centered at either one of the contiguous
peaks. Bimodal distributions are usually located in shear layers
created by mixing interfaces of fresh pockets of reactants with
external recirculated hot gases. The interaction results in large
Fig. 6
Reactive „up… and isothermal ﬂow „down…: turbulent ki-
netic energy k and UV vector plot
Fig. 7
Isothermal „left… and reactive ﬂow „right…: mean axial velocity U¯ /Uo
011508-4 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

eddies of hot and cold gases existing at different times at the same
location 8,9. Figure 10 presents the evolution of the statistical
distribution of the axial velocity as one moves from inside the
vortex, through the shear zone into the surrounding outside gases
for z/Ro=5.6. The distribution becomes distorted, and thus bimo-
dal as the LDA diagnostic volume straddles the shear zone U
=0 m/s. This is a very interesting ﬁnding of this study, yielding
the existence of large scaled eddies in the shear layer between the
upstream ﬂow and the recirculated hot gases.
Mixture Field. Measurements of multi-species concentrations
in the ﬁeld have been conducted in order to allow a better under-
Fig. 8
Isothermal „left… and reactive ﬂow „right…: local density of axial mo-
mentum U2/IO
Fig. 9
Isothermal „left… and reactive ﬂow „right…: shear stress UV/Uo
2 in
nozzle vicinity
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011508-5
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

standing of the complex turbulence-chemistry interactions. The
local concentration was subsequently analyzed by means of con-
ventional gas analysis, based on molecular excitation processes,
due to modulated infrared absorption. Two commercial analyzers
Hartmann and Braun Model URAS 14 and Magnos 14 10 and
a suction probe of 1 mm were applied.
Figure 11 presents the local equivalence ratio of the reactive
ﬁeld obtained by analyzed gas samples as well as the ﬂame front,
as it was detected by the carbon monoxide measurements Fig.
15, as well as by the spontaneous emission of the ﬂame Fig. 12.
The calculation of the local equivalence ratio from measurements
of carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, hydrocarbons, and the ox-
ides of nitrogen uses a matrix solution of a set of ten simultaneous
equations based on the combustion chemical equation of hydro-
carbon fuel 11. As this measurement yields, there is sufﬁcient
residence time below the ﬂame base to achieve spatial and tem-
poral uniformity of the mixture, leading to a quasi-premixed state.
The results appear to be in line with previous work concerning
lifted diffusion jet ﬂames 12,13, proposing that fuel and air are
fully premixed at the base of a lifted ﬂame.
Fig. 10
Reactive ﬂow: PDF evolution of axial velocity through shear layer for z/Ro=5.6
Fig. 11
Reactive ﬂow: local equivalence ratio with ﬂame front
and UV vector plot
Fig. 12
Flame illumination for the investigated conditions „ap-
erture f/5.6 exposure time 1/30 s…
011508-6 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

Compared to the isothermal conditions, the macromixing of air
and fuel in the reactive case is slightly dampened. This probably
occurs due to the impact of the temperature and thus of the kine-
matic viscosity on the diffusive mass transport. In the isothermal
case, quantities of methane responding to the global adjustment of
the mixture were also measured in the surrounding area of the jet,
upstream from the nozzle exit, whereas in the reactive ﬁeld, fuel
was fully oxidized in its downstream path Fig. 13. Due to the
conﬁnement of the ﬂow, the evolution of an external recirculation
zone resulting in the horizontal transport of methane from the
upper layers to the jet’s base, is to be assumed 14.
The dominance of the large recirculation zone moving the hot
products upstream and parallel to the jet’s boundary layer can also
be conﬁrmed from the examination of the carbon dioxide concen-
tration in the ﬂame. These concentration levels were found to be
signiﬁcant across the stabilization area, whereas in the jet core
they were negligible Fig. 14. This evidences that in the case of a
conﬁned lifted ﬂame, hot reaction products, carried to the edges of
the jet, react with fresh unburnt mixture in a re-ignition process
supporting the stability of the combustion 15.
The carbon monoxide concentration is in very good agreement
with the spontaneous emission captures locating the main reaction
zone of the ﬂame. The widespread region in which carbon mon-
oxide is measured Fig. 15 is probably a result of the effective
restriction of its oxidation due to the presence of hydrocarbon
species 16. The anchor-shaped form of the reaction zone of the
lifted ﬂame in this case is very similar to the characteristic struc-
ture of the tribranchial ﬂame 17. However, the suspicion raised
by this observation for the existence of a stabilization mechanism
similar to that of the triple ﬂame, is not supported either from the
velocity ﬁeld or from the local equivalence ratio.
Temperature Field. High frequency temperature measure-
ments were performed by means of an S type Pt/Pt-10% Rh
compensated microthermocouple probe, with wire diameter of
100 m 18. The raw temperature data were corrected for radia-
tive losses in terms of a heat transfer coefﬁcient determined from
the frequency response of the compensated signal according to a
function proposed by Sato and Kumura 19.
The contours of mean and rms temperatures are shown in Fig.
16. The combination of mean and ﬂuctuating temperatures allows
the location of the combustion area as well as the regions of
boundary layers. The low mean temperatures near the nozzle vi-
cinity in the jet signify that even though the mixture at this loca-
tion is highly turbulent, no combustion occurs. This also occurs
Fig. 13
Isothermal „left… and reactive ﬂow „right…: methane
concentration, % vol.
Fig. 14
Reactive ﬂow: carbon dioxide concentration, % vol.
Fig. 15
Reactive ﬂow: carbon monoxide concentration, % vol.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011508-7
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

due to the high axial velocities located at this regime. As the
unburnt mixture approaches the combustion area, the temperature
grows progressively reaching ignitable levels at z/Ro=8. Areas of
high temperature ﬂuctuations between the jet and the recirculated
gases outside the combustion zone are due to intermittency effects
caused by the ﬂuctuating boundary layer between the unburnt jet
and the combustion products.
The reaction zone is devoid of steep temperature gradients, con-
ﬁrming that a dominant inner recirculation zone does not exist.
Temperature peaks, which usually result from the nonhomoge-
neous character of a diffusive ﬂame, were also found to be
avoided; i.e., quasi-premixed conditions are apparently accom-
plished. The highest temperatures in the ﬁeld reach 80% of the
adiabatic combustion temperature responding to the global sto-
ichiometry, indicating heat losses of the system. The hottest re-
gions themselves show only moderate levels of ﬂuctuating tem-
peratures, apparently due to the mixture homogeneity 20.
Another important observation concerns the spatial structure of
the reaction zone in terms of an arrow-shaped front propagating
upstream and parallel to the jet shear layer towards its edge. This
procedure is apparently potentiated by entrainment phenomena
7, already described in this paper in terms of a dominant outer
recirculation zone. The elevated temperature conditions located at
the jet base are expected to have a major impact on the increase of
the local laminar burning velocity and, thus, on the local turbulent
burning velocity. The ﬂammability limits of the mixture at this
position are also expected to rise signiﬁcantly. Acting on the as-
sumption of the Vanquickenborne model 12, the combustion
should be possible in higher ﬂow velocities and, thus, in a lower
equivalence ratio. This indicates that extended lean blow-out lim-
its are expected to be achieved in the case of the conﬁned swirled
lifted nonpremixed ﬂame, enabling the progress towards lean
combustion.
Flame Topology. A brief recapitulation can be summed up out
of the ﬁndings of this study, concerning the topology of a lifted
conﬁned swirl nonpremixed ﬂame, in terms of the mixing proce-
dure, the temperature distribution, the turbulence levels, and the
velocity distribution within the ﬂame. Four regions can be identi-
ﬁed, with the precombustion area being the most important of
them, concerning the conditions that have to be fulﬁlled in order
to achieve the stabilization of the lifted ﬂame Fig. 16:
a
Precombustion area: A weak inner recirculation zone ac-
celerates the mixing procedure. The ﬂow is highly turbu-
lent and the macromixing is achieved. The temperature
gradually rises from the preheating temperature of the
mixture to ignitable levels. There is also an inﬂuence of
the temperature ﬁeld on the ﬂux of the axial momentum.
b
Combustion zone: The temperature reaches progressively
its maximum levels, corresponding to 80% of the adiabatic
combustion temperature. No recirculation zone is ob-
served within the combustion region, and the reaction is
devoid of temperature peaks. CO emission indicates the
combustion zone, which has an arrow-shaped form. Large
scale eddies exist in the shear layer between the upstream
ﬂow and the recirculated gases.
c
Outer recirculation area: Part of the combusted products
performs an upstream recirculation next to the down-
stream propagating unburnt mixture, and thus these hot
reaction products react with fresh unburnt mixture in a
re-ignition process, supporting the stability of the combus-
tion. This procedure is of great importance for the main-
tenance and stabilization of the lifted combustion, since
efforts to ignite the lifted ﬂame in a nonconﬁned environ-
ment failed. Areas of high temperature ﬂuctuations be-
tween the jet and the recirculated gases outside the com-
bustion zone occur due to intermittency effects.
d
Postﬂame region: The reactive species are fully oxidized
resulting in the existence within the mixture of the ex-
pected combustion products of the global mixture adjust-
ment not labeled in Fig. 16. The temperature approaches
constant levels and equals the adiabatic combustion tem-
perature, devoid of the heat losses due to radiation and
heat transfer to the chamber walls due to heat conduction
and convection.
NOx Emissions. In order to approve its operability, the lifted
swirl nonpremixed ﬂame was also tested under high pressure con-
ditions in the pressurized rig described in the experimental setup
section. Within the scope of these experiments, the applied nozzle
was scaled down by a factor of 0.5 and was compared to a similar
Airblast conﬁguration producing an attached swirl ﬂame. The ex-
periments were carried out with Jet-A1 fuel, in order to achieve
near service conditions. Gas analysis was performed by means of
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, focusing on the emis-
sions of nitric oxide NOx.
The production of NOx depends on a variety of parameters,
such as the local temperature, the local mixing rates, the global
ﬂame residence time, and the radiative heat losses 21. According
to the main chemical pathway responsible for NOx formation in
combustion the thermal NO pathway postulated by Zeldovich,
temperatures above 1700 K are required in order to signiﬁcantly
activate the NO production 22.
NOx emissions for the described nozzles plotted against the
adiabatic ﬂame temperature are depicted in Fig. 17. The experi-
Fig. 16
Reactive ﬂow: mean temperature „right… Trms „left… „in
K… and combustion regimes „A,B,C…
Fig. 17
EINOx emissions „kg NOx/kg fuel… for lifted and at-
tached ﬂame against adiabatic ﬂame
011508-8 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

ments were performed for preheating temperatures of 573 K,
pressures of 7 and 9 bar, and an equivalent ratio  range from 0.5
to 1.2. The results demonstrate that the lifted ﬂame achieves, as
expected, the required objective, namely, the reduction of the NOx
emissions in the lean area, and thus in adiabatic combustion tem-
peratures below 2000 K. This occurs due to the premixed charac-
ter of the lifted ﬂame. The absence of an inner recirculation zone
in the ﬂame also results in a lower residence time within the hot
regime of the ﬂame and thus in lower NOx emissions 23.
Conclusions
This study aimed to investigate a conﬁned lifted swirl nonpre-
mixed ﬂame. The results demonstrated that, for the investigated
ﬂame, a signiﬁcant amount of the total fuel ﬂow was already
mixed at a macrolevel upstream of the ﬂame stabilization zone.
Temperature peaks, resulting from nonhomogeneity, were found
to be avoided and hence combustion with low production of the
pollutant NOx was accomplished. The combination of velocity
and temperature maps correlated to the mixture ﬁeld made it pos-
sible to locate the stabilization area, the recirculation zones, as
well as the postﬂame region. The results showed a ﬂow ﬁeld de-
void of a large dominant inner recirculation zone. A signiﬁcant
amount of exhaust gases was found upstream from the reaction
zone and perimetrical from the downstream jet, forming an outer
recirculation zone that apparently dominated the stabilization of
the lifted swirl nonpremixed ﬂame. This procedure is of vital im-
portance for the maintenance and stabilization of the lifted com-
bustion, since efforts to ignite the lifted ﬂame in a nonconﬁned
environment failed. The lifted swirl nonpremixed ﬂame was also
found to have signiﬁcant reduced NOx emissions and elevated
pressure conditions at the lean area under, compared to a similar
Airblast conﬁguration producing an attached swirl ﬂame.
Acknowledgment
We kindly acknowledge ﬁnancial support by the European
Commission through project TLC Contract No. AST4-CT-2005-
012326.
Nomenclature
D  diameter, m
D  angular momentum, kg m2/s
I  axial momentum, kg m/s
L  length, m
M˙  mass ﬂux, kg/s
P  power, W
R  radius, m
Re  Reynolds number
S  swirl number
T  temperature, K
U  axial velocity component, m/s
V  radial velocity component, m/s
K  turbulence kinetic energy, m2/s2
P  pressure, bar
X  radial coordinate, m
Z  axial coordinate, m
Greek Symbols
  ﬁnite difference
  mass ﬂow stream function
P  density, kg/m3
  equivalence ratio
Subscripts
A  air
AD  adiabatic
CC  combustion chamber
O  referencing nozzle throat
PR  preheating
Operators
− time averaged
  ﬂuctuation
Abbreviations
CCD  charge coupled device
EINOx  emission index of nitric oxides
LDA  laser Doppler anemometry
PDF  probability density function
rms  root mean square
RQL  rich quench lean
References
1 Zarzalis, N., Fokaides, P. A., and Merkle, K., 2005, Fuel Injection Apparatus,
Patent No. DE 10 2005 022 772.4, EP 06 009 563.5.
2 Lefebvre, A., 1989, Atomisation and Sprays, Hemisphere Publishing Corpora-
tion, Washington, DC.
3 Fokaides, P., and Zarzalis, N., 2006, Report on Stability and Flow Characteri-
sation at Atmospheric Pressure Conditions,” Deliverable D.2.3.3.a. for the Eu-
ropean project “Towards Lean Combustion” Contract No. AST4-CT-2005-
012326.
4 Leuckel, W., 1967, “Swirl Intensities, Swirl Types and Energy Loss of Differ-
ent Swirl Generating Devices,” IFRF-Doc. No. G 02/a/16.
5 Merkle, K., Haessler, H., Buechner, H., and Zarzalis, N., 2003, “Effect of Co-
and Counter-Swirl on the Isothermal Flow- and Mixture-Field of an Airblast
Atomizer Nozzle,” Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 24, pp. 529–537.
6 Ricken, V., 2006, “Untersuchungen zur Stickoxidemission von Gasturbinen-
brennkammern mit luftgestufter Verbrennungsführung,” Ph.D. thesis, TU
Karlsruhe, Germany in German.
7 Thring, M. W., and Newby, M. P., 1953, “Combustion Length of Enclosed
Turbulent Jet Flames,” 4th International Symposium on Combustion, Balti-
more, MD, pp. 789–796.
8 Flores, D., 2003, “Analysis of Lean Premixed Turbulent Combustion Using
Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy Temperature Measurements,”
Ph.D. thesis, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.
9 Vanoverberghie, K., Van Den Bulck, E., and Tummers, M., 2004, Flow Struc-
ture of Lifted Swirling Jet Flames,” Flow, Turbul. Combust., 73, pp. 25–47.
10 Analysentechnik, Advance Optima, Modulares Prozessanalysensystem, 42/24-
10-3 DE, Hartmann & Braun, Belgium.
11 SAE, 1994, “Procedure for the Calculation of Gaseous Emissions From Air-
craft Turbine Engines,” SAE Paper No. APR1533.
12 Vanquickenborne, L., and van Tiggelen, A., 1966, “The Stabilization of
Mechanism of Lifted Diffusion Flames,” Combust. Flame, 10, pp. 59–69.
13 Eickhoff, H., Lenze, B., and Leuckel, W., 1984, “Experimental Investigation
on the Stabilization Mechanism of Jet Diffusion Flames,” 20th Symposium
(International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, pp. 311–318.
14 Craya, A., and Curtet, R., 1955, “On the Spreading of a Conﬁned Jet,” Acad.
Sci., Paris, C. R., 2411, pp. 621–622.
15 Broadwell, J., Dahm, W., and Mungal, M., 1984, “Blowout of Turbulent Dif-
fusion Flames,” Twentieth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Institute, pp. 303–310.
16 Smooke, M. D., Mitchell, R. E., and Keyes, D. E., 1989, “Numerical Solution
of Two-Dimensional Axisymmetric Laminar Diffusion Flames,” Combust. Sci.
Technol., 67 pp. 85–122.
17 Domingo, P., and Vervisch, L., 1996, “Triple Flames and Partially Premixed
Combustion in Autoignition of Non-Premixed Turbulent Mixtures,” Twenty-
Sixth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute,
pp. 233–240.
18 Kunugi, M., and Jinno, H., 1959, “Measurements of Fluctuating Flame Tem-
perature,” 7th International Symposium on Combustion, pp. 942–948.
19 Sato, A., and Kumura, J., 1975, “A Correctional Calculation Method for Ther-
mocouple Measurement of Temperature in Flames,” Combust. Flame, 24, pp.
34–41.
20 Gupt, K. A., Lewis, M. J., and Daurer, M., 2001, “Swirl Effects on Combus-
tion Characteristics of Premixed Flames,” J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 123,
pp. 619–626.
21 Warnatz, J., Maas, U., and Dibble, R. W., 2001, Combustion, Physical and
Chemical Fundamentals, Modeling and Simulation, Experiments, Pollutant
Formation, 3rd ed., Springer, New York.
22 Zeldovich, Y. B., 1946. “The Oxidation of Nitrogen in Combustion and Ex-
plosions,” Acta Physicochim. URSS, 21.
23 Schmitel, P., Günter, B., Lenze, B., Leuckel, W., and Bockhorn, H., “Turbulent
Swirling Flames: Experimental Investigation of the Flow Field and Formation
of Nitrogen Oxide,” 28th Combustion Symposium (International), pp. 303–
309.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011508-9
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
