
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
www.elsevier.com/locate/combustﬂame
Flame imaging as a diagnostic tool for industrial
combustion
R. Hernández, J. Ballester ∗
Fluid Mechanics Group/LITEC, Centro Politécnico Superior, CSIC-University of Zaragoza, María de Luna, 3,
E-50018 Zaragoza, Spain
Received 21 December 2007; received in revised form 8 April 2008; accepted 24 June 2008
Abstract
Different approaches for condition monitoring of combustion systems based on the capture and processing of
ﬂame images are presented and discussed. The objective is to devise methods capable of converting geometrical
and luminous data into reliable information on the state of practical combustion systems. Suitable processing
methods are needed to extract representative information from ﬂame images, as they contain large amounts of data
whose physical interpretation is not, in general, straightforward. A thorough experimental programme has been
conducted in a model industrial burner, in order to create a database of ﬂame images for subsequent analysis. One
of the options is the extraction and analysis of representative image features; even though the parametric studies
revealed good sensitivity to changes in combustion regimes, this approach may entail some information loss and
requires adaptation to the speciﬁc system. The other two methods explored are designed as ﬂame identiﬁcation
techniques based on the whole image. One of them use self-organising feature maps and yields as output the
most probable combustion regime, among those previously characterised. The other one is an adaptation of a
speech recognition method and informs about the probability of an unknown state to correspond with the different
combustion regimes. Their performance was tested in terms of their success rate for identiﬁcation as well as on
their capabilities to estimate NOx emission, as a representative outcome of the combustion process. Results in
other combustion situations (oil burner and premixed combustor) are also reported. The good results obtained in
all cases are thought to support the potential of the methods described for ﬂame monitoring.
© 2008 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Flame images; Combustion monitoring; Classiﬁcation; Identiﬁcation; Neural networks
1. Introduction
Visualisation methods have been historically an
invaluable diagnostic tool in ﬂuid mechanics and
combustion, since information on the spatial distribu-
tion of the relevant variables (even just as qualitative
* Corresponding author. Fax: +34 976 761 882.
E-mail address: ballester@unizar.es (J. Ballester).
patterns) can be most helpful to describe, or even
understand, important features of a ﬂow or a ﬂame.
A wide range of imaging techniques are nowadays
available, enabling qualitative and/or quantitative de-
scriptions of many different variables (see, e.g., [1]).
In principle, many of them might be exploited to char-
acterise industrial ﬂames by providing direct informa-
tion from the combusting ﬂow, which is recognised to
be a key step in order to develop cleaner and more ef-
0010-2180/$ – see front matter © 2008 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2008.06.010


--- Page 2 ---

510
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
ﬁcient combustion systems [2,3]. However, practical
reasons still prevent the use of many of them: lack of
ruggedness, high cost, difﬁcult optical access, etc. In
the current state-of-art, the recording of radiation nat-
urally emitted by the ﬂame appears to be a feasible
method; in particular, it avoids the need for seeding
or external illumination and is amenable to low-cost,
rugged CCD cameras. This kind of methods has been
explored in a number of works, and the results are
thought to conﬁrm its suitability for practical applica-
tions.
Different approaches are possible. Some meth-
ods are oriented to derive quantitative information for
some combustion variables. Pyrometry can be used
to obtain temperature distributions over large regions
of the ﬂame; two-colour techniques (either in the in-
frared or simply using two channels of a conventional
RGB camera) are the most common choice due to
its reduced sensitivity to uncertainties in emissivity
or attenuation. Refs. [4–6] describe some application
examples in coal ﬂames. Emission spectroscopy re-
quires collecting radiation in narrow bands associ-
ated to chemiluminescence of excited radicals (e.g.,
OH∗, CH∗), whose concentration can be related to
the location of reaction fronts or to the magnitude of
heat release rates [1,2]. Hence, the emission at spe-
ciﬁc wavelengths might be more closely related to the
combustion state than wide-band radiation, and some
of the works oriented to the diagnostic/control of in-
dustrial ﬂames [7–10] are based on the analysis of
bandpass-ﬁltered images.
Alternatively, ﬂame images can be interpreted as
a ‘signature’ of a particular combustion state. This
approach has been applied in several works, always
aimed at developing novel monitoring techniques
(and, ultimately, advanced control strategies) for prac-
tical applications. Instrumentation requirements are
relatively little demanding: conventional CCD cam-
eras and frame-grabbers are, in principle, enough to
collect the data needed; most of the difﬁculties with
the hardware are associated with installation in the
combustion chamber and protection of instruments
from high temperatures and fouling. The main chal-
lenges are thought to be related with data analysis
and, above all, the conversion of raw images into us-
able information.
The most common approach is ‘feature extrac-
tion,’ i.e., the derivation of signiﬁcant parameters
from a ﬂame image. In the ﬁrst place, such a pro-
cedure greatly reduces the amount of information
needed to represent an image. In the second place,
some features might be representative of particular
behaviours of practical interest, due to their intrinsic
meaning or their relationship with certain combus-
tion conditions (e.g., ﬂame length can be relevant for
some applications or, in some cases, might be used
as an indicator of staged combustion). The features
analysed consist of geometrical parameters [10–12],
different variables related to the level and spatial dis-
tribution of luminosity [13,14] or colour [15–17], as
well as combinations of several of those properties
[6,18]. Characteristic frequencies have also been de-
rived from high-speed image records, as a relevant
feature of the process either by itself or combined
with other image properties [6,14,19].
The existence of relationships among combus-
tion conditions and selected image features has been
demonstrated by parametric studies reported in a
number of works [6,12,13,18–20]. But, in most cases,
those parameters do not have an intrinsic physical
meaning, and serve mainly as indicators of a particu-
lar combustion state. Therefore, any attempt to exploit
ﬂame images for practical purposes involves as a nec-
essary subsequent task that of relating those variables
with known situations or with real combustion pa-
rameters. A wide range of approaches and processing
methods have been reported. Kurihara et al. [11] pro-
posed an empirical index for the prediction of NOx
emissions as a function of some selected geometrical
parameters. Shimoda et al. [4] applied a highly sim-
pliﬁed physical model to relate unburnt carbon in a
coal ﬁred plant with luminosity features derived from
ﬂame images collected at two wavelengths. Baek et
al. [15] found a linear relationship between a chro-
matic parameter calculated from ﬂame images and
the emissions of NOx and unburnt carbon in a pi-
lot coal-ﬁred furnace. Rahman et al. [14] proposed
two ‘quality indices,’ combining parameters related
to luminosity and ﬂuctuation frequency derived from
ﬂame images, as performance indicators for utility
boilers. Yu and MacGregor [17] used partial least
squares to predict NOx and SO2 emissions and heat
losses in an industrial boiler from a set of image fea-
tures (related to its geometry, luminosity and colour).
Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN, thereafter) have
been used as ﬁtting tools to relate image features with
relevant combustion parameters. Lu et al. [10] used
a feed-forward ANN to predict successfully the com-
bustion regime from 5 geometrical/luminous param-
eters of the ﬂame. ANN and fuzzy logic were com-
bined in [8,21] to adjust air and fuel ﬂow rates, based
on ﬂame brightness and length. Wang et al. [22] ap-
plied a back-propagation ANN to relate a set of image
parameters (average and deviation of temperature, ig-
nition distance) with NOx emissions. Bae et al. [23]
used a neural network to distinguish ﬂame on/off con-
ditions from the analysis of luminosity distributions.
A different, relatively little explored approach
consists in treating the image as a data set that can
be processed as a whole in order to ‘classify’ or
‘identify’ the image as representative of a particu-
lar combustion state. Allen et al. [9] reported notably


--- Page 3 ---

R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
511
good results using artiﬁcial neural networks to clas-
sify different combustion states using the full image
as input data.
Finally, the use of ﬂame images for control or opti-
misation purposes has been examined in a few works
(all in laboratory rigs). Allen et al. [9] and Lu et
al. [10] coupled an ANN-based state predictor and a
closed-loop control to bring the system to the desired
state. Burkhardt et al. [8,21] combined ANN and a
fuzzy controller to reach optimal conditions. Soot for-
mation was avoided in [16] using a fuzzy controller
whose inputs were the levels of blue and orange in
ﬂame images. It should be noted that all control ap-
plications mentioned require a ‘state identiﬁcation’
stage, before a control action can be deﬁned.
This review demonstrates the growing interest in
the use of ﬂame images for online monitoring as well
as the broad range of possible methods. The approach
selected and investigated in this work is explained in
the next section, in the framework of a brief discus-
sion on the possibilities and limitations of the differ-
ent alternatives.
2. Monitoring based on ﬂame images: Needs and
approaches
A ﬁrst issue in the development of any monitoring
technique is to deﬁne the amount and type of infor-
mation needed to characterise a process state. This
might not be problematic when a system can be fully
characterised by a few parameters, which is not the
case for industrial ﬂames. Their thorough descrip-
tion would require determining the spatial and tem-
poral variations of many physico-chemical variables,
still challenging at laboratory scale and unthinkable
for the moment in real plants. Therefore, a selection
needs to be made on the information to be collected.
Gas composition is the type of data most widely used
to monitor combustion systems, but this is a highly
incomplete description of the process. A reliable diag-
nostic is thought to be only possible if based on some
description of the ﬂame itself.
In this context, imaging techniques appear as a
most suitable alternative: they can provide data ob-
tained directly from the ﬂame, in the form of a 2-D
distribution (still a simpliﬁcation of reality, but much
richer than global values). Among the different op-
tions available, a passive technique based on the col-
lection of radiation spontaneously emitted by ﬂames
has been used in this work. This option limits the
possibilities for quantitative determination of speciﬁc
variables, but nowadays it is considered the most fea-
sible alternative for practical applications. Neverthe-
less, it should be noted that the approaches studied in
this work should be equally valid for the processing
of data generated by sophisticated laser-based tech-
niques.
A second issue is the type of approach selected
for the processing and interpretation of image data.
Two main categories can be established: methods ori-
ented to the derivation and analysis of physically-
meaningful parameters and those based on using sen-
sorial information as a signature of a process state.
In principle, the ﬁrst one clearly appears as the most
powerful and desirable. However, their development
and application is not considered obvious at all. Let’s
consider the possibilities offered by passive imag-
ing according to this strategy. As already mentioned,
spontaneously-emitted radiation can be used to esti-
mate some physico-chemical parameters of a ﬂame.
One of them is the determination of temperature
distribution by pyrometry (actually, only valid for
particle-laden ﬂames, as Plank’s law does not apply
in blue ﬂames). Another one is the use of emission
spectroscopy to derive information on excited radicals
from radiation collected at speciﬁc wavelengths. This
kind of information, by itself, can be most valuable if
the objective is the ‘characterisation’ of ﬂames; how-
ever, how to exploit it for online ‘monitoring’ of an
industrial burner is not so straightforward. This would
require, for example, establishing the desired spatial
distribution of OH∗or the ability to interpret a par-
ticular chemiluminescence image in practical terms,
and both are rarely possible in practice. Alternatively,
this kind of information can be used to estimate the
stoichiometry of a ﬂame. In fact, methods based on
chemiluminescence of excited radicals are probably
among the most mature technologies for online mon-
itoring in practical premixed combustors (e.g., [24–
26]). However, it should be noted that even for this
application, which has been analysed in many works
and has a sound physical basis, no universal relation-
ships are available and the technique needs calibration
for speciﬁc fuels and facilities [25–27].
All this argumentation points to the difﬁculty of
using directly physico-chemical parameters for online
‘monitoring’; instead, empirical knowledge speciﬁ-
cally adapted to the particular application needs to
be added for converting measured data into repre-
sentative parameters and/or transforming these into
information adequate to monitor or optimise indus-
trial ﬂames. In fact, previous works oriented to mon-
itoring from ﬁltered images (which might be related
to some physical variables, like temperature or ex-
cited radicals), actually treated the results as a char-
acteristic pattern (signature) of the different ﬂame
states, instead of evaluating directly the implications
of the temperature or radicals distributions regarding
the ‘quality’ of the ﬂame. Only in a few cases this
was attempted, by means of simpliﬁed models, spe-
ciﬁc of particular applications [4,7]. In general, the


--- Page 4 ---

512
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
methods (with the exception of [9]) are thought to re-
quire careful design and adaptation in order to select
the most representative parameters and to develop the
empirical rules needed for ﬂame monitoring in a new
application. None of the works reviewed reports im-
plementation in different combustion situations.
The treatment of image data as a ‘signature’ of a
ﬂame state is an alternative that can be compatible
with any type of diagnostic technique: ﬁltered spon-
taneous radiation (pyrometry, chemiluminescence),
laser-based techniques (e.g., PLIF), broadband radi-
ation (explored in this work), etc. In this case, the
basic assumption is that, due to the huge amount of in-
formation contained in an image (intensity/colour for
each pixel), the probability that different combustion
states produce the same set of data is very low. As
a fundamental advantage, this type of methods does
not require interpreting the highly complex physico-
chemical phenomena involved. At the same time, its
empirical nature can also be an important weakness.
Whether this is a serious problem or not will largely
depend on how the ‘empirical knowledge’ is devel-
oped and applied. For a method to become a feasible
monitoring technique, it should be of a generalisable
nature in the sense that implementation in new ap-
plications does not require a costly design/adaptation
procedure and includes as few as possible ad-hoc
models or parameters.
The aim of this paper is to evaluate different
image processing methods regarding their capabili-
ties for the identiﬁcation of combustion states. Three
different approaches have been applied (feature ex-
traction, ANN-based identiﬁcation, probabilistic pat-
tern recognition), treating images from a conventional
CCD camera as a signature of ﬂame states. The aim
was not to develop and ﬁne-tune a method speciﬁ-
cally adapted to a particular situation, which would
be of limited interest, but to assess the potential of the
approach for a relatively general case. In order to ap-
proach this objective, (1) all results presented were
obtained by applying the methods as initially con-
ceived, without any ad-hoc work (apart from some de-
tails regarding pre-processing of raw images), (2) the
methods were applied to different burners, again with
no ad-hoc adaptation (for brevity, only the results ob-
tained with an air-staged burner are described in de-
tail) and (3) the use of knowledge or rules speciﬁc to
the particular burners used was avoided.
3. Experimental facility
The tests have been performed in a water-cooled
experimental furnace, equipped with an industry-type
natural gas burner (Fig. 1). The burner includes a
number of adjustable settings, enabling the study of
Fig. 1. Test facility and instrumentation.
a wide range of ﬂame types. Combustion air enters
through two concentric air injections, each with a
variable swirl generator (moveable blocks). A broad
range of conditions, from conventional, fast-mixing
ﬂames to low-NOx, air-staged combustion, can be
achieved by means of a proper adjustment of air dis-
tribution and the two swirl settings. Further details on
this facility and a detailed characterisation of the dif-
ferent combustion regimes can be found in [28].
The ﬂow rates of fuel, primary and secondary air
were measured with thermal mass-ﬂow meters and
controlled by closed loops acting on the respective
regulation valves, whereas swirl numbers were ad-
justed manually. The mass-ﬂow rate of natural gas
was ﬁxed to 5 m3 N/h throughout the tests and the
equivalence ratio was kept at 0.88 (3% O2 in ﬂue
gases, by vol. db). Gas sampling was performed us-
ing a speciﬁc probe located at the exit of the com-
bustion chamber, connected to a bank of individual
on-line analysers for O2 (paramagnetic sensor), CO,
CO2 (NDIR) and NOx (chemiluminescence).


--- Page 5 ---

R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
513
Three of the burner settings were varied in the ex-
periments: air distribution between primary and sec-
ondary registers (air ratio, AR, expressed as fraction
of secondary air over the total air ﬂow rate) and the
swirl numbers of both air streams (S1 and S2, respec-
tively; both reported here as the % with respect to
maximum swirl level). The different combinations of
S1, S2 and AR tested led to a wide range of ﬂame pat-
terns. NOx emissions ranged from 15 ppm for deep
air-staging conditions (AR = 100%) up to 44 ppm
for fast-mixing ﬂames. Detailed in-ﬂame measure-
ments revealed signiﬁcant changes in the distribution
of species and temperatures inside the ﬂame when
AR, S1 or S2 were varied. The dynamic behaviour of
the ﬂames was analysed from time-resolved measure-
ments of pressure and OH∗chemiluminescence (ra-
diation at 310 nm), yielding widely different results:
some ﬂames were highly stable (AR < 60% and high
swirl levels), others displayed signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations
but pressure and radiation signals were uncorrelated
(AR = 60–80% or low swirl levels), whereas high
values of AR led to strong correlations of both signals
as a clear indication of the onset of thermo-acoustic
instabilities. The experimental characterisation of the
different combustion regimes has been reported in
[28]. No detailed description of the ﬂames is included
here; ﬁrstly, for brevity and, secondly, because it is not
essential for the purpose of this work. Exploiting the
knowledge gained from detailed measurements for
ﬂame monitoring from images was avoided on pur-
pose; whereas this might add ‘some physics’ and even
lead to improved performance, the procedures so de-
veloped would lose much of their generality. Hence,
the monitoring methods presented here do not use any
qualitative or quantitative piece of information not
contained in the very ﬂame images.
Flame images were captured using a CCD camera
(Panasonic WV-CL350) housed inside a water-cooled
jacket, installed in the furnace wall and oriented per-
pendicularly to the burner axis, so that a full picture
of the ﬂame can be obtained. The use of a pinhole
lens together with a purge of compressed air main-
tained the optics clean and cool. Monochrome im-
ages (8-bit greyscale, 320×240 pixels, exposure time
1/60 s) were recorded in a process computer through
a frame-grabber board (Data Translation DT3155).
Image records were collected for a total of 49 differ-
ent ﬂames, corresponding to different combinations
of S1, S2 and AR.
Since objective is the exploration of feasible meth-
ods for the monitoring of practical ﬂames, an essen-
tial feature of this study is the use of conventional
video cameras. This imposes some limitations on the
information that may be recorded. The radiation col-
lected by the CCD corresponds basically to the visible
range; for blue ﬂames, this includes chemilumines-
cent emission from different radicals: narrow bands
for CH∗, C∗
2, broadband radiation from CO∗
2 and
other minor contributions [29]. The camera performs
a line-of-sight integration, so that each pixel accumu-
lates contributions from points at different distances.
As explained below, representative images were ob-
tained by averaging several frames; hence, ﬂuctu-
ations due to turbulence or (much more important
in some cases) ﬂame oscillations are smoothed out.
Therefore, although there must be some connection
between the images recorded and the physics of the
ﬂame, the lack of resolution in wavelength, space and
time makes the derivation of some kind of combustion
variable from them very difﬁcult. Temporal or spatial
averaging can be a serious drawback for monitoring
methods based on physical parameters (e.g., derived
by pyrometry or chemiluminescence), but they are not
necessarily when the image is treated as a signature.
By no means does this imply that low resolution is a
positive feature. On the contrary, a better resolution
in wavelength, space or time might produce images
more representative of the process; but this would
require much more expensive and delicate instrumen-
tation (e.g., intensiﬁed CCD, ﬁlters, several cameras
for 3-D reconstruction, etc.). Furthermore, whereas a
wide range of conventional, inexpensive CCD cam-
eras are nowadays available that might provide im-
ages with better deﬁnition, the good results reported
with a monochrome, 340 × 240, 8-bit images serves
to demonstrate the low requirements in this respect of
the methods studied.
4. Feature extraction
Image analysis algorithms were used to derive a
wide range of parameters from the frames recorded at
each of the operating conditions tested. An image was
represented by two different functions (see Fig. 2):
• Intensity function: I(x,y) = 0–255, where x and
y are pixel coordinates.
• Presence function: I∗(x,y) = 0 when I(x,y) =
0 and = 1 when I(x,y) > 0.
The presence function was then used to calculate
various geometrical parameters: area, width distribu-
tion, maximum width, length, centre of geometry and
angle at the ﬂame root. Features related to luminosity
distribution were derived from the intensity function:
centre of mass, discrete moments, and a number of
statistical parameters derived from the intensity his-
togram, such as mean, variance, skewness or kurtosis.
Fig. 2 illustrates how some of those parameters are
derived from a ﬂame image.


--- Page 6 ---

514
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
Fig. 2. Extraction of some features from a ﬂame image.
The next step was to explore the sensitivity of the
different parameters to variations in operating condi-
tions. For this method to be valid, modiﬁcations in
burner settings must cause a meaningful change (ex-
ceeding its experimental uncertainty) in a particular
image feature. For brevity, only a few examples are
shown in Fig. 3 for variations in the swirl levels of
the two air streams. The intervals drawn at each data
point represent the dispersion about the mean value,
calculated over the full sequence of images recorded
in a test. Increasing swirl numbers led, as expected, to
more compact ﬂames with smaller area and length.
The ﬁnal objective is to identify the combustion
state from selected features of the ﬂame images; this
requires some sort of quantitative relationship among
burner settings and image features. With this purpose,
multiple linear regression was applied to the full set
of experimental results. The binary correlation coefﬁ-
cients were below ±0.5 in all cases, indicating weak
linear relationships. As shown in Fig. 3, even though
some variables seem to display well-deﬁned depen-
dences, their non-linearity justiﬁes the low correla-
tions obtained. Therefore, other types of functional
forms, speciﬁcally adapted to each feature, should
be used to represent adequately the relationships ob-
served. This is thought to be a signiﬁcant shortcoming
if the objective is to develop generalisable diagnostic
methods.
Some trials were also performed using artiﬁcial
neural networks as the ﬁtting algorithm, due to their
ability to handle multivariate, non-linear relation-
ships. Although this method provided reasonable re-
sults with some combinations of image features, the
capabilities for state identiﬁcation were poorer than
with the approaches explained in the following sec-
tions. The cause is thought to be the information loss
associated to the replacement of the full image by a
few representative parameters.
5. Identiﬁcation of combustion states with ANNs
Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) are mathemati-
cal algorithms inspired on the structure of biological
neural systems and the way information is processed
by the brain, with good capabilities to handle com-
plex information with unknown and highly non-linear
functional relationships among the different variables.


--- Page 7 ---

R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
515
Fig. 2. (continued)
Ref. [30] describes fundamental and application as-
pects of these methods.
Images are an outstanding case of complex data
sets, whose processing and/or interpretation has mo-
tivated great efforts during the last decades. As de-
scribed in [31], ANN-based algorithms can be very
effective for most of the tasks usually faced in im-
age processing. Object recognition based on features
is one of them; in fact, ANNs have been success-
fully used in a number of works speciﬁcally oriented
to identify combustion states (or, equivalently, to es-
timate performance parameters like pollutant or un-
burnt emissions) using as inputs some selected fea-
tures previously extracted [8,10,22,23]. As noted at
the end of previous section, this procedure was also
tested in this work, although its performance was not
as good as with the other methods reported.
Alternatively, all pixels forming an image can be
directly used as input data (i.e., the number of repre-
sentative features equals the number of pixels). The
main drawback is the large amount of data to be pro-
cessed; the advantage is that information loss due to
data reduction is avoided. The only experience found
in the open literature is the work by Allen et al. [9]
where combustion states were successfully identiﬁed
using a back-propagation ANN fed with the intensity
levels in 1024 pixels.
As noted in [31], self-organising feature maps
(SOFM, thereafter) are suitable for object recogni-
tion based on pixel data, and was the method selected
in this work. The so-called Kohonen maps are used
here, which have been widely applied for classiﬁca-
tion purposes, especially in pattern recognition [32,
33]. A SOFM consists of neurons organised on a reg-
ular low-dimensional grid. The neurons are connected
to adjacent ones by a neighbourhood relation dic-
tated by the topology of the map (hexagonal in this
case). Each neuron in the map contains a weight vec-
tor with the same dimension than the input vectors
and represents a ‘pattern’ ﬂame image. During train-
ing the input vectors are compared with that of each
neuron by calculating a distance (Euclidean in this
case) and the weight vectors of the closest neuron
(winner neuron) and its neighbours are modiﬁed ac-
cording to the so-called Kohonen learning rule. This
process is iterated many times so that the distances


--- Page 8 ---

516
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
Fig. 3. Effect of swirl settings on ﬂame area and length.
AR = 75% in all cases.
between the input vectors and the winner neurons and
the distances among neighbour neurons get smaller;
the ﬁnal results is a set of ‘pattern images’ that are
ordered in the map according to their visual features.
The interested reader can ﬁnd more detailed descrip-
tions in the references quoted. Once the SOFM has
been trained, an ‘unknown ﬂame’ representing an
‘unknown state’ is classiﬁed by the ‘winner neuron’
when it is shown to the SOFM; identiﬁcation with re-
spect to ‘known states’ consists in selecting among
the ﬂames included in the database used for training
the case yielding the same winner neuron.
5.1. Image pre-processing
Different values of the three burner settings (S1,
S2, AR) were combined to yield a total of 49 dif-
ferent combustion states. Sequences of 100 images
(greyscale, 320 × 240 pixels) were captured for each
of the tests. As a previous stage, the images were pre-
processed in order to reduce the size of the input vec-
tor as much as possible without loosing information
as well as to strengthen some relevant characteristics.
The steps followed were:
1. Average: All images recorded for a single test
were averaged. This step is not only very useful
for data reduction (99%) but also to ﬁlter out ﬂuc-
tuations among different frames, resulting in a
more representative image of the ﬂame. This was
ensured by averaging over 100 images, although
most probably a much lower number would suf-
ﬁce.
2. Contrast: Luminosity values were normalised, so
that the darkest pixel of the image was set to 255
(white in greyscale) and the brightest to 0 (black).
This operation should not be interpreted as an
information loss because absolute luminosity de-
pends on many factors (CCD calibration, lens,
attenuation along the optical path, etc.) and its
consideration could make the procedure highly
dependent on the particular setup.
3. Segmentation (thresholding): The ﬂame area was
delimited by setting to 0 all pixels with intensity
<60.
4. Trimming: After completing the previous opera-
tions, large areas of the image consisted of black
pixels. In order to discard useless data, the ﬂame
images were trimmed by a rectangle built from
the disjunction of the smallest rectangles enclos-
ing non-black parts of the individual images.
Such rectangular area was deﬁned at the training
stage, and also used afterwards to trim any new
image. As a result, images were reduced from
320 × 240 to 170 × 200 pixels.
5.2. Conﬁguration and training of the SOFM
Initially, the topology and number of cells of the
SOFM need to be deﬁned. For this application, a 3-
by-10 map might be suitable to represent the matrix
of test cases: 3 adjustable burner settings and a max-
imum of 10 different values for each of them. How-
ever, a larger map was preferred to favour a clear topo-
logical isolation among different groups of ﬂames,
and a 10-by-10 map was ﬁnally used.
As a ﬁrst step, the ANN was trained with im-
ages captured in 49 different combustion regimes.
The SOFM was trained for 1000 epochs. In each of
these epochs, the distance between a particular ﬂame
image and every neuron in the SOFM (deﬁned by a
set of weights) was calculated. The neuron yielding
the shortest distance was marked as the winner and
the weights of all neurons in the neighbourhood of the
winner were updated using the Kohonen rule. As a re-
sult of the training process, each of the 100 neurons
ends with an associated ‘pattern’ ﬂame image.


--- Page 9 ---

R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
517
Fig. 4. Pattern ﬂame images associated to the SOFM neu-
rons.
Fig. 5. Swirl level in primary stream, S1, associated to the
neurons of the SOFM (greyscale: white for S1 = 100%, and
black for 0%).
5.3. Topological classiﬁcation
Fig. 4 displays the pattern images associated to
the different neurons in a 10-by-10 map. This repre-
sentation serves also to illustrate the way in which
the SOFM operates: images are grouped according
to their degree of similitude. It should be noted that
although the neurons are represented equidistant in
the network, actually they are not. The white lines
have been drawn on the map to indicate the longest
distances between neighbour neurons. Each subgroup
so obtained includes images with evident similarities
among them and is characterised by patterns that are
appreciably different from those of other groups.
Fig. 6. Swirl level in secondary stream, S2, associated to
each of the neurons of the SOFM (greyscale: white for
S2 = 100%, and black for 0%).
Fig. 7. NOx emissions associated to each of the neurons
of the SOFM (greyscale: white indicates the highest value,
44 ppm, and black the lowest, 14 ppm).
A basic assumption behind the use of images for
the diagnostic of combustion states is that geomet-
rical/luminous properties maintain some relationship
with operating conditions or system performance. The
type of classiﬁcation provided by Kohonen maps can
be particularly useful to evaluate this hypothesis. With
this purpose, numerical values were assigned to each
of the 100 neurons, according to the following pro-
cedure. The parameters (burner settings, emissions)
characterising each of the 49 combustion tests were
transferred to the corresponding winner neuron. An
interpolation procedure was applied to assign numer-
ical values to those neurons without an associated
‘real’ combustion regime, using the two coordinates,
V and H, deﬁning its location in the map (Fig. 4)
as independent variables. Figs. 5–7 display the re-


--- Page 10 ---

518
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
Table 1
Measured NOx emission for the neurons in the bottom-left
zone of Fig. 4 with an associated real ﬂame
Neuron coordinates
Measured
NOx (ppm)
V
H
1
1
37.6
1
1
37.9
1
1
38.2
1
3
35.8
1
4
34.4
2
5
33.4
3
1
41.5
3
2
35.8
4
3
22.7
4
5
22.8
sults obtained in terms of the swirl levels in the two
air streams and NOx emissions, respectively. The fol-
lowing example describes how this assignation pro-
cedure was implemented. The location of the neurons
in Figs. 4–7 will be described with the coordinates
V and H (both in the range 1–10). Let’s take the
image at V = 2, H = 4 in Fig. 4; like the other im-
ages shown in Fig. 4, it does not correspond to a real
ﬂame but was created internally by the SOFM algo-
rithm from the set of 49 images used for training. In
a subsequent stage, the SOFM was used to assign a
neuron to each of the 49 ﬂames. Table 1 displays the
results: some of the neurons were associated to a real
ﬂame image (or, in a few cases, to several, like neu-
ron V = 1, H = 1), but others were not (e.g., V = 2,
H = 4). Those with an associated real ﬂame were
assigned its measured NOx emission. For the other
neurons, a NOx value was calculated by linear inter-
polation from actual measured emissions assigned to
neighbour neurons, using the coordinates V and H
as independent variables. As a result, a NOx concen-
tration of 37.6 ppm was calculated for the neuron at
V = 2, H = 4; this method enabled assigning a NOx
value to all 100 neurons as shown in Fig. 7. An equiv-
alent procedure was applied to build Figs. 5 and 6 for
S1 and S2, respectively.
As shown in Fig. 5, the different degrees of swirl
in the primary air become automatically grouped in
the SOFM. Since other burner settings (S2 and AR)
were also varied, ﬂames with the same S1 can display
widely different aspects, which explain that similar
S1 values can be found in different regions of Fig. 5.
Similar comments are applicable to Fig. 6. This ‘auto-
matic’ grouping of cases with similar burner settings
is, obviously, due to the fact that precisely those set-
tings determine the aerodynamics and mixing pattern
in the ﬂame, and therefore its visual appearance.
Fig. 8. Average ﬂame image recorded with the burner ad-
justed at AR = 50%, S1 = 100%, S2 = 50%; measured
NOx emission was 37.7 ppm.
5.4. Estimation of NOx emissions using ﬂame
images
An alternative viewpoint is to evaluate whether
images and NOx emissions (two different results of
the combustion process) display some correlation.
This can be observed in Fig. 7, displaying the NOx
emissions assigned to the 100 neurons of the SOFM.
The different emission levels are noticeably grouped
over the map, with gradual transitions between one
neuron and its neighbours. Since this distribution is
directly obtained from the distribution generated by
the Kohonen map according to image properties, the
close relationship among both aspects becomes ap-
parent.
Such strong correlation might be exploited to in-
fer the NOx emission of a particular ﬂame using the
image as the only input. With that purpose, a set of
42 new image records (different from those used for
training) were classiﬁed using the SOFM developed;
i.e., each of them was assigned to one of the neurons
in the 10-by-10 map. The NOx emission estimated
for that ﬂame was the value previously assigned to its
winner neuron, as shown in Fig. 7. For example, the
ﬂame image shown in Fig. 8 was recorded for AR =
50%, S1 = 100%, S2 = 50%, and the measured NOx
emission was 37.7 ppm. Classiﬁcation with SOFM
yielded as winner the neuron at V = 2, H = 4. As
explained above, no measured NOx was available for
this neuron, and the value assigned by interpolation
was 37.6 ppm. Therefore this was the value of NOx
predicted from the image in this case, very close to the
actual value of 37.7 ppm. Actual NOx emissions and
estimations with this method are compared in Fig. 9.
A fairly good agreement is obtained, with deviations
<3 ppm in most cases; in particular, high- and low-
NOx regimes are perfectly distinguished.


--- Page 11 ---

R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
519
Fig. 9. Comparison between predicted and measured NOx emissions. Predictions based on classiﬁcation with SOFM.
This is thought to be a most relevant result for
practical applications, as the good correlation ob-
tained among images and NOx emissions might en-
able the development of advanced diagnostic methods
by using ﬂame images to estimate NOx emissions
(i.e., a ‘virtual’ NOx sensor). This could open new
possibilities for the monitoring of emissions from in-
dividual ﬂames in multi-burner furnaces, or to greatly
reduce the response time of gas analysers down to the
levels acceptable for control purposes.
Alternatively, the Kohonen map can just be used
to identify the combustion state with respect to oth-
ers previously known (used at the training stage). The
process of assigning a winner neuron to a new in-
put image yields a particular location in the map that
can coincide with a particular combustion regime, or
can be used to ﬁnd the most similar regimes as those
located at short distances. The comparison between
estimated and actual NOx emissions serves also as
an indication of the good accuracy of the SOFM as
a ﬂame identiﬁcation tool.
6. A probabilistic classiﬁcation method
The result of most identiﬁcation methods (e.g.,
SOFM) is the state, among those previously known,
that most probably corresponds to the unknown state
being processed. A shortcoming is that the reliabil-
ity of this result is not qualiﬁed. It would be most
desirable, for example, to obtain some information
about the degree of coincidence with respect to the
state assigned or, if the unknown ﬂame displays some
similarity with several states, the relative probabilities
associated to each of them. This would enable, among
others, the detection of off-design operations, evaluat-
ing how reliable is the identiﬁcation or combining the
result with other sources of information.
A different approach has been applied for the clas-
siﬁcation of ﬂame images that provides information
on the probability of coincidence with each of the
combustion states previously known. This procedure
is inspired on the cepstral analysis techniques, com-
monly used for speech recognition [34]. Although
sound records are of a type different from image data,
both can be equally transformed into covariance ma-
trices, as required in this kind of methods.
6.1. Image pre-processing
Ten black and white images (320 × 240 pixels
each) were recorded for each of the combustion
regimes tested. Each of them is obtained by averaging
ten individual frames in the sequence captured.
As a ﬁrst step, Principal Component Analysis
(PCA, thereafter) was applied for data reduction.
Given the large amount of data needed to represent
the images, minimising the size of the input vectors
entails signiﬁcant beneﬁts, especially when real-time
performance is required. PCA is a convenient method
for image processing, because it allows reducing the
dimension of the input space while maintaining much


--- Page 12 ---

520
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
of the original structure of the input images. It has
been used extensively in pattern recognition [35] and
has shown to be an effective method for the analysis
of ﬂame images [17,20].
Images are represented by a matrix I of dimen-
sion 320× 240. Previous to PCA, I is transformed by
rearranging image blocks into columns. First, I is di-
vided into p square blocks (if necessary, padded with
zeros) of s ×s pixels; second, a new matrix X with s2
rows and p columns is formed by ﬁlling each column
with the values in one of the blocks. Finally, PCA is
applied to derive a lower-dimensional representation.
Given a matrix X, and the desired new dimension, q,
the PCA algorithm yields the matrix M (q rows and
s2 columns) and the vector B (q components) needed
to obtain a matrix Y (q rows and p columns), accord-
ing to
(1)
Yij =
s2

k=1
MikXkj + Bi,
i = 1,...,p.
Y, M and B can be taken, therefore, as an alternative
representation of the original matrix X. A parametric
study on the inﬂuence of s (in the range 5–18) and
q (from 5 to 20) yielded as the optimal combination
s = 14, q = 12. Finally, Y , M and B were put to-
gether in a new matrix Z, with q rows and p + s2 + 1
columns. Cepstral analysis techniques were applied
on the matrices Z. The corresponding covariance ma-
trix, Z_COV, is calculated as
(2)
(Z_COV)ij =
s

k=1
ZikZt
kj.
A library of covariance matrices was created by
calculating Z_COV for nine of the images stored for
each of the N combustion regimes tested; therefore,
each combustion state is characterised by N1 = 9
different data sets. The degree of similarity among
different images was compared by calculating a ‘dis-
tance’ between their respective covariance matrices.
The parameter chosen was the arithmetic harmonic
sphericity (AHS) distance, deﬁned for two generic
matrices A and B of dimension m as
D(A,B) = log10

Tr

AB−1
Tr

BA−1
(3)
−2log10 m.
The important data reduction rate achieved should
be noted, since only q2 = 144 data contained in
Z_COV are ﬁnally used to evaluate an image, instead
of 76800 values in the original matrix I.
6.2. Probability calculation and pattern selection
Classiﬁcation is performed by calculating the
probability of an unknown ‘test ﬂame’ (xi) to be
like each of the N ‘pattern ﬂames’ in the library
(yj ), P(xi ∼yj). In general, each ‘test ﬂame’ is
characterised by different ‘test images,’ xi,n with
n = 1,...,N2, so the probability is averaged over all
of them:
(4)
P(xi ∼yj) =
N2
n=1 P(xi,n ∼yj)
N2
.
P(xi,n ∼yj) is calculated as the probability for a
particular ‘test image,’ xi,n, of ‘test ﬂame’ xi to have
a null AHS distance from the matrices characteris-
ing a ‘pattern ﬂame’ yj . Since each ‘pattern ﬂame’
is deﬁned by N1 ‘pattern images’ yj,m, N1 different
distances can be calculated. The average of the AHS
distances between the test image (xi,n) and each of
the N1 ‘pattern images’ was taken as the representa-
tive value:
(5)
D(xi,n,yj) =
N1
m=1 D(xi,n,yj,m)
N1
.
So, the set of N1 ‘pattern images’ is treated as
an ensemble of data sets providing a statistical rep-
resentation of a speciﬁc combustion regime; this is a
relevant feature of the method and provides the ro-
bustness required to handle ‘noisy’ data (associated,
for example, to turbulent ﬂuctuations in industrial
ﬂames). This is represented statistically by a Gaus-
sian probability distribution, fyj (d), for the AHS dis-
tance: different occurrences of the same combustion
regime are expected to provide an ensemble of AHS
distances with ∼0 mean and a variance associated to
this particular regime. The width of the distribution
is estimated from the standard deviation, σyj , of the
N1(N1 −1)/2 distances calculated among pairs of the
N1 pattern images available.
The probability of a ‘test image,’ xi,n, to belong to
a particular pattern, yj , is estimated as fyj(d) for d =
D(xi,n,yj). This is illustrated in Fig. 10 for two hy-
pothetical patterns y1 and y2; if the functions fy1(d)
and fy2(d) (with respective widths σy1 and σy2) are
centred respectively at D(xi,n,y1) and D(xi,n,y2),
the probability sought is directly obtained as the in-
tercept with the ordinates axis. This example clearly
shows that not only the mean value must be con-
sidered, but also the width of the distribution. Even
though the average AHS distance is shorter for pat-
tern y1, the most probable combustion regime is y2.
Pattern y1 is represented by a very narrow distribu-
tion, and the probability decays rapidly even at short
AHS distances; on the contrary, pattern y2 is charac-
terised by a wider range of covariance matrices, and
the probability of actually representing an unknown
state maintains signiﬁcant values up to relatively high
AHS distances.
Fig. 11 displays the classiﬁcation tests performed
for two of the ﬂames. The test case on the left (#5)


--- Page 13 ---

R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
521
Fig. 10. Evaluation of the probability that a test ﬂame xn corresponds with pattern ﬂames y1 and y2.
corresponds to the image shown in Fig. 8, already
mentioned in a previous section. The intercept of the
Gaussians to the reference patterns, fyj (0), yields a
measure of the probability of the test image to belong
to that particular combustion regime. In some cases
(Fig. 11), several of the reference cases give a non-
negligible probability. To facilitate the interpretation,
the results were normalised so that the sum for all pat-
terns is 100%:
(6)
P(xi,n ∼yj) =
fy,j (0)
N1
m=1 fy,m(0)
.
For example, test image #5 yielded non-zero prob-
abilities for three of the ﬂames (see Fig. 11 and Ta-
ble 2). Since the highest probability was obtained for
the correct pattern, the identiﬁcation was successful
in this case. It should also be noted that ﬂames #6
and #7 were also very similar, because variations in
swirl number of secondary air in the range 0–50%
had little inﬂuence on the aerodynamics of the ﬂame
for S1 = 100%, as evidenced by the very similar NOx
emissions measured for the three ﬂames.
6.3. Classiﬁcation tests
This identiﬁcation method was applied to the same
N = 49 combustion regimes considered in the previ-
ous section. N1 = 9 images were used to generate a
set of covariance matrices for each of those ‘pattern
ﬂames’; an additional image (N2 = 1), recorded in the
same operating conditions, was stored for each of the
49 cases, and then used as ‘test images’ to evaluate the
performance of the method. Fig. 12 displays the cal-
culated probabilities, P(xi ∼yj), that a particular test
image, xi, corresponds to pattern yj . A fully success-
ful identiﬁcation would be obtained if the probability
is 0 if i ̸= j and 100 when i = j. Fig. 12 can be inter-
preted in two complementary ways:
• The outcome of the identiﬁcation process is that
‘test image’ xi corresponds to the combustion
regime, yj , for which P(xi ∼yj) is maximum.
The results shown in Fig. 12 indicate that iden-
tiﬁcation has been successful in 32 out of 49
cases. Nevertheless, it should be noted that all
wrong identiﬁcations occurred among very simi-
lar ﬂames, in most cases with probabilities for the
winner pattern that are only slightly higher than
those obtained for the correct one. This is an im-
portant advantage of this method, as the output
not only includes the most probable pattern but
also informs about similarities with other ﬂames.
• The absolute value of the probability obtained for
the winner pattern can be taken as an indication
of the reliability of this result. Low probabilities
can be due, as shown in Fig. 12, to the similarity
between some reference cases. Otherwise, a low
value could indicate, for example, that the un-
known state is out of the range represented by
the pattern ﬂames, or that some deviation has oc-
curred in the combustion equipment.
Similarly to the exercise reported with the SOFM,
this identiﬁcation tool might be used to estimate
some relevant parameters of the combustion process.
Fig. 13 displays the NOx estimations obtained by
assigning the value measured for the corresponding
winner patterns to each of the test cases. The co-
incidence is almost perfect in most cases; even in
the cases of wrong identiﬁcations, the deviation is


--- Page 14 ---

522
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
Fig. 11. Classiﬁcation tests for two of the test ﬂames (arbitrary units).
very small, further conﬁrming the similarities be-
tween the ﬂames with wrong or ambiguous identiﬁ-
cations. Signiﬁcant differences are only observed in
the regimes with lowest NOx emissions, correspond-


--- Page 15 ---

R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
523
Table 2
Results of the classiﬁcation procedure for test image #5
Pattern ﬂame
AR (%)
S1 (%)
S2 (%)
NOx (ppm)
Probability (%)
#5
50
100
50
37.6
49.9
#6
50
100
25
37.9
25.2
#7
50
100
0
38.2
24.9
Fig. 12. P(xi ∼yj ) estimated by image identiﬁcation for the 49 ﬂames.
ing to the highest air staging ratios (AR = 90–100%).
As previously noted, those ﬂames displayed thermo-
acoustic oscillations, which can result in wider vari-
ability among ﬂame images and, hence, in less certain
identiﬁcations.
6.4. Combination with other classiﬁcation criteria
As already noted, an advantage of this approach is
that the result obtained is not limited to a yes/no an-
swer, but also quantiﬁes the degree of similarity with
respect to all the patterns available. This can be fur-
ther exploited, for example, to combine this type of
diagnostic with other potential sources of informa-
tion.
This possibility is illustrated by using NOx emis-
sion as a representative feature of the different com-
bustion states. Similar steps were followed in order
to obtain a classiﬁcation based only in NOx emis-
sions. The probability distributions associated to the
‘pattern ﬂames’ consisted of a Gaussian function with
the measured NOx emission as the mean value, and a
standard deviation representing the experimental un-
certainty (⩽2 ppm, as estimated from repeatability
tests). A procedure similar to that just described was
followed to estimate P ′(xi ∼yj), using the differ-
ence between average NOx emissions of the unknown
and pattern cases was used instead of the mean AHS
distance. The results with this procedure are presented
in Fig. 14, in terms of P ′(xi ∼yj). These results
demonstrate that the NOx criterion is clearly insuf-
ﬁcient to distinguish one particular ﬂame among all
cases included in the test set. Success rate is very
low and only 6 out of 49 ﬂames yielded probabilities
>20% for the correct pattern. Hence, NOx emission
can help in classifying different regimes but this crite-
rion alone is not a reliable method to identify ﬂames.
The results obtained with the two classiﬁcation
methods (images and NOx) can be combined together
by multiplying the probability matrices. The results
are normalised to 100% and shown in Fig. 15. Only
slight differences can be observed between Figs. 12
and 15, due to the ambiguous predictions obtained


--- Page 16 ---

524
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
Fig. 13. Comparison between predicted and measured NOx emissions.
Fig. 14. P ′(xi ∼yj ) estimated by comparing NOx emissions for the 49 ﬂames.
with the NOx criterion. Nevertheless, all the changes
were in the correct direction and some improvement
can be seen in many of the probabilities along the
diagonal. In particular, the superposition of both cri-
teria reduced off-diagonal probabilities for test ﬂames
C11–13 and C15–17. In these and other cases, the


--- Page 17 ---

R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
525
Fig. 15. P ′′(xi ∼yj ) = P(xi ∼yj )∗P ′(xi ∼yj ), for the 49 ﬂames.
NOx criterion contributed with different weights that
ﬁnally led to increase the conﬁdence of the prediction,
or even to a correct identiﬁcation.
As already noted, NOx emission is not a distinc-
tive feature among most of the ﬂames contained in
this set of cases. Nevertheless, it serves to illustrate
a general procedure that could be applied using other
features to distinguish among cases with similar im-
age patterns. If that additional feature displays clear
variations for the cases where image classiﬁcation is
ambiguous, the combined probability would help to
discard the wrong pattern (if there is no feature that
displays signiﬁcant variations in dubious cases, prob-
ably those combustion regimes are so similar that a
wrong classiﬁcation does not entail any practical con-
sequence).
7. Application to other combustion situations
The potential of monitoring methods should not be
evaluated from the results in a particular application
but strongly depends on their capabilities to handle
different situations. Moreover, ideally, they should be
applicable without needing a costly process of ad-hoc
design and adjustment and should avoid as much as
possible the use of speciﬁc parameters and interpreta-
tion criteria that can be adequate for one particular ap-
plication but not for many others. Due to the nature of
the methods reported here, it is not possible to demon-
strate their generality on physical grounds; although
there is a relationship among visual and physical char-
acteristics of the ﬂames, it involves many different
physico-chemical processes that are not well under-
stood yet and whose role strongly depends on the
particular system. However, some insight in this re-
spect can be gained from experiences with other types
of ﬂames.
A preliminary version of the SOFM method was
also applied to a commercial oil-ﬁred burner with a
nominal capacity of 60 kW. The ﬂames in this case
were yellow and highly radiating, with characteris-
tics (physical and visual) very different from those
of the blue ﬂames described. In particular, the na-
ture and origin of emission spectra are expected to be
deeply different: dominated by black-body radiation
from soot particles, with a much smaller contribu-
tion due to chemiluminescence of excited radicals.
An exercise similar to that reported in Section 5.4
was performed to estimate NOx concentration from
ﬂame images. NOx emissions varied in the range 53–
94 ppm for the ﬂames analysed; the estimation error
was within ±5 ppm in practically all cases, very sim-
ilar in relative terms to the results shown in Fig. 9.
The probabilistic method was used for the identi-
ﬁcation of lean-premixed ﬂames. The facility was a
dump combustor with an axial swirler (60◦vanes) in
the mixture injection duct and was operated at a ther-


--- Page 18 ---

526
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
Fig. 16. Comparison between predictions and measurements. NOx and CO emissions have been normalised by characteristic
maximum values (50 and 3000 ppm, respectively).
mal input of 33 kW with natural gas. Equivalence ra-
tio was varied in the range 0.57–1.0, and the objective
was to identify the operating conditions using ﬂame
images as the only input. The method was applied ex-
actly as described above, initially developed for the
diffusion ﬂame, without any adaptation work speciﬁc
to the new facility. The visual and physical charac-
teristics of the ﬂames were, obviously, very different
from those of the air-staged burner. Fig. 16 compares
actual and predicted values for equivalence ratio (ER),
NOx and CO emissions, obtained in an identiﬁca-
tion exercise based exclusively on ﬂame images. Each
test ﬂame was assigned the parameters measured in a
previous test campaign for the pattern ﬂame yielding
the highest probability. Signiﬁcant deviations resulted
only for some CO estimations, although only in cases
of relatively high emissions (>1000 ppm) where even
experimental repeatability is rather low. In general,
the quality of the predictions is considered satisfac-
tory, suggesting that this technique offers also a good
potential for the monitoring of premixed ﬂames.
Background radiation was easily removed in all
the cases explored by image thresholding. However,
this issue might become more critical in combustion
chambers with very hot and radiative walls and could
require a careful selection of threshold values or re-
moving a part of the incoming radiation by low-pass
optical ﬁltering. For the burners studied in this work,
image databases included ∼3–4 different values for
each of the burner settings (e.g., 49 cases were char-
acterised, including simultaneous variations in 3 inde-
pendent burner settings). Nevertheless, a wider study
would be needed to establish the minimum amount of
information needed to apply this type of methods.
8. Conclusions and ﬁnal remarks
The potential of ﬂame imaging as a monitoring
tool has been investigated through the application of
different processing methods to an image database
generated in a model industrial burner. Similarly
to other works, parametric analyses conﬁrmed that
variations in operating conditions affect signiﬁcantly
some image characteristics. However, much better
results were obtained with two other approaches treat-
ing the image as a whole. The main differences and
novelties with respect to other works in this ﬁeld are:
• The methods were conceived as general proce-
dures, in contrast with feature-based techniques
which always need adaptation to particular situ-
ations in terms of feature selection, development
of empirical correlations among image features
and combustion parameters as well as deﬁnition
of the most suitable functional forms.
• They have been evaluated in widely different ap-
plications. To the authors’ knowledge, no previ-


--- Page 19 ---

R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
527
ous work in this ﬁeld reports attempts to apply
and evaluate other methods in more than one sit-
uation.
• The methods proposed are suitable to any kind
of image. The sensor can be a conventional CCD
camera, or any other imaging technique such as
planar laser techniques. Moreover, the perfor-
mance might still improve, as the information
generated with advanced diagnostic techniques is
usually more intimately related to ﬂame proper-
ties and displays stronger gradients and sensitiv-
ity to operating conditions than the luminosity in
the visible range.
One of the methods exploits the good capabilities
of self-organising feature maps for pattern classiﬁca-
tion (and, therefore, identiﬁcation). Although these
techniques are conceived for qualitative classiﬁca-
tion, values for the relevant parameters can be readily
obtained through the assignation/interpolation proce-
dure proposed. The second method uses an approach
similar to those used for speaker recognition. In this
case, principal component analysis demonstrated to
be an effective data-reduction technique. A proba-
bilistic approach was followed to quantify the degree
of similarity of an ‘unknown’ image with all reference
patterns; the representation of patterns by a set of im-
ages is thought to be a salient feature of this method,
as it provides the robustness required to account for
the variability inherent to each combustion state. Both
procedures are completely general; none of the oper-
ations performed for image analysis (except, perhaps,
a part of the pre-processing) was speciﬁc to this par-
ticular combustion rig. Besides being always a valu-
able virtue, the generality of the method greatly alle-
viates one of the main potential drawbacks of empiri-
cal approaches, which is the invalidation of the empir-
ical model due to changes in system behaviour. The
ﬂame classiﬁers described can be designed to adapt
to new situations (e.g., fuel switching) by updating
the reference patterns (even during normal operation)
and with little intervention of highly-skilled person-
nel.
The methods described were also applied to
other types of ﬂames, including an oil burner and a
lean-premixed combustor, yielding results of qual-
ity similar to those presented for the gas diffusion
ﬂame. It is important to note that these techniques
have been applied, without speciﬁc adaptations for
the different cases, to widely different ﬂames: oil-/
gas-ﬁred, stable/pulsating, diffusion/premixed, fast-
mixing/staged, attached/detached. The good results
obtained in all cases are thought to strongly support
the generalisable nature of the approaches presented.
This must be considered, however, an empirical con-
clusion, as it is not possible to justify on physical
grounds the existence of a deﬁned relationship among
visible images and ﬂame characteristics for the gen-
eral case.
This kind of techniques is thought to enable the de-
velopment of advanced monitoring methods in prac-
tical combustion systems, either for the identiﬁcation
of ﬂame state (e.g., control applications, anomaly de-
tection, etc.) or as a virtual sensor for the prediction
of relevant parameters such as NOx emissions. Com-
pared to monitoring based on ﬂue gas analysis, the
techniques described offer, besides a much richer di-
agnostic, the possibility to monitor individual ﬂames
in multiburner chambers and a dramatic reduction in
response time (evaluation times were 0.9 s for the
SOFM and 0.25 s for cepstral analysis), very relevant
for control purposes.
Acknowledgments
Financial support for R. Hernández during his
PhD studies was provided by the FPU programme of
the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science. The
authors are most grateful to A. Sanz and L. Ojeda for
their valuable help with the experimental tasks as well
as to R. Ichaso and M. Artigas for their contribution
in the early stages of this study. This work was partly
funded by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Sci-
ence (grant ENE2007-63641) and by the European
Commission (contract ENK5-CT2002-000662, ‘Al-
ternative fuels for industrial gas turbines’—AFTUR).
References
[1] K. Kohse-Höinghaus, R.S. Barlow, M. Aldén, J. Wol-
frum, Proc. Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 89–123.
[2] N. Docquier, S. Candel, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 28
(2002) 107–150.
[3] J.-B. Michel, C. Champinot, J. Dugue, State of the art
on emerging combustion control sensors, in: Sixth In-
ternational Conference on Technologies and Combus-
tion for a Clean Environment, Oporto, 2001.
[4] M. Shimoda, A. Sugano, T. Kimura, Y. Watanabe, K.
Ishiyama, IEEE Trans. Energy Convers. 5 (1990) 640–
645.
[5] Y. Huang, Y. Yan, G. Riley, Measurement 28 (2000)
175–183.
[6] G. Lu, G. Gilabert, Y. Yang, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 15
(2005) 194–200.
[7] M. Ruão, M. Costa, M.G. Carvalho, Fuel 78 (1999)
1283–1292.
[8] W. Tao, H. Burkhardt, Part. Part. Syst. Charact. 12
(1995) 87–94.
[9] M.G. Allen, C.T. Butler, S.A. Johnson, E.Y. Lo, F.
Russo, Combust. Flame 94 (1993) 205–214.


--- Page 20 ---

528
R. Hernández, J. Ballester / Combustion and Flame 155 (2008) 509–528
[10] G. Lu, Y. Yan, Y. Huang, A. Reed, Meas. Control 32
(1999) 164–168.
[11] N. Kurihara, M. Nishikawa, A. Watanabe, Y. Satoh,
K. Ohtsuka, H. Miyagaki, T. Higashi, T. Masai, IEEE
Trans. Energy Convers. EC-1 (1986) 99–103.
[12] J. Wu, M. Zhang, H. Fan, W. Fan, Y. Zhou, Chem. Eng.
Sci. 59 (2004) 1473–1479.
[13] J.S. Marques, P.M. Jorge, Signal Process. 80 (2000)
1577–1589.
[14] M.G.A. Rahman, J.R. Gibbins, A.K. Forrest, Combus-
tion in power station boilers—Advanced monitoring
using imaging, Report No. Coal R264 DTI/Pub URN
04/1797, 2004.
[15] W.B. Baek, S.J. Lee, S.Y. Baeg, C.H. Cho, Flame image
processing and analysis for optimal coal ﬁring of ther-
mal power plant, in: IEEE International Symposium on
Industrial Electronics Proceedings, 2001, pp. 928–931.
[16] A. Tuntrakoon, S. Kuntanapreeda, Image-Based Flame
Control of a Premixed Gas Burner Using Fuzzy Logics,
Foundations of Intelligent Systems, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin/Heidelberg, 2003, 2871/2003, pp. 673–677.
[17] H. Yu, J.F. MacGregor, Am. Inst. Chem. Eng. J. 50
(2004) 1474–1483.
[18] Y. Yan, G. Lu, M. Colechin, Fuel 81 (2002) 647–656.
[19] Y. Huang, Y. Yan, G. Lu, A. Reed, Meas. Sci. Tech-
nol. 10 (1999) 726–733.
[20] D. Sbarbaro, O. Farias, Z. Zawadsky, Combust. Flame
132 (2003) 591–595.
[21] H. Burkhardt, L. Oest, W. Tao, Vision-Guided Flame
Control, SENSOR 95 Kongreß, 1995.
[22] F. Wang, X.J. Wang, Z.Y. Ma, J.H. Yan, Y. Chi, C.Y.
Wei, M.J. Ni, K.F. Cen, Fuel 81 (2002) 2113–2120.
[23] H. Bae, S. Kim, B.-H. Wang, M.H. Lee, F. Hrashima,
IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 53 (2006) 338–348.
[24] N. Docquier, F. Lacas, S. Candel, Proc. Combust. Inst.
29 (2002) 139–145.
[25] T.M. Muruganandam, B.-H. Kim, M.R. Morrell, V.
Nori, M. Patel, B.W. Romig, J.M. Seitzman, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 1601–1609.
[26] Y. Hardalupas, M. Orain, C.S. Panoutsos, A.M.K.P.
Taylor, J. Olofsson, H. Seyfried, M. Richter, J. Hult,
M. Aldén, Chemiluminescence sensor for local equiv-
alence ratio of reacting mixtures of liquid fuel vapour
in air, in: D. Pollard, P.A. Pilavachi (Eds.), Proceed-
ings of the 1st International Conference on Industrial
Gas Turbine Technologies, July 10–11, 2003, Brussels,
Belgium.
[27] V.N. Nori, J.M. Seitzman, Chemiluminescence mea-
surements and modelling in syngas, methane and Jet-A
fuelled combustors, in: 45th Aerospace Sciences Meet-
ing and Exhibit, AIAA-2007-0466, January 2007.
[28] A. Sanz, J. Ballester, M.A. González, Exp. Therm.
Fluid Sci. 32 (2008) 776–790.
[29] A.G. Gaydon, The Spectroscopy of Flames, Chapman
& Hall, London, 1974.
[30] S. Haykin, Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foun-
dation, Macmillan/IEEE Press, New York, 1994.
[31] M. Egmont-Petersen, D. de Ridder, H. Handels, Pattern
Recognit. 35 (2002) 2279–2301.
[32] R.F. Molz, P.M. Engel, F.G. Moraes, L. Torres, M.
Robert, A fast prototyping neural network model for
image classiﬁcation, in: Proceedings of the XV Con-
ference on Design of Circuit and Integrated Systems
(DCIS), vol. 1, 2000, pp. 836–841.
[33] L. Franco, A. Treves, A neural network facial expres-
sion recognition system using unsupervised local pro-
cessing, in: Proceedings of the Second International
Symposium on Image and Signal Processing and Anal-
ysis (ISPA 01), 2001, pp. 628–632.
[34] J.P. Campbell, Proc. IEEE 85 (1997) 1437–1462.
[35] M.A. Vicente, O. Reinoso, C. Pérez, J.A. Sabater, J.A.
Azorín, Recognition of 3D objects by PCA analysis (in
Spanish), in: XXIII Jornadas de Automática, Tenerife,
2002.
