
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
www.elsevier.com/locate/combustﬂame
Investigations of swirl ﬂames in a gas turbine
model combustor
I. Flow ﬁeld, structures, temperature, and
species distributions
P. Weigand, W. Meier ∗, X.R. Duan 1, W. Stricker, M. Aigner
Institut für Verbrennungstechnik, Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR), Pfaffenwaldring 38,
D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany
Received 22 November 2004; received in revised form 2 June 2005; accepted 8 July 2005
Available online 21 September 2005
Abstract
A gas turbine model combustor for swirling CH4/air diffusion ﬂames at atmospheric pressure with good optical
access for detailed laser measurements is discussed. Three ﬂames with thermal powers between 7.6 and 34.9 kW
and overall equivalence ratios between 0.55 and 0.75 were investigated. These behave differently with respect to
combustion instabilities: Flame A burned stably, ﬂame B exhibited pronounced thermoacoustic oscillations, and
ﬂame C, operated near the lean extinction limit, was subject to sudden liftoff with partial extinction and reanchor-
ing. One aim of the studies was a detailed experimental characterization of ﬂame behavior to better understand the
underlying physical and chemical processes leading to instabilities. The second goal of the work was the estab-
lishment of a comprehensive database that can be used for validation and improvement of numerical combustion
models. The ﬂow ﬁeld was measured by laser Doppler velocimetry, the ﬂame structures were visualized by planar
laser-induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) of OH and CH radicals, and the major species concentrations, temperature, and
mixture fraction were determined by laser Raman scattering. The ﬂow ﬁelds of the three ﬂames were quite sim-
ilar, with high velocities in the region of the injected gases, a pronounced inner recirculation zone, and an outer
recirculation zone with low velocities. The ﬂames were not attached to the fuel nozzle and thus were partially pre-
mixed before ignition. The near ﬁeld of the ﬂames was characterized by fast mixing and considerable ﬁnite-rate
chemistry effects. CH PLIF images revealed that the reaction zones were thin (⩽0.5 mm) and strongly corrugated
and that the ﬂame zones were short (h ⩽50 mm). Despite the similar ﬂow ﬁelds of the three ﬂames, the oscillating
ﬂame B was ﬂatter and opened more widely than the others. In the current article, the ﬂow ﬁeld, structures, and
mean and rms values of the temperature, mixture fraction, and species concentrations are discussed. Turbulence
intensities, mixing, heat release, and reaction progress are addressed. In a second article, the turbulence–chemistry
interactions in the three ﬂames are treated.
2005 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author. Fax: +49 711 6862 578.
E-mail address: wolfgang.meier@dlr.de (W. Meier).
1 Present address: Southwestern Institute of Physics, P.O. Box 432, 610041 Chengdu Sichuan, People’s Republic of China.
0010-2180/$ – see front matter 2005 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2005.07.010


--- Page 2 ---

206
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
Keywords: Gas turbine; Model combustor; Swirl ﬂame; Turbulence–chemistry interaction; Validation measurements; Laser
techniques
1. Introduction
Swirl ﬂames are used extensively in practical com-
bustion systems because they enable high energy con-
version in a small volume and exhibit good ignition
and stabilization behavior over a wide operating range
[1–4]. In stationary gas turbine (GT) combustors, they
are used mostly as premixed or partially premixed
ﬂames, and in aero engines, as diffusion ﬂames. To
reduce pollutant emissions, especially NOx, today the
ﬂames are operated generally very lean [5–7]. Un-
der these conditions, the ﬂames tend to exhibit unde-
sired instabilities, e.g., in the form of unsteady ﬂame
stabilization or thermoacoustic oscillations. The un-
derlying mechanisms of the instabilities are based
on the complex interaction between ﬂow ﬁeld, pres-
sure, mixing, and chemical reactions, and are not
well enough understood to date. Detailed measure-
ments in full-scale combustors are hardly possible,
and very expensive and numerical tools have not yet
reached a sufﬁcient level of conﬁdence to solve the
problems. A promising strategy lies therefore in the
establishment of a laboratory-scale “standard com-
bustor” with practical relevance and detailed, com-
prehensive measurements using nonintrusive tech-
niques with high accuracy. The gained data set will
be used for validation and optimization of numeri-
cal combustion simulation codes which then can be
applied to simulate the behavior of technical combus-
tors. Intrusive probe measurements are less suited for
these applications as they disturb the local ﬂow ﬁeld
and change the conditions for stabilization and for
reaction—locally or even in general [8,9]. In turbu-
lent reacting ﬂows, the use of optical measurement
techniques is therefore essential for reliable infor-
mation. Laser-based tools are the method of choice
offering the potential to measure most of the impor-
tant quantities with high temporal and spatial reso-
lution, often as one- or two-dimensional images, and
the ability to perform the simultaneous detection of
several quantities [10–13]. The ﬂow ﬁeld can be mea-
sured by laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) or particle
imaging velocimetry (PIV); the temperature by laser
Rayleigh scattering, laser Raman scattering, coher-
ent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS), or laser-
induced ﬂuorescence (LIF); species concentrations by
LIF or Raman scattering; ﬂame structures by planar
LIF (PLIF) or PIV; and the mixture fraction by Ra-
man scattering.
In recent years a variety of laser-based investiga-
tions in GT model combustors have been reported
that, besides feasibility studies, concentrated on cer-
tain aspects of the combustion process or model
validation. For example, Kaaling et al. [14] per-
formed temperature measurements with CARS in
a RQL (rich-quench-lean) combustor, and Kamp-
mann et al. [15] used CARS simultaneously with 2-D
Rayleigh scattering to characterize the temperature
distribution in a double-cone burner. In the same com-
bustor, Dinkelacker et al. [16] studied the ﬂame front
structures with PLIF of OH and 2-D Rayleigh scat-
tering. Fink et al. [17] investigated the inﬂuence of
pressure on the combustion process by applying PLIF
of OH and NO in a LPP (lean prevaporized premixed)
model combustor. With respect to NOx reduction
strategies, Cooper and Laurendeau [18,19] performed
quantitative NO LIF measurements in a lean direct-
injection spray ﬂame at elevated pressures. Shih et
al. [20] applied PLIF of OH and seeded acetone in a
lean premixed GT model combustor, and Deguchi et
al. [21] used PLIF of OH and NO in a large practical
GT combustor. Hedman and Warren [22] used PLIF
of OH, CARS, and LDV for the characterization of
a GT-like combustor ﬁred with propane in order to
achieve a better understanding of the fundamentals
of GT combustion. PLIF of OH was also applied by
Lee et al. [23] to study ﬂame structures and instabil-
ities in a lean premixed GT combustor, by Arnold et
al. [24] to visualize ﬂame fronts in a GT combustor
ﬂame of 400 kW, and by Fritz et al. [25] for revealing
details of ﬂashback. Löfström et al. [26] performed
a feasibility study of two-photon LIF of CO and 2-D
temperature mapping by LIF of seeded indium in a
low-emission GT combustor. A comparison of two
different laser excitation schemes for major species
concentration measurements with laser Raman scat-
tering was performed by Gittins et al. [27] in a GT
combustion simulator. At a high-pressure test rig of
the DLR, various laser techniques (LDV, CARS, PLIF
of OH and kerosene, and 2-D temperature imaging
via OH PLIF) were applied to GT combustors un-
der technical operating conditions to achieve a better
understanding of combustor behavior and to validate
CFD codes [28–31].
In the study discussed here, a nozzle with two
concentric air swirlers and an annular fuel supply be-
tween them was used for CH4/air diffusion ﬂames,
with thermal powers up to 35 kW at atmospheric
pressure. The combustion chamber enabled almost
unrestricted optical access to the ﬂames and was,
thus, ideally suited for the application of laser mea-
surement techniques. The velocity ﬁelds were mea-


--- Page 3 ---

P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
207
sured by 3-D LDV, the ﬂame structures by PLIF of
OH and CH, and the joint probability density func-
tions (PDFs) of temperature, major species concentra-
tions, and mixture fraction by laser Raman scattering.
Three ﬂames with different characteristics were in-
vestigated: ﬂame A was operated at a speciﬁc power
rate of 42.4 MW/(m3 bar) that is comparable to the
values of aeronautical or modern aero-derivative in-
dustrial gas turbines, which are operated around 25
to 70 MW/(m3 bar); ﬂame B was chosen at a power
rate of 12.5 MW/(m3 bar) that is comparable to most
industrial gas turbines, which are operated at 5 to
20 MW/(m3 bar); and ﬂame C was operated at the
same airﬂow as ﬂame B but with reduced fuel sup-
ply close to the lean extinction limit (with a power
rate of 9.2 MW/(m3 bar)). This is of interest because
modern gas turbines in power plants are operated un-
der extremely lean conditions to meet the emission
limits. In addition, the ﬂames were operated at three
different equivalence ratios to investigate the stabi-
lization of the ﬂames. Flame A with an equivalence
ratio of Φ = 0.65 burned stably, whereas ﬂame B
(Φ = 0.75) emitted strong thermoacoustic noise, and
ﬂame C with Φ = 0.55 operated close to the blowoff
limit and randomly experienced sudden liftoff and
reestablishment of stable operation.
The advantage of the combustor setup used was
the excellent optical access to the ﬂame zone, en-
abling the collection of information from the whole
area around the ﬂame zone in a burner that is close
to technical application. In particular, the detailed
velocity measurements at the nozzle exit result in
well-deﬁned boundary conditions, which are impor-
tant for numerical methods. One major goal of the
work was the detailed experimental analysis of the
ﬂames to gain deeper insight into, e.g., the mixing
and stabilization processes, the shape of the reaction
zones and the regions of heat release, and effects of
turbulence–chemistry interactions. The second goal
was the establishment of a comprehensive database
which can be used for the veriﬁcation and improve-
ment of combustion simulation codes. The present
article focuses on ﬂow ﬁelds, on the distribution of the
temperature, the major species concentrations and the
mixture fractions, and on the instantaneous and mean
ﬂame structures. The turbulence–chemistry interac-
tions, which play an important role in these ﬂames,
are discussed in a second article [32]. The thermoa-
coustic oscillations of ﬂame B were analyzed previ-
ously by phase-resolved measurements [33–35]. The
results from those investigations represent a supple-
ment of the measurements without phase resolution
presented in the current article, and some of the ﬁnd-
ings are used here to support the discussion of the
characteristics of ﬂame B.
2. Experimental
2.1. Combustor and ﬂames
The gas turbine model combustor is schematically
shown in Fig. 1. The burner was a modiﬁed version
of a practical gas turbine combustor with an air blast
nozzle for liquid fuels [36]. Co-swirling dry air at
room temperature was supplied to the ﬂame through a
central nozzle (diameter 15 mm) and an annular noz-
zle (i.d. 17 mm, o.d. 25 mm contoured to an outer
diameter of 40 mm). Both air ﬂows were fed from
a common plenum with an inner diameter of 79 mm
and a height of 65 mm. The radial swirlers consisted
of 8 channels for the central nozzle and 12 chan-
nels for the annular nozzle. The ratio of the air mass
ﬂows through the annular and central nozzle was ap-
proximately 1.5. Nonswirling CH4 was fed through
72 channels (0.5 × 0.5 mm), forming a ring between
the air nozzles. Compared with an annular nozzle
for CH4 with a slit width of <0.5 mm, this conﬁg-
uration ensured better realization of the cylindrical
symmetry of the fuel injection and set well-deﬁned
boundary conditions for numerical simulation. The
exit planes of the fuel and central air nozzles were
located 4.5 mm below the exit plane of the outer
air nozzle; the latter was deﬁned as reference height
h = 0. The combustion chamber had a square section
of 85 × 85 mm and a height of 114 mm and consisted
of four quartz plates held by steel posts (diam 10 mm)
in the corners, thus allowing very good optical access
Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of the model combustor.


--- Page 4 ---

208
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
Table 1
Parameters of the three ﬂames investigated
Air
CH4
Ptha
(kW)
Φglob
f glob
T glob ad
(K)
sl/min
g/min
sl/min
g/min
A
850
1095
58.2
41.8
34.9
0.65
0.037
1750
B
218
281
17.2
12.3
10.3
0.75
0.042
1915
C
218
281
12.6
9.0
7.6
0.55
0.031
1570
a Pth, thermal power; Φglob, equivalence ratio for the overall mixture; f glob, mixture fraction for the overall mixture; T glob ad,
adiabatic temperature for the overall mixture with inlet temperature T0 = 295 K.
to the ﬂame. A conical top plate made of steel with
a central exhaust tube (diam 40 mm, length 50 mm)
formed the exhaust gas exit. The high velocity in the
exhaust tube avoided any backﬂow from outside the
combustion chamber.
The three ﬂames investigated were: ﬂame A, with
Pth = 34.9 kW and an overall equivalence ratio of
Φglob = 0.65 that ran very stably; ﬂame B, with
Pth = 10.3 kW and Φglob = 0.75, which exhibited
pronounced self-excited thermoacoustic oscillations
at a very high noise level; and ﬂame C, operated close
to the lean extinction limit, with Pth = 7.6 kW and
Φglob = 0.55, which randomly lifted off and rean-
chored to the normal stabilization height. Table 1 lists
characteristic parameters of the investigated ﬂames,
i.e., the volume and mass ﬂow rates of air and fuel
as well as the resulting values for power and overall
“global” values for equivalence ratio, mixture frac-
tion, and adiabatic temperature (given the subscript
“glob”). The mass ﬂows of the gases were controlled
with Brooks ﬂow controllers (Type 5853S for air and
Type 5851S for CH4) with an accuracy of typically
±0.5%. As can be seen from Table 1, ﬂames B and
C had almost identical total ﬂow rates but different
ﬂame parameters. To achieve this, the air mass ﬂow
was kept constant for both ﬂames and only the fuel
mass ﬂow, which represents 7.3% of the total ﬂow for
ﬂame B and 5.5% for ﬂame C, was changed. This was
chosen to achieve a high similarity of the velocity dis-
tributions to exclude ﬂow ﬁeld effects as a source for
the different behavior of the two ﬂames.
All three ﬂames—established under globally lean
conditions—showed no soot production and burned
with a light blue color. The ﬂames appeared as type 2
swirl ﬂames [1,37] with a conically shaped toroidal
ﬂame zone at different opening angles and, as was
conﬁrmed by the velocity measurements, showed pro-
nounced recirculation zones on the axis (inner recir-
culation zone, irz) and near the walls of the com-
bustion chamber (outer recirculation zone, orz). The
visual appearance of the ﬂames, despite the square
combustion chamber, revealed good rotational sym-
metry.
The swirl number S was calculated from the ve-
locity proﬁle just above the nozzle exit neglecting the
pressure term according to
S =
 R
0 2πuwρr dr
R
 R
0 2πu2ρr dr
,
where u = axial velocity (m/s), w = circumferential
velocity (m/s), ρ = density (kg/m3), r = radius (m),
and R = maximum radius of the nozzle exit (m). The
swirl numbers are S ≈0.9 for ﬂame A and S ≈0.55
for ﬂames B and C. Given the fact that the nozzle
was contoured and a combustion chamber was used
with an expansion factor D/d = 3.4 (D = diameter
of combustion chamber, d = diameter of nozzle), vor-
tex breakdown with establishment of an irz was to be
expected [38]. Due to the conﬁnement, an orz was
also found. The nozzle Reynolds number based on the
cold inﬂow and the minimum outer nozzle diameter
(25 mm) was about 15,000 for ﬂames B and C and
about 58,000 for ﬂame A.
All three ﬂames did not burn directly at the fuel
nozzle exit, but rather with a liftoff height of some
millimeters. In ﬂame C, sudden liftoff (partial ex-
tinction) and ﬂashback randomly occurred (approx-
imately 10 times per minute), as it was chosen to
operate close to the lean extinction limit that was
found to be at Φ = 0.53. The random liftoff which
reached up to a height of 30–40 mm lasted typically
100–150 ms. Thus, ﬂame C was, for about 2% of the
time, in the partially extinguished mode. Of the three
ﬂames discussed here, ﬂame B exhibited the highest
noise level with a quite discrete frequency of about
290 Hz. Flame C showed nearly the same frequency
spectrum as ﬂame B but with a much reduced ampli-
tude. Flame A emitted a rather broadband noise with
small peak amplitudes at about 380 Hz.
2.2. Measuring techniques
All three velocity components were measured si-
multaneously using commercial LDV systems (DISA/
DANTEC) and a cw-Ar+ laser (Coherent, INNOVA
90, operated at 1 W). The optical arrangement con-
sisted of a two-component system (DISA 55X,
λlaser = 488 and 514.5 nm) and a single-component
system (DISA Flow Direction Adapter, λlaser =


--- Page 5 ---

P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
209
514.5 nm), which were arranged orthogonally and
both used in the forward scatter mode. The laser
beams were transmitted via mono mode ﬁbers into
the optical modules. A frequency shift of 40 MHz was
applied for all three directions; the center frequency
of the detection was adapted to each measuring point.
Focusing lenses with f = 300 mm were used; the re-
sulting probe volumes were about 60 µm in diameter
and 1.0 mm in length for x and y directions, and
120 µm in diameter and 1.5 mm in length for the z
direction, corresponding to the axial (u), radial (v),
and tangential (w) directions of the velocity, respec-
tively. Because the spatial intensity distribution of the
Mie scattering with its maximum in forward direction
is more than 100 times higher than at 90◦, the two
systems could be operated at the same wavelength
(here 514.5 nm) because the forward-scattered sig-
nals can be clearly discriminated by their intensities in
this orthogonal geometry. The detection optics were
arranged in the y–z plane at about 10◦off axis and
consisted of commercial camera lenses (f = 85 mm,
f/1.8 for x and y directions and f = 105 mm, f/4
for the z direction) focusing the signals on photo-
multiplier tubes. For the simultaneous detection and
analysis of the photomultiplier signals, three Dantec
burst spectrum analyzers (BSA enhanced, 57N20 and
57N35) were used with a record length of 64 points.
ZrO2 particles with a diameter of approximately 2 µm
were seeded as scatterers into the airﬂow. Because
of the small size, the particles can follow ﬂow ﬁeld
ﬂuctuations up to a frequency of 1.2 kHz within an
accuracy of 99%. At each measuring location, typi-
cally 10,000 to 15,000 validated velocity data were
recorded, except in the area of the ﬂame zone, where
sometimes only 2000 samples were validated during
the record time. For ﬂames B and C, measurements
at lower heights were carried out coincidentally with
a time ﬁlter of 2 µs, thus providing also the Reynolds
stress tensors and cross moments. Using only the co-
incidental values, the effective probe volume and,
consequently, the data rate are drastically reduced,
leading to much longer acquisition time. Therefore,
this was done only at selected heights. For calcu-
lating mean values, the noncoincidental values were
used for an improved statistic. The lowest height for
LDV measurements was h = 1.5 mm for ﬂame A. In
ﬂames B and C an improvement of the setup enabled
measurements as low as h = 1.0 mm. For simplicity
in this study, these levels are all labeled h = 1 mm.
Planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) of OH
and CH radicals was applied to visualize the ﬂame
structures. A Nd:YAG laser pumped optical paramet-
ric oscillator (Spectra Physics GCR 290 and MOPO
730) was used to supply pulsed laser radiation for the
excitation of OH and CH radicals. The laser beam
was formed to a light sheet (h ≈45 mm) and irradi-
ated vertically into the ﬂame intersecting the ﬂame
axis. The pulse energies were typically 3 mJ/pulse
for OH and 4 mJ/pulse for CH with a bandwidth
of about 0.45 cm−1. The sheet thickness was ap-
proximately 0.25 mm in the imaged area. The re-
sulting spectral laser intensities are on the order of
16 MW/cm2 cm−1 for CH and 12 MW/cm2 cm−1
for OH. Compared with the saturation intensities,
which are around 1 MW/cm2 cm−1 for the chosen
transitions [39,40], the applied laser intensities are
relatively high and a signiﬁcant degree of satura-
tion is expected. The excited ﬂuorescence was col-
lected at 90◦by a lens (for OH: achromatic UV lens,
f = 100 mm, f/2, Halle Nachf.; for CH: camera lens,
f = 50 mm, f/0.95, Canon) and, after spectral ﬁlter-
ing, detected with an intensiﬁed CCD camera (for
OH: LaVision Flamestar II; for CH: Roper Scientiﬁc).
The laser pulse duration was 5 ns; the temporal detec-
tion gate of the image intensiﬁer was 50 ns for OH
and 200 ns for CH (limited by irising effects of the
image intensiﬁer). OH radicals were excited on the
R1(8) line of the A2Σ+–X2Π (ν′ = 1, ν′′ = 0) tran-
sition at λ = 281.3 nm [41] and the ﬂuorescence was
detected through an interference ﬁlter in the wave-
length region λ ≈312 ± 10 nm. For CH, the Q1(7)
line of the B2Σ–X2Π (ν′ = 0, ν′′ = 0) band was
excited at 390.3 nm [42,43]. For suppression of laser-
scattered light and background radiation, a ﬁlter com-
bination of a KV418 (Schott) and a short-pass ﬁlter
with a cutoff wavelength of 450 nm (Oriel) was used
in front of the camera, and only the ﬂuorescence in
the B–X (0,1) and A–X bands around λ ≈430 nm
was detected. The A state is efﬁciently populated by
collision-induced electronic energy transfer from the
B to the A electronic level [44,45].
For pointwise quantitative measurement of the
concentrations of major species (O2, N2, CH4, H2,
CO, CO2, H2O) and temperature, laser Raman scat-
tering was used [46]. The radiation of a ﬂashlamp-
pumped dye laser (Candela LFDL 20, wavelength
λ = 489 nm, pulse energy Ep ≈3 J, pulse duration
τp ≈3 µs) was focused into the combustion cham-
ber, and the Raman scattering emitted from the mea-
suring volume (length ≈0.6 mm, diam ≈0.6 mm)
was collected by an achromatic lens (D = 80 mm,
f = 160 mm) and relayed to the entrance slit of a
spectrograph (SPEX 1802, f = 1 m, slit width 2 mm,
dispersion 0.5 nm/mm). The dispersed and spatially
separated signals from the different species were de-
tected by photomultiplier tubes in the exit plane of the
spectrograph and sampled by boxcar integrators. The
species number densities were calculated from these
signals using calibration measurements, and the tem-
perature was deduced from the total number density
via the ideal gas law [46,47]. The simultaneous de-
tection of all major species with each laser pulse also


--- Page 6 ---

210
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
Fig. 2. Vectorplots of combined uv velocities for ﬂames A, B, and C; negative u velocities are displayed in red. The lines indicate
the size of the combustion chamber.
enabled the determination of the instantaneous mix-
ture fraction [48]. At each measuring location 500
single-pulse measurements were performed within a
scanning pattern of roughly 100 points, from which
the joint probability density functions (PDFs) were
computed. The choice of 500 samples turned out to be
a good trade-off between measuring time and conver-
gence of the mean and rms values. Studies in highly
turbulent regions of these ﬂames revealed that the “ﬁ-
nal” values are reached to within 2% after 300 to 400
samples. The measurement uncertainty for the mean
values of temperature, mixture fraction, and mole
fraction of O2, H2O, and CO2 is typically 3–4%.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. LDV measurements
As expected for this type of conﬁned swirl ﬂame,
the mean ﬂow ﬁeld of each of the three ﬂames shows
a strong inner recirculation zone (irz) along the axial
centerline as well as an outer recirculation zone (orz)
near the walls of the combustion chamber, as can be
seen in the vectorplots of the combined uv velocities
displayed in Fig. 2. The inlet velocities at the lowest
measuring height h = 1 mm correspond to the mass
ﬂows, with the maximum values for the axial velocity
of umax = 39.0 m/s in ﬂame A, umax = 13.3 m/s in
ﬂame B, and umax = 13.0 m/s in ﬂame C. The angle
of the maximum mean velocity in the uv plane with
respect to the axial centerline is about 26◦for all three
ﬂames for h = 10–20 mm. The measurements also
revealed (not shown) that the ratio of the tangential
velocity w and the axial velocity u is nearly double
for ﬂame A (S ≈0.9) compared with ﬂames B and
Fig. 3. Radial proﬁles of the normalized mean axial velocity
(u/umax) at h = 1 mm for ﬂames A, B, and C.
C (S ≈0.55). Nevertheless, the resulting ﬂow ﬁelds
are very similar, despite the different visible appear-
ance of the three ﬂames. The normalized mean axial
velocities (umean/umax) at h = 1 mm, illustrated in
Fig. 3, are almost identical and show that the inﬂow
at this height extends radially from r = 5 to 15 mm.
The isolines of umean = 0, plotted in Fig. 4, indi-
cate the boundaries of the irz. It can be seen that for
ﬂames A and C, the irz reaches up to h ≈73 mm,
whereas in ﬂame B it ends at h ≈62 mm. In the near
ﬁeld of the nozzle, for h < 10 mm, the contours of
the irz are nearly identical for all three ﬂames, and in
all three ﬂames the irz extends below the lowest mea-
suring level. It can therefore be assumed that the irz
reaches even into the central air nozzle, which ends
at h = −4.5 mm. In comparing the mean values of
the different ﬂames, it must, however, be considered
that ﬂame B is subject to periodic oscillations and that
the time-averaged velocities represent an average not
only over turbulent ﬂuctuations but also over periodic
variations (see discussion below).


--- Page 7 ---

P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
211
Fig. 4. Isolines of umean = 0 representing the extension of
irz for ﬂames A, B, and C.
Fig. 5 illustrates the mean values and rms ﬂuctua-
tions of the three velocity components of ﬂame A for
h = 1.5, 5, 15, and 45 mm. At h = 1.5 mm, the proﬁle
of the axial velocity u reﬂects the inﬂow of the fresh
gas at r ≈5–16 mm with maximum values around
39 m/s and the irz with velocities of u ≈−20 m/s.
The radial velocity component v is negative for r >
16 mm, reﬂecting the size of the orz. In the inﬂow,
v is roughly half as large as u. The tangential ve-
locity w is rather constant in the orz (w ≈10 m/s),
and its radial proﬁle displays two maxima in the re-
gion of the inﬂow, which likely reﬂect the ﬂows from
the two air nozzles with the minimum between them
originating from the fuel nozzle and its wake. For
r = 0–5 mm, w increases linearly with r, reﬂecting
the solid body rotation part of the vortex. The rms
values of u and v have a pronounced maximum in
the shear layer between the inﬂow and the irz, and v
exhibits another maximum in the shear layer between
the inﬂow and the orz. The high level of the rms val-
ues close to the ﬂame axis demonstrates that the ﬂow
ﬁeld is subject to strong turbulent ﬂuctuations in this
region of the ﬂame. At h = 5 mm, the gradients of the
radial proﬁles of the mean and rms values have be-
come smaller in comparison to h = 1.5 mm, but the
basic features of the ﬂow are unchanged. In the orz,
umean is close to zero but urms is 6–9 m/s. This shows
that u changes frequently its direction in the orz. At
h = 15 mm, the proﬁles have broadened and the re-
verse ﬂow on the axis reaches its highest negative ve-
locity of umean ≈−26 m/s. The orz has shrunk but is
still discernible from the negative v component. The
mean tangential velocity component indicates a solid
body vortex up to r ≈10 mm. For r > 10 mm, wmean
declines but the shape of the radial proﬁle does not
resemble that of a potential vortex. wrms is quite con-
stant over the radius, whereas urms and vrms exhibit
broad maxima. With increasing downstream position,
the proﬁles smooth out and the orz vanishes, whereas
the irz reaches a radial expansion of r ≈13 mm at
h = 45 mm.
In the shear layer between the inﬂow and the irz,
large velocity ﬂuctuations and the low mean veloc-
ity generally cause a very high turbulence intensity
(urms/umean ≫100%). Therefore, intense mixing of
the cold fresh gas with hot burned gases coming from
the irz can be expected in this region. Fig. 6 shows,
for example, radial proﬁles of normalized urms at
h = 10 mm, normalized by the maximum velocities
at h = 1 mm; i.e., umax = 39.0, 13.3, and 13.0 m/s
for ﬂames A, B, and C, respectively. The broad peaks
of the urms values around r ≈6 mm indicate that the
instantaneous ﬂow ﬁelds are subject to strong turbu-
lent ﬂuctuations and that the shear layer is not lo-
cally stable. This ﬁnding is also supported by the
single shot 2-D LIF images that are discussed in the
following paragraphs. In Fig. 6 it can also be seen
that for the three ﬂames, the relative velocity ﬂuctu-
ations urms/umax are very similar and the values of
urms reach more than 50% of umax at r ≈3–10 mm.
Therefore, the irz should not be regarded as a sta-
ble structure with the ﬂuid following streamlines that
hardly vary their positions. However, from the mea-
surements performed in this study, there was no indi-
cation of coherent structures such as rotating vortex
pairs.
To demonstrate that the average ﬂow conditions at
the nozzle exit for ﬂames B and C were similar, the
radial velocity proﬁles of u, v, and w at the exit of the
nozzle are plotted in Fig. 7. As clearly can be seen, the
mean proﬁles of all three velocity components match
very well as intended, so that the mean ﬂow ﬁeld can
be excluded as the primary reason for the different
behavior of these two ﬂames. However, periodic vari-
ations would not be revealed by the mean proﬁles.
One also recognizes the good symmetry of the time-
averaged velocity proﬁles, as is expected for a rota-
tional symmetric ﬂow. The dips in the proﬁles that can
be seen at r ≈10–12 mm result from the wake of the
fuel nozzle and have already disappeared at h = 5 mm
(not shown) due to the high turbulence. The orz be-
comes apparent by the inward-directed radial veloc-
ity v in the region r > 15 mm. Further downstream,
the different thermal powers and combustion temper-
atures of ﬂames B and C lead to a different thermal
expansion which has an inﬂuence on the ﬂow veloci-
ties. To demonstrate this effect, Fig. 8 shows the radial


--- Page 8 ---

212
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
Fig. 5. Radial proﬁles of the mean values (left side) and rms ﬂuctuations (right side) of the three velocity components in ﬂame A
at different heights.
proﬁles of u, v, and w at h = 30 mm. Here, the ax-
ial velocity in ﬂame B is signiﬁcantly larger than in
ﬂame C; e.g., umax is 10.6 m/s in ﬂame B and 8.3 m/s
in ﬂame C. The proﬁles of the radial velocity com-
ponent are almost identical and those of the tangen-
tial velocity show only slightly higher velocities for
ﬂame B. Thus, the different thermal expansion of the
ﬂames inﬂuences predominantly the axial velocity,
as expected for conﬁned ﬂames. It is also typical of
conﬁned ﬂames that the swirl number decreases with
combustion progress due to the axial acceleration.
In ﬂame B, LDV measurements have also been
performed with phase resolution at heights h = 1
and 5 mm. In those measurements, the phase of
the acoustic oscillation was measured by a micro-
phone simultaneously with two velocity components
[34,35]. An important ﬁnding was that the irz and
orz varied in size during an oscillation cycle, resem-
bling a pumping motion: The irz varied mainly in
the axial direction, and the orz in the radial direc-
tion. Thus, although the mean ﬂow ﬁelds of ﬂames B
and C look very similar, they are inherently differ-


--- Page 9 ---

P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
213
Fig. 6. Radial proﬁles of urms at h = 10 mm for ﬂames A,
B, and C.
ent, with ﬂame B exhibiting periodic variations super-
posed onto turbulent ﬂuctuations and ﬂames A and C
exhibiting only turbulent ﬂuctuations.
3.2. Flame structures from OH LIF and CH LIF
measurements
In ﬂames, OH can be found in detectable concen-
trations at temperatures above approximately 1400 K,
especially in fuel-lean mixtures [49]. The equilib-
rium OH concentration increases exponentially with
temperature but differently for fuel-lean and fuel-rich
mixtures. Furthermore, OH is formed in superequi-
librium concentrations in the reaction zones, and its
relaxation to equilibrium by three-body collisions is
quite slow at atmospheric pressure (τ > 3 ms) [50].
Thus, high OH LIF intensities can be regarded as an
indicator of hot gas and/or reacting fuel/air mixtures.
CH radicals are formed at high temperatures on the
fuel-rich side of the reaction zone and have a much
shorter lifetime (≈10 ns) than OH radicals [51]. Thus,
high CH concentrations can be interpreted as a marker
for the fuel consumption layer of the reaction zone
and, with some restrictions, as a qualitative measure
of the heat release rate [52]. For illustration, Fig. 9
shows the calculated proﬁles of the temperature and
OH and CH mole fractions as a function of the mix-
ture fraction f for a strained laminar CH4/air counter-
ﬂow diffusion ﬂame with a strain rate of a = 400 s−1
[53,54]. Signiﬁcant CH concentrations are present
only in mixtures with f ≈0.05–0.08. In contrast, OH
is also found in lean mixtures and covers a range of
f ≈0.015–0.08. It can also be seen that CH is a fac-
tor of about 500 lower in concentration than OH and,
thus, much harder to detect. Although the turbulent
ﬂames investigated cannot be directly compared with
a counterﬂow diffusion ﬂame, this example shows at
least qualitatively the characteristic behavior of OH
and CH.
With respect to the interpretation of the LIF im-
ages presented here, one has to keep in mind that
the LIF intensities are not necessarily proportional
to the species number density. The relative popula-
tion of the initial state excited by the laser changes
with temperature (Boltzmann fraction f B). For OH,
the Boltzmann fraction of the initial rotational state,
N′′ = 8, varies by less than 7% over the temperature
range of interest (T ≈1400–2200 K). For CH, f B of
N′′ = 7 decreases by roughly 20% over the tempera-
ture range 1700 to 2200 K. Because the LIF signals
are quenching dominated, variations in quenching en-
vironment can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the ﬂuorescence
yield. An estimation was performed for OH using the
LASKIN program [55] and the temperature and gas
composition from the strained laminar ﬂame calcula-
tion with a = 400 s−1 already used in Fig. 9. It turned
out that the OH ﬂuorescence yield varied by about
15% over the range of interest. Taking into account
that the composition of the ﬂame under investigation
may deviate from the strained laminar ﬂame compo-
sition, the measured LIF signal intensities reﬂect the
OH density roughly within 25%. For CH, the situation
is more complex because quenching in two electronic
states, A and B, and predissociation in the B state play
a role. However, in the thin layer of the reaction zone
where CH is present, the gas composition and tem-
perature do not change drastically and variations in
quenching are expected to be small. Rensberger et al.
[56] reported that changes in the ﬂuorescence quan-
tum yield after excitation of the B(ν′ = 0) state in
different ﬂames were small and that quenching var-
ied by less than 50%. In the ﬂames investigated here,
variations should not be larger.
Fig. 10 shows typical OH single-shot LIF distri-
butions for the three ﬂames. The images display the
region r = −41–41 mm and h ≈0–47 mm. For tem-
peratures below ≈1300–1400 K, OH concentrations
were below the detection limit (dark areas). For all
three ﬂames, the OH distributions cover broad areas
with strongly wrinkled contours and sometimes iso-
lated regions (at least in a 2-D cut). These structures
yield a good impression of the turbulent transport and
mixing processes within the ﬂames. These images
show that the instantaneous ﬂame structures (and very
likely also the instantaneous ﬂow ﬁelds) are much less
uniform as might be assumed from the mean ﬂow
ﬁeld. The steep gradients of OH LIF intensities that
frequently occurred may represent either a reaction
zone or the boundary between cold and hot ﬂuid. The
OH-free regions near the nozzle reﬂect the inlet ﬂow
of mostly unreacted fuel and air, which is directed di-
agonally upward. The mean contours of these regions
can be better seen in the averaged images of Fig. 11
(left). The highest mean OH LIF intensities and thus,
within 25% uncertainty, the highest mean OH con-


--- Page 10 ---

214
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
Fig. 7. Radial proﬁles of the simultaneously measured three
velocity components u, v, and w for ﬂames B and C at
h = 1 mm.
centrations are found in each ﬂame in the irz shortly
above the nozzle, with a maximum at h ≈10 mm.
Here, ﬂame C has the lowest mean OH concentration,
followed by ﬂame B with approximately 50% more
and ﬂame A with approximately 75% more. Around
h = 30 mm on the axis, the concentrations are ap-
proximately three times less than at h = 10 mm for
each ﬂame. These signiﬁcant OH concentrations in
the irz in the averaged images (and also in most of
the single shot images) indicate a high temperature
in this region. The mixing of this hot gas from the
irz with fresh gas from the nozzles presumably plays
Fig. 8. Radial proﬁles of the simultaneously measured three
velocity components u, v, and w for ﬂames B and C at
h = 30 mm.
the key role in the ignition and stabilization of the
ﬂames. Investigations in ﬂame B using planar two-
line OH LIF thermometry showed that temperature
and OH concentrations were not generally well cor-
related in that ﬂame and that superequilibrium con-
centrations contributed signiﬁcantly to the high OH
levels within and some millimeters downstream of
the reaction zones [57]. Comparison of the OH LIF
distributions from the three ﬂames further shows that
ﬂame C exhibits a smaller area containing OH, espe-
cially in the orz. This is explained by the lower overall
temperature level of this ﬂame (see Table 1) accord-


--- Page 11 ---

P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
215
Fig. 9. Calculated proﬁles for temperature and concentra-
tions of OH and CH radicals in a counterﬂow diffusion ﬂame
with a strain rate of a = 400 s−1.
ing to the global equivalence ratio. It is also seen that
for ﬂame A, the inlet ﬂow of cold gas penetrates fur-
ther downstream in comparison to the other ﬂames.
The averaged CH LIF distributions displayed in
Fig. 11 (right) reﬂect the regions where ﬂame reac-
tions and heat release take place. The shapes of the
three ﬂames are quite different: while ﬂames A and C
are conically shaped with opening angles θ/2 ≈30◦
and ≈45◦, respectively, ﬂame B has a signiﬁcantly
larger opening angle and is rather ﬂat with θ/2 ≈75◦.
The difference between ﬂames B and C is surprising
because their mean ﬂow ﬁelds are quite similar and
the mean velocities are almost identical at h = 1 mm
(see Fig. 7). Comparing the velocity ﬁelds and the
CH LIF images it becomes apparent that the heat re-
lease for ﬂame C and especially for ﬂame B does not
take place predominantly in the shear layer between
the irz and the inﬂow, as might be expected. The CH
LIF distribution and the region of the shear layer are
in good accordance only for ﬂame A, whereas for
ﬂames B and C, the opening angles of the ﬂame zones
are larger than that of the shear layer. The unusual be-
havior of ﬂame B is related to the periodic pulsations
and is addressed in Section 3.3. Further, it is impor-
tant to note that for all three ﬂames the regions of
heat release do not begin at the fuel nozzle, but at
h ≈5 mm, h ≈4 mm, and h ≈6 mm for ﬂames A,
B, and C, respectively. Due to this liftoff, fuel, air,
and exhaust gas are already partially premixed before
ignition. According to the CH LIF images, the heat
release is complete at h ≈20 mm and h ≈40 mm for
ﬂames B and C, respectively. In ﬂame A, there is still
a small amount of CH at the upper end of the mea-
sured area at h = 47 mm.
For the interpretation of the averaged distributions
one has to keep in mind that ﬂames B and C exhibit
unsteady combustion behavior. Flame A is highly tur-
bulent but steady, and mean and rms values are re-
lated to turbulent ﬂuctuations. Flame C is subject to
sudden partial extinction and can be regarded as bi-
modal, i.e., either burning stably or not burning up to
h = 30–40 mm. However, the partially extinguished
state is present only about 2% of the time and its con-
tribution to the time-averaged values is small. Thus,
ﬂame C should be classiﬁed as “nearly steady” and its
ﬂuctuations are caused predominantly by turbulence.
For ﬂame B, the situation is different, because the
thermoacoustic pulsations are permanent and tempo-
ral changes of the ﬂame include turbulent ﬂuctuations
as well as periodic variations. The mean species and
temperature distributions discussed in this article are
averaged over both turbulent and periodic changes. To
distinguish between them, phase-resolved measure-
ments have to be performed that yield averaged values
at distinct phase angles of the periodic pulsation. Such
measurements have also been performed for ﬂame B,
and the results are discussed in detail in separate pub-
lications [33–35].
The single-shot LIF distributions of CH, displayed
in Fig. 12, show thin (≈0.3–0.5 mm) and strongly cor-
rugated reaction zones which are, at least in the 2-D
cut, sometimes interrupted. Their shapes are domi-
nated by the turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld and vary strongly
from shot to shot. Some samples exhibit only weak
ﬂame reactions, while others possess strongly dis-
torted and intense reaction zones. Analysis of a larger
number of single shots revealed that in ﬂame A, the
CH layers are more intensely contorted and the ﬂame
surface area is larger than in ﬂames B and C [58]. Fur-
thermore, CH LIF peak intensities differ in the three
ﬂames. They are highest for ﬂame B (Φglob = 0.75)
followed by ﬂame A (Φglob = 0.65) and ﬂame C
(Φglob = 0.55); i.e., the order is the same as for the
global equivalence ratios. This indicates that the reac-
tions occur, on average, at different local equivalence
ratios and not generally around Φlocal = 1, as would
be assumed for diffusion ﬂames. This observation is
conﬁrmed by the Raman results concerning the ther-
mochemical states of the ﬂames.
3.3. Mixture fraction, temperature, and species mole
fractions
To yield an overview of the main features of
the distributions of mixture fraction f , temperature
T , and mole fraction X, the results from the point-
wise Raman measurements are displayed as two-
dimensional charts which were obtained by interpo-
lating between the measuring locations. With the op-
tical setup of the Raman system, measurements were
restricted to the region h ⩾5 mm and r ⩽30 mm.
The distributions of the mean mixture fraction, as
displayed in Fig. 13, show that the highest f values
are found directly above the fuel nozzle exit, as ex-
pected. It is, however, remarkable that these values
are already quite small at h = 5 mm; e.g., fmax =


--- Page 12 ---

216
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
Fig. 10. Single-shot OH LIF images of ﬂames A, B, and C.
0.072, 0.059, and 0.056 for ﬂames A, B, and C, re-
spectively. This demonstrates the fast mixing result-
ing from this nozzle conﬁguration. In comparison,
the stoichiometric mixture fraction is fstoich = 0.055
and the overall mixture fractions of the ﬂames were
fglob = 0.037 (A), 0.042 (B), and 0.031 (C) (see Ta-
ble 1). For ﬂames A and C, mixing is complete at
h ≈40 mm, and for ﬂame B, already at h ≈20 mm.
These values are in agreement with the heights of
the CH distributions (see Fig. 11 right), indicating
that mixing and the main ﬂame reactions are closely
linked at these heights. It is further seen that in the
near ﬁeld of the nozzle, f is considerably higher in
the irz (f > fglob) than in the orz where f ≈fglob.
The relatively high f values in the irz enhance the
stabilizing effect of the irz on the ﬂame, because they
enable a temperature level that is higher than T glob ad.
The rms values of f (displayed in Fig. 13 left) exhibit


--- Page 13 ---

P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
217
Fig. 11. Averaged OH LIF images (left) and CH LIF images (right).
a maximum of frms ≈0.04 at h = 5 mm and decrease
rapidly with height. For a closer look at the mixing
behavior of the three ﬂames, Fig. 14 shows the radial
proﬁles of fmean at h = 5 and h = 10 mm. Flame A
reaches the largest fmean (r = 6 mm at h = 5 mm,
r = 8 mm at h = 10 mm) of all three ﬂames, which
is explained by the high exit velocities of this ﬂame
and, thus, the shorter time for mixing before reaching
h = 10 mm. It is surprising that the radial proﬁle of
f mean of ﬂame B shows a signiﬁcantly smaller vari-
ation than that of ﬂame C, although the mean ﬂow
ﬁelds are quite similar. The reason lies in the ther-
moacoustic oscillations of ﬂame B: In addition to
the turbulent ﬂuctuations, the periodic variations also
contribute to a homogenization of the time-averaged
mixture fraction distribution.
The distributions of the mean temperatures, dis-
played in Fig. 15, reﬂect the different shapes of the


--- Page 14 ---

218
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
Fig. 12. Single-shot images of CH LIF.
ﬂames, and it once more becomes evident that ﬂame B
is very different from the others. It is also seen that
the ﬁnal temperatures of the ﬂames (at large heights)
are increasing with their global equivalence ratios,
as expected. To identify the differences more clearly,
Fig. 16 displays the axial proﬁles of T mean and
T rms. At h = 5 mm, all three ﬂames exhibit a similar
temperature of T ≈1300 K. With increasing height,
T mean values increase strongly, reach a maximum at
h = 10–20 mm, and decrease slowly afterward. For
ﬂames A and B, the maximum mean temperatures are
even higher than T glob ad due to the relatively high
f values in this region. The temperature ﬂuctuations
reach a level of 500–600 K close to the nozzle and
decrease to 40–70 K at larger heights, which corre-
sponds to the inherent rms of typically 3% due to
measurement precision. Considering the temperature
ﬂuctuations within the irz, especially in the lower part,
Fig. 13. Two-dimensional mixture fraction distribution (right
side: mean values, left side: rms values).
it becomes obvious that the irz is not a stationary vor-
tex stable in time and space but, rather, is subject to
signiﬁcant turbulent ﬂuctuations, as was already indi-
cated by the single-shot images of OH and CH in this
region and by the velocity ﬂuctuations. A similar re-
sult was obtained by Ji and Gore [59] in a different
swirl ﬂame, where they showed by particle image ve-
locimetry that the instantaneous structure of the irz is
often composed of a number of smaller vortices. This
must be kept in mind for the phenomenological un-
derstanding of ﬂame behavior.
More details of the comparison between the three
ﬂames are seen in the radial proﬁles of T mean at


--- Page 15 ---

P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
219
Fig. 14. Radial proﬁles of mean mixture fraction at
h = 5 mm and h = 10 mm.
h = 5 and 10 mm in Fig. 17. The low-temperature
regions at r ≈6–17 mm reﬂect the inlet streams of
fresh gas. Here it is seen that ﬂame B reaches signiﬁ-
cantly higher temperatures than the other two ﬂames;
e.g., at h = 5 mm the lowest mean temperatures are
Tmin = 408, 627, and 476 K for ﬂames A, B, and
C, respectively. The higher temperatures of ﬂame B
in this region are partly explained by the more fre-
quent occurrence of reactions (see CH distribution in
Fig. 11). However, at h = 5 mm and especially for
r > 10 mm, the main source of the elevated tempera-
tures is mixing of hot exhaust gas from the recircula-
tion zones with fresh gas. The increased temperature
level at h = 5 mm enhances, of course, the reactiv-
ity of the gas mixtures and, thus, the heat release and
burnout [60]. This can clearly be seen in the temper-
ature proﬁles at h = 10 mm, where ﬂame B already
reaches a minimum temperature of 1007 K, whereas
for ﬂames A and C the minimum temperatures are 554
and 639 K, respectively. The transition between the
inlet stream and the orz at r ≈20 mm is clearly vis-
ible in the proﬁle of ﬂame A at h = 5 mm. It is also
obvious that for h ⩾10 mm, the temperature level in
the orz is in general lower than in the irz, which is due
to the leaner mixtures (lower f values) and heat loss
to the wall in the orz.
Phase-correlated measurements in ﬂame B re-
vealed that the phase-resolved mean temperature of
Fig. 15. Two-dimensional temperature distribution (right
side: mean values, left side: rms values).
the inﬂowing gas at h = 5 mm varied by about 300 K
during an oscillation cycle [34]. This variation was
correlated with a periodic expansion of the recircula-
tion zones: When the irz penetrated into the central
air nozzle and the orz reached its maximum expan-
sion, large amounts of recirculating exhaust gas were
mixed into the fresh gas, increasing the temperature
within the inﬂow. The measurements further indicated
that variations of the temperature level of the inﬂow
and the heat release rate were correlated, leading to
the conclusion that the temperature of the inﬂow had
a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the heat release rate.


--- Page 16 ---

220
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
Fig. 16. Axial proﬁles of temperature (mean + rms).
Fig. 17. Radial proﬁles of mean temperature at h = 5 mm
and h = 10 mm.
The right part of Fig. 18 displays the distributions
of the mean values of the differences between the
“quasi-adiabatic” ﬂame temperature T a and the mea-
sured temperature T . “Quasi-adiabatic” ﬂame tem-
perature is deﬁned here as the temperature for the
particular mixture fraction taken from a calculation
for a strained laminar counterﬂow diffusion ﬂame
with a strain rate of a = 1 s−1 [53,54]. T a has been
calculated for the measured mixture fraction at each
location for each single shot and from these results
Ta −T has been averaged. The use of the real adi-
abatic ﬂame temperature (and composition) is not
meaningful for fuel-rich regions of turbulent ﬂames,
because the thermal decomposition of CH4 (which
is complete for adiabatic equilibrium) takes a longer
Fig. 18. Right: two-dimensional distribution of the differ-
ence between locally possible adiabatic temperature T a and
the measured mean temperature T . Left: two-dimensional
distribution of the mean H2O mole fraction. Both values can
be taken as a measure of the reaction progress.
time than is typically available in these ﬂames. Devi-
ations between T and T a can stem either from heat
loss of the ﬂame gases, e.g., due to thermal radia-
tion or wall contact, or from ﬁnite-rate chemistry ef-
fects. As long as heat loss is of minor importance,
the mean value of Ta −T can be taken as a mea-
sure of the mean reaction progress in the ﬂame, and
is an indirect way to display the effects of ﬁnite-rate
chemistry, which is discussed in more detail in the
accompanying article [32]. The results displayed in


--- Page 17 ---

P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
221
Fig. 18 show that Ta −T reaches signiﬁcant values
in all three ﬂames; e.g., the maximum mean values
are >1400, >900, and >1000 K for ﬂames A, B, and
C just above the nozzle exit. From the large values
of Ta −T and its distributions, it becomes obvious
that ﬁnite-rate chemistry effects play a very impor-
tant role in the ﬂames investigated. The burned gases
reach a ﬁnal state with Ta −T < 200 K that is close
to equilibrium. Comparison of the results reveals that
nonequilibrium effects are quite differently distrib-
uted in the three ﬂames: Flame A reaches a constant
level of Ta −T at h ≈55 mm, and in ﬂame C signiﬁ-
cant effects of ﬁnite-rate chemistry are observed up to
h ≈45 mm, whereas in ﬂame B a uniform Ta −T is
attained by h ≈20 mm. These heights are in good ac-
cordance with the CH LIF images, where for ﬂames B
and C, the same heights are found for detectable CH,
and for ﬂame A, CH is still present at the upper end
of the image at h = 47 mm. The observed difference
in height between ﬂames A and C is in accordance
with the different ﬂow velocities and Reynolds num-
bers of the ﬂames. The much faster burnout of ﬂame B
is again related to the thermoacoustic pulsations and
is probably caused mainly by the relatively high tem-
perature level of the gas in the inﬂow as discussed
before.
Finally, the mean distributions of the mole frac-
tions X of H2O, CH4, and O2 are presented in
Figs. 18 and 19. The shapes of the distributions
of X(H2O), displayed in Fig. 18 (left), resemble
strongly those of temperature for each ﬂame (see
Fig. 15). Inspection of the single-shot results (not dis-
played) reveals that the correlation between X(H2O)
and T is in quite good agreement with the correla-
tions calculated for strained laminar ﬂames. From
the single-shot correlations it is, however, seen that
the ﬂames experience a temperature loss in the
orz, probably due to heat conduction to the burner
plate [32].
As shown in Fig. 19 (left), the distributions of
X(CH4) exhibit the highest values close to the fuel
nozzle; however, for ﬂames A and C the maxima
are not exactly above the CH4 injection but shifted
slightly inward. Close to the nozzle (h < 15 mm), the
CH4 distribution of ﬂame B is signiﬁcantly broader
than those of ﬂames A and C. A similar trend was
already seen in the mixture fraction distributions
(Figs. 12 and 13) and can also be observed for the
O2 distribution (Fig. 19). This result is a further indi-
cation that the periodic oscillations of the ﬂow ﬁeld
generate additional mixing of fuel, air, and exhaust
gas, which promotes reaction progress. The consump-
tion of CH4 with increasing distance from the nozzle
is in general accordance with the decrease in Ta −T
except for a small discrepancy in the orz, where
Ta −T increases, due to the above-mentioned tem-
Fig. 19. Left: two-dimensional distribution of the mean CH4
mole fraction. Right: two-dimensional distribution of the
mean O2 mole fraction.
perature loss. This can be seen comparing Fig. 18
(right) and Fig. 19 (left) at positions r > 25 mm and
h = 0–10 mm. Here, the CH4 concentration is around
or smaller than 1% but the temperature difference
Ta −T is larger than 200 K for ﬂame A or even
400 K for ﬂames B and C. The temperature differ-
ence is not explainable by the remaining fuel and is
probably due to heat transfer to the casing. In the irz,
above h ≈10 mm, and in the exhaust gas region, no
CH4 is found.


--- Page 18 ---

222
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
The distributions of X(O2) (Fig. 19, right) re-
ﬂect again the shapes of the ﬂames and are in good
agreement with those of T and Ta −T ; i.e., X(O2)
decreases as T increases. The fact that the lowest
mean concentrations of O2 are found near the ﬂame
axis within the irz conﬁrms that the mixing charac-
teristics of the burner conﬁguration generate a rel-
atively fuel-rich (but still overall lean) recirculating
gas ﬂow which is of importance for ﬂame stabiliza-
tion. The distributions of the remaining major species
(N2, CO2, CO, H2) are in good agreement with the
results presented and are not displayed. The mean
mole fractions of the intermediate species CO and
H2 are generally below 0.018 and 0.012, respectively.
The highest concentrations of these species are found
in the shear layer between the inlet ﬂow and the irz
at h = 10–20 mm with near-stoichiometric mixture
fractions and temperatures between 1000 and 1500 K.
4. Summary and conclusions
A laboratory-scale GT model combustor has been
described and three CH4/air diffusion ﬂames with dif-
ferent ﬂame characteristics have been investigated us-
ing LDV, PLIF of OH and CH, and laser Raman scat-
tering. The main goals of the studies were (1) to carry
out a detailed experimental analysis to improve under-
standing of the physical and chemical processes lead-
ing to the different behaviors of swirling ﬂames, and
(2) to provide a useful database for the veriﬁcation
and improvement of numerical combustion models.
The results presented in this article concern the ﬂow
ﬁelds and the ﬂame structures, as well as the mean
values and ﬂuctuations of the major species concen-
trations, mixture fraction, and temperature. A sec-
ond article addresses turbulence–chemistry interac-
tions and their effect on mixing and stabilization [32].
The shapes of the mean ﬂow ﬁelds of all three
ﬂames are quite similar: The injected ﬂows of CH4
and air formed a cone with an opening angle θ/2
of about 26◦with respect to the ﬂame axis. Due to
the swirl, a pronounced irz was established which
reached from h ≈70 mm down into the central air
nozzle. This reverse ﬂow of hot combustion products
formed the major source for the ignition and stabiliza-
tion of the ﬂames. The instantaneous ﬂame structures
and velocity ﬂuctuations gave evidence that the irz
was, at least in the lower part, subject to strong tur-
bulent ﬂuctuations of its shape and composition. An
orz was established in the lower part of the combus-
tion chamber.
The ﬂame structures were visualized by planar
laser-induced ﬂuorescence of OH and CH. The re-
sults showed that the instantaneous ﬂame shapes were
dominated by turbulence and that the three ﬂames
could hardly be distinguished based on a single in-
stantaneous OH or CH image. The reaction zones
of all three ﬂames were generally thin (⩽0.5 mm)
and strongly wrinkled but more contorted in ﬂame A,
which had a higher Reynolds number. The averaged
images of CH PLIF showed the regions of heat re-
lease. It could be seen that none of the ﬂames was
attached to the nozzle; i.e., reactions did not start
below h ≈5, 4, and 6 in ﬂames A, B, and C, re-
spectively. The ﬂames were thus partially premixed
before ignition. Flame B had a remarkably short ﬂame
length of h ≈20 mm, whereas the other two ﬂames
reached up to h ≈50 mm (ﬂame A) and h ≈40 mm
(ﬂame C), which also represented a fast burnout. The
averaged OH and CH distributions also revealed the
signiﬁcantly different shapes of the three ﬂames. The
opening angles for the ﬂame zones deviated from the
opening angle of the ﬂow ﬁelds for ﬂame C and espe-
cially for ﬂame B, while for ﬂame A the two angles
matched roughly.
While a certain similarity was seen for ﬂames A
and C, with opening angles θ/2 of 30◦and 45◦, re-
spectively, ﬂame B had a signiﬁcantly larger opening
angle (θ/2 = 75◦) and was much shorter. The differ-
ent shapes of ﬂames B and C were surprising because
their mean ﬂow ﬁelds were very similar, especially
at the nozzle exit. Except for the velocity ﬁelds, all
other measured quantities conﬁrmed that ﬂame B ex-
hibited a different behavior than ﬂames A and C. Mi-
crophone measurements revealed that the sound emis-
sions of ﬂame B were concentrated at a frequency of
≈290 Hz, proving the occurrence of thermoacoustic
oscillations, and previously reported phase-resolved
LDV and PLIF measurements showed signiﬁcant pe-
riodic variations of the ﬂame structure during an os-
cillation cycle. Periodic changes in the expansion of
the inner and outer recirculation zones enhanced the
mixing of fuel, air, and exhaust gas, which in turn con-
tributed to increased reaction progress.
Measurements of the mixture fraction demon-
strated the fast mixing of fuel and air of this nozzle
conﬁguration. At h = 5 mm, variations of the mean
mixture fraction along the radial proﬁle remained be-
tween fmean = 0.02 and 0.08 for ﬂame A and were
even smaller for the other ﬂames. Mixing was com-
pleted at about the same height as the heat release, i.e.,
at h ≈40 mm for ﬂames A and C and at h ≈20 mm
for ﬂame B. Within the irz, f and T were higher and
X(O2) was smaller than the global values. The ﬂow
and the mixing characteristics of the burner enhanced
the effect of the irz with respect to ignition and stabi-
lization of the ﬂame. Although measurements could
not be performed below h = 0 mm, the results ob-
tained indicated that hot combustion products were
transported via the irz into the central nozzle, where


--- Page 19 ---

P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
223
they mixed with air before reentering the combustion
chamber.
The distributions of Ta −T showed that in all
three ﬂames, pronounced ﬁnite-rate chemistry effects
occurred which led to a signiﬁcant deviation from
equilibrium composition and temperature, especially
within the high-velocity regions of the inlet ﬂow and
the neighboring shear layers. Finally, it should be
noted that the experimental data are available from
one of the authors (W.M.) on request for validation of
numerical codes for swirling turbulent ﬂames.
Acknowledgments
The work presented here was performed mainly in
the frame of the project Combustion Control and Sim-
ulation, funded by the State of Baden-Württemberg,
and as part of the DLR project NACOS. The ﬁnan-
cial support within these projects is gratefully ac-
knowledged by the authors. We furthermore thank
B. Lehmann for execution of the LDV measurements
and B. Noll for fruitful discussions.
References
[1] A.K. Gupta, D.G. Lilley, N. Syred, Swirl Flows, Aba-
cus Press, Kent, 1984.
[2] N. Syred, N.A. Chigier, J.M. Beér, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 13 (1971) 617–624.
[3] N. Syred, J.M. Beér, Combust. Flame 23 (1974) 143–
201.
[4] R. Weber, J. Dugué, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 18
(1992) 349–367.
[5] S.M. Correa, Proc. Combust. Inst. 27 (1998) 1793–
1807.
[6] A.H. Lefebvre, Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor &
Francis, Philadelphia, 1999.
[7] H.J. Bauer, Prog. Comput. Fluid Dyn. 4 (2004) 130–
142.
[8] W. Meier, X.R. Duan, P. Weigand, B. Lehmann,
Gaswärme Int. 53 (2004) 153–158.
[9] W. Stricker, in: K. Kohse-Höinghaus, J. Jeffries (Eds.),
Applied Combustion Diagnostics, Taylor & Francis,
New York, 2002, pp. 155–193.
[10] A.C. Eckbreth, Laser Diagnostic for Combustion Tem-
perature and Species, Gordon & Breach, 1996.
[11] K. Kohse-Höinghaus, J. Jeffries (Eds.), Applied Com-
bustion Diagnostics, Taylor & Francis, New York,
2002.
[12] A.R. Masri, R.W. Dibble, R.S. Barlow, Prog. Energy
Combust. Sci. 22 (1996) 307–362.
[13] J. Wolfrum, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28 (1998) 1–41.
[14] H. Kaaling, R. Ryden, Y. Bouchie, D. Ansart, P. Ma-
gre, C. Guin, in: 13th International Symposium on Air
Breathing Engines (ISABE), Chattanooga, TN (USA),
1997.
[15] S. Kampmann, T. Seeger, A. Leipertz, Appl. Opt. 34
(1995) 2780–2786.
[16] F. Dinkelacker, A. Soika, D. Most, D. Hofmann, A.
Leipertz, W. Polifke, K. Döbbeling, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 27 (1998) 857–865.
[17] R. Fink, A. Hupfer, D. Rist, in: Proceedings, ASME
Turbo Expo 2002, GT-2002-30078.
[18] C.S. Cooper, N.M. Laurendeau, Appl. Phys. B 70
(2000) 903–910.
[19] C.S. Cooper, N.M. Laurendeau, Combust. Flame 123
(2000) 175–188.
[20] W.-P. Shih, J.G. Lee, D.A. Santavicca, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 26 (1996) 2771–2778.
[21] Y. Deguchi, M. Noda, Y. Fukuda, Y. Ichinose, Y. Endo,
M. Inida, Y. Abe, S. Iwasaki, Meas. Sci. Technol. 13
(2002) R103–R115.
[22] P.O. Hedman, D.L. Warren, Combust. Flame 100
(1995) 185–192.
[23] S.-Y. Lee, S. Seo, J.C. Broda, S. Pal, R.J. Santoro, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 28 (2000) 775–782.
[24] A. Arnold, R. Bombach, W. Hubschmid, B. Käppeli,
ERCOFTAC Bull. 38 (1998) 10–19.
[25] J. Fritz, M. Kröner, Th. Sattelmayer, in: Proceedings,
ASME Turbo Expo 2001, 2001-GT-0054.
[26] C. Löfström, J. Engström, M. Richter, C.F. Kaminsky,
P. Johansson, K. Nyholm, J. Nygren, M. Aldén, in: Pro-
ceedings, ASME Turbo Expo 2000, 2000-GT-0124.
[27] C.M. Gittins, S.U. Shenoy, H.R. Aldag, D.P. Pacheco,
M.F. Miller, M.G. Allen, in: 38th AIAA Aerospace Sci-
ences Meeting, Reno, NV, 2000.
[28] U.E. Meier, D. Wolff-Gaßmann, J. Heinze, M. Froder-
mann, I. Magnusson, G. Josefsson, in: 18th Interna-
tional Congress on Instrumentation in Aerospace Simu-
lation Facilities (ICIASF 99), Toulouse, 1999, pp. 7.1–
7.7.
[29] U.E. Meier, D. Wolff-Gaßmann, W. Stricker, Aero-
space Sci. Technol. 4 (2000) 403–414.
[30] M. Carl, T. Behrendt, C. Fleing, M. Frodermann, J.
Heinze, C. Hassa, U. Meier, D. Wolff-Gaßmann, S.
Hohmann, N. Zarzalis, ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power 123 (2001) 810–816.
[31] O. Kunz, B. Noll, R. Lückerath, M. Aigner, S.
Hohmann, in: 37th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint
Propulsion Conference and Exhibition, Salt Lake City,
UT, 2001, AIAA 2001-3706.
[32] W. Meier, X. Duan, P. Weigand, Combust. Flame 144
(2006) 225–236.
[33] R. Giezendanner, O. Keck, P. Weigand, W. Meier, U.
Meier, W. Stricker, M. Aigner, Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol. 175 (2003) 721–741.
[34] X.R. Duan, W. Meier, P. Weigand, B. Lehmann, Appl.
Phys. B 80 (2005) 389–396.
[35] P. Weigand, W. Meier, X.R. Duan, R. Giezendanner-
Thoben, U. Meier, Flow Turbulence Combust., in press.
[36] M. Cao, H. Eickhoff, F. Joos, B. Simon, in: ASME
Propulsion and Energetics, 70th Symposium, AGARD
Conf. Proc. 422 (1987) 8.1.
[37] W. Leuckel, N. Fricker, J. Inst. Fuel 49 (1976) 103–112.
[38] D.G. Lilley, AIAA J. 15 (8) (1977) 1063–1078.


--- Page 20 ---

224
P. Weigand et al. / Combustion and Flame 144 (2006) 205–224
[39] J.A. Sutton, J.F. Driscoll, Appl. Opt. 42 (2003) 2819–
2828.
[40] J. Tobai, T. Dreier, J.W. Daily, J. Chem. Phys. 116
(2002) 4030–4038.
[41] G.H. Dieke, H.M. Crosswhite, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Ra-
diat. Transfer 2 (1962) 97–199.
[42] J. Luque, D.R. Crosley, J. Chem. Phys. 104 (1996)
3907–3913.
[43] J. Luque, D.R. Crosley, SRI Report No. MP 98-021,
SRI Int., Menlo Park, CA, 1998.
[44] C.D. Carter, J.M. Donbar, J.F. Driscoll, Appl. Phys.
B 66 (1998) 129–132.
[45] J. Luque, R.J.H. Klein-Douwel, J.B. Jeffries, D.R.
Crosley, Appl. Phys. B 71 (2000) 85–94.
[46] O. Keck, W. Meier, W. Stricker, M. Aigner, Combust.
Sci. Technol. 174 (2002) 73–107.
[47] P. Weigand, R. Lückerath, W. Meier, http://www.dlr.de/
VT/Datenarchiv, 2003.
[48] V. Bergmann, W. Meier, D. Wolff, W. Stricker, Appl.
Phys. B 66 (1998) 489–502.
[49] G. Dixon-Lewis, Proc. Combust. Inst. 23 (1990) 305–
324.
[50] R.S. Barlow, R.W. Dibble, J.-Y. Chen, R.P. Lucht,
Combust. Flame 82 (1990) 235–251.
[51] J. Luque, R.J.H. Klein-Douwel, J.B. Jeffries, G.P.
Smith, D.R. Crosley, Appl. Phys. B 75 (2002) 779–790.
[52] H.N. Najm, P.H. Paul, C.J. Mueller, P.S. Wyckoff,
Combust. Flame 113 (1998) 312–332.
[53] J.-Y. Chen, University of California at Berkeley, private
communication.
[54] J.H. Miller, R.J. Kee, M.D. Smooke, J.F. Grcar, Paper
WSS/CI 84-10, in: Western State Section of the Com-
bustion Institute, Spring Meeting, 1984.
[55] U. Rahmann, A. Bütler, U. Lenhard, R. Düsing,
D. Markus, A. Brockhinke, K. Kohse-Höinghaus,
LASKIN—A Simulation Program for Time-Resolved
LIF-Spectra, International Report, University of Biele-
feld, Faculty of Chemistry, Physical Chemistry I,
http://pc1.uni-bielefeld.de/laskin V. 5.0.
[56] K.J. Rensberger, M.J. Dyer, R.A. Copeland, Appl.
Opt. 27 (1988) 3679–3689.
[57] R. Giezendanner-Thoben, U. Meier, W. Meier, M.
Aigner, Flow Turbulence Combust., in press.
[58] W. Meier, X.R. Duan, P. Weigand, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 30 (2005) 835–842.
[59] J. Ji, J.P. Gore, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002) 861–867.
[60] M. Braun-Unkhoff, DLR Stuttgart, private communica-
tion.
