
--- Page 1 ---

A. Duncan Walker
Jon F. Carrotte
James J. McGuirk
e-mail: j.j.mcguirk@lboro.ac.uk
Department of Aeronautical and Automotive
Engineering,
Loughborough University,
Loughborough LE11 3TU, UK
Compressor/Diffuser/Combustor
Aerodynamic Interactions in Lean
Module Combustors
The paper reports an experimental investigation into the possibility of increased interac-
tions between combustor external aerodynamics and upstream components, e.g., predif-
fuser, compressor outlet guide vane (OGV), and even the compressor rotor, caused by the
trend in lean module fuel injectors to larger mass ﬂows entering the combustor cowl. To
explore these component interaction effects, measurements were made on a fully annular
rig comprising a single stage compressor, an advanced integrated OGV/prediffuser, fol-
lowed by a dump diffuser and a generic combustor ﬂametube with metered cowl and
inner/outer annulus ﬂows. The ﬂow split entering the cowl was increased from 30% to
70%. The results demonstrate that, with ﬁxed geometry, as the injector ﬂow increases, the
performance of the prediffuser and feed annuli suffer. Prediffuser losses increase and at
high injector ﬂow rates, the diffuser moves close to separation. The substantial circum-
ferential variation in cowl ﬂow can feed upstream and cause rotor forcing. Notable
differences in performance were observed inline and between injectors at the OGV exit,
suggesting that geometry changes such as an increased dump gap or nonaxisymmetric
prediffuser designs may be beneﬁcial. DOI: 10.1115/1.2747646
Introduction
In future aeroengine gas turbine combustor designs, lean mod-
ule combustion will be essential in order to achieve required NOx
targets. Consequently, up to 70% of the ﬂow issuing from the
compressor may be required to enter the ﬂametube through the
fuel injectors, compared with typically 30% in current combus-
tor designs. To accommodate this increased mass ﬂow require-
ment while maintaining an acceptable pressure drop, lean module
fuel injectors will be signiﬁcantly larger than their conventional
air-spray counterparts. This will necessitate geometry changes to
the combustor external aerodynamic layout such as a deeper
ﬂametube, potentially increasing the aerodynamic loss due to in-
creased turning within the dump region. In addition to affecting
the turning losses incurred by the residual airﬂow entering the
feed annuli surrounding the ﬂametube, these geometry and ﬂow
split changes and the strongly 3D circumferential distribution of
the ﬂow into the combustor head compared to current practice are
likely to increase the coupling or interaction between the combus-
tor external aerodynamics and upstream components such as the
compressor outlet guide vane OGV/prediffuser combination and
possibly even lead to forcing of the ﬁnal compressor rotor stage.
Upstream modiﬁcation of turbomachinery ﬂow due to the po-
tential ﬁeld introduced by downstream components is by no
means a new phenomenon. It has led, for example, to work on
optimization of the aerodynamic interaction between the fan and
by-pass OGVs Shahpar et al. 1. Equally, the two-way interac-
tion between the prediffuser, upstream OGV, and downstream
combustor is well known. The impact of OGV wakes on the per-
formance of a downstream located prediffuser has been fully
documented Stevens et al. 2, Barker and Carrotte 3,4, as has
the beneﬁcial effect of the blockage caused by the downstream
combustor cowl stabilizing the prediffuser ﬂow Klein 5. Re-
cent works by Barker et al. 6 and Walker et al. 7 have shown
how, by adopting an integrated approach whereby the design of
the OGV and prediffuser are considered simultaneously, the OGV
wake ﬂows can be manipulated to advantage in achieving im-
proved prediffuser performance. Finally, computational ﬂuid dy-
namics CFD simulations have also recently addressed the topic
of interaction between closely coupled components such as com-
pressor and combustor Schlueter et al. 8. In this work, the main
effort was placed on identiﬁcation of appropriate techniques for
coupling the unsteady Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes predic-
tion of the compressor ﬂow with the large-eddy simulation pre-
diction of the prediffuser/combustor combination. It seems that
the coupling was essentially one way downstream in the engine,
so that although combustor cowl/fuel injector pressure and ﬂow
characteristics could inﬂuence the prediffuser, it was assumed that
these did not penetrate further upstream and inﬂuence the com-
pressor calculation. While this is certainly the design intent, and is
a good assumption for present designs, the present paper is aimed
at addressing the question as to how strong this upstream effect
might be for lean module type geometries and injector ﬂow splits.
The present investigation extends the study of Walker et al. 7
to consideration of combustor cowl fuel injector ﬂow in addition
to the compressor/prediffuser components. An experimental inves-
tigation has been undertaken to characterize the extent that the
component interactions described above are modiﬁed when in-
creasing the injector airﬂow from conventional levels to those
expected in lean module combustors, using a combustion system
layout typical of current design practice. The experimental study
utilizes the same rig as used by Walker et al. 7. This comprises
a fully annular generic lean module combustor downstream of a
single stage axial compressor. The OGV/prediffuser coupling is
effected via an advanced integrated OGV/prediffuser geometry
4,5. Several traverse planes are used to gather ﬁve-hole probe
data that allow the ﬂow structure to be examined through the
rotor, OGV, prediffuser, and in the inner/outer annulus supply
ducts, quantifying the extent of the component interactions and
associated system performance. Several conﬁgurations are inves-
tigated where the injector mass ﬂow has been increased system-
atically from 30% to 50% and ﬁnally 70%.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received May
1, 2007; ﬁnal manuscript received May 4, 2007; published online January 9, 2008.
Review conducted by Dilip R Ballal. Paper presented at the ASME Turbo Expo
2007: Land, Sea, and Air GT2007, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, May 14–17, 2007.
Paper No. GT2007-27872.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011504-1
Copyright © 2008 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

Experimental Facility
During this project, all experimental data were obtained on a
low speed isothermal test facility operating at nominally atmo-
spheric conditions. Figure 1 provides an illustrative sketch, and
full details are provided in 7. During the present study, an addi-
tional centrifugal fan was added, in series, to the system. This
gave a greater ﬂexibility in control and provided the extra drive
required to overcome the increased rig pressure drop incurred by
forcing a higher proportion of air through the combustor cowl.
The working section Fig. 2 is comprised of a single stage
axial compressor, an OGV prediffuser assembly, and a represen-
tation of a downstream combustion system. Geometric details on
integrated guide vane IGV, rotor, and OGV rows are given in
7. The rotor is operated at a ﬁxed nondimensional mass ﬂow
m˙ RT/AP, and speed ND/ RT corresponding to a ﬂow
coefﬁcient Va/U of =0.403 and a mass ﬂow of approximately
4 kg s−1. This results in an axial velocity through the blade rows
of approximately 40 ms−1Mach number 0.12 and an OGV Rey-
nolds number of approximately 1.6105. The downstream ﬂow
distribution to the feed annuli and combustor cowl is controlled by
a system of throttles; the centrifugal fan is utilized as a further
throttle to ensure that the axial compressor maintains the desired
operating condition.
Test Geometry
Integrated OGV/Prediffuser. The OGV row has 160 vanes
whose geometry includes speciﬁc lean, sweep, and camber char-
acteristics that were determined in 6 by a process of manual
CFD optimization. This achieves a spanwise blade loading varia-
tion that creates secondary ﬂows to transport higher momentum
towards the walls, thus ofﬂoading the end wall boundary layers
within the prediffuser. Hence, as reported in 7, this integrated
OGV IOGV design was able to achieve a prediffuser area ratio
of 1.8 without separation. At the same nondimensional length of
2.23, this would have resulted in separation according to the stan-
dard Howard et al. 9 design chart.
Generic Flame Tube Cowl and “Fuel Injectors.” The same
simple ﬂametube geometry as used previously 7 was retained in
the present work. This presents the IOGV/prediffuser with a rep-
resentative downstream blockage. Lean module combustors may
not feature air admission ports in the annuli, hence no dilution
holes were included in the ﬂametube liner walls. The resultant
generic ﬂametube, illustrated in Fig. 3, has 20 “fuel injectors”
represented by 20 simple holes, with the area of these set initially
Test 1 to match the effective area of an injector sized to take
30% of compressor discharge ﬂow. As the mass ﬂow through
“injectors” and hence the cowl was increased, the ratio of mass
ﬂow to “injector” area was maintained by increasing the size of
the holes. This meant that as the mass ﬂow increased, the relative
acceleration of the dump ﬂow into the cowl did not change. The
ﬁnal conﬁgurations tested are detailed in Table 1.
Instrumentation
Probes. Aerodynamic performance was assessed using suitably
calibrated miniature ﬁve-hole probes as described by Wray and
Carrotte 10 and employed in non-nulled mode to determine the
local ﬂow vector and total and static pressures. As indicated in
Fig. 2, ﬁve-hole probe area traverses were conducted at rig inlet
X1, rotor exit X2, OGV exit X3, prediffuser exit X4, within
the inner X5i, and outer X5o feed annuli and just upstream of
the dummy injector XI. The probes were traversed in the radial
direction using a stepper motor powered linear guide attached to
the external casings of the test section. Circumferential traversing
was achieved by rotation of the casing or rotation of the IGV,
OGV, and ﬂametube.
Data Reduction and Errors. Overall aerodynamic perfor-
mance is quantiﬁed in terms of total pressure loss and static pres-
sure recovery coefﬁcients derived from the ﬁve-hole probe area
traverses data, corrected to the International Civil Aviation Or-
ganisation ICAO standard day conditions. Thus, at any measure-
ment plane, the mass ﬂow rate and bulk average velocity are
deﬁned:
m˙ = UdA = U¯ A
1
The mass ﬂow balance on area traverse planes was within ±1% of
the rig mass ﬂow entering the test facility measured via a ﬁve-hole
probe traverse at plane X1. Spatially averaged values of total
and static pressure at each plane were derived using the mass-
weighted technique described by Klein 5, e.g.,
P˜ = 1
m˙  Pdm˙ =
1
U¯ A PUdA
2
The mass-weighted total pressure loss  and static pressure rise
Cp coefﬁcients are then deﬁned as
1−2 = P˜ 1 −P˜ 2
P˜ 1 −p˜1
Cp1−2 = p˜2 −p˜1
P˜ 1 −p˜1
3
The mass-weighted total pressures were repeatable to within
±1 mm H2O, which amounts to less than ±0.5% of the dynamic
pressure at OGV exit. Thus, the repeatability of the derived total
pressure loss and static pressure rise coefﬁcients was better than
±0.005 of the values presented.
Results and Discussion
Cowl Flow Variation. As an indication of the strength of the
variation in cowl inlet ﬂow conditions induced by the ﬂow split
Fig. 1
Test facility
011504-2 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

changes, Fig. 4 shows measured values of the total pressure ﬁeld
just upstream 13 mm of the hole in the combustor cowl for the
two higher mass ﬂows 50% and 70% expressed as a loss coef-
ﬁcient with respect to the rotor exit plane X2. One particular
point to notice is the increase in nonuniformity of the total pres-
sure feed to the injector implied at the high ﬂow 70% condition.
Since lean module fuel injectors may need high levels of ﬂow
uniformity to achieve lean emissions performance, it is clear that
extra efforts to ensure this by suitable tailoring of the combustor
external aerodynamics are likely to be needed. To increase injec-
tor ﬂow while keeping prediffuser/dump diffuser geometry the
same is unlikely to be acceptable. As the porosity of the cowl
increases, and the dump gap remains the same, the downstream
static pressure ﬁeld as seen by the prediffuser exit changes from
one that is effectively uniform circumferentially at low cowl
ﬂows—varying from a higher level in between injectors where
ﬂow impingement occurs to a slightly lower level in line with the
“sink” ﬂow areas of the cowl that feed the fuel injectors—to a
larger amplitude variation in static pressure at increased cowl ﬂow
from the highs in between injector locations, to signiﬁcant lows
inline with injectors. At the very least, this is likely to disturb the
beneﬁcial blockage effect on the prediffuser expected at an un-
changed dump gap. Whether the effect penetrates even further
upstream is now addressed.
Rig Inlet (X1) and Rotor Exit (X2). Figure 5 presents the
nondimensional axial velocity proﬁles at rig inlet X1 for the
various cowl ﬂow splits; the different development lengths on the
inner/outer annulus walls in the rig entry section explain the dif-
ferent inner/outer boundary layer shapes seen at station X1. Figure
5 shows that upstream of the IGV, the inlet proﬁle remains con-
stant for all conditions; the IGV is too far upstream even at the
highest cowl ﬂow rate to sense the downstream change in ﬂow
split. This is, however, not the case for the rotor exit X2 proﬁles,
as can be seen in Fig. 6, which contains normalized and pitch-
averaged axial velocity, yaw angle, and total pressure proﬁles;
these have been averaged over a single IGV sector i.e., two OGV
sectors given the blade numbers, and the bulk Mach number at
station X3 is 0.12. Cleary, for 30% and 50% cowl ﬂow, the rotor
Table 1
Summary of test conﬁgurations
Test No.
“Injector” diameter mm
Mass ﬂow split, %
inner/cowl/outer
1
40.0
35/30/35
2
52.5
25/50/25
3
61.5
15/70/15
Fig. 2
Measurement planes
Fig. 3
Cowl details
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011504-3
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

exit conditions only change marginally. However, for 70% of the
prediffuser efﬂux passing through the cowl, the rotor exit ﬂow
ﬁeld is clearly altered. The velocity proﬁles show a ﬂow deﬁcit at
the tip of the rotor—a feature also reﬂected in the pressure and
yaw angle proﬁles. The change in the combustor ﬂow split to 70%
cowl ﬂow has created a strong enough variation in the down-
stream static pressure ﬁeld to feed upstream and force the com-
pressor rotor. Note that the left hand pressure proﬁles in Fig. 6 are
plotted as two sets for the 70% case. One set represents a two
OGV pitch average taken inline with injectors and one is taken in
between injectors. Although some difference is seen, the nondi-
mensionalizing dynamic head is taken relative to the local OGV
sector and hence circumferential variations in ﬂow strength are
not seen. The right-hand pressure plot in Fig. 6 shows an average
taken over a whole injector sector eight OGV passages, again,
one sector is in between and one inline with the injector location.
Now a clear difference is seen in the total pressure level in the
core passage between sectors, indicating that as the rotor passes
through the circumferentially varying static pressure ﬁeld, it is
forced to move around on its characteristic.
Figure 7 quantiﬁes the magnitude of the varying static pressure
seen by the rotor at both 50% and 70% conditions from measure-
ments of a ﬁxed wall static at rotor exit X2 as the combustor was
rotated though two sectors. At 50% cowl ﬂow, there are only
slight variations in the measured pressure circumferentially, prob-
ably due to the potential ﬁeld of the OGV, but only just within
measurement accuracy. The static pressure for the 70% case, how-
ever, can be seen to vary signiﬁcantly from inline to in between
injectors, showing a low pressure inline. The circumferential reso-
lution in the data is again just sufﬁcient to pick up the changes in
static pressure caused by the potential ﬁeld of the downstream
OGVs. However, this is small compared to the variation caused by
the cowl ﬂow suction ﬁeld, which is equivalent to approximately
5% of the rotor total pressure rise. This is certainly enough to
force the rotor to move locally up or down its characteristic. The
fact that the changes in downstream ﬂow split can penetrate as far
upstream as the rotor and can affect its operation is signiﬁcant,
and shows that dump gap design rules to achieve optimum stabil-
ity for prediffusers will clearly not be transferable between con-
ventional and lean module combustors.
OGV Exit (X3). Final conﬁrmation of the change in upstream
interaction between 50% and 70% ﬂow split is provided in Fig. 8.
This shows the circumferential variation of a single OGV exit
X3 total pressure measurement located at midannulus height be-
tween two OGVs as the combustor is rotated through one injector
sector. At 30–50% cowl ﬂow, the pressure is constant to within
measurement accuracy. Caution must be exercised here in that this
measurement is only at midblade passage, midannulus height, so
it cannot be unequivocally concluded that the OGV row does not
see the variation in circumferential blockage provided by the com-
bustor see below. However, at 70%, the measured pressure at
OGV exit varies signiﬁcantly and periodically with the injector
location. The magnitude of this variation is relatively large at 7%
of the local dynamic pressure. Velocity data averaged over respec-
tive sectors shows that with respect to the rig overall mass ﬂow
rate, the indicated mass ﬂow per sector varies from inline to in
between injectors by ±5%. It is clear, therefore, that at 70%, the
downstream pressure ﬁeld has propagated upstream and beyond
the OGV to inﬂuence the rotor. The OGV performance is also
affected by this interaction. Figure 9 plots axial velocity contours
for two 2-OGV sectors in between and inline with injectors. Ad-
jacent OGV wakes differ because there is one IGV per two OGVs
and the IGV wake persists through the rotor, deepening the left-
hand OGV wake. For 70% cowl ﬂow, there appears to be a reduc-
tion in the bulk velocity. Table 2 details the total pressure loss and
static pressure recovery across the OGV. For the two lower ﬂow
Fig. 4
Cowl inlet data: minj=50% „top…, minj=70% „bottom…
„height=80 mm, sector angle =9 deg „4-OGV passages……
Fig. 5
Rig inlet axial velocity proﬁle „X1…
011504-4 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

splits, performance is maintained. Over a whole injector sector it
would appear that 70% cowl ﬂow produces a similar level of
OGV performance. However, if separate 2-OGV sectors are con-
sidered, this is not the case. Between injectors, where there is a
ﬂow deﬁcit,  increases from 0.13 to 0.15, whereas inline with
injectors, where there is increased ﬂow,  falls to 0.1.
Prediffuser Exit (X4). Given that, for Test 3, the rotor and
OGV are affected by the circumferential variation in blockage
presented by the combustor, it would be logical to expect this to
be reproduced at prediffuser exit. Additionally, it would also be
reasonable to assume that variations of prediffuser exit ﬂow
should be observed as the airﬂow through the cowl increases.
Figure 10 indicates that this is indeed the case. Normalized axial
velocity contours were gathered over a full injector sector the
bulk average Mach number at station X4 is 0.07. Clearly, as the
combustor mass ﬂow is redistributed, the ﬂowﬁeld and OGV
wake structure also change. Increasing the injector ﬂow from 30%
to 50% alters the OGV wake development, with the ﬂow taking
on an inboard bias. The most likely explanation for this is that at
50% ﬂow, although the upstream interaction has not reached the
rotor, it has reached the OGV and the total pressure proﬁle at
OGV exit has been modiﬁed. This change is then ampliﬁed by the
prediffuser to produce the inboard bias shown. At 70% cowl ﬂow,
the ﬂow structure at prediffuser exit changes again, exhibiting low
velocity regions suggesting the inner wall boundary layer in par-
ticular is under duress. The residual swirl level at prediffuser exit
also changes with test condition. At 30% cowl ﬂow, the pitch-
averaged residual yaw angle is −4 deg over the central 60% of
the passage height, rising to 3 deg near the diffuser end walls.
At 50% ﬂow, this changes to 4 deg in the core ﬂow and as much
Fig. 6
Pitch averaged proﬁles at rotor exit „X2…
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011504-5
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

as 20 deg in the wall regions. At 70% cowl ﬂow, since the rotor
exit condition has now changed appreciably, the core swirl angle
is −2 deg over most of the passage height, rising to 5 deg near
the outer wall.
Overall System Performance. Measurements in both feed an-
nuli allow the overall system performance to be established. Table
3 gives the mass-weighted total pressure loss and static pressure
recovery coefﬁcients for the inner annulus X5i quoted with re-
spect to both rotor exit X2 and OGV exit X3. As the injector
mass ﬂow is increased from conventional air-spray levels 30%,
to levels more typical of lean module designs 50–70%, the total
pressure loss increases. The system loss from rotor exit is 22% of
rotor exit dynamic for 30% cowl ﬂow and this rises to 23% for
50% and 26% for 70%. The overall system static pressure rise is
not signiﬁcantly affected, but both  and Cp values from OGV
exit to annulus show a large increase in loss and deterioration in
feed quality as the injector mass ﬂow increases. The data for the
outer annulus indicate similar trends and are not repeated here.
Conclusions
The effect on combustion system external aerodynamics of in-
creasing the injector ﬂow split from air-spray levels to those typi-
cal of lean module injectors has been studied. In order to do this,
three combustor ﬂow conﬁgurations were tested each utilizing the
same inlet section, IGV, rotor, and integrated OGV/prediffuser.
The ﬂow fraction of compressor efﬂux entering the cowl was
systematically increased from 30% to 50% and 70% while in-
creasing the effective area of cowl to maintain a constant mass
ﬂow per unit area. From the results presented here, the following
conclusions can be made:
•
For all ﬂow splits, rig inlet conditions remained constant.
•
At rotor exit, there was no change in the ﬂowﬁeld as the
cowl mass ﬂow increased from 30% to 50%. At 70%, a
notable circumferential variation in the static pressure ﬁeld
Table 2
OGV performance data
Test No.
X2−X3
CpX2−X3
1
0.132
0.38
2
0.128
0.38
3 Burner sector
0.129
0.38
3 2-OGV sector between
0.153
0.36
3 2-OGV sector inline
0.097
0.39
Fig. 7
Rotor exit „X2… static pressure
Fig. 8
OGV exit „reference… total pressure
Fig. 9
Axial velocity contours at OGV exit „X3…: „a… 50% be-
tween, „b… 70% between, „c… 50% inline, „d… 70% inline „height
=36.6 mm, sector angle =4.5 deg „2-OGV passages……
011504-6 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

was observed. This resulted in a degradation of the out-
board, tip ﬂow as the rotor was forced locally to move up/
down its characteristic.
•
Similarly for 30% to 50% cowl ﬂow, the performance of the
OGV row did not change, but at 70%, a circumferential
redistribution of mass ﬂow was observed, increasing by
5% in line with the injectors and decreasing by the same
amount in between. Consequently, the OGV total pressure
loss coefﬁcient varied from 0.097 in line to 0.153 between
injectors with an overall sector average of 0.129.
•
As the cowl mass ﬂow increased from 30% to 50% and
70%, the prediffuser ﬂow quality worsened, particularly
near the inner wall, where at 70% the prediffuser was close
to separation.
•
System performance from rotor through to feed annuli is a
direct function of the condition of the prediffuser exit ﬂow
ﬁeld, particularly the boundary layer ﬂow. As the injector air
ﬂow was increased and the prediffuser performance de-
creased, the annulus ﬂow incurred higher losses and became
less uniform. For both annuli the loss coefﬁcient increased,
suggesting an increase in system loss of almost 20% at the
higher injector ﬂow.
•
An estimate of injector feed suggested that at the higher
ﬂow rate, the total pressure was nonuniform.
Acknowledgment
The ﬁnancial support of the European Union under contract No.
F-AST3-CT-2003-502961 INTELLECT_DM is gratefully ac-
knowledged. The authors would also like to express their appre-
ciation to L. Monk, W. Niven, and A. Fardoe for their help in the
construction of the test facility. The helpful comments and tech-
nical support provided by A. Barker are gratefully acknowledged.
Nomenclature
A  passage area
AR  area ratio
c  outlet guide vane chord
Cp  static pressure rise coefﬁcient
h  annulus passage height
L  diffuser length
m˙  mass ﬂow rate
N  rotor speed
P,p  local total or static pressure
R  gas constant perfect gas law
Rn  nondimensional radius r−ri/ro−ri
r  radius relative to rig centerline
ri, ro  inner casing, outer casing radius
s  blade pitch
T,t  total or static temperature
U  rotor midpassage blade speed
Va  midpassage axial velocity
x  axial distance
  kinetic energy ﬂux coefﬁcient
  ﬂow coefﬁcient Va/U
  density
  total pressure loss coefﬁcient
Subscripts
X1  rotor inlet traverse plane
X2  rotor exit/OGV inlet traverse plane
X3  OGV exit traverse plane
X4  prediffuser exit traverse plane
X5i  inner annulus traverse plane
X5o  outer annulus traverse plane
Superscripts
–  area weighted spatially averaged mean value
  mass weighted spatially averaged mean value
References
1 Shahpar, S., Giacche, D., and Lapworth, L., 2003, “Multi-Objective Design
and Optimisation of Bypass Outlet Guide Vanes,” ASME Paper GT2003-
38698.
Table 3
Inner annulus performance data
Test No.
X2−X5I
X3−X5I
CpX2−X5I
CpX3−X5I
1
0.224
0.159
0.71
0.71
2
0.232
0.204
0.72
0.69
3
0.262
0.284
0.71
0.65
Fig. 10
Axial velocity contours at prediffuser exit „X4…: „a…
minj=30%, „b… minj=50%, „c… minj=70% „height=65.9 mm, sector
angle =18 deg „8-OGV passages……
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011504-7
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

2 Stevens, S. J., Harasgama, S. P., and Wray, A. P., 1984, “The Inﬂuence of
Blade Wakes on Combustor Shortened Prediffusers,” J. Aircr., 219, pp. 641–
648.
3 Barker, A. G., and Carrotte, J. F., 2001, “Inﬂuence of Compressor Exit Con-
ditions on Combustor Annular Diffusers, Part 1: Diffuser Performance,” J.
Propul. Power, 173, pp. 678–686.
4 Barker, A. G., and Carrotte, J. F., 2001, “Inﬂuence of Compressor Exit Con-
ditions on Combustor Annular Diffusers, Part 2: Flow Redistribution,” J. Pro-
pul. Power, 173, pp. 687–694.
5 Klein, A., 1995. “Characteristics of Combustor Diffusers,” Prog. Aerosp. Sci.,
313, pp. 171–271.
6 Barker, A. G., Carrotte, J. F., Luff, J., and McGuirk, J. J., 2003, “D1.1 Design
of an Integrated OGV/Diffuser System,” Loughborough Univ, UK, Dept. of
Aero. & Auto. Eng. Report No. TT03R01.
7 Walker, A. D., Carrotte, J. F., and McGuirk, J. J., 2006, “Enhanced External
Aerodynamic Performance of a Generic Combustor Using an Integrated OGV/
Prediffuser Design Technique,” ASME Paper No. GT2006-90184.
8 Schlueter, J., Wu, X., Pitsch, H., Kim, S., and Alonso, J., 2005. “Integrated
Simulations of a Compressor/Combustor Assembly of a Gas Turbine Engine,”
ASME Paper No. GT2005-68204.
9 Howard, J. H. G., Henseler, H. J., and Thornton-Trump, A. B., 1967. “Perfor-
mance and Flow Regimes for Annular Diffusers,” ASME Paper No. 67-WA/
FE-2.
10 Wray, A. P., and Carrotte, J. F., 1993, “The Development of a Large Annular
Facility for Testing Gas Turbine Combustor Diffuser Systems,” Paper No.
AIAA-93-2546.
011504-8 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
