
--- Page 1 ---

REVIEW
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications,
and key technologies on components
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li*
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Aero Engines Aero-thermodynamics & Collaborative
Innovation Center for Advanced Aero-Engine, School of Energy and Power Engineering, Beihang University,
Beijing 100191, China
Received 7 March 2022; accepted 10 November 2022
Available online 4 March 2023
KEYWORDS
Distributed generation;
Micro gas turbines
(MGTs);
Compressor;
Turbine;
Optimization
Abstract
Owing to their precedent characteristics, micro gas turbines (MGTs) have been
favored as popular power machinery in plenty of energy systems such as distributed energy sys-
tems, range extenders, solar power generations, fuel cell systems and individual power supplies.
Their speciﬁc features essentially include but are not limited to strong fuel adaptability, low
emissions, ﬂexible structure, and easy maintenance. Over the past 20 years, various types of
MGTs have been developed. Classical and forward-looking technologies have been employed
in the design and production of MGTs and their components. Among them, fully radial ﬂow
structures, gas lubricated bearings and efﬁcient recuperators are typical approaches to enhance
the overall performance and compactness, however, the exploitation of ceramic based materials
and intelligent algorithms in component design can also assist in improving the performance.
The applications of MGTs have been expanded to many ﬁelds, and the research on related com-
ponents has also made new progress. Due to the time frame, there is no systematic summary of
the latest relevant research, so it is essential to have a comprehensive understanding of the ap-
plications of MGTs and their pertinent components. This paper aims to present a comprehen-
sive review on MGTs, covering the development status, applications, factors of performance
and representative explorations of their components. Some investigations regarding the charac-
teristics of commercial MGTs are also conducted. Applications in distributed energy, range ex-
tenders, solar generations, and fuel cell systems are distinctly introduced. Recent research work
*Corresponding author.
E-mail address: liyulong1897@163.com (Yulong Li).
Peer review under responsibility of Propulsion and Power Research.
Production and Hosting by Elsevier on behalf of KeAi
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jppr.2023.01.002
2212-540X/ª 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
http://ppr.buaa.edu.cn/
Propulsion and Power Research
www.sciencedirect.com
Propulsion and Power Research 2023;12(1):1e43


--- Page 2 ---

on compressors, turbines, combustors, recuperators, and rotor systems are reviewed and
analyzed. The technologies and methods associated with materials, manufacturing, and cycles
beneﬁcial to the future development of MGTs are also explained and discussed in some detail.
ª 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
The growing diversiﬁcation of energy and resources to
sustain anthropogenic activity has attracted an increasing
concern worldwide, in the context of the development of the
modern social and economic structure. The widespread
exploitation of natural fossil fuels exposes the unsustain-
ability of energy and leads to an impact on the environment.
A reduction in unnecessary consumption in the energy
system will contribute to more sustainable development.
The traditional energy structure has apparent characteristics
of centralized supply, which brings unnecessary loss and
economic waste in energy transfer. Therefore, small-scale
energy systems with clean emissions are generally encour-
aged as complementary optimization approaches, and new
demands on distributed energy systems are produced.
The distributed energy system (DES), which provides the
on-demand supply and gradient utilization of energy, has
been developed rapidly worldwide since when proposed at
the end of the 20th century [1,2]. Conventional power
device, like internal combustion engine (ICE), was unable to
meet the demand for fuel forms and emission standards
required by DES, therefor, the micro gas turbine (MGT)
with an appropriate power range can be considered one of
the alternatives. Based on the Brayton cycle’s combustion
characteristics in the presence of high pressure, MGTs have
good adaptability to various properties of fuels. Both low
and high heating values of gaseous or liquid fuels can
provide
appropriate
combustion
performance.
With
advanced combustion technology, the emission of MGTs
can also reach a low level [3,4]. Additionally, MGTs also
have remarkable development potentials for standby power
sources, mobile power sources, new energy power genera-
tions, mechanical drives, and range extenders for trans-
portation
[5,6].
By
this
view,
the
performance
and
development of MGT have received extensive attention in
recent years.
MGTs represent a kind of gas turbine with power levels
up to 500 kW [7]. A typical MGT consists of a compressor,
a combustion chamber, and a turbine. Also, modern high-
Nomenclature
m
mass ﬂow (unit: kg/s)
n
rotating speed (unit: rpm)
P
pressure (unit: Pa)
T
thermodynamic temperature (unit: K)
R
gas constant (unit: J/(mol$K))
Greek letters
b
pressure/expansion ratio
h
efﬁciency
ε
recuperator effectiveness
Abbreviations
AM
additive manufacturing
ACCT
active control casing treatment
CFD
computational ﬂuid dynamics
CHP
combined heat and power
CMC
ceramic-matrix composite
CSP
concentrated solar power
DED
directed energy deposition
DES
distributed energy system
DIFF
diffusion combustion ﬂameless combustion
EV
electric vehicle
FC
fuel cell
FEA
ﬁnite element analysis
FLOX
ﬂameless oxidation
FPBO
fast pyrolysis bio-oil
ICE
internal combustion engine
ICR-GT intercooling regenerative gas turbine
LDI
lean direct inject combustion
LHV
low heat value
LP
lean premix combustion
LW
liqueﬁed wood
MCFC
molten carbonate fuel cell
MGT
micro gas turbine
NAVD
non-axisymmetric vaned diffuser
NSGA
non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm
ORC
organic Rankine cycle
RANS
Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes
RE
range extender
RQL
rich-quench-lean combustion
R-GT
regenerative gas turbine
SE
Stirling engine
SOFC
solid oxide fuel cell
SVO
straight vegetable oil
TBC
thermal barrier coating
TIT
turbine inlet temperature
ULSD
ultra-low-sulfur diesel
VOC
volatile organic compounds
2
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 3 ---

efﬁcient MGTs are commonly equipped with recuperators to
recover the waste heat. Figure 1(a) [6] illustrates a typical
MGT generator set. The airﬂow passes through the inlet, the
compressor impeller, the cold passage of the recuperator, the
combustion chamber, the turbine impeller, the hot passage
of the recuperator and then exits. Based on this process,
Figure 1(b) shows a schematic representation of the MGT
cycle. The ambient air is compressed into high-pressure air
in the compressor and heated in the recuperator, where the
waste heat of the exhaust gas is recovered. The air then
enters the combustion chamber and burns, forming high-
pressure gas at high temperatures. The gas impacts the
turbine and drives the compressor and generator. Reale et al.
[8] have provided gave a brief review of MGTs and related
systems, enumerating some layouts of combined systems,
and analyzing the role of computational ﬂuid dynamics
(CFD) in combustion chamber research. Al-attab et al. [9]
summarized the typical research and application of external
combustion gas turbines, involving a certain range of MGT
applications. Ward et al. [10] reviewed the effect of hu-
midiﬁcation on the improvement of cycle efﬁciency and
ﬂexibility of MGTs and their components, by introducing
the relevant structural layout. Additionally, the application
of speciﬁc technologies to MGTs and the review studies on
the components of MGTs, such as fuel nozzles [11] and
recuperators [5], were examined.
In contrast to previous works, this study fully covers the
developments of MGTs technologies from the perspectives
of applications, performances and beneﬁcial representative
explorations on components in the global framework. The
comprehensiveness and the latest time of the review repre-
sent other distinctive features of the present work. The
technology of components is further evaluated from the
perspective of serving the overall performance of MGTs.
This review paper is aimed to provide a direction for future
development, which includes challenges and opportunities.
Current development directions of MGTs aim to improve
efﬁciency and simplify their structure. Increasing the turbine
inlet temperature and reducing component loss are effective
ways to enhance efﬁciency. Simplifying structure and
employing lightweight materials can also magnify the
compactness of MGTs and make them more ﬂexible for a
diverse range of applications. This paper attempts to provide
a relatively comprehensive review based on previously
published literature, covering the development and current
status of MGTs, applied research, deﬁnition and inﬂuencing
factors on performances, and related studies on components.
Section 2 outlines the current development process of MGTs
and the mainstream performance of the MGTs. Section 3
explains various applications of MGTs and then the con-
ﬂicts of MGTs in these applications are discussed. Section 4
summarizes the inﬂuential factors of MGTs performances
from static, dynamic and thermo-economic points of view.
Section 5 displays the key technologies of MGTs compo-
nents and the current status of related research. Finally,
Section 6 summarizes the key points of MGTs reviewed in
this paper, and prospects the future research direction of
MGT-related-technologies from six perspectives.
2. Development and current status
The structure and performance of MGTs have been
increasingly improved for decades after their ﬁrst appear-
ance. So far, several companies have released relevant
products. The development process and the mainstream
performance of MGTs are inclusively explained in this
section.
2.1. The development of MGTs
Gas turbine technology has become attractive since Holz
developed the ﬁrst 370 kW gas turbine in the 1920s [12].
The initial research was performed with the aim of
increasing the power level. Small and micro-scale gas tur-
bines designed for low-power applications ﬁrst appeared in
the 1950s. Initially, MGTs were designed as automotive
engines and auxiliary power supply devices for military
products [13e15]. The former failed due to variable oper-
ating conditions under the vehicle circumstances and the
latter was demonstrated in Allison’s power supply for
Patriot air defense systems in 1978. In the 1990s, with the
introduction and application of distributed generation, the
Figure 1
Schematic representations of: (a) an MGT generator set
from Capstone [6], (b) a typical cycle of the MGT.
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
3


--- Page 4 ---

demand for MGTs surged in the business market intensiﬁed
[16]. A group of pioneering MGTs represented by Capstone,
AlliedSignal and Elliott products, came to market around
2000.
With the development of material technology and
machining technology, the structure and performance of
MGTs have also been improved [17]. Early MGTs, in the
1960s, had a similar conﬁguration to large scale gas tur-
bines. The generator was separated from the gas turbine
shaft and connected by a gearbox and coupling. The
connection brought some efﬁciency loss, but allowed the
generator to operate at lower rotation speeds, as the gas
turbine was running at tens of thousands of rpm. It was
considered as a stopgap measure when the high-speed
generators were not mature. The centrifugal compressor
was chosen because of the appropriate pressure ratio of
MGTs, and its extensive exploitation. Limited by the ma-
terial progress at the time, the turbine inlet temperature
(TIT) of MGTs was limited to 800e900 K, and the efﬁ-
ciency was about 20%.
The application of high-speed generators enables gas
turbines to directly drive the generators. The coupling and
gearbox are removed to simplify the MGT system and
thereby improve efﬁciency. Since high-speed generators are
typically designed in coupling with gas turbine structures,
great improvements in compactness are achieved, resulting
in a reduction of the overall size and weight.
The application of recuperators in MGTs is also of great
signiﬁcance. By recovering the waste heat, the overall
thermal efﬁciency of MGTs is substantially enhanced by
about 5%e10%. A compact recuperator allows the airﬂow
to experience less distance and pressure loss before entering
the recuperator, reducing the ﬂow losses, however an
externally placed recuperator may have better potential in
heat transfer performance, because its size is unconstrained.
Gas/liquid lubricated bearings are another crucial tech-
nique employed in MGT systems. The lubricated bearings
break the limitation on the maximum rotating speed sub-
jected to the performance of the rolling bearing. Therefor
the rotor impeller with a small ﬂow and large load can gain
superior designability at high rotating speed, and thus the
overall efﬁciency is enhanced. MGTs using gas/liquid
lubricated bearings tend to have longer life spans as well as
lower frequency maintenance, assisting in the reduction of
running costs.
The latest mainstream MGTs, beneﬁting from the prog-
ress
of
high-temperature
materials,
raised
a
TIT
to
900e1200 K. The thermal efﬁciency is considerably
enhanced, to about 25%e35%. The radial ﬂow compressors
and turbines with the back-to-back arrangement are com-
mon structures, and annular combustors are set to increase
compactness.
2.2. MGTs for business use
In the past 20 years, new products of MGTs have been
released to a greater extent. The products from Capstone,
AlliedSignal, Elliott and Turbec have taken a large share of
the commercial MGTs market, while some other brands’
products have also been proposed. Figures 2e4 illustrate the
physical or schematic pictures of these MGTs.
Most of the commercial MGTs have equipped with the
technologies mentioned above. C-series from Capstone (see
Figure 2(a) [18]), equipped with fully radial ﬂow impellers,
air bearings and compact annular recuperator, are the
benchmarking
products.
Capstone
MGT
program
has
launched C30, C65, C200 and other products since 1995,
among which the 30 kW business model was expected to
have a ﬁxed cost of about 500 $/kW and a generation cost of
45e50 $/MWh [14]. However, similar to the C-series
products in the rotor structure, AlliedSignal AS75 [19] has a
single cylinder combustor and an independent recuperator
(see Figure 2(b) [19]). The TIT at about 900 C helps AS75
to achieve higher efﬁciency. Honeywell Parallon75 [20] is
launched on the basis of AS75 and is applied in the 70 kW
solar power generation project in Nanjing, China. TG80CG
represents an 80 kW class MGT from Bowmen (see Figure
2(c) [21]), based on the air bearings. It can provide 80 kW of
power, at an efﬁciency between 25% and 28%, and an
additional 150 kW of heat at the same time [22].
One of the major features of the products mentioned
above is the exploitation of air bearing. However, limited by
technical maturity, some other products utilize oil-lubricated
bearings. Elliott’s TA series MGTs meet the power re-
quirements of 45 kW, 60 kW, 80 kW, and 200 kW (see
Figure 3(a) [4]). Figure 3(b) [23] presents the TA45 rotor
Figure 2
Photos of various MGTs: (a) Capstone C30 [18], (b) AlliedSignal AS75 [19], (c) Bowmen TG80CG [21].
4
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 5 ---

system where the compressor pressure ratio reaches 4.3 at
the rated speed of 116,000 rpm and the overall efﬁciency
reaches 30% [23]. Released by Turbec (have been acquired
by Ansaldo) in 1999, the T100 MGT has been applied to
more than 500 facilities worldwide [24]. The structure and
workﬂow of the T100 have been presented in Figure 3(c)
[25]. The T100 has the highest TIT of around 950 C, and
the NOx emission is reduced to less than 15 ppm via
advanced combustion technology [26]. The electrical efﬁ-
ciency is about 30%, slightly higher than previously intro-
duced MGTs, which may mostly beneﬁt from its higher TIT.
However, compared with the advantages brought by the
higher TIT and power size, the efﬁciency gains of T100 are
limited. This issue suggests that the component may be
Figure 3
Photos of various MGTs: (a) Elliott TA45 [4], (b) rotor system of TA45 [23], (c) Turbec T100 [25], (d) PowerWorks PW70 [4], (e)
FlexTurbine GT333s [27], (f) reference model of GT333s (KG2) [28], (g) Bladon [29], (h) ET group [30].
Figure 4
MGTs of local companies in China: (a) ENN E100 [31], (b) Wisdomturbine [32], (c) AVIC Dong’an 100 kW MGT [33], (d) AVIC
WD18 [33].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
5


--- Page 6 ---

designed conservatively, perhaps to consider service life or
stability.
In corporation with some technology from ordinary tur-
bine engines, a number of products have also shown good
performance. The 70 kW-class MGT from PowerWorks
(Ingersoll Rand), illustrated in Figure 3(d) [4], contains a
double-shaft structure. Actually, double-stage turbines are
separated by two shafts to drive the compressor and
generator. Although this design is believed to increase the
complexity of turbine structure and losses, PW70 achieves
the tied-highest efﬁciency among the current products,
indebted to its proper overall design. Another product with
the highest efﬁciencies is produced by Flex Turbine (see
Figure 3(e) [27]). Drawing on another Ingersoll Rand
product, KG2 (see Figure 3(f) [28]), Flex Turbine rede-
signed a 333 kW MGT in the early 2000s, the so called
GT333s [27]. Equipped with couplings and gearboxes,
GT333s reach maximum efﬁciency of 33%, and all the
emissions of CO, NOx, and VOC are less than 5 ppm.
In addition, Bladon [29] and ET group [30] have also
introduced their MGT products. The disclosed information
reveals that Bladon’s 12 kW MGT (see Figure 3(g) [29]) has
a rotating speed of 134,000 rpm, which supports the spec-
ulation of using air bearings. The 45 kW-class MGT of the
ET group has been demonstrated in Figure 3(h) [30]. With a
uniquely biased recuperator, it can reach a power generation
efﬁciency of 28% at a rated speed of 60,000 rpm.
Local companies in China have recently launched MGTs
based on mature technologies. For instance, ENN Energy
has introduced the 100 kW-class MGT, the so called E100,
as illustrated in Figure 4(a) [31]. The turbine shaft is sup-
ported by oil-lubricated bearings and connected to the
generator through a coupling. This company also plans to
conduct subsequent research on MGTs using air bearings
and integrated shafts. The 240 kW-class, two-shaft MGT
from Wisdomturbine (see Figure 4(b) [32]) has a TIT of
1200 K, thus growing the efﬁciency up to 22.9% for a
simple cycle [32]. In Figure 4(c) [33] and Figure 4(d) [33],
AVIC Dong’an also presents a 100 kW-class MGT and an
18 kW auxiliary power unit, respectively.
The main parameters of current commercial MGTs have
been summarized in Table 1. Currently, the compressor
pressure ratio of MGTs is generally in the range of 3e5
according to different power levels, and the rotating speed is
generally above 50,000 rpm, with a maximum value of
134,000 rpm. A lower power level demands a higher
rotating speed in order to obtain better impeller perfor-
mance. The TIT is limited to less than 950 C with an
overall efﬁciency of 25%e33%. Additionally, it can be
concluded that it is easier for MGTs at a high power level to
achieve higher efﬁciency, while a lower-powered MGT has
advantages in terms of operational ﬂexibility.
3. Applications
MGTs were initially designed for vehicles but developed
rapidly after the appearance of the DES concept. Thanks to
the appropriate size and power level, MGTs have been
further utilized in solar power generation and gas turbine-
fuel cell systems and they play a pivotal role in the per-
formance of complex systems. This section aims to intro-
duce several typical applications of and corresponding
research on MGTs.
3.1. Distributed energy system
The distributed energy system is a kind of energy
system based on distributed power generation technology
and the concept of energy cascade utilization. For directly
facing users, DES provides on-demand supply and meets
various requirements. The DES represents a concept of
power production and management, but is often associated
with distributed generation in practical technology research
[34e36]. In order to further match demand as well as reduce
distribution losses, small and micro generation devices
of kW-level are the main development trends of miniaturi-
zation of distributed generation systems. Combined heat and
power (CHP) systems are mostly employed in distributed
generation. With the advantage of proximity to users, the
heat by-products are utilized for heating in a CHP system
[37].
Figure 5 presents a basic system diagram of the MGT-
CHP system, composed of an MGT, a generator, and
Table 1
The main characteristics of the commercial MGTs.
Model
Manufacturer
Power (kW)
Pressure ratio
TIT (C)
Rotate speed (rpm)
Recuperator
Efﬁciency (%)
C30 [18]
Capstone
30
3.2
840
96,000
Y
26
AS75 [19]
AlliedSignal
75
3.7
900
72,000
Y
28.5
TA45 [23]
Elliott
45
4.3
870
116,000
Y
30
T100 [24,26]
Turbec (Ansaldo)
100
4.5
950
70,000
Y
30
PW70 [4]
PowerWorks
70
3.3
870
60,000
Y
33
TG80CG [22]
Bowmen
80
4.3
680
68,000
Y
25e28
Bladon12 [29]
Bladon
12
e
e
134,000
Y
25
ET45 [30]
ETgroup
45
e
e
60,000
Y
28
GT333s [27]
FlexTurbine
333
e
e
e
Y
33
E100 [31]
ENN
100
4.2
e
51,000
Y
26
T2-200 [32]
Wisdomturbine
240
7.5
927
54,000/44,000
N
22.9
6
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 7 ---

refrigeration or heating devices. A complex system also
includes controllers, thermal storage units, and auxiliary
boilers to meet peak heat demand [38].
Numerous studies have been conducted on the applica-
tion of MGTs in distributed energy systems. In 2000, Pila-
vachi et al. [39] introduced MGTs and cogeneration
systems, pointing out that the EU requires the overall efﬁ-
ciency of cogeneration systems to reach above 60%. In fact,
the MGT-CHP-based systems could achieve 90% of the
overall efﬁciency [38]. Murugan et al. [40] summarized the
micro-CHP
systems
for
residential
exploitation.
By
comparing the characteristics of different energy conversion
devices, they pointed out that MGTs are promising tech-
niques suitable for residential, commercial and educational
buildings. Caresana [41] and Gimelli [42] also believed that
MGT-CHP-based systems have excellent applicability for
small and medium-sized power consumers, such as shop-
ping centers and remote areas.
The characteristics of several prime movers for mCHP
have been presented in Table 2 [40]. Compared with internal
combustion engines, MGTs have fewer moving parts, better
fuel adaptability, and lower emissions [41,42]. MGTs are
also easy to maintain and could meet high environmental
standards. Compare with fuel cells (FC), organic Rankine
cycle (ORC) system and Stirling engine (SE), MGTs
generally have higher power density and higher exhaust gas
temperature, which are good driving heat sources to achieve
efﬁcient cogeneration [43].
Based on these advantages, many distributed energy
systems with MGT have been exploited since commercial
MGTs entered the market in the late 1990s. Take Capstone
as an example [18]: the C30 provides electricity and hot
water for the MTS Argonon dual-fuel vessels and Cal-
ifornia’s Tahoe Center, at an altitude of 6300 feet. Two
65 kW products are utilized in the ONE NK Leisure Centre,
supplying 75 kWh of electricity and 130 kWh of heat
annually. Lotte New York Palace Hotel has been equipped
with twelve C65, achieving 780 kW power generation, and
3.45 MMBtu/h hot water at 93 C. It can also be exploited
for building refrigeration with an absorption chiller. Addi-
tionally, Capstone’s products are employed in more than 30
distributed generation facilities worldwide.
In order to enhance the performance of cogeneration,
researchers have proposed methods for evaluating the per-
formance of CHP systems and examining the inﬂuencing
factors. The methods based on the ﬁrst law (relate with
energy) and the second law (relate with exergy) of ther-
modynamics have been employed to examine the inﬂu-
encing factors and predict the performance of CHP systems
[44e46]. To this end, Balli et al. [47] evaluated the per-
formance of MGT-CHP systems by scrutinizing the energy
and exergy. The working conditions of T100 were taken as
the template. The energy rate, exergy rate, and other prop-
erties at various system locations were obtained to evaluate
the energy loss/exergy consumption of each component.
The energy/exergy discrepancy between the inlet and outlet
of the system represents the sum of energy losses/exergy
consumption in components. The performed study revealed
that the exhaust gas could cause a maximum energy loss of
44.03 kW (about 13.14%) since the waste heat was not
exploited. In general, exergy is deﬁned as the representation
of the quantity and quality of energy. With 345.27 kW of
fuel exergy input, 99.15 kW electrical exergy and 24.46 kW
heat exergy growth were produced. The total exergy con-
sumption was 221.66 kW, which is mainly due to the exergy
destruction of the irreversible process. The irreversible
Figure 5
Basic schematic representation of the MGT-CHP system.
Table 2
The characteristics of prime movers for mCHP [40].
MGT
ICE
FC
ORC
SE
Recoverable heat
45%e55%
15%e20%
25%e35%
45%e65%
e
Moving parts
Shaft & Impeller
Crankshaft &
multiple pistons
e
Shaft & Impeller
Pistons
Energy source
HC fuels of high/low heat value,
Biofuel, H2, NH3, waste heat
HC fuels like
Petrol and diesel,
H2
HC fuels, H2
Indirect heating:
low quality heat
source from heat
exchange
Indirect heating
NOx emission
<10 ppm
<100 ppm
<10,000 ppm
e
e
Generation efﬁciency
25%e33%
20%e40%
30%e40%
<10%
10%e20%
Co-generation efﬁciency
60%e90%
60%e80%
60%e90%
65%e80%
65%e90%
Maintenance
>8000 h
<1000 h
e
150e250 h/year
e
State
Uncommon
widespread
Proven technology
Development,
early market
Development,
early market
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
7


--- Page 8 ---

reaction of high-quality chemical energy to low-quality
process
heat
in
the
combustion
chamber
caused
a
maximum exergy loss of 129.61 kW (about 37.54%). Thu
et al. [45] believed that 70% of exergy loss occurs in the
combustion chamber, where the excess air coefﬁcient in-
creases from 550% to 720% when the magnitude of exerted
load changes from 100% to 25%. Together with the poor
heat transfer in the recuperator at low ﬂow rates, the MGT-
CHP system has a larger loss under the evaluation of the
second law. Feng et al. [48] pointed out that the performance
would decrease at part-load conditions and could be restored
by adding energy storage systems, which made it suitable
for full conditions. Other explorations have revealed that
Humidiﬁed cycle is helpful to the ﬂexibility of distributed
generation systems [49,50].
3.2. Range extender
Electric vehicles (EVs) have received great attention in
the context of environmental protection, but still confront
challenges like heavy weight, high price, low energy den-
sity, and short mileage due to the battery limitations [51,52].
The range extender (RE) is an effective approach to unlock
the mileage problem by providing additional power sources
[53]. While the current RE is generally modiﬁed from the
ICE, the MGTs are considered to be a promising develop-
ment direction for REs. Compared with ICE, MGTs possess
outstanding advantages in power density, fuel adaptability
and emission performance, hence leading to the reduction of
CO emissions by 30% and NOx emissions by 50% [54e56].
Generally, an MGT-RE powertrain consists of ranger
extender (MGT), generator, power converter, battery pack
and electric motor, as illustrated in Figure 6 [57]. In this
system, MGT provides a power source and generates elec-
tricity as an RE. Further, the source motor output and the
wheel load input are isolated by the electrical connection,
which solves a series of problems caused by the old direct
drive strategy. This fact implies that the RE is a practical
scheme for MGTs applied to vehicles.
Table 3 presents some vehicles equipped with Res of
MGT. Volvo tested the VT300 gas turbine drive on heavy
trucks in 2005 and made positive progress [58]. The
Capstone CMT-380 concept car [59] was equipped with a
30-kW gas turbine and gained a total mileage of 800 km
with a battery pack. The Jaguar C-X75 released in 2010 had
four electric motors driven by two 70 kW MGT generators
from Bladon Jets [60]. Single MGT had a power-to-weight
ratio of 2 kW/kg [61], which is higher than that of the usual
ICE powertrain. MGT range extender vehicles produced by
Techrules [62,63], Mitsubishi [64], Hybrid Kinetic [65] and
Delta Motorsport [66] have also been reported in the liter-
ature. Wrightspeed exploited recuperated 80-kW MGT as
the power unit of electric trucks [67]. The RE of Wright-
speed, as presented in Figure 7 [67] has achieved good
economic beneﬁts.
Figure 6
Overall schematic representation of an MGT-REEV system [57].
Table 3
MGT range extender vehicles.
Year
Brand
Power (kW)
2005
Volvo [58]
300
2009
Capstone [59]
30
2010
Jaguar [60]
70
2016
Techrules [62,63]
15e30
2017
Wrightspeed [67]
80
2019
Mitsubishi [64]
60
8
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 9 ---

Concerning the MGT range extenders, researchers have
focused on the overall performance and studied the factors
that affect the emissions, fuel consumption and power per-
formance of MGT-REEV. Karvountzis-Kontakiotis et al.
[68] established a vehicle model based on the Power de-
mand and NEDC standard in MATLAB. Simulations were
performed on the ICE, ICE range extender and MGT range
extender in the presence of various circumstances. These
investigators exploited a thermo-kinetic-based model to
estimate CO and NO emissions, and discovered that using
MGT as range extender can remarkably enhance emissions.
The obtained results indicate the reduction of NO and CO
emissions in order by about 79.6% and 92% through
consuming more fuel. Tan et al. [69] also developed a model
to simulate MGT-REEV and emphasized that MGT-REEV
had comparable mileage to ICE. The 10 kW power output
could meet the operation demand of their battery pack. The
authors also modiﬁed a turbocharger into MGT based on the
simulation results and conducted performance tests, which
showed a peak power of 9.5 kW. Areﬁn et al. [70] examined
an electric truck with a range extender, focusing on the
performance of noise, emission, and output power. The
produced noise by the MGT was low at low speeds, while
the high-frequency noise from generators was apparent and
covered all the operating conditions. The results also
revealed that the best ambient temperature (i.e., those placed
in the range of 20e22 C) would affect the output power.
Furthermore, air ﬁlters would increase the power output by
3% and lessen emissions at high speeds. Sim et al. [71]
developed an MGT for range extenders, which increased the
mass/volume power density by 400%/500% compared to
diesel engines.
Since MGTs represent scaled-down versions of gas tur-
bines, their characteristics are commonly affected by their
power level. In order to gain higher thermal efﬁciency,
MGTs usually work in the presence of high speed shafts,
resulting in larger generators and inverters, which is detri-
mental to vehicle-board applications [72]. The low powers
can also lead to scale effect problems in component per-
formance. By affecting component efﬁciency, it has a sub-
stantial inﬂuence on the overall performance of the REEV,
such as battery pack size and charging time, according to
Javed et al. [73]. The slow response also restricts MGTs for
vehicle use. The MGT-RE dynamic model established by
Shah et al. [74] showed that the dynamic response of the
MGT to several power demand strategies under NEDC
working conditions exhibited a large delay, requiring an
energy buffer to allow operation in a vehicle.
Current explorations support the application of MGTs in
REs and they have formed relevant industrialization. The
advantages of MGTs are emission and fuel adaptability.
While longer life, lower vibration and more compact size
are potential drivers for further commercial exploitation.
Higher cost, and non-maximum efﬁciency at the same
power level are among the major problems that limit their
application. By this view, the slow start-up speed still needs
further research and solution to meet ﬂexible requirements
for vehicle use.
3.3. Concentrated solar power system
Solar thermal power systems have attracted more atten-
tion due to their high efﬁciency and cheap heat storage [75].
In the 1980s, solar thermal power systems using gas tur-
bines as power conversion machinery were designed in the
United States and widely tested [76]. In a gas turbine-
concentrated solar power (GT-CSP) system, the pressur-
ized air is heated by the collected and stored solar heat, to
increase the inlet temperature of the combustion chamber
and reduce fuel consumption. Although some earlier studies
have pointed out that heavy gas turbines are attractive al-
ternatives to solar thermal power generation [77,78], due to
their maturity, current megawatt-scale gas turbines with
solar power generation systems were rarely reported [79].
Kilowatt-scale MGTs are suitable for concentrated solar
power (CSP) systems. A small power makes the system
scale manageable. The heliostat will not occupy too much
area, making the system less constrained by the size of the
site.
Figure 8 shows a typical MGT-CSP system. Sunlight is
concentrated through the heliostats into the receiver, and the
concentration ratio can be high. As the MGTs adapt to high
TIT, the allowable highest temperature of solar receiver can
be much higher, as demonstrated in Figure 9 [80]. A sup-
plementary combustor is often equipped to manage the en-
ergy input to stabilize working condition of MGT. In
addition to the tower collectors that have been demon-
strated, the form of energy collection also includes dish
collector systems, which is often with smaller individual
Figure 7
Wrightspeed range extender [67].
Figure 8
Schematic representation of a tower MGT-CSP system.
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
9


--- Page 10 ---

power. Common turbochargers can be retroﬁtted and inte-
grated [81]. Due to the small size and weight, MGTs have
the advantage to be easily integrated next to the heat col-
lector, which is also favored by space CSP systems [82].
Some current MGT-CSP facilities have been also illustrated
in Table 4.
The project code, named Solgate [83,84] and Solhyco
[85,86], has been carried out in the PSA platform, Spain,
establishing MGT-CSP systems with the full power of
250 kW and 75 kW, respectively. The power system of
Solgate has been modiﬁed from Turboshaft OST3. On the
other hand, Solhyco implements a commercial gas turbine,
named T100. Both systems have a tower collector, receiver
cavity boxes are applied to collect the heat, and the absorber
tubes are arranged in the box to transfer the heat to the
compressed air ﬂowing inside. The Solgate system is also
equipped with a two-stage concentrator to increase the
temperature, which is considered an effective solution to
reduce high temperature surfaces and heat loss [87]. The
facility with a tower scheme also includes TulipTM built by
AORA Solar in Israel [88] and the 75 kW solar-thermal
project built in Nanjing, China [20].
The US. South West Solar corporation and Brayton En-
ergy jointly launched the 80 kW Solar CAT project using
Brayton 80 kW MGT as the power core, having a 23 - meter
diameter dish collector [89,90]. The MGT is usually rec-
ommended to be installed near the dish focal point to avoid
heat loss caused by long pipelines. Casaccia has provided an
MGT-CSP system with a low power level of 3e10 kW,
showing well integration [91,92].
In addition to these practical MGT-CSP systems, some
explorations have also proposed related designs. Giostri
et al. [93] evaluated the thermodynamic performance of a
dish receiver system with a design power of 31.5 kW and a
TIT of 850 C, which was fully provided by solar energy.
Pozivil et al. [94] developed a solar receiver for MGT, and it
was revealed that pressurized pressured air could obtain
47 kW of energy in the heat exchange with the cylindrical
SIC cavity surrounded by the mesh porous ceramics and
gain a pressure loss of 2.7%. Ragnolo et al. [95] designed an
MGT system for dish collectors such that the receiver was
Figure 9
The applicable temperature range of the thermal cycle as a
function of the concentration ratio [80].
Table 4
MGT-CSP facilities.
Location/Project/
Company
Code name
MGT models
Power
Receiver & Method
Time/Reference
Spain PSA
CESA-1
Solgate
OST3 (modiﬁed
from a turboshaft)
250 kW in design;
230 kW in experiment due
to damage
Tower
Triple receiver model,
each one includes a sec-
ondary concentrator and a
receiver vessel make up
with absorber tubes
Solar hybrid co-
generation
1999/[83]
2006/[84]
Solhyco
Turbec T100
600 Ce800 C;
Receiver could provide
maximum 181.9 kW;
Operating at 75 kW under
full solar input
Tube collector
Solar hybrid co-
generation
2008/[85]
2010/[86]
Israel AORA
Solar
Tulip
Turbec T100
100 kW electric
170 kW heat
Tower, voluhmetric
receiver
2009/[88]
US. South West
Solar/Brayton
Energy
Solar CAT
Brayton Energy
80 kW
80 kW
Dish collector with a
diameter of 23 m
2011/[89]
2016/[90]
EU. ENEA
Casaccia
OMSoP
Provided by
Compower and
modiﬁed by CITY
University
3e10 kW full solar input
Dish, MGT installed at the
focal point
2015/[91]
2017/[92]
Nanjing, China
e
Parallon75
75 kW
Tower, pressure cavity
receiver
2007/[20]
10
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 11 ---

placed in front of the combustion chamber and could pro-
vide 25 kW of preheating energy in the presence of nominal
solar input.
As mentioned above, the MGT in the CSP system is not
completely heated externally in general, but retains the
combustion chamber. The fuel consumption usually varies
inversely with the sun intensity to maintain a steady power
generation. The uneven distribution of solar radiation during
days and seasons makes dynamic change in the fuel con-
sumption. Therefore, the operating cost of CSP systems
often considers fuel consumption and relates to the opera-
tion strategies, requiring considerations from multiple per-
spectives. According to M.C. Cameretti’s research [96], the
total cost of the MGT-CSP system is due to the area of the
heliostats, as shown in Figure 10. An excessively large
mirror surface can lead to an increase in maintenance costs.
The optimized total cost is 35,655 euros per year, and the
fuel cost accounts for more than 87% of the total costs. The
system can generate electricity of around 615 MWh. In the
solar power generation and desalination system described by
Coppitters [97], solar energy enhances the generation efﬁ-
ciency by about 3.2%. The proposed designs achieve a
levelized cost of water between $ 1.78/(m3/d) and $ 1.92/
(m3/d), which is comparable with conventional solar-
powered
desalination
plants.
Exergoeconomix
can
be
employed to evaluate the cost of electricity generation.
Babaelahi [98] conducted multi-objective optimization on
thermal efﬁciency, exergetic efﬁciency and the cost of
electricity generation, and then the trade-off between elec-
tricity generation cost and efﬁciency is presented. Giostri
[87] also modeled and analyzed a small-scale MGT-CSP
system. By optimizing the optics, the system obtained a
levelized cost of energy of 175 V/MWh, which was rela-
tively cheaper than large-towers solar systems.
MGTs are ideal power machines for CSP systems. The
compression and circulation method allow complex ﬂow
piping to meet the integration needs of CSPs. Extensive fuel
adaptability enables it to be combined with biofuels and
other technical means, thereby further reducing fuel costs
[99]. Current commercial and experimental setups have
indicated the maturing of this technology. Further in-
vestigations are still required on control methods suitable for
various insolation conditions [100], as well as design
methods appropriate for complex coupled systems. In
particular, the performance of receivers and heat exchangers
will also have a crucial impact on the application of MGTs
in CSP systems.
3.4. Micro gas turbine - fuel cell system
High-temperature fuel cell systems have been exten-
sively
employed
in
distributed
energy systems
since
combining fuel cells with MGTs can improve efﬁciency
[101]. There are usually two types of fuel cells combined
with MGTs: molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC) and solid
oxide fuel cell (SOFC). The mixed cycle can also be divided
into two types: the top-level cycle and the bottom-level
cycle. A top-level cycle is deﬁned as a high-pressure
cycle, which usually contains a pressurized tubular fuel
cell [102]. The oxidant end of the fuel cell is fed with high-
pressure gas after the compressor. While the bottom-level
cycle works under the action of normal pressure. The
oxidizer enters the fuel cell before or after going through the
MGT. Figure 11 presents a schematic representation of the
top cycle. The operation of the fuel cell in a high-pressure
air environment after the compressor is bound to increase
the efﬁciency and power density of the fuel cell. The high-
temperature exhaust gas is utilized as a heat supplement or
directly expands in the turbine. The SOFCs are generally
considered to be suitable for top cycles to achieve high ef-
ﬁciency [103,104]. Figure 12 illustrates a schematic repre-
sentation of the bottom cycle. The ambient air is compressed
ﬁrst and then preheated in the heat recovery unit. A
high-temperature heat exchanger is exploited to exchange
heat between burned gas and compressed air, and the
heated air directly drives the turbine. The turbine exit air is
burned with the unreacted fuel components from the
anode of the fuel cell, and the gas enters the cathode of the
fuel cell as a reactant. In the cycle, both reactants in the
anode and cathode are at normal pressure, which is
consistent with the characteristics of the bottom-level cycle.
Usually, the
repeated
transportation
of CO2 between
anode and cathode makes MCFCs suitable for the bottom
cycle [105].
A lot of research on MGT-FC cogeneration has been
conducted. Komatsu et al. [106] believed that the decrease
in system efﬁciency in the presence of partially applied
loads was mainly due to the decrease in the operating
temperature of the SOFC module. The results indicated that
the SOFC-MGT system could reach a generation efﬁciency
of 60% (LHV) at the design point while the efﬁciency
remained above 50% (LHV) at a load level of 60%. These
results display that the MGT with a ﬂexible airﬂow should
maintain the operating temperature. Jia et al. [107] proposed
a co-gasiﬁcation system of woody biomass and animal
manure with MGT-SOFC. The results show that the thermal
efﬁciency could reach 55%, which was close to the
Figure 10
Plot of the total annual cost in terms of the mirror surface
area [96].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
11


--- Page 12 ---

efﬁciency of MGT systems burning waste gas on the basis
of the SOFC (about 42%e58%). Further the system gained
considerable investment returns.
Ebrahimi et al. [108] combined a cycle of SOFC, MGT,
and ORC. The high-enthalpy exhaust gas from the fuel cell
was utilized in the MGT and the exhaust gas from MGT was
then exploited in a heat recovery steam generator in the
Rankine cycle. Sensitivity analysis of the system had been
conducted, giving out a maximum total efﬁciency of 65%.
For further research, biomass fuel was utilized in a similar
system for cogeneration [109].
Liu [110] explored the performance of a pressurized
MCFC-MGT system based on a commercially available
MGT. The understudied system was less efﬁcient than
SOFC and traditional MCFC systems. Several control ap-
proaches for the case of partially exerted load were devel-
oped and explained. The alternative speed method of gas
turbine provided better performance, but was confronted
with a risk of the surge. Ahn et al. [111] designed an MCFC-
MGT system with a carbon capture device, which achieved
almost 100% CO2 capture. Compared with other normal
MFCF systems, the system with carbon capture had a higher
output power. In later research, off-gas recirculation was
assessed to substantially enhance the thermal efﬁciency of
the global system, by over 57% [112].
The integration of the MGT and FC system remarkably
improves the system efﬁciency, where FC can be very
beneﬁcial to MGT to bypass the efﬁciency limitation of the
Carnot cycle. Such a system is considered to be a promising
application direction. Further, some models have been put
into commercial operation [113]. However, compared to
other MGT systems, the application of the FC system re-
quires more cost in the cogeneration system, and the return
on investment should be further paid attention to.
3.5. Other applications
In addition to the above-mentioned applications, mobile/
emergency power sources also represent foreseeable appli-
cations of MGTs. With respect to small size, lightweight,
Figure 12
Schematic representation of a bottom cycle MGT-MCFC system.
Figure 11
Schematic representation of a top cycle MGT-SOFC system.
12
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 13 ---

good fuel adaptability, and equivalent running cost to an
internal combustion engine, MGTs have inherent advan-
tages in the ﬁeld of kilowatt level mobile power and are
appropriate choices for emergency rescue, disaster relief
power supply and applications requiring high power gen-
eration quality.
With the advent of ultra-MGTs of smaller scales and
power levels, it became possible for MGTs to be exploited
in single-soldier power systems [114e116]. High energy
density, low vibration, smooth operation, and low noise are
among the outstanding advantages. Although the energy
conversion is improvable, MGTs still have a larger power
density than lithium batteries.
4. Multidimensional performances of MGTs
The performance of MGTs has been always the focus of
attention of investigators and engineers. A reasonable
overall design and higher components performances can
enhance the overall performances of MGTs, to be favored
by more applications, as the capability of MGTs has a great
impact on integrated systems [117,118]. This section has
been mainly organized based on the following three
perspectives.
4.1. Steady-state performance
Steady-state thermal analysis should be carefully exam-
ined to obtain the performances at the design point of
MGTs. Such an effect on the performance of the MGT of
typical operating parameters as well as the key component
performance, such as pressure ratio, TIT, impeller efﬁciency,
and recuperator effectiveness can be obtained. This analysis
is general to all scales of gas turbines, and has been dis-
closed in publications and textbooks [119,120].
The steady-state analysis is generally based on com-
mercial software/packages (GSP, WTEMP, and GT-Power)
or private codes [121]. The component equations are
established one by one according to the cycle structure. In
addition, the states are solved by recursion or iteration
process according to the input boundaries and mass/energy
conservation. Compared with the predicted results by a
theoretical formula based on the ideal gas model, the solu-
tion results by a program package or speciﬁc software code
in accordance with the real physical properties lead to more
reliable accuracy estimation.
The thermodynamic sensitivity analysis conducted by
Galanti and Massardo [122] was employed to display the
inﬂuence of the law of component parameters such as
turbomachinery efﬁciency, TIT and recuperator effective-
ness. Figure 13 [122] illustrates the classical “efﬁciency vs.
speciﬁc work” graph for both cycles under investigation. As
it is seen, the R-GT exhibits a simple regenerative cycle,
while the ICR-GT exhibits an intercooling regenerative
cycle. From the efﬁciency standpoint, there is an optimal
pressure ratio, which is limited by the TIT. An increase of
the TIT from 900 K to 950 K leads to a 2% increase in
maximum efﬁciency. The speciﬁc work presents a mono-
tonic trend as a function of the pressure ratio, which implies
that a higher pressure corresponds to a lower mass ﬂow rate.
It is beneﬁcial to reduce the impeller size, but an excessively
low mass ﬂow with high speciﬁc work on the compressor/
turbine will lead to difﬁculties in the design of the impeller.
The sensitivity analysis of the global efﬁciency of the R-
GT cycle in terms of the impeller efﬁciency and recuperator
effectiveness has been demonstrated in Figure 14 [122]. In
the plotted results, the base points are chosen as recuperator
effectiveness of 87%, compressor isentropic efﬁciency of
79.6%, turbine isentropic efﬁciency of 85.8% with a vari-
able range of 5%. The isentropic efﬁciency of the turbine
has the greatest impact on global efﬁciency, followed by that
of the compressor. The plotted results reveal that the effect
of recuperator effectiveness is relatively small such that a
gain of 5% on the effectiveness leads to a 2% increase in
global efﬁciency.
4.2. Off-design performance and transient
performance
The off-design performance and transient performance
are taken as crucial representative features, since the ﬂexible
energy demand makes the MGTs operate between partial
Figure 13
R-GT and ICR-GT cycle efﬁciency in terms of the spe-
ciﬁc work varying pressure ratio and TIT [122].
Figure 14
The R-GT cycle efﬁciency in terms of the components’
efﬁciency/effectiveness [122].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
13


--- Page 14 ---

load conditions, and the performance of MGTs is still of
concern at the time. Further, response delay restricts the
application of MGTs.
Simple partial load conditions can be analyzed by quasi-
static methods and the key is to obtain the working char-
acteristics of the impellers in the presence of partial load
condition with variational rotating speed and mass ﬂow. The
transient performance analysis requires dynamic analysis
models, generally based on the working curves of impellers,
energy conservation equation, torque inertia equation, and
the volume effect of the original volume. A co-working
equation was also established for the analysis [121].
Commonly, two types of methodologies are utilized to
obtain the working characteristics of impellers. For the
actual impeller, the turbo component module relies on the
compressor or turbine maps to evaluate the mass ﬂow and
temperature change of the gas with a quasi-steady-state
approach, as presented in Figure 15 [123]. The mapping
relationships among normalized mass ﬂow, normalized
rotated speed, pressure ratio and isentropic efﬁciency have
been illustrated in the map, and a guideline can be helpful in
positioning. For the simulated impeller, the module can be
evaluated by the established formula [124,125].
Both methods require normalization of the mass ﬂow and
rotating speed. The common normalization approach is
introduced as follows [121]: normalized mass ﬂow: m
ﬃﬃﬃﬃTi
p =
Pi, and normalized shaft speed: n=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃTi
p , where T represents
the qualitative temperature at the impeller inlet, P represents
the inlet pressure, and subscript i can be taken as ‘c’ or ‘t’ to
signify the compressor and turbine respectively.
The dynamic performance of MGTs has typical charac-
teristics of non-linear and large time-delay, which are
essentially caused by the synthetical effect of rotational
inertia of the shaft, thermal inertia of the recuperator, and
co-working of the impeller [126]. Since the rotational inertia
of the MGTs is smaller than that of the large gas turbines,
the inﬂuence of the thermal inertia of the recuperators on the
system can be readily ampliﬁed. The control and monitoring
of the turbine outlet temperature are important in transient
conditions. In general, surge boundary brings limitations on
the dynamic control, because the system failure is difﬁcult
to recover once the surge occurs. The high requirements are
put forward for the control system, making it problematic
for a simple PID controller to deal with complex coupling
[127], and resulting in problems like overspeed or over-
temperature. Therefore, the low-value comparator based on
the temperature and speed limitations is extensively utilized
in the regulation of MGTs. Furthermore, advanced fuzzy
PID algorithms or expert control were also examined and
applied [128,129].
With the increase of MGT applications, more complex
systems have been proposed, including CSP, FC, grid-
connected, and grid-independent generation. The regulation
under multi-factor operating conditions of MGTs will be a
common question. There are great discrepancies in energy
injection between various systems, but the working model
of cooperation impellers has speciﬁc versatility. The recu-
perator can also be described by a general heat exchanger
model. In order to establish a generalized system model and
relevant regulation mechanism based on the black box of
energy supply will be beneﬁcial for the adaptation of MGTs
to different systems.
4.3. Thermoeconomic
As the promotion deployment is constrained by invest-
ment cost, the thermal economy of MGTs is also crucial
factor affecting its design and optimization. The cost
Figure 15
The working map of a compressor [123].
14
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 15 ---

variation is related to efﬁciency improvement, so an ex-
amination of the role of harmony optimization in both
thermal efﬁciency and thermal economy is required.
The capital cost evaluation of the components of MGTs
has been introduced in previous works [121,130]. The
equipment cost is usually dependent upon capacity with a
0.6 exponent, leading to a higher cost on small size com-
ponents in MGTs [131]. Based on the established cost
functions, the capital cost of compressors, turbines and
recuperators can be obtained. According to Galanti and
Massardo, the cost functions of components in MGTs are
given in Table 5 [122]. The costs of impellers are commonly
expressed in terms of ﬂow, efﬁciency and pressure ratio.
The coefﬁcient f is introduced in the cost calculation of the
recuperator to evaluate the material prices for various
working temperatures. In the case of using superalloys, the
factor f can be 1.5 to 9 times higher than the case of using
stainless steel [132].
The investment in impellers increases along with the
pressure ratio, while the investment in recuperators de-
creases, which is understandable that the temperature limi-
tation of TIT reduces the heat transfer rate. Galanti and
Massardo [122] stated that over 2% increase in turbine
isentropic efﬁciency over design point resulting in a sudden
rise in investment cost, as demonstrated in Figure 16 [122].
The turbine efﬁciency is the major factor among those of
impellers.
The effectiveness of recuperator noticeably affects the
cost such that with 5% additional effectiveness, the invest-
ment in recuperators increases by approximately 80%.
Therefore, although high recuperator effectiveness can
reduce waste heat and enhance system global efﬁciency, it is
usually not particularly high due to cost constraints [57]. In
the meantime, since the working temperature of the recu-
perator is related to the TIT, the material cost of recuperator
is stepped determined by the TIT.
Further, for a simple regenerative MGT, the operating
parameters pertinent the best global efﬁciency and the best
thermal economy can be different. The trade-offs are usually
observed between the capital investment and the overall
performance.
5. Status of the component technology and
research
As explained above, the researchers have innovated
overall cycles to expand the application range of MGTs, and
research works on the overall parameters is also introduced
and discussed. The improved component performance is
proven to have a positive impact. This section is aimed to
focus on the key technologies of MGTs components and the
latest
research
on
compressors,
turbines,
combustion
chambers, recuperators, and rotor systems.
5.1. Compressor
As a key component, the compressor’s margin directly
determines the operation adaptability of the MGT. The
compressor system of MGTs is usually composed of an
impeller, casing, and diffuser. The inlet guide vanes are
common in medium and large gas turbines, but are rarely
utilized in MGTs. The design of impeller machinery such as
compressors has become mature since Wu [133] proposed
the theory of three-dimensional ﬂow in 1953. After the
advent of CFD technology, numerical simulations have also
provided great convenience for compressor design and
theoretical research.
Table 5
Cost functions of components in MGTs [122].
Components
Cost functions
Coefﬁcients
Compressor
Xcompressor Z
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Rg=Rref
p
,c1,
_ma
c2  hpol c
,ln bc
c1 Z 55:8; c2 Z 0:942
Turbine
Xturbine Z t1 _mg
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Rg=Rref
p
ln bt
t2  hpol t
t1 Z 376:1; t2 Z 0:903
Combustor
Xcombustor Z
cc1 _ms
cc2  Pin=Pout
cc1 Z 36:1; cc2 Z 0:995
Recuperator
Xrecuperator Z 1:5

r1 , _mcold
in
,ðPcold
in Þ
0:5 ,ðDP0:5Þ ,
ε
1  ε

,f
r1 Z 625:1
Generator
Xgenerator Z g1ðPelÞg2
g1 Z 18:7; g2 Z 0:95
Figure 16
The investment cost of the recuperative gas turbine in
terms of the efﬁciency of the varying components [122].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
15


--- Page 16 ---

Current research on compressors is primarily focused on
performance loss and instability to guide the design and
optimization of compressor systems. The main purpose of
this subsection is to introduce the research on centrifugal
compressors designed for MGTs, including methods of sta-
bility expansion, efﬁciency enhancement and optimization.
5.1.1. Stability expansion
The principle of compressor instability and stability
expansion has always been a prominent research direction in
the mechanical analysis of compressors. For the compres-
sors on MGTs, small-scale and radial ﬂow are the main
differences between large GTs. The wall friction near the
blade tip and root alters the vortex structure and affects the
free ﬂow. Particularly, the enlarged assembly error between
compressor and shell due to the scale effect can enhance the
inﬂuence of the tip leakage ﬂow [134]. Xiang et al. [135]
examined the inﬂuences of tip clearance variation and
impeller miniaturization by distinctly ﬁxing the Reynolds
number and tip clearance. The obtained results revealed that
the compressor performance can be deteriorated when the
Reynolds number decreases subjected to ﬁxed tip clearance,
indicating that the miniaturization can deteriorate the per-
formance as the leakage ﬂow disturbs more ﬂow area.
Therefore, a series of stabilization measures have been
investigated [136]. Thanks to the good process feasibility,
the treatments of the wall treatment and self-circulating
casing, as passive means have been examined and applied
in centrifugal impellers. Xue et al. [137] explored the sta-
bility expansion of self-circulation casing treatment by
implementing coupled optimization methods (i.e., optimal
Latin hypercube sampling, polynomial surrogate model,
Fourier amplitude sensitivity test and gradient mutation
hybrid optimization algorithm). The isentropic efﬁciency at
the design point or near-stall point was improved, and the
stable working range was expanded by about 9.59%.
Further, low-energy-ﬂuid extraction and separation inhibi-
tion were considered as two main ameliorative mechanisms.
The mechanisms of instability caused by accessory sys-
tems such as volutes, diffusers, and intake pipes have been
also of grave concern. For this purpose, Hellstrom et al.
[138] carried out a numerical simulation on a centrifugal
compressor with volute by adopting the large-eddy simu-
lation method to capture large-scale unstable ﬂows. The
results indicated that a reverse ﬂow can occur in the impeller
inlet and diffuser due to the appearance of the radial pres-
sure gradient, leading to a highly unstable ﬂow near the
surge point. Olivero et al. [139] scrutinized the ﬂow of a
single-stage centrifugal compressor with splitter blades
based on a steady-state model. To this end, software CFX
was exploited to solve the internal ﬂow and the results
showed that the excessive Mach number at the leading edge
would cause the gradual reduction of the pressure, forming a
low speed zone on the suction surface. Another low speed
zone near the casing spread along the blade and spread into
the diffuser. The results indicated that the blade inlet angle
should be appropriately optimized in order to eliminate
excessive Mach numbers. Yang et al. [140] proposed an
active control casing treatment (ACCT), in which injection
holes were circumferentially drilled in the shroud at a po-
sition where a recirculation zone may be formed. Through
conducting experiments, the obtained results revealed that
the ACCT system could substantially extend the threshold
of the ﬂow. A better effect was also observed at low speeds,
achieving the maximum improvement rate of 32.73%. Sun
et al. [141] experimentally examined the instability mech-
anism in the entire working section of the centrifugal
compressor. The gained results showed that the unstable
ﬂow at the inlet of the impeller caused stall surge at low
speeds, while the unstable ﬂow at the inlet of the diffuser
produced deep surge at high speeds. In order to extend the
stable ﬂow range, Sun et al. [142] further designed a non-
axisymmetric vaned diffuser (NAVD) by modifying the
local passage angle and the local vane stagger based on a
normal vaned diffuser. The comparative experimental re-
sults indicated that the NAVD delayed the surge at high
levels of speed by suppressing the instability ﬂow at the
inlet of the diffuser, but the suppression was not apparent at
low speed. Zhang et al. [143] carried out experimental
research on centrifugal compressors with uniform inlet pipe
and two types of inlet bent torsional pipe to explore the
effects of various intake conditions on the performance and
stable operating range. The results revealed that the inter-
ference of the high-pressure area induced by the pipe and
the volute would lead to a reduction of about 22% in the
stable operating range, while the rational arrangement of the
pipe could weaken the pressure peak strip at the inlet region
leading to an increase of around 6.4% at the near-stall point.
Moreover, acoustics have been reported in the study on
the surge of centrifugal compressors. In this regard, Kabral
et al. [144] proposed a method based on the full acoustic 2-
port model [145] and experimentally studied the joint effect
of the sound and ﬂow ﬁelds on the centrifugal compressor
stall and surge inception. The gained results displayed that
the centrifugal compressor’s unstable ﬂow below the critical
frequency can amplify the sound waves and cause surge or
self-excited oscillation.
5.1.2. Loss mechanism
The efﬁciency of the compressor is directly related to the
loss of ﬂow in the compressor. Studying the loss mechanism
and loss correlation in compressor systems will be of great
beneﬁt for designing of highly efﬁcient compressors.
Zhang et al. [146] reviewed the research on loss mech-
anisms and loss correlations of centrifugal compressors,
pointing out that preceding explorations were not accurate
enough in compressors with high loads (pressure ratios) or
at off-design points. The authors presented an approach to
select the loss correlations based on the inlet Mach number
and speciﬁc speed of the compressor. Three sets were
demonstrated and performances of eight open-public cen-
trifugal compressors were assessed. The results showed that
16
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 17 ---

the deviations were less than 1.20% on the isentropic efﬁ-
ciency under the design condition while a maximum devi-
ation on the total pressure ratio at about 7.67% occurred
under the off-design condition. Li et al. [147] established a
new set of loss correlations, including loss correlations
of impellers, vaneless diffusers and vaned diffusers. An
optimization methodology based on one-dimensional cal-
culations using Isight platform was also proposed and good
results were achieved, with an increase of the pressure ratio
and efﬁciency, by about 4% and 2%, respectively.
The effect the of Reynolds number on the compressor
ﬂow is nontrivial at all [148]. The research on the loss of
centrifugal compressors for low levels of the Reynolds
number essentially focuses on the impeller. To evaluate the
effect of the Reynolds number, Casey et al. [149] examined
the friction loss in the centrifugal compressor and then
suggested a correction formula for the correlation between
surface roughness and compressor parameters. Dietmann
et al. [150] proposed an approach for analysis of the Rey-
nolds number and roughness on the compressor perfor-
mance, and developed three methods to determine the
inﬂuence of the Reynolds number. Zheng et al. [151]
pointed out that an increase in the low Reynolds number
causes development in the boundary layer thickness, which
resulted in a smaller throat area. In addition, the obtained
results reveal that the separation of the boundary layer near
the outlet can also lead to a higher loss.
Although the impeller loss is considered to be the main
factor, Tiainen et al. [152] proved that the loss of a vaneless
diffuser cannot be ignored at low Reynolds numbers. Using
the k-u SST mode, the authors performed numerical simu-
lations on two compressors with and without splitter blades
at design points, near surge, and near throttling conditions.
The obtained results indicated that the thickness of the blade
boundary layer and wall boundary layer in order exhibited
an increase of about 20% and 37.8%, which caused the loss
of the total pressure recovery coefﬁcient at low Reynolds
numbers. The effect of the diffuser on losses became
highlighted as the Reynolds number lessened, which
accounted for 50% of the total efﬁciency loss. The achieved
results also proved the theory of boundary layer thickness of
centrifugal compressors could be effectively exploited to
study losses in more complex impellers.
5.1.3. Performance optimization
Another research direction of centrifugal compressors
has been focused on the multi-point and multidisciplinary
optimization
of
centrifugal
compressors
in
efﬁciency,
margin, strength stress and other parameters. Although the
research introduced in this subsection is concerned with
margin and efﬁciency, the optimization results are also of
primary attention, and the mechanism should be only
considered as a partial guide.
Meroni et al. [153] carried out optimization research on
centrifugal
compressors
utilized
in
high-temperature
heat pump systems and developed a steady state mean-
line model of centrifugal compressors which can be
employed for various working ﬂuids. The governing
equations were solved with the latest state equation to
estimate the thermodynamic and transport characteristics
of ﬂuids, and multi-objective optimization was also per-
formed for the sake of power and cycle efﬁciency. Pakle
et al. [154] pointed out that the optimal design of the
compressor requires a trade-off between the pressure ratio,
margin and blade back sweep angle. The compressor was
effectively optimized by adjusting the contour of the me-
ridian channel and changing the pre-rotation angle of the
blades. The numerical simulations revealed an average of
16% increase in surge margin compared to the standard
diffuser stage without altering choke ﬂow and stage efﬁ-
ciencies. Xu et al. [155] displayed that the traditional
impeller design through one-dimensional analysis cannot
predict the internal ﬂow, hence making it difﬁcult to
directly improve the design. As an alternative approach, a
mean line design, component design, CFD simulation, and
multidisciplinary optimization methodology was proposed.
The method facilitated achieving a high pressure ratio and
high efﬁciency by optimizing the geometric parameters of
the compressor blade such as angle, thickness, and
meridional channel.
In addition to the traditional simulation-optimization
methods, the exploitation of genetic algorithms, artiﬁcial
neural networks, and the design of experiments in centrif-
ugal compressors optimization has become popular in recent
years. In this regard, Table 6 presents some research works
pertinent to centrifugal compressors of the same size
adopted in MGTs through algorithms. The relevant objects,
optimization methods, control points selection, and evalua-
tion indexes are introduced and explained.
5.1.4. Summary
This subsection is chieﬂy aimed to review the latest
progress of MGT centrifugal compressors from three di-
rections: stability, loss mechanism and optimization. The
research on the stability expansion and efﬁciency enhance-
ment has been extended from the impeller to the compressor
system, emphasizing that the impact of the accessories on
the stability cannot be ignored. The conducted studies on the
loss correlation mainly contribute to an accurate evaluation
of the efﬁciency. Recently, the algorithm employed for
multi-objective optimization of centrifugal compressors has
become attractive. We believe that efﬁcient and accurate
algorithms can assist the design of MGT centrifugal com-
pressors in the near future.
5.2. Turbine
The turbine is a key component to convert the internal
energy of gas into mechanical work. The efﬁciency and
service life of a gas turbine chieﬂy depend on whether the
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
17


--- Page 18 ---

Table 6
The optimization approaches employed for micro-size centrifugal compressors optimization methods.
Reference
Objects
Optimization methods
Control points
Results
Verstraete [156]
Small scale
centrifugal
compressor
Genetic algorithm,
Artiﬁcial neural networks
Blade thickness,
Blade leading edge inclina-
tion and height,
Blade trailing edge height,
Overall blade torsional cur-
vature
A 370 MPa (relatively 49.4%)
stress reduction was achieved at
the cost of 2.3% (relatively 3%)
efﬁciency loss.
Van den Braembussche [157]
Low solidity
diffusers
Design of experiment,
Artiﬁcial neural network,
Genetic algorithms,
Combined RANS&FEA
A total of 6 variables under
low, medium and high ﬂow
states:
Bezier blade with four control
points,
Scale factor of the thickness
distribution,
Number of blades
Stable operation at low mass ﬂow
and large pressure rise with little
loss at high mass ﬂow was
achieved.
Moussavi [158]
Separate blades of
impeller
Genetic algorithms
Position of the separation
blade on the hub curve,
Angle between the radial
plane
The CFD results were veriﬁed by
experiments. The optimized
impeller achieved a 2.7%
efﬁciency improvement while the
separation was delayed, which
improved the margin by up to
31%.
Cho [159]
Centrifugal
compressor
impeller
Evolutionary algorithm,
Artiﬁcial neural networks
based on the design of
experiment and improved by
genetic algorithms
8 control points in the Bezier
curve
After 6 generations, the
prediction result is close to the
numerical simulation. The
optimized centrifugal compressor
improved the efﬁciency by 1.4%
without pressure loss and
obtained the Pareto optimality of
the efﬁciency and pressure ratio
after 21 generations.
Ha [160]
Centrifugal
compressor
system including
compressor
impeller, vaneless
diffuser and volute
Surrogate management
framework,
Approximation model based
on the Kriging method,
Pattern search method,
Design of Experiments
Impeller Outlet radius,
Outlet blade angle,
Mass ﬂow coefﬁcient
The difference between the
prediction results of Kriging
method and numerical simulation
is small, which proves the
feasibility of this optimization
method.
Oka [161]
Centrifugal
compressor
impeller
A two-dimensional inverse
blade design method based on
a meridional viscous ﬂow
analysis,
Non-dominated sorting ge-
netic algorithm (NSGA-II)
Blade loads on a total of 27
control points, including 18
points on main blades and 9
points on separate blades.
The best impeller geometry and
blade load distribution were
obtained. Flow separation on the
suction side of the blade was
suppressed in the optimized
impeller, and the compressor
performance is improved.
Numerical simulation and
experimental results show that the
pressure ratio and adiabatic
efﬁciency under Pareto optimal
design are improved.
Tüchler [162]
Centrifugal
compressor of a
turbocharger
Coupling of Steady-State
Reynolds Average Solver and
genetic algorithm
Shape of blades,
Outline of meridian channel
While the compressor margin is
unchanged, the efﬁciency of the
operating point near surge is
increased by about 2%.
The author also points out that the
ﬂow loss at the operating point
near surge mainly comes from the
volute. The decrease of entropy
production in the wake area is
probably the reason for the sig-
niﬁcant improvement in
compressor performance.
18
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 19 ---

turbine can work efﬁciently and reliably [163]. According to
the Brayton cycle, high TIT can remarkably enhance the
efﬁciency of the MGT cycle [164]. Such a pattern has been
also proved for existing MGTs. Therefore, increasing the
turbine temperature tolerance and improving the turbine’s
aerodynamic efﬁciency have always been the focus of
attention
of
turbine
designers.
Until
now,
some
in-
vestigations to cover turbine materials, cooling structures
and design/optimization methods have been conducted.
5.2.1. Turbine materials
At present, the research and development of high-
temperature alloy materials for turbines are essentially ori-
ented to the needs of largeand heavy gas turbines. For instance,
ReneN5, Rene80 and Rene125 are put to use in GE’s LM2500
series gas turbines. Rolls-Royce’s MT-50 uses the third-
generation nickel-based single crystal superalloy CMSX-10
[165]. GE 9H-class heavy gas turbines have recently adopted
GTD444 and GTD222 single crystal alloys. With the exploi-
tation of thermal barrier coatings and cooling technology, the
TIT could reach 2200 K [166]. In general, the turbine
component of MGTs is difﬁcult to be manufactured due to its
small size, no matter in the form of radial or axial ﬂow. The
previous generation alloy materials, such as GTD111,
PWA1483, and IN718/738 are commonly utilized [167].
Compared to superalloys developed for heavy gas tur-
bines, ceramic materials may be a better choice for appli-
cation in MGTs. Ceramics are considered as an effective
medium for enhancing the temperature/performance of tur-
bines with the characteristics of high heat resistance, high
strength, small creep, good hardness and good corrosion
resistance in the presence of high temperatures [168,169].
Additionally, with low density, a ceramics impeller can help
to reduce the shaft load. However, ceramic materials suffer
from several shortcomings such as, brittleness, difﬁculty in
machining, and susceptibility to cracks under the action of
pressure. Since the thermal expansion coefﬁcient of ce-
ramics is much smaller than that of metals, the connection of
ceramic turbines to metal parts is also a challenging issue
[170].
Table 7 provides the currently reported test rigs and
prototypes with ceramic-based turbines. As it is seen, the
research on ceramic turbines has been continuously inten-
siﬁed since the 1960s. The corresponding allowable TIT is
greater than 1150 C, which is about 200 C higher than the
limit value of the superalloy impeller. With considerable
isentropic efﬁciency, the overall performance of MGTs has
been enhanced, reaching a global efﬁciency of 36.5% [171]
or 42.1% [172].
In the connection between ceramics and metals, brazing is a
feasible approach. To this end, the ceramic surface should be
metal treated and then welded to the shaft through a thermally
expanded intermediate layer [173]. The application of non-
integrated connections has been also reported in the litera-
ture. In 2016, the US. Naval Research Laboratory [170]
demonstrated a recuperative MGT with ceramic components,
with a novel connection between the ceramic turbine and the
metal shaft. The turbine had a tapered stub shaft with a cylin-
drical portion and a pin joint at the end. An insulating zirconia
coupling, which was permanently joined to the shaft, was
utilized to connect the rotor to the shaft, as shown in Figure 17
[170]. This coupling had two speciﬁc advantages. Firstly, the
thermal conductivity of zirconia is very low, which can be
employed to isolate heat. Secondly, it can axially slide to
accommodate various thermal expansion rates of steel, zirco-
nia, and silicon nitride ceramics. An included taper angle of
Table 7
Test rigs and prototypes using ceramic turbines.
Year/Reference
Model/Project
Materials
Modus
TIT (C)
Rotating speed (rpm)
Turbine efﬁciency
1967/[174]
DARPA, Ford
e
e
1370
50,000
e
1970/[175]
AGT-100, Allison
SN22M/SN250
Hexoloy SA
Two stage radial ﬂow
1204
86,500
68,500
80.2%/86.1%
1987/[176]
AGT-5, ATTAP
SiC-Si3N4
Two stage axial ﬂow
1204
e
e
1999/[173,177]
AGATA
Si3N4-CSN101
Radial ﬂow
1350
125,000
84%
1997/[171]
ACGTDP
C(f)/SiC-Si3N4
Radial ﬂow
1350
110,000
85%
2002/[172]
CGT302, KHI
SN281/282
Axial ﬂow
1350
64,000/48,000
87%
2005/[178,179]
J-850, AIST
Kyocera SN235
Radial ﬂow
1280
140,000
e
2009/[169]
CF McDonald
e
Radial ﬂow
1170
160,000
83%
2016/[170]
US. Naval Research Laboratory
SN282
Axial ﬂow
1225
135,000
78%
Figure 17
Diagram of the MGT shaft with zirconia insulator [170].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
19


--- Page 20 ---

19.46 is also selected, which can enhance the “self-releasing”,
maintaining concentricity with the change of temperature.
The manufacturing technology is gradually maturing.
Huang et al. [180] developed a technical route for alumina
ceramic turbines using atailored gelcasting process. Wenet al.
[181] studied the fabrication processing and mechanical
properties of Si3N4 ceramic turbines. The obtained results
revealed that although ceramic materials have excellent
temperature tolerance, there are still problems in investment
cost and service life span. As brittle products, ceramic tur-
bines are commonly inﬂuenced by thermal stress and aero-
dynamic forces. The ceramic turbines can break if the rim
speed exceeds 480 m/s [172], or confront resonance issues
[171].
Ceramic-matrix composites (CMCs) have been devel-
oped to overcome the brittleness of the monolithic (pure
ceramic) [182], which show greater competitiveness, and
have been exploited in the latest military/civil aircraft en-
gines. The study or applications of CMCs has been devel-
oped from low-stress components (i.e., nozzle, ﬂame tube)
to high-stress ones (i.e., turbine guide vanes and turbine
rotor blades) [183]. Figure 18 [184] shows the relationship
between the speciﬁc strength and the temperature of
different materials. Carbon ﬁber reinforced SiC ceramic
matrix composites (Cf/SiC) and SiC ﬁber reinforced SiC
ceramic
matrix
composites
(SiCf/SiC)
have
exhibited
excellent high-temperature performance. The latter is more
suitable for hot end components with long service life [184],
which respond to the needs of MGTs.
For SiC CMCs reinforced by continuous ﬁber, the micro-
hardness could reach as high as 2840e3320 kg/mm2. The
machinability is extremely poor and the processes of subtrac-
tive manufacturing are still under exploration [185]. Conven-
tional crafts like grinding and cutting [186], ultrasonic-assisted
machining [187] or laser-assisted machining [188] commonly
cause defects and damage, which cannot be compensated by
the surface strengthening process. Therefore, for the radial
impeller, the processing of complex surfaces will be the main
factor restricting the exploitation of CMCs. In recent years, GE
(America) and IHI Corporation (Japan) have introduced the
application of CMCs on axial ﬂow turbine rotors. However, for
the radial turbine commonly used in MGTs, the relevant
research and sample still remain in the early 21st century, and
need further research.
5.2.2. Thermal protection technology
Thermal protection technology includes passive thermal
protection and active cooling technology. Typical cooling
methods, such as impingement cooling, convective cooling,
rib spoiler cooling and ﬁlm cooling, have been extensively
employed in aero engines and large gas turbines [189e191],
however, the application of cooling in MGTs confronts the
following challenging issues.
a. For the axial ﬂow turbine, the size of its blades is limited by
the small mass ﬂow powered by MGTs, and this leads to
increasing difﬁculty in processing typical cooling methods.
b. For the radial ﬂow turbine, it is difﬁcult to arrange
cooling channels due to the lack of related designs for the
machining method of casting or cutting.
c. The compact overall structure of the MGT possess
challenges to the layout of the cooling air passage.
To enhance the design of axial ﬂow turbines, efﬁcient
cooling
approaches
can
be
employed
to
reduce
the
complexity of the internal ﬂow passage of blades. Zhu et al.
[192]
stated
that
pre-rotating
cooling
can
effectively
enhance the cooling effect of turbine blades without
adopting complex cooling structures and facilitate the
machining of small-sized turbine blades.
Figure 18
Speciﬁc strength as a function of the temperature for
different materials [184].
Figure 19
The internal air-cooling scheme for a radial ﬂow turbine
[194].
20
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 21 ---

To resolve the problems associated with the radial ﬂow
turbine, extensive investigations have been conducted.
Buchi et al. [193] proposed a ﬁlm cooling methodology by
spraying gas onto the inlet of the hub through the cavity at
the back of the impeller. Snyder et al. [194] designed three
air cooling schemes for the radial ﬂow turbine. An optimal
scheme was then selected through conducting experiments,
as illustrated in Figure 19 [194]. In the design of internal
cooling channels for the turbine, spoilers were utilized to
provide resistance to overcome the rotating centrifugal
force, thus achieving uniform distribution of the cooling
ﬂow. The blade and the hub were bonded using HIP tech-
nology. Jiang et al. [195] presented a cooling approach
based on the research of Buchi and Snyder. The high-
temperature region on the blade and hub was cooled by
opening holes on the blade, hub and casing surface.
Except for gas cooling, evaporative cooling is exploited
in the MGT due to the internal circulation of coolant.
Townsend et al. [196] veriﬁed the application of potassium
evaporative cooling in an axial ﬂow turbine. For this
purpose, potassium with a large latent heat of vaporization
was utilized as the coolant. The conceptual structure of the
blade has been illustrated in Figure 20 [196], applying the
technique of return ﬂow cascade. The coolant is retained
by the cascade to prevent the coolant from accumulating
on the top of the blade due to centrifugation. The experi-
mental results revealed that the evaporative cooling sys-
tems could help to maintain a near uniform blade
temperature as long as the speed was sufﬁcient for the
cascade to take effect. Kerrebrock et al. [197] provided an
internal evaporative cooling structure for a radial turbine.
The impeller was divided into two parts for an easier
fabrication, the blades and hub would be connected by
brazing. By punching through the top of the blade, cas-
cades made of inner channels were also exploited in the
blades to capture the return ﬂow and overcome the
centrifugation. The advantage of evaporative cooling is
that it facilitates the arrangement of cooling air, since the
condenser is mounted at the back of the turbine, and is
separated from the hot gas ﬂow path.
Limited
by
the
complex
structure,
as
mentioned,
conventional processing approaches are difﬁcult to achieve
the cooling structure. A rare way to do so faces extra
performance loss. The rapid development of additive
manufacturing
(AM)
technology
provides
a
new
direction for the manufacturing of cold channels in small
turbines.
The
internal
cooling
axial
ﬂow
turbines
were proposed in Ref. [198]. Although there exist few ex-
plorations on the additive manufacturing of inter-cooled
centrifugal turbines, it undoubtedly provides potential
possibilities.
Zhang et al. [199] developed a radial turbine with in-
ternal cooling channels and fabricated the turbine by se-
lective laser melting additive manufacturing. The physical
map of the turbine and the schematic diagram of the cooling
channel are demonstrated in Figure 21 [199]. The cold air
enters the hollow shaft from the inlet of the compressor,
passes the cooling channel inside, and exits from the
opening presented in Figure 21(b). An appropriate additive
manufacturing alloy, namely CM247-LC, was chosen,
which could withstand temperatures of about 1050 C and
was believed to work at TIT of 1200 C with internal
cooling. Nevertheless, a three-stage process including a hot
isostatic pressing step was stated to be under further
investigation. Thus, the tested prototypes were made of
Inconel 625.
Although Zhang et al. stated that the technique requires
substantial further work accounting for the durability, per-
formance at higher temperatures and the efﬁciency detri-
ment of cooling air interaction. The aforementioned work
demonstrated the potential of AM techniques in radially
cooled turbines. The additive manufacturing of superalloy,
particularly of forming, curing, and strengthening tech-
niques, deserves more attention.
Compared with active cooling, thermal barrier coating
(TBC) as passive thermal protection may be a better choice
for microturbines with the maturity of existing technology.
A coating consisting of the ceramic topcoat (TC) layer, bond
coat (BC) layer, and thermally grown oxide (TGO) layer
provides thermal insulation to improve the temperature ﬁeld
and service life of metal impellers [200]. A coating with a
thickness of 120e400 mm can reduce the temperature of the
alloy by about 300 C relative to the hot gas [201].
Some coating technologies, such as plasma spraying and
physical vapor deposition, have been applied to thermal
barrier coating on turbine blades of large gas turbines [202],
but are rarely implemented in MGTs, which may be due to
Figure 20
The conceptual structure of evaporative cooling in blades
[196].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
21


--- Page 22 ---

the wide application of radial turbines in MGTs. The com-
plex geometry restricts the application of coating techniques
such as atmospheric plasma spraying. New techniques such
as plasma spraying physical vapor deposition may improve
the situation, but their applications in radial impellers is
lacking.
The failure of thermal barrier coatings is a major chal-
lenge, particularly for applications in gas turbines, in which
the coatings should work in high temperature environments
for long durations. As for MGTs use, the ﬂexible and var-
iable working conditions will also bring alternating thermal
and stress conditions to the coatings. Thermal fatigue can
substantially inﬂuence the coating service life [203]. The
study on the mechanism of delamination cracks will help to
understand and optimize the service life of thermal barrier
coatings in gas turbines. Notably, as the rotational speed of
gas turbines increases with the decrease of the power level,
the application of coatings on small-scale gas turbines can
be a challenging issue. It should be noticed that the exerted
load on micro-turbines may be comparable to or even
greater than that of the larger gas turbine since the centrif-
ugal load is proportional to the square of the rotational
speed.
Kim et al. [204] established an in-situ deposition-based
silica coating technology for MGTs. Unlike the prefabrica-
tion TBC, the in-situ deposition works by adding a pre-
cursor to the fuel and depositing it on the surface through
which the gas passes after combustion. As illustrated in
Figure 22 [204], the deposited layer covers the surface of
hot end components well. The silica coating has higher
porosity to achieve thermal conductivity as low as yttria
stabilized zirconia. Their study revealed that the silica
coating could not be deposited on the turbine blades for a
long time, but it was possible to replenish the coating by
periodically adding precursors under operating conditions.
In summary, the application of cooling technology to
MGT-based turbines urgently requires signs of progress in
processing technology. Whether the coating technology is
suitable for MGTs requires further investigation and ex-
periments before concluding. However, we believe the
future is positive as long as the spraying process is devel-
oped and the service life problems are resolved.
5.2.3. Turbine design and optimization
Predecessors have formulated a mature systemic design
method of radial turbines. Firstly, the aerodynamic design
for the one-dimensional meridian is carried out, and then the
three-dimensional modeling of the impeller is performed.
Finally, the ﬂow and solid characteristics of the impeller are
analyzed and optimized by numerical simulations. A brief
literature survey shows that a lot of research works have
been conducted in this regard.
Rodgers et al. [205] summarized the existing methods for
determining the minimum number of blades, and discussed
the inﬂuence of parameters such as wheel diameter ratio and
degree of reaction on the performance of radial turbines.
Noughabi et al. [206] introduced the preliminary design
method of radial turbines, including the design of the inlet
and outlet speed triangles, the selection of the number of
impeller blades and the basic thermal equations. Caldiño-
Herrera et al. [207] employed higher-order Bezier curves to
model the meridional shape and blade angle. The optimal
scheme was chosen based on the numerical simulation and
gained improvement in adiabatic efﬁciency.
In recent years, researchers have paid more attention to
design and optimization methods speciﬁcally for MGT-
Figure 22
In-situ deposited white layers on the hot gas components:
(a) combustion chamber, (b) nozzles, (c) back side of turbine, (d) front
side of turbine [204].
Figure 21
Schematic representations of: (a) cooling channel and cooling ﬂow strategy (b) as-built cooled turbine wheel [199].
22
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 23 ---

based turbines. Pakle et al. [208] reported a study on the
design of double-curvature blades according to the charac-
teristics of low mass ﬂow rate and the high-pressure ratio of
a 20 kW MGT. A traditional turbine was designed also
based on the idea of Aungier [209] and Rahbar [210], and
was optimized by the inverse method based on the meridi-
onal viscous ﬂow analysis. Compared to the original design,
the optimized turbine could output a maximum of more than
100 kW of mechanical power under low mass ﬂow condi-
tions, and provide an approximately 6% increase in total-to-
static efﬁciency on average and a 6 kW increase in power
output at high expansion ratios. Fu et al. [211] has proposed
a design method different from the previously nonlinear
iteration method [212]. They explained that the optimization
process of turbines could be divided into three steps. The
shape of the meridian was modiﬁed to change the hub
diameter, then the main geometric control parameters of the
blade were adjusted, and ﬁnally, the local optimization
along the blade height was carried out. The ﬂow passage
capacity and efﬁciency were evaluated through experiments,
and the total-static efﬁciency of the radial turbine reached up
to 84.3% at the design speed. Barsi et al. [213] performed
multi-disciplinary optimization on a radial turbine by
implementing RANS and FEA to design and perform ﬂuid-
structure coupling analysis. To this end, scripts of Python/
Fortran were employed to exchange data. The efﬁciency and
aerodynamic performances of the designed turbine were in
line with expectations.
5.2.4. Summary
This subsection reviews the research on materials, cool-
ing, and design optimization of turbines. Through the
detailed review, it is proved that composite reinforced ce-
ramics may be utilized as materials for turbines in the future.
With the development of superalloy manufacturing tech-
nology, cooling methods can be considered as an effective
means of increasing the TIT. By summarizing the existing
methodologies, we believe that internal cooling has certain
advantages in MGTs, but needs further investigation. The
small mass ﬂow and high-pressure ratio characteristics of
turbines in MGTs will be the focus of further design and
optimization.
5.3. Combustion chamber
Fuel is converted into energy in the combustion chamber.
A high-quality burned gas contributes to more efﬁcient
work in the turbine, and the quality of combustion directly
affects the emission level of MGTs.
Compared with traditional gas turbines, the combustion
chamber of MGTs has some unique features given as fol-
lows [214].
a. Single-stage centrifugal compressors are generally used
in MGTs, resulting in a lower pressure in the combustion
chamber.
b. The air entering the combustion chamber is preheated by
the recuperator, resulting in a higher inlet temperature.
Since the TIT is limited, the equivalence ratio of air and
fuel is relatively low.
c. The mass ﬂow of MGTs is low, leading to a lower vol-
ume ﬂow despite a low inlet density.
d. The combustion chamber should be considered in
conjunction with other components for compactness
Current research on MGT combustors aims to lessen
emissions, improve efﬁciency, and adapt to multiple fuels.
The research results can be evaluated based on the tem-
perature distribution and the level of emissions of the
combustion chamber outlet.
5.3.1. Combustion technology
Annular and cylindrical are two common structures uti-
lized for the combustion chamber in MGTs. The structure of
the combustion chamber is commonly determined by
combustion technology. Currently, low-emission combus-
tion technologies applied in gas turbines and aero engines
essentially include diffusion combustion (DIFF) [215], lean-
premix combustion (LP) [216,217], rich-quench-lean com-
bustion (RQL) [218,219], ﬂameless combustion [220], lean
direct inject combustion (LDI) [221], and trapped vortex
combustion [222]. The LDI and trapped vortex technology
are rarely employed in MGTs because of the limitations of
the size and sensitivity to losses.
A DIFF combustor has a suitable gas-oil ratio, while an
LP combustor with a primary air excess during premix is
considered to be advantageous over the DIFF combustor
when burning natural gas [223] and hence is broadly utilized
in current MGTs [224]. Axial staged combustion represents
a kind of combustion organizing technology, which is
proven to reduce NOx emissions by controlling the resi-
dence time of high-temperature gas, including fuel staged
and air staged. An RQL combustor is characterized by a rich
oil primary mixture, followed by the quenching air supply
and the combustion under lean oil conditions [225], which
belongs to axial air staged combustion and has been applied
to aero-engines. Although the sudden temperature rise
produces a surging NO formation when quenching air is
supplied, due to the little residence time of the process, the
RQL combustor still has advantages over the LP combustor
in terms of overall NO emissions. Therefore, the RQL
combustor is considered as a viable alternative to the LP
combustor [214].
Laranci
[226,227]
designed
a
new
RQL
annular
combustor based on the Elliott TA80R MGT. To this end,
mixing holes instead of the original mixing tubes were used,
and the original geometry with fairly low manufacturing
cost is maintained. The CFD based simulations were also
performed to verify the adaptability of various kinds of fuel.
The jet stabilization approach in combustion chamber has
the features of the RQL combustion, as demonstrated in the
streamlines of Figure 23(b) [228]. Oxidant rushes in at a
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
23


--- Page 24 ---

certain axial position, forming vortex structures for stable
combustion. Alemi et al. [228] examined the effect of jet
characteristics on the combustion and NO emissions in a jet-
stabilized combustor. Three-dimensional simulations were
performed for various jet angles and Reynolds numbers, and
the NO production was predicted by the thermal Zeldovich
mechanism. The obtained results indicated that the lowest
NO emissions can be obtained by spraying downstream at
high jet Reynolds numbers. Yang et al. [229] developed a
novel elliptical jet-stabilized combustor. Numerical in-
vestigations were conducted also on the combustion and
emission characteristics by changing the ellipse’s major/
minor axis ratio. The gained results revealed that the ellip-
tical combustor achieved a stronger mixing performance
than the circular combustor, leading to a 50% reduction of
NO under an appropriate major/minor axis ratio. Hasemann
et al. [230] conducted an experimental study of a single-
stage jet-stabilized combustor with various numbers of
nozzles, diameters, and mixing zone lengths for MGTs. The
investigators pointed out that the number of nozzles in-
ﬂuences the length of the reaction area, and the change of
nozzle diameter can affect the jet speed. The results also
indicated that an increase in nozzles can lead to a decrease
in emissions and the diameter of the nozzles impacts the
pressure loss and emission of the combustor.
Flameless combustions, also known as ﬂameless oxida-
tion (FLOX), were ﬁrstly utilized in boilers [230]. There
exists a recirculation region where fresh air is diluted to be
thoroughly mixed with gas and heated above the ﬂash point
in the FLOX combustor. In contrast to the combustion
within stabilized ﬂames, temperature peaks can be avoided
at ﬂameless oxidation. Actually, the uniform temperature
distribution leads to an ultra-low NO emission. Zanger et al.
designed a two-stage combustion system based on the
FLOX concept, as presented in Figure 24 [231]. The com-
bustion chamber had a vortex-stabilized pilot stage and the
main combustion section was designed based on the prin-
ciple of jet stabilization, which generated a large amount of
ﬂue gas backﬂow, thereby causing ﬂameless oxidation. The
designed system was then successfully tested on the Turbec
T100 test rig. Schwärzle et al. [232] explored the above-
mentioned two-stage combustion chamber. The scholars
employed an ICCD camera to capture the OH signal and
investigated the shape, length, and lift-off height of the
ﬂame. NOx, CO, and UHC emissions were also detected,
while the pressure loss and gas residence time of the
combustor still should be improved. Figure 25 illustrates the
dependence of NOx and CO emissions on the equivalence
ratio in a FLOX combustor (also known as the MILD
concept) [233]. Low emissions were found at equivalence
ratios between 0.35 and 0.5, which proved the outstanding
performance of the FLOX combustor. However, Perpignan
Figure 23
(a) Schematic view of a jet-stabilized combustor, (b)
velocity contours along with streamlines on the centerline plane [228].
Figure 24
Schematic view of a double stage FLOX combustor
using jet-stabilized method [231].
Figure 25
NOx and CO emissions in terms of the equivalence ratio
in a FLOX combustor [233].
24
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 25 ---

et al. [234] displayed that the FLOX combustor requires a
large volume, presenting challenges for integration into
space-sensitive engines such as the MGTs. As jet entrain-
ment and large recirculation zone are commonly imple-
mented to strengthen the performance of the FLOX
combustor, the problems of pressure loss, gas residence
time, and working range should be rationally resolved. This
fact requires earlier consideration of the integration design
between the combustor and the whole engine.
The pressure gained combustion (i.e., constant volume
combustion) that changes the cycle mode to obtain higher
mean-effect heat addition temperature has high cycle theo-
retical efﬁciency. Nevertheless, the combination of pressure
gained combustion with continuous ﬂuid in gas turbines is a
cumbersome task, and detonation can be a possible solution.
Compared with pulse detonation, rotating detonation has
more potential applications in gas turbine combustors due to
its self-sustaining characteristics. The rotating detonation
has strong adaptability to the mass rate of working ﬂuid
[235] and products fairly low emissions [236]. Sousa et al.
[237] established a gas turbine model with a rotating deto-
nation
combustor.
Compared
with
the
deﬂagration
combustor, the obtained results showed that the overall ef-
ﬁciency rises by about 5% under low-pressure ratio cir-
cumstances. A supersonic turbine ﬁtting to the detonation
combust was also declared to be redesigned. Apparently, the
detonation combustors need further improvements to be
applied in MGT systems where emissions and fuel adapt-
ability are of great concern.
5.3.2. Fuel type
In recent years, in view of the requirements for the wide
applicability of fuels, various types of fuels with various
characteristics have been extensively exploited by MGTs.
Commonly, these fuels and combustion techniques are ﬁrst
tested on existing MGT platforms before applying them to
large gas turbines. The introduction of gaseous and liquid
fuels will be separately organized.
The representative of gaseous fuels is natural gas, having
been broadly used MGTs. The emission data of commercial
MGTs is generally based on the burning natural gas con-
ditions. Natural gas has the advantages of low ignition
temperature, high caloriﬁc value, and appropriate combus-
tion speed. The liqueﬁed natural gas is also conducive to
transport and storage. Sufﬁcient research has been con-
ducted on stable combustion based on natural gas. The
current study research mainly focuses on its injection
methods. The inﬂuences of swirler or injector geometric on
combustion and emission were also reported and discussed
[238].
A series of low caloriﬁc fuels, mixed with hydrogen,
carbon monoxide and methane or extracted from bio-
processing, has attracted attention from researchers and
engineers. Commercially available MGTs can only handle
low caloriﬁc fuels in limited operating ranges [239], which
means further explorations should be carried out to adapt
these low caloriﬁc fuels. Swirl stabilization and jet stabili-
zation are two common methods for low caloriﬁc fuels.
Swirler could stabilize the ﬂame, but leads to bad com-
bustion in the later stage. Jet stabilization confronts ﬂame
stability issues [240]. Bower et al. [239] have constructed a
combustor with the stabilized main stage and swirl stabi-
lized pilot stage, which is similar to the FLOX combustor
described previously [231]. The combustor was then tested
on an atmospheric test rig and showed good NOx emissions
in the fuel caloriﬁc value range of 7e49 MJ/kg. Khalil et al.
[241] reported a colorless distributed combustion (similar to
FLOX/MILD) combustor with vortex stabilization induced
by a tangential jet. Methane diluted with nitrogen was set to
simulate landﬁll gas with different compositions or low
heating value fuels. This issue reveals the good adaptability
of FLOX/CDC technology in low caloriﬁc value fuels.
On facing application in waste gas treatment, Cameretti
et al. [242] examined the performance of gas fuels from
biomass treatment, solid waste pyrolysis and anaerobic
digestion processes in MGTs. The results revealed that the
given low heat value fuel can alter the geometric properties
of the combustion temperature zone, leaving the traditional
LP combustor in atypical operating conditions. Schwärzle
[243] sent the waste gas containing volatile organic com-
pounds (VOC) into the combustor and co-ﬁred with natural
gas via chemiluminescence images and exhaust gas monitor
to analyze the ﬂames and combustion. The addition of VOC
helped to reduce the emissions of CO and NOx in the
presence of high combustion temperatures. At low temper-
atures, the air content in VOC had a positive correlation
with CO and a negative correlation with NOx.
Hydrogen is recognized as a pure clean fuel that is
without carbon emissions. There exist great differences in
physical and chemical properties between hydrogen and
hydrocarbon fuels. As illustrated in Table 8 [244,245], the
volume energy density of hydrogen is only about 1/3 of that
of methane, resulting in a three-times higher volume ﬂow/
velocity (in the case of using the same pipes) during
Table 8
Physical and combustion characteristics of typical gaseous fuels [244,245].
Fuel
Density (kg/m3)
Volume caloriﬁc value (MJ/m3)
Ignition temperature (C)
Laminar ﬂame velocity (cm/s)
Methane
0.717
35.6
540
38
Hydrogen
0.089
12.6
571
351
Ammonia
0.771
14.4
651
7
Note: under standard state conditions (101.325 kPa, 15 C).
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
25


--- Page 26 ---

providing the same amount of heat. This fact yields barriers
to the ﬂexible adaptation of combustion systems between
hydrogen and hydrocarbon fuels [246]. The study of mixing
hydrogen into natural gas has proved that the addition of
hydrogen will weaken the swirl stability effect [247].
Therefore,
new
technology
was
developed
to
burn
hydrogen-rich fuel or pure hydrogen in an MGT combustor.
Beita et al. [248] reviewed the thermo-acoustic instability of
hydrogen-rich fuel combustion and pointed out that the
combustion of 100% hydrogen fuel faces great challenges.
Hydrogen enrichment makes combustion in low equivalent
ratio regions unstable, and ﬂame morphology variations are
often detectable. Karyeyen et al. [249] developed a
distributed combustion combustor for hydrogen-rich gas,
and simulated the fuel with a hydrogen volume fraction
higher than 44% to predict the thermal ﬁeld. The CO
emission results were claimed to be nearly equal to zero,
while the NOx emission was lower than 20 ppm under
speciﬁc conditions. Reale et al. [250] simulated the com-
bustion of diluted hydrogen under a maximum 30% volume
fraction. For this purpose, wet cycle technology was utilized
to realize the combustion of hydrogen-rich fuel in the none-
modify combustor of T100. Hydrogen embrittlement and
water corrosion failure caused by hydrogen were also re-
ported. The coating and low hydrogen permeability mate-
rials are anticipated to resolve the raised issues.
Ammonia as another common gaseous fuel is consid-
ered as a potential hydrogen carrier that can achieve
carbon-free
power
generation.
Similar
to
hydrogen,
ammonia combusts at different rates and mechanisms than
conventional
fuels.
New
combustion
technology
for
ammonia application in MGTs has been established. The
AIST ﬁrst achieved successful NH3-kerosene-air gas tur-
bine power generation in 2014, and then in 2017 extended
the system to NH3-air combustion without the need for any
additives or pre-cracking devices. Kurata et al. [215]
released the research report on the NH3-air power gener-
ation system, which was modiﬁed from a 50 kW class
MGT, TRC50 from Tokyo turbine INC., and had a wider
operating range. Their obtained results showed that by
using NH3 fuel, combustion efﬁciency of 86%e96% is
achievable.
The
experimentally
obtained
results
also
indicated that NO and NH3 emissions are affected by the
inlet temperature of the combustion chamber. The mech-
anism explorations revealed that the unburnt NH3 was
expected to react with NO generated in the lean fuel zone
through selective non-catalytic reduction (SNCR). There-
fore, bringing in excess NH3 fuel to produce both rich and
lean fuel mixtures in the primary zone was recommended
to reduce emissions. The recent study by Okafor [251]
demonstrated an ammonia combustion chamber technol-
ogy with high efﬁciency. Swirler and nozzle structures
were modiﬁed to improve the premixing effect and gas
residence time to reduce NOx emission and achieve higher
combustion efﬁciency. According to the obtained experi-
mental results, NOx emission of 42 ppmv and ammonia
combustion efﬁciency of 99.5% was achieved at 0.3 MPa
for fuel input power of 31.44 kW. The spray combustion of
liqueﬁed ammonia was expected to lessen the cost and size
of MGTs. The ﬂame control of spray combustion of liq-
ueﬁed ammonia was ﬁrstly explored by Ayaz et al. [252]
The performed research suggested that ammonia would not
be suitable for premixed combustion because of high
ignition energy, and co-combustion with methane exhibi-
ted better emission performance. A lifecycle-based scru-
tiny further revealed the operating cost and emission level
of ammonia fuel. Ammonia, as an additive gas, could
decrease carbon oxide emissions by nearly 50% [123].
Liquid fuels such as gasoline, kerosene and biomass oil
have the advantages of good stability and easy storage,
which makes them have extensive applications. Before
entering the combustor, liquid fuels should be atomized for
stabilizing combustion [253]. Therefore, research on spray
and atomization is a crucial branch in the realm of research
on liquid fuel.
Biomass fuels (i.e., vegetable oil, diesel oil, and bio-
ethanol) are typical alternative fuels. Renewability and low
emission potential have attracted attention for their appli-
cation in MGTs. Speciﬁcally, straight vegetable oil (SVO)
for MGT use has been encouraged in recent years since the
SVO is not suitable for large-scale exploitation due to lim-
itations in the cultivation of raw materials. Bio-oil can be
pyrolyzed from an unlimited number of organic fuels and is
also considered as a potential fuel for distributed MGT
systems [254]. Figure 26 demonstrates the physical and
chemical properties of several common biomass fuels
currently used in gas turbines, as summarized by Chiong
[255]. The viscosity values of SVO and bio-oil are times
higher than that of diesel, which leads to negative effects
and makes it difﬁcult to atomize. Air-assisted pressure-swirl
atomizers are believed to help atomize and burn high-
viscosity fuels while preheating can reduce the viscosity
to enhance the atomization performance with a marked in-
crease in emission [256,257]. Additionally, the problem of
coking and clogging caused by doping components in bio-
fuels still should be methodically examined since durability
is of the major concern.
Through investigation, some bio-fuels applied to MGTs
have been also reported. Bufﬁet al. [258] scrutinized the
application of fast pyrolysis bio-oil (FPBO) in MGTs. The
gained results revealed that the viscosity of FPBO affects
the volume of atomized droplets, leading to an increase in
CO emission, and the water vapor produced by combustion
positively incorporates into the overall efﬁciency of MGTs.
Broumand et al. [259] discovered that the addition of
ethanol can improve the volatility of FPBO to inhibit
coking, and the new two-ﬂuid nozzle is designed for at-
omization since 100% FPBO is hard to combust alone
[260]. Another fuel that exploits ethanol to help combust is
liqueﬁed wood (LW) [261]. The LW-ethanol-based fuel can
combust stably in MGTs, but exhibits a substantial gap in
emissions compared to traditional fuel. The investigators
pointed out that emissions can be reduced by increasing the
proportion of the LW and the primary ﬂame temperature,
26
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 27 ---

leading to enhance heat transfer and accelerate evapora-
tion. Further, microalgae biofuel extracted by a chemical
approach was compared with Jet-A fuel on a small turbojet
engine. The addition of biofuel noticeably lessened CO,
CO2 and NOx emissions, but the proportion of biofuel
should not be too high [262].
Hoxie et al. [263] investigated the feasibility of exploit-
ing ultra-low-sulfur diesel (ULSD) combined with vegetable
oil in MGTs and conducted that vegetable oil can replace
ULSD to some extent. To this end, an optimal mixing ratio
of vegetable oil at 75% was proposed. Furthermore, the
speciﬁc gravity, viscosity, higher heating value, ﬂash point,
and other properties of this mixed fuel were measured,
providing a basis for the improvement of atomization.
Figure 27 summarizes the combustion emissions of the
fuels utilized in MGTs. It should be noticed that the most
balanced or the lowest emission data under rated conditions
of MGTs are selected and various emission control measures
can be applied to these fuels. Natural gas still has absolute
advantages in emissions, biofuels can be employed as a
supplement to natural gas, and some blended fuels have
exhibited excellent emissions performance.
The impact of fuel on the service life of MGTs is clearly
a matter of concern. Alternative fuels, particularly biofuels,
can affect the service life of MGTs due to the inadequate
content of cetane and other elements contained. Coking or
corrosion would be the subject matter, however, there are
few quantitative results due to rare studies on the effects of
service life, which may be attributed to the immaturity of
alternative fuels employed in MGTs.
5.3.3. Impacts of manufacture technology on
combustion chamber
Due to the limitations of low power levels and small
mass ﬂow, the small-size MGTs combustors confront
serious challenges in their design and manufacturing. The
parasitic energy losses relative to net power output sharply
increase as size decreases. Actually, the geometry and
boundary conditions of the combustor also have a great
impact on the performance and service life span of MGTs
[264].
In a single-cylinder, cannular or annular combustion
chamber, traditional manufacturing techniques are exploited
more often. Fuel nozzle, swirler, and ﬂame tube are manu-
factured by a machine tool or casting and then appropriately
assembled. The conventional manufacturing methods un-
doubtedly limit the original design of the components,
potentially resulting in greater losses or worse emission
levels, compared with the ideal design without speciﬁc
Figure 26
The physical and chemical properties of biomass fuels and typical fossil fuels [255].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
27


--- Page 28 ---

limitations. To achieve this goal, additive manufacturing
may be a s suitable solution since it can reduce the number
of assembly processes, and realize the production of com-
plex structures, providing higher accuracy in smaller
dimensions.
Although there exists a certain discrepancy between the
components produced by metal additive manufacturing and
those of the traditional method in terms of surface rough-
ness, it is sufﬁcient for the exploitation of the combustion
chamber
[265].
In
particular,
additive
manufacturing
signiﬁcantly increases the design freedom of the combustor.
It overcomes the drawbacks of traditional manufacturing
methods in small-size complex structural machining, and
increases the variability of geometric shapes [266]. Additive
manufacturing has shown great potential in a variety of
combustion components, such as the LEAP fuel injector
conducted by GE [267]. The additive technology is also
adopted by Siemens to repair the combustion chamber tip of
the SGT gas turbine to prolong its service life [268]. The
ﬁve-axis directed energy deposition (DED) system produced
by TWI Corporation has been employed to produce super-
alloy annular combustors for helicopter engines [269].
Although these applications or explorations have been car-
ried out in large-scale combustion chambers, additive
manufacture is undoubtedly suitable for MGTs since the
combustion chambers do not have to withstand high-
intensity creep at the pressure or temperature level of MGTs.
Adamou et al. [270] have proposed a concept for
designing of MGTs based on additive manufacturing, which
is unlike the idea of traditional manufacturing. The conical
swirler, lattice structure mixer, upstream augmented cooling
backside mixer, and ﬂat swirler designed were all appro-
priately
designed
based
on
the
concept
of
additive
manufacturing. Through CFD simulations, the designed
combustor demonstrated excellent temperature control and
fuel-air mixing capability, with a 75% and 40% reduction in
nitric oxide and carbon monoxide, respectively. The later
experimental tests also revealed that the additively manu-
factured features improved the distribution and quality of
the air-fuel mixture and performed well in the whole airﬂow
range, which was considered not possible with the baseline
designs [271].
Additive manufacturing also has certain limitations. In
order to avoid the additional support frame which is
essential to beam structures, the design of components
should be intentionally chosen to achieve self-supporting
features. Another consideration is the size of the hole, the
aperture should not be too small to avoid the blocking
during printing, or the inaccuracy affected by the surface
roughness. The limitation on the minimum aperture can be
different for various additive manufacturing technologies.
For instance, for metal additive manufacturing, selective
laser melting (SLM) has the highest resolution accuracy.
The minimum aperture allowed by the SLM depends on the
size
of
the
source
beam,
which
may
be
around
0.27e0.35 mm for conventional devices [272], corre-
sponding to a minimum aperture of about 0.8 mm. In the
research work by Adamou [270], the minimum aperture of
parts made by Inconel 625 was limited to 0.75 mm.
The additive manufacturing not only revolutionizes the
way small components are processed, but also has a
noticeable impact on the overall design concept of com-
bustion chambers. Currently, studies on combustion cham-
bers have been mostly conducted in traditional frameworks,
and only a few investigations have been devoted to MGTs
combustion
chambers
in
the
context
of
additive
manufacturing. However, it is anticipated that such research
works will rapidly grow. Additionally, the structure of
multistage cyclones and oil-gas mixed cavities can be
further examined.
5.3.4. Summary
This subsection is aimed to review the research on
combustion technology and fuel adaptability of combustors
in MGTs. Among several high-efﬁciency combustion tech-
nologies, the RQL combustion has certain advantages,
which can limit NOx emissions to a fairly low level.
Flameless oxidation with the characteristic of ideal emis-
sions and wide caloriﬁc value adaptability has attracted the
attention of many scholars and technology developers. In
addition to traditional fuels, emerging bio-fuel, ammonia,
exhaust gas, and various mixed fuels have been conﬁrmed
to be effective for MGTs. In order to achieve enhanced
performance, speciﬁc designs or optimizations should be
accomplished due to the various properties of the fuels used.
Additive manufacturing has opened up possibility of bene-
ﬁcial changes on combustion chamber, deserving further
researches and attempts.
5.4. Recuperator
The recuperator ensures the efﬁcient operation of MGTs,
but the extra cost and weight cannot be ignored. For use in
MGTs, some small-sized, low-cost and high-effectiveness
recuperators have been designed.
Figure 27
The CO and NOx emissions from several fuels.
28
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 29 ---

5.4.1. Structure and materials
The recuperator employed for MGTs has been reviewed
in detail in Ref. [5]. According to the heat exchange surface
geometry, the recuperator is essentially divided into three
types: plate-ﬁn, primary surface and tube. Zhang et al. [273]
compared the performances and costs of three types of
recuperators. The authors believed that the plate-ﬁn recu-
perator had favorable geometry and performance, but was
bulky and not suitable for mobile devices. In contrast, the
tube recuperator was more suitable for helicopters or other
mobile vehicles equipped with recuperative gas turbines.
The primary surface recuperators might be the development
trend in the future, which was also approved by McDonald
[274]. According to the accumulated performance demon-
strated in Figure 28 [274], the tube recuperator was less
efﬁcient, but gained low overall weight. Both plate-ﬁn and
primary surface recuperators present suitable effectiveness
regimes for power generations, while primary surface
recuperators have the advantage of heat transfer density.
Figure 29 [275e278] illustrates some existing recuper-
ators. Ingersoll-Rand developed a plate-ﬁn recuperator with
an operating temperature of 600e700 C in 1994 [275].
RSAB developed a primary surface countercurrent recu-
perator with a cross-corrugated (CC) structure [276]. The
substrates stamped with corrugated surfaces were stacked
together by laser welding to form the core while the intake
and exhaust manifolds were welded at the opening aside.
This speciﬁc recuperator was cost-effective and convenient
for production. Solar Turbines designed an annular primary
surface recuperator with a cross-wavy (CW) structure,
which was later licensed for Capstone C30 [277]. The
Figure 28
The speciﬁc weight trends of the gas turbine recuperator
matrix for various surface geometries [274].
Figure 29
Different recuperators: (a) Ingersoll-Rand [275], (b) RASB [276], (c) Solar Turbines [277], (d) MTU [278].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
29


--- Page 30 ---

recuperator was made of stainless steel, the heat exchange
substrate welded by laser had an involute design, and
multiple substrates were rolled up to form the complete
recuperator. MTU [278] developed an elliptical tubular
recuperator consisting of two manifolds brazed with shaped
tubes. The cold air ﬂew in and out of the tube bundle
through manifolds while heat exchange occurred as the gas
ﬂew through the space between the tubes. This tubular
recuperator has been reported to be applied in aero engines
[279].
In recent years, some new
structures have been
designed.
Counterﬂow
recuperators
with
larger
heat
transfer surfaces are favored because of higher average
temperature differences and larger speciﬁc surface areas. A
counterﬂow recuperator with wavy ﬁns for submicron gas
turbines was designed by Kim et al. [280]. Experimental
research on pressure drop and heat transfer indicated that
an increase in the inlet temperature of hot gas would result
in an increase in the average speciﬁc volume and then led
to a higher pressure drop in the presence of high temper-
atures. Do et al. [281] designed and manufactured a single-
pass counterﬂow recuperator with offset strip ﬁns. The
recuperator consists of six units, which were annularly
mounted outside of the combustor at equal intervals, as
demonstrated in Figure 30(b). Each unit was stacked by
substrates with offset strip ﬁns, and vacuum furnace
brazing was exploited to connect the substrates and the
ﬁns. The characteristics of pressure drop and effectiveness,
which were similar to those of Kim et al. [280], were ob-
tained through experimentation.
Micro power units developed at the US Naval Research
Laboratory [170] had a ceramic-made plate-ﬁn recuperator
that could withstand an inlet temperature of 1040 C. The
recuperator units in a small volume had axial and radial
stacking designs. A total of 1200 ceramic pieces formed a
complete recuperator. The bumps on the substrate surfaces
shown in Figure 30(c) were designed to resist gas pressure
and thus reduce stresses, while on the other hand, the bumps
could serve a crucial purpose during sintering.
At present, most of the preferred recuperators are heat
exchangers whose integration with rotor systems is con-
cerned since the MGTs are commonly designed as a
complete system. This results in a challenge for recuper-
ators’ design and processing. However, for some distinct
applications such as CSP and FC, the MGT can be split and
reintegrated into a complete system. In this case, the recu-
perators can be designed and manufactured based on the
ordinary counter-ﬂow/cross-ﬂow gas-to-gas heat exchanger,
reducing a certain cost.
As mentioned above, superalloys have already been
exploited in additive manufacturing, and have shown good
sealing performance and strength. Therefore, additive
manufacturing can offer more efﬁcient and economical so-
lutions for the production of MGT recuperators.
Figure 31 shows the recuperator manufactured by HiETA
[282] for the MGT-RE of Delta motorsport. The additively
manufactured recuperator unit is 33% smaller in volume and
9.4% more effective against the conventional competition
for the same speciﬁcation. Zhang et al. [283] have designed
an additively manufactured manifold-microchannel gas-gas
heat exchanger using Inconel 718 superalloy. Compared
with the conventional plate ﬁn heat exchanger, the heat
transfer density increased by 25% for the same heat transfer
ratio to pressure drop. Since the material takes up a
large proportion of the cost of recuperators, additive
manufacturing can minimize the material waste and thus
lessen the overall cost. AM technology has also shown
advantages in the production cycle.
Similar to the design of combustor components, additive
manufacturing also liberates some design ideas for heat
transfer microstructures, which are commonly subjected to
conventional processing techniques. For instance, the clas-
sical enhanced heat transfer approach, ﬁns or ribs, can be
vary in shape, including triangle, star-shape, and dimpled-
sphere [284]. An additively manufactured vortex generator
in the microchannel can be exploited to strengthen the
laminar heat transfer [285]. These structures can make the
recuperators manufactured by additive technology exhibit
smaller volumes or higher effectiveness than recuperators
produced by traditional manufacturing methodologies.
However, in terms of the overall performance of micro
gas turbines, the enhancement of heat transfer needs to be
viewed dialectically. Considering that the MGT system is
sensitive to pressure loss between the compressor and
Figure 30
Recuperators designed by (a) Kim [280], (b) Do [281] and (c) Michael Vick [170].
30
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 31 ---

turbine [286], the recuperator with balancing heat transfer
efﬁciency and pressure loss is more recommended. The
enhanced heat transfer structure may reduce the total area
and thus reduce the friction loss, but the ﬂow loss intro-
duced by the structure alone may be larger. The roughness
of the heat transfer surface should be taken into concern
since it will increase the heat transfer but bring more pres-
sure loss [287]. However, for additively manufactured heat
exchangers, the control of surface roughness is one of the
difﬁculties, but it is easy to solve by machining or other
manufacturing approaches.
In addition, the heat exchangers processed by diffusion
weldings such as PCHE and PFHE are recommended,
because they have no solder residue and small deformation,
and are suitable for both steel and non-metallic materials.
Nevertheless, a current processing cost perspective reveals
that brazing is less expensive and suitable for the tempera-
ture and pressure levels of MGTs.
It is foreseeable that material cost will still be the main
component of recuperator processing. For the case where
the inlet temperature of the recuperator is less than 675 C,
347 stainless steel can meet the requirements. Inconel
625, costs ﬁve times of 347 steel, leading to an increase in
the allowable inlet temperature of the recuperator by 800 C
based on McDonald [169]. The corresponding TIT is up
to 1150 C, which is hard to maintain under the state of
art on turbines. In fact, based on the turbine material and
their allowable TIT discussed above, the commonly used
superalloy can meet the needs of the recuperator and
maintain low cost. Additionally, facing the development of
ceramic/CMCs
turbines
or
centripetal
turbines
with
cooling, the study of ceramic recuperators as technical
reserves
is
highly
necessary.
The
binder
jetting
method
(additive
manufacturing)
[288]
and
diffusion
welding have been employed in the processing of SiC ce-
ramics, furthermore, some other ceramic plate-ﬁn recuper-
ators have been reported [289]. Xiao [5] believed that
the development of reliable and low-cost recuperators
of
ceramic
materials
is
still
in
progress.
However,
considering the inﬂuence of the inlet temperature of the
recuperators on the overall efﬁciency of the MGT shown
in Figure 32 [5], the deployment of superalloys and ce-
ramics is still the ﬁrst choice for more development of
recuperators.
5.4.2. Recuperator optimization
Stevens et al. [290] examined the optimization of MGT
recuperators and pursued higher heat exchange effective-
ness and low-pressure drop to achieve higher overall-cycle
efﬁciency. The authors remarked that there was a corre-
lation between the pressure drop of the cold side and that
of the hot side of the recuperator, which depends on the
pressure ratio of the compressor. A simpliﬁed procedure
was the proposed and its good consistency with other
multi-objective optimization results was presented.
Cai et al. [291] optimized a cross-wavy primary surface
with the design of a circular involute. A calculation model
of related heat transfer and pressure drop was then estab-
lished, and the genetic algorithm was employed for multiple
optimizations. The developed optimization was based on the
recuperator of C30/C65, aiming to reduce the total pressure
loss. The obtained results were successfully veriﬁed with the
experimentally observed data, and a noticeable reduction in
the pressure loss was achieved.
Zhang et al. [292] proposed an optimization approach for
the primary surface recuperator on a turbo-shaft engine for
helicopters. The interdependence between the recuperator
weight and effectiveness was appropriately quantiﬁed under
speciﬁc constraints relative to the selected heat transfer
surface geometry. By employing multi-objective genetic
algorithm optimization, the best balance point between the
performance and the recuperator weight was obtained and
discussed.
Giugno et al. [293] scrutinized the inﬂuence of design
parameters on the cost and volume of recuperators by
implementing the Monte Carlo method and response
sensitivity analysis. The minimum volume, minimum cost,
and compromise schemes were proposed with a minimum
average volume of 2.52 dm3 and a minimum average cost of
1652.6 euros.
Figure 32
Effect of recuperator-inlet temperatures [5].
Figure 31
Additively manufactured recuperator made by HiETA
equipped in an MGT-RE [282].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
31


--- Page 32 ---

Maghsoudi et al. [294] performed a thermal-economic
analysis of plate-ﬁn recuperators with different ﬁns and
ﬂow forms. The performed study was mainly based on a
200 kW MGT recuperator model. Cross and counter-ﬂow
plate-ﬁn recuperators employing rectangular, triangular,
offset strip, and louver ﬁns were then optimized for effec-
tiveness and cost via NSGA-II. The data envelopment
analysis (DEA) model was then utilized to evaluate the total
cost, pressure drop, volume, and weight. The authors carried
out a similar study in another work [295], which ﬁrst opti-
mized various forms of recuperators, and sorted the optimal
solutions by using the normalization method and the
concept of non-dominated sorting. The results obtained
showed that offset strips and louvered ﬁns provide high-
pressure drop and the best heat transfer performance. Eco-
nomic analysis and multi-objective optimization of offset ﬁn
heat exchangers were further examined [296]. The under-
taken study took the geometry of the heat exchange ﬁns as
optimization variables, and cycle efﬁciency and discounted
payback period as the main considerations. For a 200 kW
MGT, the optimization results were reported to be 29.5%
overall efﬁciency and a discounted payback period of about
1.4 years.
5.4.3. Summary
In this subsection, recuperators of MGTs were brieﬂy
sorted out by introducing a few structures and optimization
methodologies. An ideal recuperator for MGTs requires
high recuperation, high effectiveness, and low pressure
drop. In this regard, the primary surface recuperators have
attracted
special
attention
due
to
their
outstanding
compactness and low losses. The recuperator also should
have good performances in anti-oxidation and creep resis-
tance at high temperatures. In general, ceramics or super-
alloys perform better than stainless steel. Superalloys can
meet the needs of current TIT conditions, and thereby, ce-
ramics will be the future direction. The application of ad-
ditive technologies can bring considerable beneﬁts to the
recuperators in terms of density and cost. However, some
enhanced approaches unlocked by AM need to be estimated
under the framework of overall performance of MGTs
before being employed. Similar to the impellers, the
exploitation of optimization algorithms in the design of
recuperators
has
recently
attracted
the
attention
of
investigators.
5.5. Rotor and bearing
Rotor and bearing have a direct impact on the working
state of MGTs. Therefore, the rotor systems and support
schemes of MGTs should be methodically designed and
veriﬁed. This subsection is aimed to analyze the relationship
between the rotor systems and the support schemes based on
the existing prototypes, and then introduces some main-
stream bearing technologies.
5.5.1. Rotor system and support
As a high-speed machine, the design of the rotor system
of MGTs is of great importance. Generally, the connection
between the turbine shaft and the generator shaft can affect
the support scheme. Some models employ the gearbox
transmission [27,32], and only the gas turbine part’s support
requires consideration. Some models have independent
support for both shafts [31] and the shafts are connected by
a coupling. The shafts can be considered as a single
equivalent shaft, whose stiffness equals the superposition of
the stiffness of the turbine shaft and generator shaft. The
concept of the integrated shaft is mostly employed in
existing MGTs, designed with the impeller arranged back-
to-back [18,19,23,26,30]. The support is usually placed in
front of the compressor and separated on both sides of the
motor.
Since the compressor and turbine have divided the shaft
into three parts, the supporting scheme can be expressed as
x-x-x according to the number of bearings in each part. For
example, the supporting scheme with two bearings in front
of the compressor is stated by 2-0-0. Table 9 presents the
shaft connection, support schemes and bearing types of
current commercial MGTs.
Some experimental works on MGTs exhibited unique
support schemes, as shown in Table 10. The 100 kW-MGT
developed by KIMM [297] was supported by air bearings.
Table 9
Support and rotor characteristics of commercial MGTs.
Model/Reference
Shaft
Connection
Support scheme
Bearing
Rotating speed (rpm)
Capstone/[18]
1
Integrated
2-0-0
Air bearing
96,000
AlliedSignal/[19]
1
Integrated
2-0-0
Air bearing
72,000
Elliott/[23]
1
Integrated
2-0-0
Liquid(oil) bearing
116,000
Turbec/[26]
1
Integrated
2-0-0
Liquid(oil) bearing
70,000
ET Group/[30]
1
Integrated
2-0-0
e
60,000
ENN/[31]
1
Coupling
(2þ2)-0-0
Liquid(oil) bearing
51,000
Flex/[27]
2
Gearbox & Coupling
2-0-0
Liquid(oil) bearing
e
PowerWorks/[4]
2
Gearbox & Coupling
e
Liquid(oil) bearing
60,000
Wisdom/[32]
2
Gearbox & Coupling
Gas: 1-0-1
e
54,000/44,000
Power: 0-3-1
32
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 33 ---

The radial bearings and thrust bearings in order were ar-
ranged at both sides of the generator rotor and the back of
the compressor, forming a 2-1-0 support scheme. The motor
shaft and the gas turbine shaft were connected by an elastic
coupling. Micro power units developed by the US Naval
Research Laboratory [170] utilized liquid-lubricated bear-
ings and couplings. The compressor arranged in reverse was
capable of the reduction of the axial force, and the two
radial bearings were organized in a 1-1-0 form. The dual-
shaft MGT designed by Sim et al. [71] had four supports.
The gas shaft was supported by two ceramic ball bearings
set between the compressor and the turbine, and the power
shaft was supported at the back of the turbine. The obtained
results revealed that the ceramic ball bearings could reach a
speed of up to 170,000 rpm. Maia et al. [298] designed the
rotor system of the turbocharger. The topology of an inte-
gral shaft with compressor, generator, and turbine arranged
was selected after the experiment, indicating that the
application of 0-2-0 support leads to the best vibration
scenario.
For the rotor systems and supports, rotor dynamics
analysis should be also performed, from which the modality
can be obtained to evaluate the critical speed. The aggres-
sive control methods on rotated speed are utilized to cross
the critical speed as soon as possible during verifying the
working conditions since the deformation at the transcritical
speed may lead to the impeller collision. The 2-0-0 support
mainly possesses the characteristic of a cantilever. It is
easily understood that the cantilever length and shaft end
load have substantial inﬂuences on the deformation of the
cantilever shaft. Therefore, for the 2-0-0 support scheme,
the second bearing is placed closer to the compressor and
even integrated into the compressor hub. The support
scheme with bearing all between compressor and turbine is
similar to that of a common turbocharger and has better
modal characteristics in theory [300,301]. But in this way,
the support and lubrication of the generator shaft require
additional consideration. The method of establishing para-
metric models and optimizing objective functions by algo-
rithms has been adopted in the optimization of the rotor
system. Figure 33 illustrates the topology of the rotor system
in Ref. [302], and the parameters shown in the ﬁgure were
regarded as input objects. The bearing spacing was stated as
the product of the axle diameter and the objective optimi-
zation coefﬁcient. By considering the optimization effect, a
model was established to evaluate the maximum peak of the
unbalance response, the absolute value of the difference
between the operating speed and the nearest critical speed
and the derivative of the amplitude of the unbalance
response at the working speed point to the frequency.
Further, the structural parameters were obtained by particle
swarm optimization, and hence the unbalanced response
was lessened. A similar method can also be implemented for
the shafting setting of MGTs.
Table 10
The characteristics of the support and rotor of tested MGTs.
Work/Reference
Shaft
Connection
Support scheme
Bearing
Rotating speed (rpm)
Maia/[298]
1
Integrated
0-2-0
Float ring
70,000
Ji/[57]
1
Coupling
0-3-0
Float ring
100,000
Arroyo/[299]
1
Integrated
2-0-0
Ceramic ball bearing
100,000
Lim/[297]
1
Coupling
2-1-0
Air bearing
47,500
Vick/[170]
1
Coupling
1-1-0
Liquid(oil) bearing
135,000
Sim/[71]
2
Gearbox & Coupling
Gas: 0-2-0
Ceramic ball bearing
170,000
Power: 0-0-2
Figure 33
Topology of the rotor system in an ORC system [302].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
33


--- Page 34 ---

5.5.2. Bearings
A brief literature surveybased ontheabove statistics reveals
that liquid-lubricated bearings with oil as the lubricant are
mostly employed. Oil-lubricated bearings can withstand large
loads and possess a speciﬁc damping effect, but may suffer
from frictional losses at a high speed [303,304]. A relevant oil
supply system is also required. Floating ring and semi-ﬂoating
ring bearings, as special oil-lubricated bearings, have good
rotational and damping characteristics and thereby are
commonlyadoptedinturbochargers.Therelevanttechnologies
have been also implemented in MGT presently [305,306]. The
air bearings have a relatively higher speed and a smaller loss,
but with poor rotational stability [307]. Thus, the air bearings
for MGTs do not yet exhibit a substantial difference in rotating
speed with respect to the case of using the oil-lubricated
bearing. In addition, water-lubricated bearings have been re-
portedusedinMGTsunder humidiﬁedcirculationtoreducethe
type of working medium [308]. For lubricated bearings, the
inﬂuence of frictional heat cannot be ignored [300]. The ther-
mal expansionandthedistributionoftemperatureandviscosity
insidethe oil ﬁlm can affectthe support effect. Furthermore, the
heat transfer between the hot-end components and the bearings
cannot be overlooked. In this view, placing bearings before the
compressor has particular advantages.
As a third type of bearings, magnetic bearings possess
the characteristics of non-contact, non-lubrication, long life,
and controllability [309], which have attracted the interest of
researchers [310e312]. NREC developed ORC energy re-
covery machinery using active magnetic bearings, empha-
sizing that the exploitation of active magnetic bearings
results in signiﬁcant cost reductions in weight, space, and
system complexity [313]. The active magnetic bearings can
also serve as displacement sensors. The magnetic bearings
are rarely utilized in MGTs since the coupling effect with
the magnetic ﬁeld of the generator is the essential obstacle.
Shenyang Liming of AECC reported their developed
WD095 MGT on the basis of magnetic bearings, which are
now available for commercial purchases.
5.5.3. Summary
Inﬂuenced by the back-to-back layout of the impeller, the
support scheme of 2-0-0 is widely used in MGTs presently.
Concentrated mass distribution at the cantilever’s end has
brought special challenges to the design of the shaft. The
liquid lubricated bearing is widely used because of its high
maturity. The air bearing has the advantage of lower loss
under high rotating speed conditions, but the speed limit is
not much different from that of the oil bearing in MGTs. The
magnetic bearings have performance advantages, but their
application in MGTs still needs further research and
development.
6. Conclusions and prospective
In the present paper, we have made a comprehensive
review of MGTs, covering the developments of commercial
MGTs, applications, performances and the latest attractive
research on MGT components. According to the performed
investigations, the MGT itself has become a relatively
mature industrial product, and commercial products have
also been applied in a certain ﬁeld. Generally, the conﬁgu-
ration of MGTs tends to be similar. Technologies such as
full radial ﬂow structure, lubricated bearings, and high-
efﬁciency heat exchangers have been broadly employed in
commercial MGTs and have brought considerable beneﬁts
to the system.
MGTs have exhibited excellent performance and have
broad application prospects. The low power generation costs
and
good
comprehensive
energy
utilization
are
well
demonstrated in the ﬁeld of distributed energy systems. The
potential of low-vibration and low-emission has made
MGTs particularly competitive in the market of ranger ex-
tenders, as high investment costs and insufﬁcient response
speed make them drag the leg. The combination of MGTs
with concentrated solar power or fuel cell systems greatly
expands the ﬂexibility and stability of the original systems.
This co-generation also enables the MGT cycle to break
through to higher thermal efﬁciency, which offers an
appropriate replacement for distributed energy and mobile
power generation. The inﬂuence of component parameters
on the performance of MGTs is brieﬂy introduced in Section
4. The hot-end components have a considerable impact on
the performance of the steady-state, transient, and thermal
economy, which means that research on turbines or recu-
perators should has a higher priority.
In order to further enhance the performance of MGTs and
expand their applications in the energy industry, MGTs still
confront serious challenges in subsequent development. The
future development of MGTs will mainly depend on the
research progress in the following aspects.
1. Prototyping technology of hot end components and
auxiliary thermal protection technology
The ultimate goal is to increase TIT, which is critical to
overall efﬁciency. The conceivable technical routes include
advances in material technology and applications of thermal
protection technologies. For the development of materials,
given that superalloys have been exploited in combustion
chambers, guide vanes, and turbine impellers, ceramics or
ceramic matrix composites with high thermal resistance
manufactured for the hot-end components will be of deci-
sive value progress. Achieving higher TITs and then
reducing maintenance costs result in prolonging the service
life of components. Similar to the early use of superalloys,
the processing quality restricts the application of ceramic
matrix composites or other advanced high temperature
materials. New processes to reduce the surface damage and
residual stress caused by machining should be concerned.
Additive manufacturing is a potential digital forming tech-
nology, but the mechanical and geometric accuracy of
CMCs components produced by the AM is poor. A variety
of AM technologies (including direct ink writing, binder
34
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 35 ---

jetting,
selective
laser
sintering,
laminated
object
manufacturing and stereolithography) have not yet demon-
strated the characteristics applicable to turbines with re-
quirements of high precision and high bearing capacity. The
AM technology that is suitable for manufacturing contin-
uous ﬁber toughened ceramic composites with better me-
chanical properties will be an important direction.
Meanwhile,
with
AM
technology,
the
digital
manufacturing of nickel-based superalloys provides the
possibility of active thermal protection in MGTs, as the
processing
of
complex
geometries,
including
cooling
channels or room for heat pipes is implemented. By
allowing the single-phase or two-phase cooling technologies
to be applied to the centrifugal impeller, the ﬂow tempera-
ture increases on the basis of the existing material perfor-
mance. The coating technology will also be a pivotal part of
MGT thermal protection. Although the present literature
suffers from the lack of application of centrifugal impellers,
the attempts in MGT turbines based on existing coating
technologies should be highly encouraged.
The next-generation MGT turbine form is expected to be
a ceramic impeller equipped with anti-corrosion coating and
internal cooling channels, which is a combination of passive
protection and active cooling technology.
2. Adaptive combustion technology
Adaptive combustion technology should be examined to
reduce emissions and further expand the application of eco-
friendly and sustainable fuels. New layouts or designs based
on advanced manufacturing technology is to be expected.
Among the existing technologies, the ﬂameless combustion
has better emission performance and is suitable for a wide
range of fuel caloriﬁc. The further research and applications
in MGTs are of high interest. A generic combustion struc-
ture/technology to lessen the hardware cost of MGT
switching between various fuels will be another intriguing
direction. In the future, the decentralization of constant
volume combustion/detonation technology will be a revo-
lutionary development in MGTs.
3. High-precision simulation and intelligent optimization
CFD methods have already been employed for the geo-
metric design and veriﬁcation of MGT components, which
greatly reduces the experimental cost and shortens the
design cycle. With great progress in computational ability,
the use of high-precision numerical simulation to capture
aerodynamic and heat transfer phenomena will be more
accurate, Thereby, the caused mechanism can be rationally
explained and interpreted, and a suitable basis for the design
of components can be given. Artiﬁcial intelligence meth-
odologies such as genetic algorithms and artiﬁcial neural
networks are vitally beneﬁcial in design and optimization.
Given that most of the current research works are focused
on independent components, the interactions between
different components are rarely involved. Digital twin
technology is the development process of future simulation
technology. MGT-based digital modeling can provide online
information exchange, which greatly contributes to the
study of dynamic work and coupled effects between com-
ponents. Data collection and mining based on the digital
twin model are means to achieve health monitoring and
service life prediction, which is important for commercial
MGTs, and will be a focused process.
4. High-efﬁciency and low-cost heat exchange technology
Heat exchangers play important roles in MGTs as well as in
their corresponding coupling systems. In the case that material
costs exist objectively, efﬁcient heat exchange technology
signiﬁcantly lessens investment costs and ﬂow losses. The
primary surface heat exchangers and microchannel heat ex-
changers have speciﬁc potentials. The additive approaches are
believed to reduce costs, and the bionic technologies are also
expectedtolessenthe additional losses duringgrowing the heat
transfer capacity. The materials with high-temperature resis-
tance, high thermal conductivity, and low heat capacity will
help to increase the working range and reduce the thermal
inertia of the heat exchanger.
5. Efﬁcient waste heat recovery cycles
The current co-production technology mainly realizes
waste heat recovery by direct heating or absorption cooling.
The waste heat is individually utilized, and thereby the ef-
ﬁciency is low. Among various approaches, the Stirling
engine and ORC cycle are more efﬁcient ways of heat uti-
lization, which are expected to be applied to the waste heat
recovery of MGTs. The cooperative performance of MGTs
and heat recovery cycle should be further scrutinized to
attain high overall thermal efﬁciency.
6. Intelligent control technology
The regulation of complex cycles, including MGTs, is un-
doubtedly complicated, and this necessitates establishing a
global regulation model as well as a control method for each
speciﬁc system. However, for applications such as range ex-
tenders, MGTs are only implemented as highly integrated
power generation devices, and such applications have raised
higherresponsivenessrequirementsfor MGTs.Itisnoteworthy
to develop intelligent control systems to reduce the response
delay and overshoot in dynamical conditions. Some advanced
PID-based control schemes have been proposed, and the reg-
ulations with intelligent prediction through artiﬁcial neural
networks, genetic algorithms, and machine learning are now
under further exploration. Furthermore, given that the existing
control system in MGTs is usually with a single object strategy
on the fuel valve, the development of active control on high-
speed generators is a good complement. This issue becomes
more highlighted for commercial MGTs with features of the
integrated shaft and the capability to start up and generate
electricity with the same alternator.
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
35


--- Page 36 ---

Acknowledgments
The authors appreciate the ﬁnancial support provided by
the National Science and Technology Major Project (Grant
No. 2017-III-0003-0027).
References
[1] T. Ackrmann, G. Andersson, L. Söder, Distributed generation: a
deﬁnition, Elec. Power Syst. Res. 57 (3) (2001) 195e204.
[2] J.L.D. Monaco, The Role of Distributed Generation in the Critical
Electric Power Infrastructure, 2001 IEEE Power Engineering Society
Winter Meeting, Conference Proceedings (Cat. No. 01CH37194),
IEEE, Columbus, USA, 2001, pp. 144e145.
[3] I.A. Waitz, G. Gauba, Y.S. Tzeng, Combustors for micro-gas turbine
engines, J. Fluid Eng. 120 (1) (1998) 109e117.
[4] M. Nascimento, L. Rodrigues, E. Santos, E. Gomes, F. Dias,
E. Velásques, R. Carrillo, Micro Gas Turbine Engine: a Review,
Progress in Gas Turbine Performance, InTech, 2013, pp. 107e141.
[5] G. Xiao, T.F. Yang, H.L. Liu, D. Ni, M.L. Ferrari, M.C. Li, Z.Y. Luo,
K. Cen, M.J. Ni, Recuperators for micro gas turbines: a review, Appl.
Energy 197 (2017) 83e99.
[6] M. Mehlkopf, Capstone Microturbine, Berlin, September, 2009. URL:
https://asue.de/sites/default/ﬁles/asue/termine_veranstaltungen/2009/
fachveranstaltung2009/vortraege/capstone-microturbine.pdf.
[7] C. Soares, Microturbines: Applications for Distributed Energy Sys-
tems, Elsevier, 2011.
[8] F. Reale, R. Sannino, Numerical modeling of energy systems based
on micro gas turbine: a review, Energies 15 (3) (2022) 900.
[9] K.A. Al-attab, Z.A. Zainal, Externally ﬁred gas turbine technology: a
review, Appl. Energy 138 (2015) 474e487.
[10] D.P. Ward, M.M. Carrero, S. Bram, A. Parente, F. Contino, Towards
higher micro gas turbine efﬁciency and ﬂexibility: humidiﬁed mGTs
d a review, turbo expo: power for land, sea, and air, Charlotte, USA,
2017, V003T06A030.
[11] M.A. Hashim, A. Khalid, H. Salleh, N.M. Sunar, Effects of fuel and
nozzle characteristics on micro gas turbine system: a review, IOP
Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. 226 (2017) 012006.
[12] R.M. Lin, G.H. Jin, Gas Turbine Power Generation Device and its
Application, China Electric Power Press, 2004.
[13] H.J. Braun, The Chrysler automotive gas turbine engine, 1950e80,
Soc. Stud. Sci. 22 (2) (1992) 339e351.
[14] V.D. Biasi, Low Cost and High Efﬁciency Make 30 to 80 kW
Microturbines Attractive, Gas Turbine World, 1998.
[15] W.G. Scott, Micro-turbine generators for distribution systems, IEEE
Ind. Appl. Mag. 4 (3) (1998) 57e62.
[16] W.E. Liss, Natural gas power systems for the distributed generation
market, Proc. Power-Gen Int. Conf. GRI-99/0198 (1999).
[17] S.H. Zhao, The development of new concepts of micro gas turbines,
Gas Turbine Technol. 14 (2) (2001) 8e13, https://doi.org/10.3969/-
j.issn.1009-2889.2001.02.003.
[18] Capstone Turbine Corporation, URL: https://www.capstoneturbine.
com [cited 22 November 2020].
[19] R.J. Yinger, Behavior of Capstone and Honeywell Microturbine
Generators during Load Changes, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, 2001.
[20] Y.M. Zhang, W.J. Zhang, D.Y. Liu, L.G. Sun, X.H. Liu, J. Wang,
Solar thermal power Series 17 Research and development of 70 kW
tower solar thermal power generation system, Sol. Energy 11 (2007)
43e46, https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1003-0417.2007.11.008.
[21] J.B. Campbell, T.J. King, B. Ozpineci, D.T. Rizy, L.M. Tolbert,
Y. Xu, X. Yu, Ancillary Services provided from DER, Oak Ridge
National Lab (ORNL), Oak Ridge, USA, 2005.
[22] I. Zamora, J.I.S. Martin, A.J. Mazón, J.J.S. Martín, V. Aperribay,
Emergent technologies in electrical microgeneration, Int. J. Emerg.
Elec. Power Syst. 3 (2) (2005).
[23] R. Capata, E. Sciubba, The concept of the gas turbine-based hybrid
vehicle: system, design and conﬁguration issues, Int. J. Energy Res.
30 (9) (2006) 671e684.
[24] Ansaldo, AE-T100, URL: https://www.ansaldoenergia.com [cited 22
November 2020].
[25] European Turbine Network (ETN), Micro Gas Turbine Technology
Summary: Research and Development for European Collaboration,
2017.
URL:
https://etn.global/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/MGT-
Technology-Summary-ﬁnal-for-the-website.pdf.
[26] P.A. Pilavachi, Mini- and micro-gas turbines for combined heat and
power, Appl. Therm. Eng. 22 (18) (2002) 2003e2014.
[27] Flexturbine, URL: https://www.ﬂexenergy.com/turbine-innovations
[cited 22 November 2020].
[28] Dresser-Rand KG2-3E, URL: https://dalkos.ru/upload/documents/
Dresser-Rand_KG2-3E.pdf [cited 22 November 2020].
[29] Bladon, URL: https://www.bladonmt.com [cited 22 November
2020].
[30] ETGROUP, Micro-Gas Turbine, URL: https://www.etgroup.nl/en/
micro-gas-turbine [cited 22 November 2020].
[31] ENN, URL: http://www.ennturbine.cn/productIntro.html [cited 01
November 2020].
[32] Wisdomturbine, URL: http://www.wisdomturbine.com [cited 01
November 2020].
[33] Product introduction of AVIC Dong’an micro gas turbine, URL:
https://max.book118.com/html/2019/1023/5101343221002142.shtm
[cited 22 November 2020].
[34] L. Goldstein, B. Hedman, D. Knowles, S.I. Freedman, T. Schweizer,
Gas-Fired Distributed Energy Resource Technology Characteriza-
tions, 2003. NREL/TP-620-34783.
[35] A. Datta, R. Ganguly, L. Sarkar, Energy and exergy analyses of an
externally ﬁred gas turbine (EFGT) cycle integrated with biomass
gasiﬁer for distributed power generation, Energy 35 (1) (2010)
341e350.
[36] G.
Pepermans,
J.
Driesen,
D.
Haeseldonckx,
R.
Belmans,
W. D’Haeseleer, Distributed generation: deﬁnition, beneﬁts and is-
sues, Energy Pol. 33 (6) (2005) 787e798.
[37] S. Jain, S. Roy, A. Aggarwal, D. Gupta, N. Kumar, Study on the
parameters inﬂuencing efﬁciency of micro-gas turbines: a review, in:
Proceedings of the ASME 2015 Power Conference, San Diego,
USA, 2015. Paper No. V001T09A006.
[38] E.S. Barbieri, P.R. Spina, M. Venturini, Analysis of innovative
micro-CHP systems to meet household energy demands, Appl. En-
ergy 97 (2012) 723e733.
[39] P.A. Pilavachi, Power generation with gas turbine systems and
combined heat and power, Appl. Therm. Eng. 20 (15e16) (2000)
1421e1429.
[40] S. Murugan, B. Horák, A review of micro combined heat and power
systems for residential applications, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 64
(2016) 144e162.
[41] F. Caresana, L. Pelagalli, G. Comodi, M. Renzi, Microturbogas
cogeneration systems for distributed generation: effects of ambient
temperature on global performance and components’ behavior, Appl.
Energy 124 (2014) 17e27.
[42] A. Gimelli, M. Muccillo, Optimization criteria for cogeneration
systems: multi-objective approach and application in an hospital
facility, Appl. Energy 104 (2013) 910e923.
[43] H.W. Zhang, Y. Long, S.Y. Huang, Scheme selection and performance
analysis of distributed energy systems, Heat. Vent. Air Cond. 34 (5)
(2004) 47e51, https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1002-8501.2004.05.010.
[44] I.G. Rice, Thermodynamic evaluation of gas turbine cogeneration
cycles: Part I e heat balance method analysis, J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power 109 (1) (1987) 1e7.
[45] K. Thu, B.B. Saha, K.J. Chua, T.D. Bui, Thermodynamic analysis on
the part-load performance of a microturbine system for micro/mini-
CHP applications, Appl. Energy 178 (2016) 600e608.
[46] F.F. Huang, Performance evaluation of selected combustion gas
turbine cogeneration systems based on ﬁrst and second-law analysis,
J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 112 (1) (1990) 117e121.
36
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 37 ---

[47] O. Balli, H. Aras, Energetic and exergetic performance evaluation of
a combined heat and power system with the micro gas turbine
(MGTCHP), Int. J. Energy Res. 31 (14) (2010) 1425e1440.
[48] Z.B. Feng, H.G. Jin, Part-load performance of CCHP with gas tur-
bine and storage system, Proc. CSEE 26 (4) (2006) 25e30, https:
//doi.org/10.3321/j.issn:0258-8013.2006.04.006.
[49] P. Stathopoulos, C.O. Paschereit, Retroﬁtting micro gas turbines for
wet operation. A way to increase operational ﬂexibility in distributed
CHP plants, Appl. Energy 154 (2015) 438e446.
[50] J.J. Lee, R.S. Jeon, R.S. Kim, The inﬂuence of water and steam
injection on the performance of a recuperated cycle microturbine for
combined heat and power application, Appl. Energy 87 (4) (2010)
1307e1316.
[51] E. Tate, M.O. Harpster, P.J. Savagian, The electriﬁcation of the
automobile: from conventional hybrid, to plug-in hybrids, to
extended-range electric vehicles, SAE Int. J. Passenger Cars Elec-
tron. Electr. Syst. 1 (1) (2008) 156e166.
[52] A.M.
Andwari,
A.
Pesiridis,
S.
Rajoo,
R.
Martinez-Botas,
V. Esfahanian, A review of battery electric vehicle technology and
readiness levels, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 78 (2017) 414e430.
[53] F.R. Kalhammer, B.M. Kopf, D.H. Swan, V.P. Roan, M.P. Walsh,
Status and prospects for zero emissions vehicle technology, Rep.
ARB Independ. Expert Panel 1 (1) (2007) 12e36.
[54] R. Virsik, A. Heron, Free piston linear generator in comparison to
other range-extender technologies, World Electr. Vehicle J. 6 (2)
(2013) 426e432.
[55] A. Heron, F. Rinderknecht, Comparison of range extender technol-
ogies for battery electric vehicles, in: 2013 Eighth International
Conference and Exhibition on Ecological Vehicles and Renewable
Energies (EVER), IEEE, Monte Carlo, Monaco, 2013, pp. 1e6.
[56] B.L. Arav, R. Shulman, V.A. Kozminykh, Reﬁnement of hybrid
motor-transmission set using micro turbine generator, Procedia Eng.
129 (2015) 166e170.
[57] F.Z. Ji, X.B. Zhang, F.R. Du, S.T. Ding, Y.H. Zhao, Z. Xu, Y. Wang,
Y. Zhou, Experimental and numerical investigation on micro gas
turbine as a range extender for electric vehicle, Appl. Therm. Eng.
173 (2020) 115236.
[58] A. Olsson, B. Jönsson, L. Sundin, The Volvo Heavy Truck Gas
Turbine VT300, 2005. SAE Technical Paper 2005-01-3504.
[59] Jeff Salton, Capstone CMT-380 electric hybrid supercar with
microturbines,
URL:
https://newatlas.com/capstone-cmt-380-an-
electric-hybrid-featuring-wind-turbines/13517 [cited 22 November
2020].
[60] Bladon Jets, Jaguar cx75 concept case study, URL: http://www.
bladonjets.com/applications/automotive/jaguar-c-x75-concept-case-
study [cited 22 November 2020].
[61] K. Sangani, A jet for every home, Eng. Technol. 6 (2) (2011) 42e45.
[62] TXR-S, URL: http://www.txr-s.com/?technology/id/7.html [cited 22
November 2020].
[63] Techrules, URL: http://www.techrules.cn [cited 22 November 2020].
[64] R. Golan, The turbine-electric Mitsubishi Mi-Tech reminds us what’s
great about concepts, URL: https://www.digitaltrends.com/cars/
2019-mitsubishi-mi-tech-turbine-electric-convertible-suv-concept-
unveiled [cited 22 November 2020].
[65] Hybrid Kinetic, URL: http://www.hkmotors.com/Industrial/car.aspx
[cited 22 November 2020].
[66] Delta Motorsport, URL: https://www.delta-motorsport.com [cited 22
November 2020].
[67] I. Wright, Wrightspeed Powertrains, ACT Expo 2015, Dallas, USA,
May
4-7,
2015.
URL:
https://cdn.actexpo.com/pdfs/ACTE2015/
presentations/5-1EDTA2/1MediumHeavyEVTech/1Wrightspeed.pdf.
[68] A. Karvountzis-Kontakiotis, A.M. Andwari, A. Pesyridis, S. Russo,
R. Tuccillo, V. Esfahanian, Application of micro gas turbine in
range-extended electric vehicles, Energy 147 (2018) 351e361.
[69] F.X. Tan, M.S. Chiong, S. Rajoo, A. Romagnoli, T. Palenschat,
R.F. Martinez-Botas, Analytical and experimental study of micro gas
turbine as range extender for electric vehicles in asian cities, Energy
Proc. 143 (2017) 53e60.
[70] M.A. Areﬁn, R. Islam, Investigation of different validation param-
eters of micro gas turbine for range extender electric truck, Int. J.
Eng. 31 (10) (2018) 1782e1788.
[71] K. Sim, B. Koo, H.K. Chang, T.H. Kim, Development and perfor-
mance measurement of micro-power pack using micro-gas turbine
driven automotive alternators, Appl. Energy 102 (2013) 309e319.
[72] M.K. Tran, A. Bhatti, R. Vrolyk, D. Wong, R. Fraser, A review of
range extenders in battery electric vehicles: current progress and
future perspectives, World Electr. Vehicle J. 12 (2) (2021) 54.
[73] A. Javed, H.A. Khalid, S. Arif, M. Imran, Z.A. Khan, Micro gas
turbine small-scale effects in range extended electric vehicles, J.
Energy Resour. Technol. 143 (12) (2021) 120906.
[74] R.M.R.A. Shah, A. McGordon, M.M. Rahman, M. Amor-Segan,
P. Jennings, Characterisation of micro turbine generator as a range
extender using an automotive drive cycle for series hybrid electric
vehicle application, Appl. Therm. Eng. 184 (2020) 116302.
[75] H.L. Liu, D. Chen, T.F. Yang, G. Xiao, X. Zhou, J.L. Chen,
Z.H. Luo, M.J. Ni, K.F. Cen, Solar gas turbine power generation
technology: a review, Therm. Power Gener. 47 (2) (2018) 6e15,
https://doi.org/10.19666/j.rlfd.201710111, 62.
[76] J.B. Schroeder, Closed Brayton cycle advanced central receiver
solar-electric power system, in: Volume 1: Executive Summary, Final
Report, Boeing Engineering and Construction Co., Seattle, USA,
November, 1978.
[77] S.C. Kuo, Large Gas-Turbine Modiﬁcations for Solar-Fossil Hybrid
Operation, Final Report, United Technologies Research Center, East
Hartford, USA, 1983.
[78] P. Schwarzbzl, R. Buck, C. Sugarmen, A. Ring, J. Enrile, Solar gas
turbine systems: design, cost and perspectives, Sol. Energy 80 (10)
(2006) 1231e1240.
[79] R. Korzynietz, J.A. Brioso, A. del Río, M. Quero, M. Gallas,
R. Uhlig, M. Ebert, R. Buck, D. Teraji, Solugas-comprehensive
analysis of the solar hybrid Brayton plant, Sol. Energy 135 (2016)
579e589.
[80] S. Alshahrani, A. Engeda, Performance analysis of a solar-biogas
hybrid micro gas turbine for power generation, J. Sol. Energy Eng.
143 (2) (2020) 1e40.
[81] W. Roux, A. Sciacovelli, Recuperated solar-dish Brayton cycle using
turbocharger and short-term thermal storage, Sol. Energy 194 (2019)
569e580.
[82] A. Jayachandran, A.Y. Tkachenko, H. Omar, A. Krishnakumar,
Modeling and parametric optimization for a solar-powered closed-
cycle micro gas turbine for space applications, J. Phys. Conf. 1745
(2021) 012099.
[83] European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Inno-
vation, SOLGATE: Solar Hybrid Gas Turbine Electric Power Sys-
tem, Final Report, Publications Ofﬁce, 2005. URL: https://op.europa.
eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/e4f88dd1-74ac-4416-aba0-
3868cc8ea5ca.
[84] P. Heller, M. Pfaender, T. Denk, F. Tellez, A. Valverde, J. Fernandez,
A. Ring, Test and evaluation of a solar powered gas turbine system,
Sol. Energy 80 (10) (2006) 1225e1230.
[85] L. Amsbeck, R. Buck, P. Heller, J. Jedamski, R. Uhlig, Development
of a tube receiver for a solar-hybrid microturbine system, in: Pro-
ceedings of 14th Biennial CSP Solarpaces Symposium, Las Vegas,
USA, 2008.
[86] L. Amsbeck, T. Denk, M. Ebert, C. Gertig, P. Heller, P. Herrman,
J. Jedamski, J. John, P. Tobias, J. Rehn, Test of a solar-hybrid
microturbine system and evaluation of storage deployment, in:
Proceedings of Solar PACES, DLR, Perpignan, France, 2010.
[87] A. Giostri, M. Binotti, C. Sterpos, G. Lozza, Small scale solar tower
coupled with micro gas turbine, Renew. Energy 147 (2020)
570e583.
[88] Z. Rosenzweig, U. Collaboration, Where renewable energy and
higher education converge, Renew. Energy Focus 17 (4) (2016)
145e146.
[89] South West Solar. URL: http://www.swsolartech.com [cited 22
November 2020].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
37


--- Page 38 ---

[90] W. Schiel, T. Keck, Parabolic Dish Concentrating Solar Power (CSP)
Systems: Concentrating Solar Power Technology, Woodhead Pub-
lishing, 2012, pp. 248e322.
[91] M. Lanchi, M. Montecchi, T. Crescenzi, D. Mele, A. Miliozzi,
V. Russo, D. Mazzei, M. Misceo, M. Falchetta, R. Mancini, Inves-
tigation into the coupling of micro gas turbines with CSP technol-
ogy: OMSoP project, Energy Proc. 69 (2015) 1317e1326.
[92] G.
Gavagnin,
D.
Sánchez,
G.S.
Martínez,
J.M.
Rodríguez,
A. Muñoz, Cost analysis of solar thermal power generators based on
parabolic dish and micro gas turbine: manufacturing, transportation
and installation, Appl. Energy 194 (2017) 108e122.
[93] A. Giostri, Preliminary analysis of solarized micro gas turbine applica-
tion to CSP parabolic dish plants, Energy Proc. 142 (2017) 768e773.
[94] P. Pozivil, N. Ettlin, F. Stucker, A. Steinfeld, Modular design and
experimental testing of a 50 kWth pressurized-air solar receiver for
gas turbines, J. Sol. Energy Eng. 137 (3) (2015) 031002.
[95] G. Ragnolo, L. Aichmayer, W. Wang, T. Strand, B. Laumert, Tech-
noeconomic design of a micro gas-turbine for a solar dish system,
Energy Proc. 69 (2015) 1133e1142.
[96] M.C. Cameretti, Modelling of a hybrid solar micro-gas turbine
fuelled by biomass from agriculture product, Energy Rep. 6 (3)
(2020) 105e116.
[97] D. Coppitters, F. Contino, A. El-Baz, P. Breuhaus, W.D. Paepe,
Techno-economic feasibility study of a solar-powered distributed
cogeneration system producing power and distillate water: sensi-
tivity and exergy analysis, Renew. Energy 150 (2020) 1089e1097.
[98] M. Babaelahi, H. Jafari, Analytical design and optimization of a new
hybrid solar-driven micro gas turbine/stirling engine, based on
exergo-enviro-economic concept, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess-
ments 42 (2020) 100845.
[99] M. Bustamante, A. Engeda, W. Liao, Small-scale solarebio-hybrid
power generation using brayton and rankine cycles, Energies 14 (2)
(2021) 472.
[100] J.M. Yang, G. Xiao, M. Ghavami, J. Al-Zaili, T.F. Yang, A. Sayma,
D. Ni, Thermodynamic modelling and real-time control strategies of
solar micro gas turbine system with thermochemical energy storage,
J. Clean. Prod. 304 (1) (2021) 127010.
[101] C.F. Mcdonald, A.F. Massardo, T. Korakianitis, Microturbine/fuel-
cell coupling for high-efﬁciency electrical-power generation, J. Eng.
Gas Turbines Power 124 (1) (2002) 110e116.
[102] R.P. Qiao, Q.C. Liang, J.N. He, F. Yang, Performance analysis of
solid oxide fuel cell and micro gas turbine top-level cycle, E3S Web
Conf. 261 (2021) 02015.
[103] P. Costamagna, L. Magistri, A.F. Massardo, Design and part-load
performance of a hybrid system based on a solid oxide fuel cell
reactor and a micro gas turbine, J. Power Sources 96 (2) (2001)
352e368.
[104] A. Layne, S. Samuelsen, M. Williams, P. Hoffman, Hybrid heat
engines: the power generation systems of the future, in: ASME
Turbo Expo 2000: Power for Land, Sea, and Air, Munich, Germany,
2000. Paper No. 2000-GT-0549 V002T02A063.
[105] P. Lunghi, S. Ubertini, U. Desideri, Highly efﬁcient electricity gen-
eration through a hybrid molten carbonate fuel cell-closed loop gas
turbine plant, Energy Convers. Manag. 42 (14) (2001) 1657e1672.
[106] Y. Komatsu, S. Kimijima, J.S. Szmyd, Performance analysis for the
part-load operation of a solid oxide fuel cellemicro gas turbine
hybrid system, Energy 35 (2) (2010) 982e988.
[107] J.X. Jia, L.Y. Shu, G.Y. Zang, L.J. Xu, A. Abudula, K. Ge, Energy
analysis and techno-economic assessment of a co-gasiﬁcation of
woody biomass and animal manure, solid oxide fuel cells and micro
gas turbine hybrid system, Energy 149 (2018) 750e761.
[108] M. Ebrahimi, I. Moradpoor, Combined solid oxide fuel cell, micro-
gas turbine and organic Rankine cycle for power generation
(SOFCeMGTeORC),
Energy
Convers.
Manag.
116
(2016)
120e133.
[109] M.H. Karimi, N. Chitgar, M.A. Emadi, P. Ahmadi, M.A. Rosen, Per-
formance assessment and optimization of a biomass-based solid oxide
fuel cell and micro gas turbine system integrated with an organic
Rankine cycle, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 45 (11) (2020) 6262e6277.
[110] A.G. Liu, Y.W. Weng, Performance analysis of a pressurized molten
carbonate fuel cell/micro-gas turbine hybrid system, J. Power Sour-
ces 195 (1) (2010) 204e213.
[111] J.H.
Ahn,
T.S.
Kim,
Performance
evaluation
of
a
molten
carbonate fuel cell/micro gas turbine hybrid system with oxy-
combustion carbon capture, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 140 (4)
(2018) 041502.
[112] J.H. Ahn, J.H. Jeong, T.S. Kim, Performance enhancement of a
molten carbonate fuel cell/micro gas turbine hybrid system with
carbon capture by off-gas recirculation, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power
141 (4) (2019) 041036.
[113] MHPS wins ﬁrst order for integrated SOFC/gas turbine hybrid unit,
Fuel Cells Bull. 2018 (2) (2018) 6.
[114] T. Onishi, S. Burguburu, O. Dessornes, Y. Ribaud, Numerical design
and study of a MEMS-based micro turbine, in: ASME Turbo Expo
2005:
Power
for
Land,
Sea,
and
Air,
Reno,
USA,
2005,
pp. 847e855. Paper No: GT2005-68168.
[115] O. Dessornes, S. Landais, R. Valle, A. Fourmaux, S. Burguburu,
C. Zwyssig, Z. Kozanecki, Advances in the development of a micro-
turbine engine at ONERA, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 136 (7)
(2013) 071201.
[116] L. Fu, Z.P. Feng, G.J. Li, Experimental investigation on overall
performance of a millimeter-scale radial turbine for micro gas tur-
bine, Energy 134 (2017) 1e9.
[117] A. Javed, H.A. Khalid, S.U.B. Arif, M. Imran, A. Rezk, Z.A. Khan,
Micro gas turbine small-scale effects in range extended electric ve-
hicles, J. Energy Resour. Technol. 143 (12) (2021) 120906.
[118] S. Safari, A.H. Ghasedi, H.A. Ozgoli, Integration of solar dryer with
a hybrid system of gasiﬁer-solid oxide fuel cell/micro gas turbine:
energy, economy, and environmental analysis, Environ. Prog. Sus-
tain. Energy 40 (3) (2021) e13569.
[119] Y.A. Cengel, M.A. Boles, M. Kanoglu, Thermodynamics: an Engi-
neering Approach, eighth ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2011.
[120] P.P. Walsh, P. Fletcher, Gas Turbine Performance, second ed.,
Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
[121] M. Henke, T. Monz, M. Aigner, Introduction of a new numerical
simulation tool to analyze micro gas turbine cycle dynamics, J. Eng.
Gas Turbines Power 139 (4) (2016) 042601.
[122] L. Galanti, A.F. Massardo, Micro gas turbine thermodynamic and
economic analysis up to 500 kWe size, Appl. Energy 88 (12) (2011)
4795e4802.
[123] S.K. Ayaz, O. Altuntas, H. Caliskan, Enhanced life cycle modelling
of a micro gas turbine fuelled with various fuels for sustainable
electricity production, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 149 (2021)
111323.
[124] N. Zhang, R.X. Cai, Explicit Analyze Part-load performance solution
of constant speed single shaft gas turbine and its cogeneration, J.
Eng. Thermophys. 19 (2) (1998) 141e144. URL: https://kns.cnki.
net/KCMS/detail/detail.aspx?dbcodeZCJFD&ﬁlenameZGCRB199
802002.
[125] C. Bo, C. Yuan, X. Zhao, L. Yuan, S.Y. Liao, Circulation analyze of
externally ﬁred micro gas turbine, Chin. J. Power Eng. 28 (6) (2008)
880e885, https://doi.org/10.3321/j.issn:1000-6761.2008.06.012.
[126] Y.Y. Li, G.Q. Zhang, Z.W. Bai, X.W. Song, L.G. Wang, Y.P. Yang,
Backpressure adjustable gas turbine combined cycle: a method to
improve part-load efﬁciency, Energy Convers. Manag. 174 (2018)
739e754.
[127] A. Rosini, A. Palmieri, D. Lanzarotto, R. Procopio, A. Bonﬁglio, A
model predictive control design for power generation heavy-duty gas
turbines, Energies 12 (11) (2019) 2182.
[128] R. Yang, Y.B. Liu, Y.H. Yu, X. He, H.S. Li, Hybrid improved particle
swarm optimization-cuckoo search optimized fuzzy PID controller
for micro gas turbine, Energy Rep. 7 (2021) 5446e5454.
[129] W.L. Zeng, X.S. Wang, X.J. Lv, Y.W. Weng, Research on control
performance of micro gas turbine generator set based on fuzzy PID,
38
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 39 ---

J. Eng. Therm. Energy Power 36 (10) (2021) 212e221, https:
//doi.org/10.16146/j.cnki.rndlgc.2021.10.028.
[130] A.F. Massardo, M. Scialo, Thermoeconomic Analysis of gas turbine
based cycles, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 122 (4) (2000) 664e671.
[131] G.B.D. Campos, C. Bringhenti, A. Travserso, J.T. Tomita, Ther-
moeconomic optimization of organic Rankine bottoming cycles for
micro gas turbines, Appl. Therm. Eng. 164 (2020) 114477.
[132] C.F. McDonald, Recuperator considerations for future higher efﬁ-
ciency
microturbines,
Appl.
Therm.
Eng.
23
(12)
(2003)
1463e1487.
[133] C.H. Wu, A General Theory of Three-Dimensional Flow in Subsonic
and Supersonic Turbomachines of Axial-, Radial-, and Mixed-Flow
Types, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington
DC, 1952.
[134] Y.F. Zhang, X.G. Lu, W.L. Chu, J.Q. Zhu, Numerical investigation of
the unsteady tip leakage ﬂow and rotating stall inception in a tran-
sonic compressor, J. Therm. Sci. 19 (4) (2010) 310e317.
[135] J.T. Xiang, J. Schluter, F. Duan, Numerical study of the tip clearance
ﬂow in miniature gas turbine compressors, Aero. Sci. Technol. 93
(2019) 105352.
[136] J. Tiainen, A. Grönman, A. Jaatinen-Värri, J. Backman, Flow control
methods and their applicability in low-Reynolds-number centrifugal
compressorse areview,Int.J.Turbomach.Propuls.Power3(1)(2018)2.
[137] P.F. Xue, Z.X. Liu, X.J. Li, M. Zhao, Multi-component coupling
optimization for stability improvement of transonic centrifugal
compressor,
J.
Aerosp.
Power
(2022)
1e12,
https:
//doi.org/10.13224/j.cnki.jasp.20210427.
[138] F. Hellstrom, E. Gutmark, L. Fuchs, Large eddy simulation of the
unsteady ﬂow in a radial compressor operating near surge, J. Tur-
bomach. 134 (5) (2010) 051006.
[139] M. Olivero, A. Javed, J.P.V. Buijtenen, Aerodynamic analysis of a
micro turbine centrifugal compressor, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2010:
Power for Land, Sea, and Air, Glasgow, UK, 2010, pp. 2043e2052.
[140] Q.C. Yang, L.S. Li, Y.Y. Zhao, J. Xiao, Y. Shu, Q. Zhang, Experi-
mental investigation of an active control casing treatment of cen-
trifugal compressors, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 83 (2016) 107e117.
[141] Z.Z. Sun, X.Q. Zheng, T. Kawakubo, Experimental investigation of
instability inducement and mechanism of centrifugal compressors
with vaned diffuser, Appl. Therm. Eng. 133 (2018) 464e471.
[142] Z.Z. Sun, X.Q. Zheng, H. Tamaki, Y. Kaneko, Flow instability
suppression and deep surge delay by non-axisymmetric vaned
diffuser in a centrifugal compressor, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 95 (2019)
105494.
[143] H.Z. Zhang, C. Yang, C.M. Yang, H. Zhang, L.L. Wang, J. Chen,
Inlet bent torsional pipe effect on the performance and stability of a
centrifugal compressor with volute, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 93 (2019)
105322.
[144] R. Kabral, M. Abom, Investigation of turbocharger compressor surge
inception by means of an acoustic two-port model, J. Sound Vib. 412
(2018) 270e286.
[145] M. Åbom, Measurement of the scattering-matrix of acoustical two-
ports, Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 5 (2) (1991) 89e104.
[146] C.W. Zhang, X.Z. Dong, X.Y. Liu, Z.G. Sun, S.X. Wu, Q. Gao,
C.Q. Tan, A method to select loss correlations for centrifugal
compressor performance prediction, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 93 (2019)
105335.
[147] P.Y. Li, C.W. Gu, Y. Song, A new optimization method for centrif-
ugal compressors cased on 1D calculations and Analyses, Energies 8
(5) (2015) 4317e4334.
[148] J. Tiainen, A. Jaatinen-Värri, A. Grönman, T. Fischer, J. Backman,
Loss development analysis of a micro-scale centrifugal compressor,
Energy Convers. Manag. 166 (2018) 297e307.
[149] M.V. Casey, The effects of Reynolds number on the efﬁciency of
centrifugal compressor stages, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 107 (2)
(1985) 541e548.
[150] F. Dietmann, M.V. Casey, The effects of Reynolds number and
roughness
on
compressor
performance,
in:
10th
European
Conference on Turbomachinery Fluid dynamics & Thermodynamics,
Lappeenranta, Finland, 2013. Paper ID. ETC2013-052.
[151] X.Q. Zheng, Y. Lin, B.L. Gan, W.L. Zhuge, Y.J. Zhang, Effects of
Reynolds number on the performance of a high pressure-ratio
turbocharger compressor, Sci. China Technol. Sci. 56 (2013)
1361e1369.
[152] J. Tiainen, A. Jaatinen-Varri, A. Gronman, T. Turunen-Saaresti,
J. Backman, Effect of freestream velocity deﬁnition on boundary
layer thickness and losses in centrifugal compressors, J. Turbomach.
140 (5) (2018) 051003.
[153] A. Meroni, B. Zühlsdorf, B. Elmegaard, F. Haglind, Design of
centrifugal compressors for heat pump systems, Appl. Energy 232
(2018) 139e156.
[154] S. Pakle, K. Jiang, Design of a high-performance centrifugal
compressor with new surge margin improvement technique for high
speed turbomachinery, Propuls. Power Res. 7 (1) (2018) 19e29.
[155] C. Xu, R.S. Amano, Centrifugal compressor design impacts: lean
and meridional shape, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2013: Turbine Tech-
nical Conference and Exposition, San Antonio, Texas, USA, 2013.
Paper No. GT2013-94111 V05BT24A005.
[156] T. Verstraete, Z. Alsalihi, R.A.V.D. Braembussche, Multidisciplinary
optimization of a radial compressor for microgas turbine applica-
tions, J. Turbomach. 132 (3) (2010) 1291e1299.
[157] R.A.V.D. Braembussche, Numerical Optimization for Advanced
Turbomachinery Design. Optimization and Computational Fluid
Dynamics, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 147e189.
[158] S.A. Moussavi, A.H. Benisi, M. Durali, Effect of splitter leading
edge location on performance of an automotive turbocharger
compressor, Energy 123 (2017) 511e520.
[159] S.Y. Cho, K.Y. Ahn, Y.D. Lee, Y.C. Kim, Optimal design of a
centrifugal compressor impeller using evolutionary algorithms,
Math. Probl. Eng. 2012 (2012) 1094e1099.
[160] K.K. Ha, S.H. Kang, An optimization method for centrifugal
compressor design using the surrogate management framework, in:
Proceedings of the ASME-JSME-KSME 2011 Joint Fluids Engi-
neering Conference, Hamamatsu, Japan, 2011, pp. 679e684.
[161] N. Oka, M. Furukawa, K. Yamada, S. Itou, S. Ibaraki, K. Iwakiri,
Y. Hayashi, Optimum aerodynamic design of centrifugal compressor
impeller using an inverse method based on meridional viscous ﬂow
analysis, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2017: Turbomachinery Technical
Conference and Exposition, Charlotte, USA, 2017. Paper No.
GT2017-63539 V02CT44A013.
[162] S. Tüchler, Z.H. Chen, C.D. Copeland, Multipoint shape optimisa-
tion of an automotive radial compressor using a coupled computa-
tional ﬂuid dynamics and genetic algorithm approach, Energy 165
(Part A) (2018) 543e561.
[163] J.S. Li, Cooling efﬁcency of turbine guide vane with vortex inter-
laced rib for gas turbine, Aeroengine 36 (4) (2010) 12e16, https:
//doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1672-3147.2010.04.004.
[164] P. Dong, Q. Wang, Z.Y. Guo, H.Y. Huang, G.T. Feng, Conjugate
calculation of gas turbine vanes cooled with leading edge ﬁlms,
Chin. J. Aeronaut. 22 (2) (2009) 145e152.
[165] N.S. Cheruvu, K.S. Chan, R. Viswanathan, Evaluation, degradation
and life assessment of coatings for land based combustion turbines,
Energy Mater. 1 (1) (2013) 33e47.
[166] S. Hada, M. Yuri, J. Masada, E. Ito, K. Tsukagoshi, Evolution and
Future Trend of Large Frame Gas Turbines: a New 1600 Degree C, J
Class Gas Turbine, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2012: Turbine Technical
Conference
and
Exposition,
Copenhagen,
Denmark,
2012,
pp. 599e606. Paper No. GT2012-68574.
[167] S.M. Spearing, K.S. Chen, Micro-gas turbine engine materials and
structures, vol. 18, in: Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on
Composites, Advanced Ceramics, Materials, and StructuresdB:
Ceramic Engineering and Science Proceedings, John Wiley & Sons,
1997, pp. 11e18.
[168] F.W. Zok, Ceramic-matrix composites enable revolutionary gains in
turbine engine efﬁciency, Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull. 95 (5) (2016) 22e28.
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
39


--- Page 40 ---

[169] C.F. Mcdonald, C. Rodgers, Small recuperated ceramic microturbine
demonstrator concept, Appl. Therm. Eng. 28 (1) (2008) 60e74.
[170] M. Vick, T. Young, M. Kelly, S. Tuttle, K. Hinnant, A simple
recuperated ceramic microturbine: design concept, cycle analysis,
and recuperator component prototype tests, in: ASME Turbo Expo
2016: Turbomachinery Technical Conference and Exposition, Seoul,
South Korea, 2016. Paper No. GT2016-57780 V008T23A030.
[171] N. Nakazawa, M. Sasaki, T. Nishiyama, M. Iwai, H. Katagiri,
N. Handa, Status of the automotive ceramic gas turbine development
program d seven years’ progress, in: ASME 1997 International Gas
Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition, Orlando, USA,
1997. Paper No. 97-GT-383 V001T04A008.
[172] I. Takehara, T. Tatsumi, Y. Ichikawa, Summary of CGT302 ceramic
gas turbine research and development program, J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power 124 (3) (2000) 627e635.
[173] R. Lundberg, M. Ferrato, Ceramic component development for
AGATA, in: ASME 1999 International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine
Congress and Exhibition, Indianapolis, USA, 1999. Paper No. 99-
GT-392 V001T04A005.
[174] A.F. Mclean, E.A. Fisher, Brittle Materials Design, High Temperature
Gas Turbine. Interior Report No. 11, Ford Motor Co., USA, 1977.
[175] H.E. Helms, AGT 100 Project Summary, ASME 1988 International
Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exposition, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, 1988. Paper No. 88-GT-223 V002T04A009.
[176] AlliedSignal Engines, Advanced Turbine Technology Applications
Project (ATTAP) 1993 Annual Report, Phoenix, 1994, https://www.
osti.gov/servlets/purl/10195711.
[177] R. Lundberg, M.P. Moret, L. Garguet-Duport, HIPed Silicon Nitride
Components for AGATA d Properties and Evaluation, ASME 1998
International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition,
Stockholm, Sweden, 1998. Paper No. 98-GT-566 V002T04A014.
[178] H. Yoshida, T. Matsunuma, N. Iki, Y. Akimune, H. Hoya, Micro gas
turbine with ceramic rotor, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2004: Power for
Land, Sea, and Air. Vienna, Austria, 2004, pp. 45e49. Paper No.
GT2004-53493.
[179] T. Matsunuma, H. Yoshida, N. Iki, T. Ebara, S. Sodeoka, T. Inoue,
M. Suzuki, Micro gas turbine with ceramic nozzle and rotor, in:
ASME Turbo Expo 2005: Power for Land, Sea, and Air, Reno,
Nevada, USA, 2005, pp. 973e979. Paper No. GT2005-68711.
[180] M.Y.Huang,P.G.He,J.L.Yang,F.Duan,S.C.Lim,M.S.Yip,Fabrication
and characterizationofmini alumina ceramic turbine rotor using a tailored
gelcasting process, Ceram. Int. 40 (6) (2014) 7711e7722.
[181] D.S. Wen, S.R. Wang, G.Q. Wang, P.Q. Guo, L.Y. Yang, X.F. Yang,
Fabrication processing and mechanical properties of Si3N4 ceramic
turbocharger wheel, Ceram. Int. 44 (9) (2018) 10596e10603.
[182] H. Kaya, The application of ceramic-matrix composites to the
automotive ceramic gas turbine, Compos. Sci. Technol. 59 (6) (1999)
861e872.
[183] X.L. Wang, X.D. Gao, Z.H. Zhang, L.S. Cheng, H.P. Ma,
W.M. Yang, Advances in modiﬁcations and high-temperature ap-
plications of silicon carbide ceramic matrix composites in aerospace:
a focused review, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 41 (9) (2021) 4671e4688.
[184] Q.L. An, J. Chen, W.W. Ming, M. Chen, Machining of SiC ceramic
matrix composites: a review, Chin. J. Aeronaut. 34 (4) (2020) 540e567.
[185] P.R. Wang, F.Q. Liu, H. Wang, H. Li, Y.Z. Gou, A review of third
generation SiC ﬁbers and SiCf/SiC composites, J. Mater. Sci.
Technol. 35 (12) (2019) 2743e2750.
[186] J. Chen, Q.L. An, M. Chen, Transformation of fracture mechanism
and damage behavior of ceramic-matrix composites during nano-
scratching, Compos. Appl. Sci. Manuf. 130 (3) (2019) 105756.
[187] D.Z. Jia, C.H. Li, Y.B. Zhang, M. Yang, X.P. Zhang, R.Z. Li, H.J. Ji,
Experimental evaluation of surface topographies of NMQL grinding
ZrO2 ceramics combining multiangle ultrasonic vibration, Int. J.
Adv. Manuf. Technol. 100 (2019) 457e473.
[188] J.C. Rozzi, M.D. Barton, The laser-assisted edge milling of ceramic
matrix composites, in: Proceedings of the ASME 2009 International
Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference, West Lafayette,
USA, 2009, pp. 845e852.
[189] J.C. Han, S. Dutta, S. Ekkad, Gas Turbine Heat Transfer and Cooling
Technology, second ed., CRC Press, 2000.
[190] J.C. Han, Recent studies in turbine blade cooling, Int. J. Rotating
Mach. 10 (6) (2004) 443e457.
[191] H.C. Cheng, H. Wu, Y.L. Li, S.T. Ding, Effect of rotation on a
downstream sister holes ﬁlm cooling performance in a ﬂat plate
model, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 85 (2017) 154e166.
[192] Q.H. Zhu, H.H. Ji, B. Zhang, G.Z. Cao, Y.B. Chen, S.R. Guan, Numerical
study on the pre-swirl ﬂow and heat transfer characteristics of a small gas
turbine blade, J. Propuls. Technol. 33 (3) (2012) 455e462, https:
//doi.org/10.13675/j.cnki.tjjs.2012.03.024.
[193] A. Buchi, Winterthur, Switzerland, U.S. Patent Cooling device for
radial gas turbines, Docket No. 2577179, 1945.
[194] P.H. Snyder, R.J. Roelke, Design of an air-cooled metallic high-
temperature radial turbine, J. Propul. Power 6 (3) (1990) 283e288.
[195] L. Jiang, Numerical Study on Flow Field and the Rotor’s Film
Cooling of Radial Inﬂow Turbine in CCHP System, Master Disser-
tation, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, P.R. China, 2015,
https://doi.org/10.7666/d.D753343.
[196] J. Townsend, J. Kerrebrock, D. Stickler, Experimental evaluation of a
turbine blade with potassium evaporative cooling, J. Propul. Power
24 (3) (2008) 410e415.
[197] J.L. Kerrebrock, Lincoln, USA, U.S. Patent Radial ﬂow turbine with
internal evaporative blade cooling, Docket No: 6192670B1, 1999.
[198] I. Kaur, Y. Aider, K. Nithyanandam, P. Singh, Thermal-hydraulic
performance of additively manufactured lattices for gas turbine blade
trailing edge cooling, Appl. Therm. Eng. 211 (2022) 118461.
[199] Y. Zhang, T. Duda, J.A. Scoble, C.M. Sangan, C.D. Copeland,
A. Redwood, Design of an air-cooled radial turbine, part 2: experi-
mental measurements of heat transfer, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2018:
Turbomachinery Technical Conference and Exposition, Oslo, Nor-
way, 2018. Paper No. GT2018-76384 V008T26A014.
[200] O.T. Pirin, E.R. Jardón, J.C. García, Y. Mariac, Y.S. Hernández,
R. Ñeco, O. Dávalos, Effect of thermal barrier coating on the thermal
stress of gas microturbine blades and nozzles, J. Mech. Eng. 66 (10)
(2020) 581e590.
[201] P.G.
Lashmi,
P.V.
Ananthapadmanabhan,
G.
Unnikrishnan,
S.T. Aruna, Present status and future prospects of plasma sprayed
multilayered thermal barrier coating systems, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 40
(8) (2020) 2731e2745.
[202] S.H. Liu, J.P. Trelles, A.B. Murphy, W.T. He, J. Shi, S. Li, C.J. Li,
C.X. Li, H.B. Guo, Low-pressure plasma-induced physical vapor
deposition of advanced thermal barrier coatings: microstructures,
modelling and mechanisms, Mater. Today Phys. 21 (2021) 100481.
[203] I.H. Shin, J.M. Koo, C.S. Seok, S.H. Yang, T.W. Lee, B.S. Kim,
Estimation of spallation life of thermal barrier coating of gas turbine
blade by thermal fatigue test, Surf. Coating. Technol. 205 (Sup2)
(2011) S157eS160.
[204] M.T. Kim, S.W. Lee, Application of in situ oxidation-resistant
coating technology to a home-made 100 kW class gas turbine and
its performance analysis, Appl. Therm. Eng. 40 (2012) 304e310.
[205] C. Rodgers, Radial turbines - blade number and reaction effects, in:
ASME Turbo Expo 2000: Power for Land, Sea, and Air, Munich,
Germany, 2000. Paper No. 2000-GT-0456 V001T03A030.
[206] A.K. Noughabi, S. Sammak, Detailed design and aerodynamic perfor-
mance analysis of a radial-inﬂow turbine, Appl. Sci. 8 (11) (2018) 2207.
[207] U. Caldiño-Herrera, J. García, F. Sierra-Espinosa, J.O. Dávalos,
M.A. Lira, Radial inﬂow turbine geometry generation method using
third order Bezier curves for blade design, in: ASME Turbo Expo
2019:
Turbomachinery
Technical
Conference
and
Exposition,
Phoenix, USA, 2019. Paper No. GT2019-90163 V008T26A002.
[208] S. Pakle, J. Kyle, Design of double curvature radial turbine blades for
a micro gas turbine, Appl. Math. Model. 67 (2019) 529e548.
[209] R.H. Aungier, Turbine Aerodynamics: Axial-Flow and Radial-Inﬂow
Turbine Design and Analysis, ASME Press, New York, 2005.
[210] K. Rahbar, S. Mahmoud, R.K. Al-Dadah, Mean-line modeling and CFD
analysis of a miniature radial turbine for distributed power generation
systems, Int. J. Low Carbon Technol. 11 (2) (2014) 157e168.
40
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 41 ---

[211] L. Fu, Z.P. Feng, G.J. Li, Q.H. Deng, Y. Shi, T.Y. Gao, Experimental
validation of an integrated optimization design of a radial turbine for
micro gas turbines, J. Zhejiang Univ. - Sci. 16 (2015) 241e249.
[212] L. Fu, Y. Shi, Q.H. Deng, H.Z. Li, Z.P. Feng, Integrated optimization
design for a radial turbine wheel of a 100 kW-class microturbine, J.
Eng. Gas Turbines Power 134 (1) (2012) 881e889.
[213] D. Barsi, A. Perrone, L. Ratto, D. Simoni, P. Zunino, Radial inﬂow
turbine design through multi-disciplinary optimisation technique, in:
ASME Turbo Expo 2015: Turbine Technical Conference and
Exposition, Montreal, Canada, 2015. Paper No. GT2015-42702
V008T23A009.
[214] R. Tuccillo, M.C. Cameretti, Combustion and Combustors for MGT
Applications, Educational Notes RTO-EN-AVT-13, 2005, pp. 1e56.
[215] O. Kurata, N. Iki, T. Matsunuma, T. Inoue, T. Tsujimura, H. Furutani,
H. Kobayashi, A. Hayakawa, Performances and emission charac-
teristics of NH3-air and NH3CH4-air combustion gas-turbine power
generations, Proc. Combust. Inst. 36 (3) (2016) 3351e3359.
[216] M. Choi, Y. Sung, M. Won, Y. Park, M. Kim, G. Choi, D. Kim, Effect of
fueldistribution on turbulence and combustion characteristics of a micro
gas turbine combustor, J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 48 (2016) 24e35.
[217] A. Valera-Medina, D.G. Pugh, P. Marsh, G. Bulat, P. Bowen, Pre-
liminary study on lean premixed combustion of ammonia-hydrogen
for swirling gas turbine combustors, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 42 (38)
(2017) 24495e24503.
[218] G.J. Micklow, S. Roychoudhury, H.L. Nguyen, M.C. Cline, Emis-
sions reduction by varying the swirler airﬂow split in advanced gas
turbine combustors, in: ASME 1992 International Gas Turbine and
Aeroengine Congress and Exposition, Cologne, Germany, 1992.
Paper No. 92-GT-110 V003T06A007.
[219] N. Zarzalis, F. Joos, B. Glaeser, T. Ripplinger, NO(x)-reduction by
rich-lean combustion, in: 28th Joint Propulsion Conference and
Exhibit, Nashville, USA, 1992. Paper No. AIAA-92-3339.
[220] J.A. Wünning, J.G. Wünning, Flameless oxidation to reduce thermal
no-formation, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 23 (1) (1997) 81e94.
[221] J.W. Meadows, A.K. Agrawal, Porous inserts for passive control of
noise and thermo-acoustic instabilities in LDI combustion, Combust.
Sci. Technol. 187 (7) (2015) 1021e1035.
[222] C. Bruno, M. Losurdo, The Trapped Vortex Combustor: an
Advanced Combustion Technology for Aerospace and Gas Turbine
Applications, Springer, Dordrecht, 2007, pp. 365e384.
[223] X. Lu, Investigation of Flameless Combustion Technology for
Hydrogen-Rich Fuels in Micro Gas Turbine, Ph.D. Dissertation,
Institute of Engineering Thermophysics, Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences, Beijing, P.R. China, 2010, https://kns.cnki.net/KCMS/detail/
detail.aspx?dbnameZCDFD0911&ﬁlenameZ2010088115.nh.
[224] Y. Ohkubo, Low-NOx combustion technology, in: R&D Review of
Toyota CRDL, 2006, p. 41.
[225] S. Meziane, A. Bentebbiche, Numerical study of blended fuel natural
gas-hydrogen combustion in rich/quench/lean combustor of a micro
gas turbine, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44 (29) (2019) 15610e15621.
[226] P. Laranci, G. Bidini, B. D’Alessandro, M. Zampilli, F. Forcella,
F. Fantozzi, Improving lifetime and manufacturability of an RQL
Combustor formicroturbines:designandnumericalvalidation,in:ASME
Turbo Expo 2015: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition, Mon-
treal, Canada, 2015. Paper No. GT2015-43543 V003T03A009.
[227] P. Laranci, M. Zampilli, M. D’Amico, P. Bartocci, G. Bidini,
F. Fantozzi, Geometry optimization of a commercial annular RQL
combustor of a micro gas turbine for use with natural gas and vegetal
oils, Energy Proc. 126 (2017) 875e882.
[228] E.Alemi,M.R.Zargarabadi,EffectsofjetcharacteristicsonNOformation
in a jet-stabilized combustor, Int. J. Therm. Sci. 112 (2017) 55e67.
[229] X. Yang, Z.H. He, P.H. Qiu, S.K. Dong, H.P. Tan, Numerical in-
vestigations on combustion and emission characteristics of a novel
elliptical
jet-stabilized
model
combustor,
Energy
170
(2019)
1082e1097.
[230] S. Hasemann, H. Seliger, P. Kutne, M. Aigner, Experimental and
numerical design study for a small scale jet-stabilized micro gas
turbine combustor, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2018: Turbomachinery
Technical Conference and Exposition, Oslo, Norway, 2018. Paper
No. GT2018-75050 V04AT04A002.
[231] J. Zanger, T. Monz, M. Aigner, Experimental investigation of the
combustion
characteristics
of
a
double-staged
FLOX-based
combustor on an atmospheric and a micro gas turbine test rig, in:
ASME Turbo Expo 2015: Turbine Technical Conference and
Exposition, Montreal, Canada, 2015. Paper No. GT2015-42313
V04AT04A027.
[232] A. Schwärzle, T.O. Monz, M. Aigner, Detailed examination of two-
staged micro gas turbine combustor, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2016:
Turbomachinery Technical Conference and Exposition, Seoul, South
Korea, 2016. Paper No. GT2016-57730 V04BT04A039.
[233] S. Kruse, B. Kerschgens, L. Berger, E. Varea, H. Pitsch, Experi-
mental and numerical study of MILD combustion for gas turbine
applications, Appl. Energy 148 (2015) 456e465.
[234] A.A.V. Perpignan, A.G. Rao, D.J.E.M. Roekaertsm, Flameless
combustion and its potential towards gas turbines, Prog. Energy
Combust. Sci. 69 (2018) 28e62.
[235] Z. Rui, W. Dan, J.P. Wang, Progress of continuously rotating deto-
nation engines, Chin. J. Aeronaut. 29 (1) (2016) 15e29.
[236] V. Anand, E. Gutmark, A review of pollutants emissions in various
pressure gain combustors, Int. J. Spray Combust. Dyn. 11 (2019) 1e18.
[237] J. Sousa, G. Paniagua, E.C. Morata, Thermodynamic analysis of a
gas turbine engine with a rotating detonation combustor, Appl. En-
ergy 19 (2017) 247e256.
[238] M. Nozari, S. Tabejamaat, H. Sadeghizade, M. Aghayari, Experi-
mental investigation of the effect of gaseous fuel injector geometry
on the pollutant formation and thermal characteristics of a micro gas
turbine combustor, Energy 235 (2021) 121372.
[239] H.E. Bower, A. Schwärzle, F. Grimm, T. Zornek, P. Kutne, Experi-
mental analysis of a micro gas turbine combustor optimized for
ﬂexible operation with various gaseous fuel compositions, J. Eng.
Gas Turbines Power 142 (3) (2020) 031015.
[240] X.W. Guo, J. Zhang, Z.X. Zhang, H. Bai, J.J. Fan, J. Yu, D.G. Bi,
Z.X. Zhu, P.P. Gao, Research status and development of low-
nitrogen burner for low caloriﬁc value gas fuel, IOP Conf. Ser.
Earth Environ. Sci. 252 (4) (2019) 042048.
[241] A.E.E. Khalil, V.K. Arghode, A.K. Gupta, S.C. Lee, Low caloriﬁc
value fuelled distributed combustion with swirl for gas turbine ap-
plications, Appl. Energy 98 (2012) 69e78.
[242] M.C. Cameretti, R. Tuccillo, Combustion features of a bio-fuelled
micro-gas turbine, Appl. Therm. Eng. 89 (2015) 280e290.
[243] A. Schwräzle, T.O. Monz, M. Aigner, Thermal incineration of VOCs
in a jet-stabilized micro gas turbine combustor, in: ASME Turbo
Expo 2015: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition, Montreal,
Canada, 2015. Paper No. GT2015-43139 V04BT04A006.
[244] W.M. Haynes, D.R. Lide, T.J. Bruno, CRC Handbook of Chemistry
and Physics, 97th ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2016.
[245] C. Zamﬁrescu, I. Dincer, Ammonia as a green fuel and hydrogen
source for vehicular applications, Fuel Process. Technol. 90 (5)
(2009) 729e737.
[246] K.K.J.R. Dinesh, X. Jiang, M.P. Kirkpatrick, W. Malalasekera,
Combustion characteristics of H2/N2 and H2/CO syngas non-
premixed
ﬂames,
Int.
J.
Hydrogen
Energy
37
(21)
(2012)
16186e16200.
[247] S.R. Zhu, S. Acharya, Effects of hydrogen addition on swirl-
stabilized ﬂame properties, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2010: Power for
Land, Sea, and Air, Glasgow, UK, 2010, pp. 1277e1287. Paper No.
GT2010-23686.
[248] J. Beita, M. Talibi, S. Sadasivuni, R. Balachandran, Thermoacoustic
instability considerations for high hydrogen combustion in lean
premixed gas turbine combustors: a review, Hydro 2 (1) (2021)
33e57.
[249] S. Karyeyen, M. Ilbas, Application of distributed combustion tech-
nique to hydrogen-rich coal gases: a numerical investigation, Int. J.
Hydrogen Energy 45 (5) (2020) 3641e3650.
[250] F. Reale, R. Sannino, Water and steam injection in micro gas turbine
supplied by hydrogen enriched fuels: numerical investigation and
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
41


--- Page 42 ---

performance analysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 46 (40) (2021)
24366e24381.
[251] E.C. Okafor, K.D.K.A. Somarathne, A. Hayakawa, T. Kudo,
O. Kurata, N. Iki, H. Kobayashi, Towards the development of an
efﬁcient low-NOx ammonia combustor for a micro gas turbine, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 37 (4) (2018) 4597e4606.
[252] S.K. Ayaz, O. Altuntas, H. Caliskan, Thermoecologic assessment
and life cycleebased environmental pollution cost analysis of
microgas turbine, J. Environ. Eng. 146 (1) (2020) 04019096.
[253] A.H. Lefebvre, V.G. McDonell, Atomization and Sprays, second ed.,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2017.
[254] H. Panchasara, N. Ashwath, Effects of pyrolysis bio-oils on fuel
atomisation e a review, Energies 14 (4) (2021) 794.
[255] M.C. Chiong, C.T. Chong, J.H. Ng, S.S. Lam, M.V. Tran,
W.W.F. Chong, M.N.M. Jaafar, A.V. Medina, Liquid biofuels pro-
duction and emissions performance in gas turbines: a review, Energy
Convers. Manag. 173 (2018) 640e658.
[256] J.L.H.P. Sallevelt, J.E.P. Gudde, A.K. Pozarlik, G. Brem, The impact
of spray quality on the combustion of a viscous biofuel in a micro
gas turbine, Appl. Energy 132 (2014) 575e585.
[257] M. Prussi, D. Chiaramonti, G. Riccio, F. Martelli, L. Pari, Straight
vegetable oil use in micro-gas turbines: system adaptation and
testing, Appl. Energy 89 (1) (2012) 287e295.
[258] M. Bufﬁ, A. Cappelletti, A.M. Rizzo, F. Martelli, D. Chiaramonti,
Combustion of fast pyrolysis bio-oil and blends in a micro gas tur-
bine, Biomass Bioenergy 115 (2018) 174e185.
[259] M. Broumand, M.S. Khan, S. Yun, Z. Hong, M.J. Thomson,
Feasibility of running a micro gas turbine on wood-derived fast
pyrolysis bio-oils: effect of the fuel spray formation and preparation,
Renew. Energy 178 (2021) 775e784.
[260] M. Broumand, M.S. Khan, S. Yun, Z. Hong, M.J. Thomson, The
effect of thermo-catalytic reforming of a pyrolysis bio-oil on its
performance in a micro-gas turbine burner, Appl. Energy Combust.
Sci. 5 (2021) 100017.
[261] M. Bufﬁ, A. Cappelletti, T. Seljak, T. Katrasnik, A. Valera-Medina,
D. Chiaramonti, Emissions and combustion performance of a micro
gas turbine powered with liqueﬁed wood and its blends, Energy
Proc. 142 (2017) 297e302.
[262] P. Boomadevi, V. Paulson, S. Samlal, M. Varatharajan, M. Sekar,
M. Alsehli, A. Elfasakhany, S. Tola, Impact of microalgae biofuel on
micro gas turbine aviation engine: a combustion and emission study,
Fuel 302 (2021) 121155.
[263] A. Hoxie, M. Anderson, Evaluating high volume blends of vegetable oil
in micro-gas turbine engines, Renew. Energy 101 (2017) 886e893.
[264] F. Montomoli, M. Massini, Uncertainty quantiﬁcation applied to gas
turbine components, in: F. Montomoli (Ed.), Uncertainty Quantiﬁ-
cation in Computational Fluid Dynamics and Aircraft Engines,
Springer, Cham, 2019, pp. 157e193.
[265] B. Blakey-Milner, P. Gradl, G. Snedden, M. Brooks, J. Pitot, E. Lopez,
M. Leary, F. Berto, A.D. Plessis, Metal additive manufacturing in
aerospace: a review, Mater. Des. 209 (2021) 110008.
[266] N.Mahto,S.R.Chakravarthy,Responsesurfacemethodologyfor design
of gas turbine combustor, Appl. Therm. Eng. 211 (2022) 118449.
[267] GE Aviation Blog, Manufacturing milestone: 30,000 additive fuel
nozzles,
URL:
https://blog.geaerospace.com/manufacturing/
manufacturing-milestone-30000-additive-fuel-nozzles
[cited
15
August 2022].
[268] Siemens, Additive Manufacturing: Siemens uses innovative tech-
nology to produce gas turbines, URL: https://press.siemens.com/
global/en/feature/additive-manufacturing-siemens-uses-innovative-
technology-produce-gas-turbines [cited 15 August 2022].
[269] TWI, Case study: laser powder metal deposition manufacturing of
complex real
parts,
URL:
https://docplayer.net/48458850-Case-
study-laser-powder-metal-deposition-manufacturing-of-complex-
real-parts.html [cited 15 August 2022].
[270] A. Adamou, J. Turner, A. Costall, A. Jon es, C. Copeland, Design,
simulation,
and
validation
of
additively
manufactured
high-
temperature combustion chambers for micro gas turbines, Energy
Convers. Manag. 248 (2021) 114805.
[271] A. Adamou, A. Costall, J.W.G. Turner, A. Jones, C. Copeland,
Experimental performance and emissions of additively manufactured
high-temperature combustion chambers for micro-gas turbines, Int. J.
Engine Res. (2022) 1e17.
[272] M. Galati, A. Snis, L. Iuliano, Experimental validation of a numer-
ical thermal model of the EBM process for Ti6Al4V, Comput. Math.
Appl. 78 (7) (2019) 2417e2427.
[273] C.Y. Zhang, V. Gümmer, High temperature heat exchangers for recuper-
ated rotorcraft powerplants, Appl. Therm. Eng. 154 (2019) 548e561.
[274] C.F. Mcdonald, A.F. Massardo, C. Rodgers, A. Stone, Recuperated gas
turbine aeroengines, part II: engine design studies following early
development testing, Aircraft Eng. Aero. Technol. 80 (3) (2008)
280e294.
[275] J. Kesseli, T. Wolf, J. Nash, S. Freedman, Micro, industrial, and
advanced gas turbines employing recuperators, in: ASME Turbo
Expo 2003, Collocated with the 2003 International Joint Power
Generation Conference, Atlanta, USA, 2003, pp. 789e794. Paper
No. GT2003-38938.
[276] G. Lagerström, M. Xie, High performance and cost effective recu-
perator for micro-gas turbines, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2002: Power
for Land, Sea, and Air, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2002,
pp. 1003e1007. Paper No. GT2002-30402.
[277] B. Treece, P. Vessa, R. Mckeirnan, Microturbine recuperator
manufacturing and operating experience, in: ASME Turbo Expo
2002: Power for Land, Sea, and Air, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
2002, pp. 1017e1023. Paper No. GT2002-30404.
[278] C. Albanakis, K. Yakinthos, K. Kritikos, D. Missirlis, A. Goulas,
P. Storm, The effect of heat transfer on the pressure drop through a
heat exchanger for aero engine applications, Appl. Therm. Eng. 29
(4) (2009) 634e644.
[279] G. Wilfert, B. Kriegl, H. Scheugenpﬂug, J. Bernard, X. Ruiz,
S. Eury, Clean e validation of a high efﬁcient low NOx core, a
GTF high speed turbine and an integration of a recuperator in an
environmental friendly engine concept, in: 41st AIAA/ASME/-
SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit, Tucson, USA,
2005. Paper No. AIAA-2005-4195.
[280] T. Kim, B.I. Choi, Y.S. Han, K.H. Do, Experimental and analytical
investigation of a wavy ﬁn recuperator for a micro gas turbine, Int. J.
Heat Mass Tran. 148 (2019) 118998.
[281] K.H. Do, B.I. Choi, Y.S. Han, T. Kim, Experimental investigation on
the pressure drop and heat transfer characteristics of a recuperator
with offset strip ﬁns for a micro gas turbine, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran.
103 (2016) 457e467.
[282] A. Hussein, Additive Manufacturing of Compact Heat Exchangers,
in: 34th Heat Exchanger Action Group Meeting, 2017. URL: http://
hexag.org/news/34/ahmed_hussein.pdf.
[283] X. Zhang, R. Tiwari, A.H. Shooshtari, M.M. Ohadi, An additively
manufactured metallic manifold-microchannel heat exchanger for high
temperature applications, Appl. Therm. Eng. 143 (2018) 899e908.
[284] K.K. Ferster, K.L. Kirsch, K.A. Thole, Effects of geometry, spacing,
and number of pin ﬁns in additively manufactured microchannel pin
ﬁn arrays, J. Turbomach. 140 (1) (2018) 011007.
[285] H. Rastan, A. Abdi, B.Hamawandi, M.Ignatowicz,J.P. Meyer, B.Palm,
Heat transfer study of enhanced additively manufactured minichannel
heat exchangers, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 161 (2020) 120271.
[286] J. Zanger, A. Widenhorn, M. Aigner, Experimental investigations of
pressure losses on the performance of a micro gas turbine system, J.
Eng. Gas Turbines Power 133 (8) (2011) 082302.
[287] I. Kaur, P. Singh, State-of-the-art in heat exchanger additive
manufacturing, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 178 (2021) 121600.
[288] D.Singh,W.H.Yu,D.M.France,T.P.Allred,I.H.Liu,W.C.Du,B.Barua,
M.C. Messner, One piece ceramic heat exchanger for concentrating solar
power electric plants, Renew. Energy 160 (2020) 1308e1315.
[289] B.G. Carman, J.S. Kapat, L.C. Chow, L. An, Impact of a ceramic
microchannel heat exchanger on a micro turbine, in: ASME Turbo
42
Jingqi Li, Yulong Li


--- Page 43 ---

Expo 2002: Power for Land, Sea, and Air, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2002, pp. 1053e1060. Paper No. GT2002-30544.
[290] T. Stevens, M. Baelmans, Optimal pressure drop ratio for micro
recuperators in small sized gas turbines, Appl. Therm. Eng. 28
(17e18) (2008) 2353e2359.
[291] J. Cai, X.L. Huai, W.X. Xi, An optimal design approach for the annular
involute-proﬁle cross wavy primary surface recuperator in microturbine
and an application case study, Energy 153 (2018) 80e89.
[292] C.Y. Zhang, V. Gümmer, Multi-objective optimization and system
evaluation of recuperated helicopter turboshaft engines, Energy 191
(2019) 116477.
[293] A. Giugno, A. Cuneo, A. Traverso, Analysis of uncertainties in
compact plate-ﬁn recuperators for microturbines, Appl. Therm. Eng.
150 (2019) 1243e1251.
[294] P. Maghsoudi, S. Sadeghi, H. Khanjarpanah, H.H. Gorgani, A
comprehensive thermo-economic analysis, optimization and ranking
of different microturbine plate-ﬁn recuperators designs employing
similar and dissimilar ﬁns on hot and cold sides with NSGA-II al-
gorithm
and
DEA
model,
Appl.
Therm.
Eng.
130
(2018)
1090e1104.
[295] P. Maghsoudi, S. Sadeghi, H.H. Gorgani, Comparative study and
multi-objective optimization of plate-ﬁn recuperators applied in
200kW microturbines based on non-dominated sorting and normal-
ization method considering recuperator effectiveness, exergy efﬁ-
ciency and total cost, Int. J. Therm. Sci. 124 (2018) 50e67.
[296] P. Maghsoudi, S. Sadeghi, A novel economic analysis and multi-
objective optimization of a 200-kW recuperated micro gas turbine
considering cycle thermal efﬁciency and discounted payback period,
Appl. Therm. Eng. 166 (2020) 114644.
[297] H.S. Lim, J.S. Bang, B.S. Choi, M.R. Park, J.Y. Park, J. Seo, S.C. Hwang,
J.K. Sohn, B.O. Kim, Secondary ﬂow stabilization of 100 kW-class micro
gas turbine, J. Mech. Sci. Technol. 31 (4) (2017) 1753e1761.
[298] T.A.C. Maia, O.A. Faria, J.E.M. Barros, M.P. Porto, B.J.C. Filho,
Test and simulation of an electric generator driven by a micro-tur-
bine, Elec. Power Syst. Res. 147 (2017) 224e232.
[299] A. Arroyo, M. Mclorn, M. Fabian, M. White, A.I. Sayma, Rotor-
dynamics of different shaft conﬁgurations for a 6 kW micro gas
turbine for concentrated solar power, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2016:
Turbomachinery Technical Conference and Exposition, Seoul, South
Korea, 2016. Paper No. GT2016-56479 V008T23A009.
[300] Y.J. Li, F. Liang, Y. Zhou, S.T. Ding, F.R. Du, M. Zhou, J.G. Bi,
Y. Cai, Numerical and experimental investigation on thermohy-
drodynamic performance of turbocharger rotor-bearing system, Appl.
Therm. Eng. 121 (2017) 27e38.
[301] P. Koutsovasilis, Automotive turbocharger rotordynamics: interac-
tion of thrust and radial bearings in shaft motion simulation, J. Sound
Vib. 455 (2019) 413e429.
[302] J. Li, H. Gurgenci, J.S. Li, L. Li, Z.Q. Guan, F. Yang, Optimal design
to control rotor shaft vibrations and thermal management on a su-
percritical CO2 microturbine, Mech. Ind. 22 (2021) 22.
[303] J.W. Lund, K.K. Thomsen, A calculation method and data for the
dynamic coefﬁcients of oil-lubricated journal bearings, in: Topics in
Fluid Film Bearing and Rotor Bearing System Design and Optimi-
zation, 1978, 1000118.
[304] J.W. Lund, Spring and damping coefﬁcients for the tilting-pad
journal bearing, ASLE Trans. 7 (1964) 342e352.
[305] X.H. Wang, H.G. Li, G. Meng, Rotordynamic coefﬁcients of a
controllable
magnetorheological
ﬂuid
lubricated
ﬂoating
ring
bearing, Tribol. Int. 114 (2017) 1e14.
[306] L. Tian, W.J. Wang, Z.J. Peng, Nonlinear effects of unbalance in the
rotor-ﬂoating ring bearing system of turbochargers, Mech. Syst.
Signal Process. 34 (1e2) (2013) 298e320.
[307] D. Kim, Parametric studies on static and dynamic performance of air
foil bearings with different top foil geometries and bump stiffness
distributions, J. Tribol. 129 (2) (2007) 354e364.
[308] S. Nakano, T. Kishibe, H. Araki, M. Yagi, K. Tsubouchi,
M. Ichinose, Y. Hayasaka, M. Sasaki, T. Inoue, K. Yamaguchi,
H. Shiraiwa, Development of a 150 kW microturbine system which
applies the humid air turbine cycle, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2007:
Power
for
Land,
Sea,
and
Air,
Montreal,
Canada,
2007,
pp. 1041e1048. Paper No. GT2007-28192.
[309] G. Schweitzer, Active magnetic bearings e chances and limitations,
in:
6th
International
Conference
on
Rotor
Dynamics,
2002,
pp. 1e14.
[310] X. Zhang, B.C. Han, X. Liu, Y.L. Chen, L.X. Zhai, Prediction and
experiment of DC- bias iron loss in radial magnetic bearing for a
small scale turbomolecular pump, Vacuum 163 (2019) 224e235.
[311] X.N. Liu, Y. Zhou, X.S. Yan, J.J. Zhao, Z.G. Shi, J.Q. Chen,
Y.L. Zhao, G.J. Yang, Experimental study on the novel rolling-
sliding integrated auxiliary bearing in active magnetic bearing dur-
ing rotor drop, Ann. Nucl. Energy 136 (2020) 107044.
[312] S. Zheng, B.C. Han, R. Feng, Y.X. Jiang, Vibration suppression
control for AMB supported motor driveline system using synchro-
nous rotating frame transformation, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 62 (9)
(2015) 5700e5708.
[313] Concepts
Nrec,
URL:
https://www.conceptsnrec.com/solutions/
manufacturing/products/turbine-generators
[cited
22
November
2020].
Micro gas turbine: Developments, applications, and key technologies on components
43
