
--- Page 1 ---

H. Schütz
DLR-German Aerospace Center,
Institute of Combustion Technology,
Linder Höhe,
51147 Cologne, Germany
e-mail: harald.schuetz@dlr.de
R. Lückerath
DLR-German Aerospace Center,
Institute of Combustion Technology,
Pfaffenwaldring 38-40,
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
e-mail: rainer.lueckerath@dlr.de
T. Kretschmer
DLR-German Aerospace Center,
Institute of Combustion Technology,
Linder Höhe,
51147 Cologne, Germany
B. Noll
M. Aigner
DLR-German Aerospace Center,
Institute of Combustion Technology,
Pfaffenwaldring 38-40,
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
Analysis of the Pollutant
Formation in the FLOX®
Combustion
FLOX®, or ﬂameless combustion is characterized by ultralow NOx emissions. Therefore
the potential for its implementation in gas turbine combustors is investigated in recent
research activities. The major concern of the present paper is the numerical simulation of
ﬂow and combustion in a FLOX®-combustor [Wünning, J. A., and Wünning, J. G., 1997,
“Progress in Energy and Combustion Science,” 23, pp. 81–94; Patent EP 0463218] at
high pressure operating conditions with emphasis on the pollutant formation. FLOX®-
combustion is a highly turbulent and high-velocity combustion process, which is strongly
dominated by turbulent mixing and chemical nonequilibrium effects. By this means the
thermal nitric oxide formation is reduced to a minimum, because even in the nonpremixed
case the maximum combustion temperature does not or rather slightly exceeds the adia-
batic ﬂame temperature of the global mixture due to almost perfectly mixed reactants
prior to combustion. In a turbulent ﬂow, the key aspects of a combustion model are
twofold: (i) chemistry and (ii) turbulence/chemistry interaction. In the FLOX®-
combustion we ﬁnd that both physical mechanisms are of equal importance. Throughout
our simulations we use the complex ﬁnite rate chemistry scheme GRI3.0 for methane and
a simple partially stirred reactor (PaSR) model to account for the turbulence effect on the
combustion. The computational results agree well with experimental data obtained in
DLR test facilities. For a pressure level of 20 bar, a burner load of 417 kW and an air to
fuel ratio of 2.16 computational results are presented and compared with experimen-
tal data. DOI: 10.1115/1.2747266
Keywords: FLOX®-combustion, numerical simulation, complex ﬁnite rate chemistry,
PaSR model
Introduction of the Flox Principle
FLOX® is a registered trademark of WS Wärmeprozess-
technik 1. The combustor design was supplied by this company
and the manufacturing, particularly with regard to the speciﬁc
demands of the high pressure operation, was accomplished by
DLR. The term FLOX® is an acronym for “ﬂameless oxidation,”
which actually means that no distinct ﬂame is visible. The way in
which this is performed and what follows as a consequence
thereof, will be pointed out in the following. The fuel used in the
experiments and the simulations is natural gas and its composition
is depicted in Table 1.
In order to give a ﬁrst impression of the FLOX® principle a
longitudinal slice through combustor axis and two subtending
nozzles is displayed in Fig. 1. The streamlines represent the ﬂow
and we recognize an outer and a stronger inner recirculating vor-
tex that stabilizes the ﬂame. In view of the pollutant formation the
molar fraction distribution of CO and NO is shown on the upper
and lower half of Fig. 1, respectively. At ﬁrst glance we observe
that the reaction zone is far detached from the nozzle exit.
In principle, FLOX® is a technique employed to reduce nitric-
oxide NO emission to a minimum within the combustion pro-
cess. The relevant NO-formation mechanisms during methane
combustion are: i Zeldovich thermal NO, ii Fenimore
prompt NO, and iii N2O–NO. It is generally accepted that
with
increasing
combustion
temperature
the
thermal
NO-
formation becomes absolutely dominant over the other mecha-
nisms. Therefore, low NO-emission values may be attained if the
combustion is controlled in a manner in which the temperature
does not exceed the adiabatic ﬂame temperature of the global
mixture.
Equilibrium computations reveal that increasing adiabatic ﬂame
temperature correlates with increasing preheating temperature and
with decreasing air to fuel ratio . In order to maintain high op-
erational efﬁciency, the preheating temperature has to be as high
as possible. Consequently, adiabatic ﬂame temperatures below
1800 K imply an air to fuel ratio  in the range of 23.
If reaction occurs before the mixture is globally mixed on the
molecular level, the local ﬂame temperature is higher than the
adiabatic ﬂame temperature of the global mixture due to regimes
of lower air to fuel ratio which are closer to stoichiometry than the
global mixture. This should be avoided, in particular, ﬂashback
into the nozzle is absolutely prohibitive.
As is seen in Fig. 2, the mixing of fuel and oxidizer taking
place in the burner is not complete; indeed, there is a slight non-
concentric distribution of methane on the nozzle exit cross section
with a maximum concentration of 17.7% near the nozzle axis and
a minimum concentration of 0.3% at the nozzle walls. Details of
the nozzle design are not shown here.
It will be seen in the computational results that this incomplete
mixing in the burner is of less relevance in the FLOX®-
combustion. The key is that mixing proceeds at extremely high
ﬂow velocity. The consequence is that on the one hand turbulent
mixing is highly improved in the shear layer around the impinging
jet and on the other hand that chemical reactions are strongly
delayed by reason of nonequilibrium effects, even for high pre-
heating temperatures. This is also the reason why simulations us-
ing combustion models on the basis of equilibrium or near-
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received
January 4, 2007; ﬁnal manuscript received January 29, 2007, published online
January 9, 2008. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the ASME
Turbo Expo 2006: Land, Sea and Air GT2006, May 8–11, 2006, Barcelona, Spain,
Paper No. GT2006-91041.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011503-1
Copyright © 2008 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

equilibrium chemistry e.g., presumed pdf using ﬂamelets
completely fail, as they predict combustion in the nozzle 2.
The incompletely mixed fuel/air jet perpendicularly enters the
combustion chamber with high, nonswirled velocity, forming a
recirculating annulus around the jet due to mass continuity see
Fig. 1. After a certain penetration depth the jet expands, leading
to a strong reduction of the velocity magnitude. Prior to the onset
of the chemical reactions at appropriate ﬂow velocity values, mix-
ing is further improved on-the-ﬂy by turbulence. Simultaneously,
the jet is further preheated by the recirculating hot ﬂue gases. This
process is also supported by the hot combustor walls, as is found
by Vaz 2. The inﬂuence of the entrainment of the ﬂue gases in
the jet is not quantiﬁed here.
Due to nonequilibrium chemistry effects the formation of a
ﬂame is spatially delayed up to a volumetric heat release at mean
temperatures in the range of or even below the adiabatic ﬂame
temperature. Accordingly a distinct ﬂame is no more visible. At
that temperature the NO-formation is very low 1–10 ppm; far
below the equilibrium values which indicates that this process is
very slow. In contrast, the CO formation and consumption is very
fast, and we may expect exhaust values in the range of the equi-
librium data.
Computational and Experimental Setup
The computational domain is derived from the combustor,
which was experimentally investigated at the DLR test facility.
Combustor length and diameter are 200 and 100 mm, respec-
tively. From Fig. 3a we see that on the combustor head twelve
nozzles inner Ø 4.5 mm are equidistantly arranged along a circle
Ø 80 mm centered about the combustor axis. For a better optical
access, the cross section of the combustion chamber on the test rig
is of hexagonal shape. However, in the simulations a cylindrical
geometry with a combustor diameter of 106 mm is assumed in
order to reduce the computational cost. Hence, the computational
domain may be limited to a 15 deg sector as indicated in Fig. 3a.
The axial extent of the domain is displayed in Fig. 3c. Scalabil-
ity issues of the investigated FLOX® combustor had not been
addressed in the present paper as it was our primary goal to de-
velop and validate our combustion code. However, this topic will
be investigated in future work.
For the ﬂow simulation we use the commercial code Fluent 6.1.
applying the realizable k- model with standard wall functions
and the segregated solver. Chemistry and turbulence/chemistry in-
teraction are computed using the DLR combustion code IGNIS,
which supplies the Fluent code with the source terms for the com-
position and internal energy transport equations. These transport
equations are then solved in Fluent. Based on our experience, the
best results concerning performance, stability and accuracy are
achieved by performing unsteady computations. Coupling Fluent
and IGNIS in a steady mode does not converge or is highly inef-
ﬁcient due to the need for very small relaxation factors.
In order to lower computational cost, we use the Fluent code
capability to dynamically adapt the computational mesh to the
physical solution. Precisely, we start the computation with a very
coarse mesh of about 8000 cells. A steady state solution is ﬁnally
obtained on an adapted mesh of about 80,000 cells. As the adap-
Table 1
Operational conditions. The air to fuel ratio is deﬁned
as =„nAir/nFuel…/„nAir/nFuel…stoic, where n is the respective num-
ber of moles and the subscript stoic denotes stoichlometry
Air to fuel ratio 
of the global mixture
1
2.16
Pressure
bar
20
Air temperature
K
721
Fuel temperature
K
352
Air mass ﬂow
g/s
302
Fuel mass ﬂow
g/s
8.33
Speciﬁc heat density
MW/m3/bar
12.3
Burner load
kW
417
Fuel composition
mole % CH4
97.88
C2H6
0.76
C3H8
0.37
CO2
0.06
N2
0.93
Fig. 1
CO and NO molar fraction distribution and streamline
representation of the ﬂow on longitudinal slice through nozzle
and combustor axis for =2.16. Note: the molar fraction is re-
lated to dry gas and 15% O2 concentration at the combustor
exit „see Table 2….
Fig. 2
Inhomogeneous methane distribution at burner nozzle
exit, CH4min=0.3%, CH4max=17.7% -turbulent velocity proﬁle at
the nozzle exit, vmaxÉ187 m/s, vmeanÉ173 m/s. Note: Maxi-
mum speed of vÉ197 m/s is reached about 3.7 mm down-
stream of the nozzle exit-streamlines indicating recirculation
around the jet.
Fig. 3
Schematic of the experimental/computational setup
011503-2 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

tation criteria we use the global reaction rate and the production
rates for CO and OH. For example a mesh cutout after a mesh-
reﬁnement procedure based on the CO production rate is shown in
Fig. 3b. Computations are performed for the operational condi-
tions summarized in Table 1.
The Combustion Model
The IGNIS code is a powerful chemistry simulation package
incorporating different turbulent combustion models. IGNIS may
be coupled with any arbitrary CFD-code via user-deﬁned func-
tions supplying the internal energy and species densities transport
equations with the appropriate source terms. The code kernel is a
highly optimized routine solving complex chemical systems of
elementary reactions applying the “Reference Species Technique”
3 see Appendix A. This technique is a semi-implicit solution
procedure where the individual reaction equations are sequentially
solved by linearization in the respective reference species. In this
regard we found it crucial for the quality of the solution to rear-
range and solve the elementary reactions in the order of increasing
characteristic chemistry times. Within the global time step  the
characteristic chemistry time chem is then used as the time step in
a subcycled explicit solution process of each reaction equation.
Thus, the solution of a fast reaction is introduced into the solution
process of the next slower reaction, and so on. As an example, the
reordering of the reactions in the computational cell of greatest
heat release is shown in Fig. 4. While the original order reveals a
strongly ﬂuctuating behavior the rearranged order is represented
by a smooth curve revealing that the characteristic chemistry
times of the fastest and the slowest reaction ranging from
10−9 to 106 s, respectively. Unfortunately this order is different
for each cell and each time level and has to be computed sepa-
rately.
With our focus on the pollutant emission we decided to use the
GRI3.0 4 reaction mechanism comprised of 325 elementary re-
actions and 53 species to investigate the relative importance of the
different NO-formation mechanisms. In practice, solution of a
very complex chemistry system is prohibitive for the concurrent
use of an elaborate turbulence/chemistry interaction model for
example, the presumed pdf approach by reason of the computa-
tional cost. Therefore the simple “Partially Stirred Reactor Model”
5,6 see Appendix B is applied in the present computations.
This model suffers from the fact that all the turbulent structures in
a computational cell have the same mean composition and that
there is only one integral turbulent mixing time involved. On this
account the model has to be calibrated by adjusting the model
constant Cmix in Eq. B5 of Appendix B by comparison with
experimental data. For the FLOX®-combustion we found an ap-
propriate value of Cmix=0.002. The justiﬁcation for this will be
given later.
In order to evaluate the combustion model it is useful to com-
pute the local turbulent Damköhler number which may be inter-
preted as a measure of the relative importance of turbulence and
chemistry in the combustion zone. From the results of the simu-
lation used below for the code and model validation we ﬁrst com-
pute the characteristic chemistry time as deﬁned in Eq. A9 of
Appendix A. The distribution of the chemistry time and the char-
acteristic turbulent mixing time is plotted on the lower and upper
half of Fig. 5, respectively. Figure 5, as well as subsequent ﬁgures,
represents a cutout of the reaction zone behind the burner nozzle
on a longitudinal slice through burner nozzle and combustor axis.
At ﬁrst glance we see that the chemistry time is almost one
order of magnitude higher than the turbulence mixing time indi-
cating that the FLOX® combustion is notably dominated by ﬁnite
rate chemistry effects. Both characteristic times are combined to
form the Damköhler number deﬁned through Eq. B10. For com-
parison the distribution of the heat release rate and the Damköhler
number is plotted on the upper and lower half of Fig. 6, respec-
tively.
We observe that heat of combustion is released on an envelope
around the impinging fuel/air jet with a maximum of 1010 W/m3
located about 55 mm downstream behind the nozzle exit. We fur-
ther observe that the Damköhler number strongly correlates with
the heat release rate, however, the maximum value of DaT0.4 is
located slightly upstream of the point of maximum heat release.
This fact is also reﬂected in Fig. 5 by an absolute minimum in the
chemistry time.
If the computed Damköhler number is located in the Borghi-
Fig. 4
Characteristic chemistry time over the elementary reac-
tions of the GRI3.0 reaction scheme. Red colored line: nonor-
dered; black colored line: ordered chemical reactions.
Fig. 5
Characteristic chemistry time „lower half… and turbulent
mixing time „upper half… in the combustion zone on a longitu-
dinal slice through the burner nozzle and combustor axis
Fig. 6
Damköhler-# „lower half… and heat release rate „upper
half… in the combustion zone on a longitudinal slice through the
burner nozzle and combustor axis
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011503-3
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

diagram 7 we ﬁnd that the FLOX® combustion is characterized
by the conditions prevailing in a more or less well stirred reactor.
From the above considerations we may conclude that our
choice to use a complex ﬁnite rate chemistry scheme along with
the partially stirred reactor model is justiﬁed in the FLOX® ap-
plication.
Results
Code and Model Validation. For the validation of the combus-
tion models and the evaluation of the computational results OH-
LIF measurement data are available from DLR-experiments relat-
ing to the relative amount of OH-radicals and the temperature 8.
Details of the experimental theory are not presented here but may
be found in 9. The species concentrations of CO and NO were
detected by suction probing 65 mm downstream of the combustor
exit Ø 50 mm. The outer diameter of the probe is 5 mm and we
may assume that the probe does not interfere with the combustor
ﬂow. The exhaust temperature was measured with an uncorrected
thermocouple. All these values are resumed in Table 2 and used as
validation data for the simulations. The measured pressure drop
across the combustor of about 5% is coincident with the compu-
tational result.
OH. OH is involved in almost all elementary reactions and
consequently has an important inﬂuence on the accurate predic-
tion of the pollutant formation. In Figs. 7 and 8 the results of the
simulations without quasilaminar and with application of the
PaSR-model are qualitatively compared with the LIF-measured
OH-concentration on slice plane 2, as indicated in Fig. 3a.
In the simulations the onset of the OH-formation is rather
abrupt with a steep gradient in the reaction zone. In contrast, there
is a smooth transition of OH from the zero value in the center of
the jets to the surroundings. This is certainly due to a strong tur-
bulent exchange or entrainment across the shear layer between the
jets and the recirculating hot ﬂue gases. This physical process is
only deﬁciently described by the k- turbulence model. Obvi-
ously, this is not only a problem of the combustion model but
rather of the turbulence model in the ﬂow simulation code.
The results of the quasilaminar approach presented in Fig. 7
clariﬁes the pure chemistry aspect of the combustion assuming
that the composition at the beginning of each time step is perfectly
mixed on the molecular level. This is the limit of inﬁnitely fast
turbulent mixing or mix=0. Although the ﬂame front is strongly
delayed behind the nozzle exit due to ﬁnite rate chemistry effects,
comparison with the experimental data shows that the reaction is
still to fast. This shows that we have to account for the incomplete
mixing in the computational cells by application of the PaSR
turbulence/chemistry interaction model. As mentioned above the
PaSR-model has to be calibrated by adjusting the model param-
eter Cmix in Eq. B8. For this purpose we used the OH-LIF mea-
surement data to determine a value of Cmix=0.002 by tuning the
conformity
of
the
computational
and
experimental
OH-
distribution pattern. The result is shown in Fig. 8.
With the Cmix parameter ﬁxed, we further compare computa-
tional and experimental results for the temperature and the global
emission values at the combustor exit. These values are summa-
rized in Table 2 with reference to the corresponding equilibrium
data.
Temperature. Figure 9 shows the temperature distribution on
plane 3 of Fig. 3a related to a color map ranging from 1200 K
up to 2000 K. The result of the simulation is displayed on the
upper half of the ﬁgure while the data from the LIF experiment is
shown on a rectangular cutout near the combustor center on the
lower half. Comparing both data on the corresponding rectangular
areas as outlined in Fig. 9 we ﬁnd that the computational distri-
bution is almost homogeneous with the average value of 1750 K
Table 2
Comparison of computational and experimental results
Air to fuel ratio 
2.16
Max. nozzle velocity m/s
195
Adiabatic temperature K
1749
Equil. CO molar fraction ppm
3.8/2.8a
Equil. NO molar fraction ppm
2587
Combustion model
Simulation
GRI3.0
quasilaminar
Simulation
GRI3.0
PaSR
Experiment
Max. mean temperature K
1755
1750
1719c
Exhaust temperature K
1743
1742
1267b,d
Max. CO molar fraction ppm
6668
9084
¯
Exhaust CO molar fraction ppm
3.6
2.3a
3.6
2.3a
1.0a,b
Max. NOx molar fraction ppm
3.2
3.0
¯
Exhaust NOx molar fraction ppm
2.5
1.8a
2.3
1.6a
6.2a,b
aConcentration for dry exhaust gas related to 15% O2 concentration.
bSuction thermocouple probing 65 mm behind the combustor exit.
cMeasured on an area as indicated-in Fig. 9.
dTemperature decreased due to undeﬁned amount of cooling air, uncorrected thermocouple.
Fig. 7
OH molar fraction distribution on slice plane 2 „see Fig.
3„a…… for =2.16. Comparison-Simulation: GRI3.0 quasilaminar/
Experiment: LIF.
011503-4 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

being very close to the adiabatic ﬂame temperature of the global
mixture. Against this the experimental data are very inhomoge-
neous in the range of 1498–1983 K indicating turbulent effects.
The averaged value is 1719 K and is about 30 K lower than the
computational result. As already discussed above with respect to
the OH distribution the computational code is not able to correctly
predict this inhomogeneity. The consequence thereof in terms of
the NO formation will be discussed below.
Due to some heat loss across the combustor wall the computed
exhaust temperature is about 10 K lower than the maximum tem-
perature. This value does not match the experimental value which
is almost 475 K lower. However, it has to be noted that in the
experiment the exhaust ﬂow is diluted by an unspeciﬁed amount
of cooling air and that there is no radiative correction of the ther-
mocouple.
CO and NO at the Combustor Exit. The maximum value of the
CO molar fraction in the reaction zone is far beyond the equilib-
rium value of 2.8 ppm. We also ﬁnd that this value is essentially
higher with application of the PaSR model 9000 ppm than
with the quasilaminar approach 6600 ppm. This tendency is in
the opposite direction of the OH formation see Figs. 7 and 8
which will be investigated in more detail in the next section. How-
ever, in both combustion models CO is reduced in the remainder
of the combustor and approaches a value of 2.3 ppm related to
15% O2 at the combustor exit, which is slightly lower than the
equilibrium data. The respective experimental value is less than
1.0 ppm.
Concerning the NOx formation the computational result at the
combustor exit is 1.8 ppm for the quasilaminar model and
1.6 ppm for the PaSR model, respectively. The experimental value
is 6.2 ppm. For almost perfectly premixed combustion Leonard
and Stegmaier 10 found an NOx emission value of less than
2 ppm for a combustion temperature of 1750 K. They further
found that this is independent of pressure level, preheating tem-
perature, and residence time. Even though mixing on-the-ﬂy prior
to
combustion—as
it
is
characteristic
for
the
FLOX®
combustion—is efﬁcient, we conclude from the work of Leonard
and Stegmaier that in the present application the mixing is not yet
perfect. One indication of this is given by the measured tempera-
ture distribution displayed in Fig. 9 where hot spots of up to
2000 K may be found. The fact is that turbulent structures may
contain near-stoichiometric mixture locally resulting in tempera-
ture values essentially higher than the cell mean temperature. Ac-
cordingly the thermal NO formation in the experiment is higher
than the value computed from the mean cell temperature. The
reason is, as explained before, that ﬁrst the k- model in the
RANS approach has a strong smoothing behavior and second that
the PaSR model does not account for different composition in the
turbulent substructures of the computational cells. Both deﬁcien-
cies will be addressed in future works.
In contrast to the decrease of CO, the NO concentration slowly
increases towards the combustor exit. Consequently there must be
an optimal combustor length with an acceptable level of the CO
and NO emission values, as well. The process of CO and NO
formation will be considered in more detail in the next section.
Analysis of CO and NO Formation. As mentioned before,
OH plays an important role in the formation and consumption of
CO as well as NO. Therefore the production rate of OH is incipi-
ently compared with the heat release rate as shown on the upper
and lower half of Fig. 10, respectively.
Identifying the layer of maximum heat release with the ﬂame
front we observe that the OH production rate increases in the
streamwise direction on a cross section through the ﬂame front.
Roughly speaking, OH is consumed in front of the ﬂame front and
attains its absolute maximum immediately behind the ﬂame front.
The formation process of OH is far to complex to be displayed
here rather its inﬂuence on the pollutant formation is discussed
below.
CO Formation. From Fig. 11 we ﬁnd that the CO formation
inversely correlates with the OH formation. For a better under-
Fig. 8
OH molar fraction distribution on slice plane 2 „see Fig.
3„a…… for =2.16. Comparison-Simulation: GRI3.0+PaSR-model
„Cmix=0.002…/Experiment: LIF.
Fig. 9
Temperature distribution on slice plane 3 „see Fig. 3„a……
for =2.16-Comparison-Simulation: GRI3.0+PaSR/Experiment:
OH-LIF
Fig. 10
OH „upper half… production rate and heat release rate
„lower half… in the combustion zone on a longitudinal slice
through the burner nozzle and combustor axis
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011503-5
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

standing of this fact the GRI3.0 reaction mechanism is analyzed
with respect to the CO formation at the two characteristic points
of highest production and consumption, as indicated in Fig. 11.
The result is depicted in Fig. 12 where the relative amount of the
CO production is plotted over the individual equations of the
GRI3.0 reaction scheme. The red bars in the charts signify the
elementary reactions that produce CO primarily from HCO, viz.,
HCO+H2O⇔CO+H+H2O,
HCO+O2⇔CO+HO2,
and
HCO⇔CO+H. In the blue colored reactions, CO is consumed.
We observe that at both analysis points the same elementary re-
actions are involved. While the CO formation process is com-
prised of several reactions with several intermediate species in-
volved see legend in Fig. 11, the CO consumption is primarily
described by a single one reaction, viz., CO+OH⇔CO2+H.
At the analysis point 2 where OH is at its maximum this reac-
tion is absolutely predominant over the formation reactions result-
ing in an almost complete consumption of CO. Against this the
CO consumption at the analysis point 1 is essentially diminished
for lack of OH radicals. Also the formation reactions are stronger
leading to a net production and also to an absolute maximum of
CO of about 9000 ppm at this point see Fig. 1.
NO Formation. In analogy to CO the distribution of the NO
formation is compared with the OH formation in Fig. 13. How-
ever, in contrast to CO the NO formation directly correlates with
the OH formation. Clearly, the production of NO begins with the
advent of the OH formation.
Here we analyze the NO formation at the three points indicated
in Fig. 13 with the results for the ﬁrst and second analysis point
shown in Fig. 14. The ﬁrst analysis point is located in front of the
reaction zone where we ﬁnd a weak consumption of NO. The
respective analysis of the reaction mechanism shown in Fig. 14
reveals that this primarily results from two competing reactions
describing an exchange between NO and NO2. Of course, this is
not really a reduction of the pollutant emission since NO2 is also
a harmful chemical. Additionally there is also a minor amount of
NO consumption attributed to Fenimore reactions that are associ-
ated with the CH species see Fig. 14.
The second analysis point is located at the maximum of the NO
formation. The respective analysis in Fig. 14 reveals that com-
pared to the ﬁrst analysis point a lot more reactions are involved.
In particular, the number of Fenimore reactions is numerous.
These are the blue colored reactions in Fig. 14 and are those
reactions that are associated with the CH species see legend of
Fig. 14. In addition we also ﬁnd a contribution of the three Zel-
dovich reactions red and two reactions describing the NO for-
mation from N2O green. The analysis at the third point is similar
to that at the second point and is not plotted here.
Recapitulating, the relative amount attributed to the different
NO formation mechanisms at the three analysis points and inte-
grated over the whole computational domain is shown in Table 3.
In the reaction zone point 2 the amount of Fenimore-NO is
almost 70% and the amount of NO produced from the Zeldovich,
N2O and NO2 reactions is approximately in equal measure of
Fig. 11
OH „upper half… and CO „lower half… production rate in
the combustion zone on a longitudinal slice through the burner
nozzle and combustor axis. 1, 2 analysis points.
Fig. 12
Relative amount of CO production plotted over the el-
ementary reactions of the GRI3.0 mechanism at analysis point
1 „left… and analysis point 2 „right…
Fig. 13
OH „upper half… and NO „lower half… production rate in
the combustion zone on a longitudinal slice through burner
nozzle and combustor axis. 1, 2, 3 analysis points.
Fig. 14
Relative amount of NO production plotted over the el-
ementary reactions of the GRI3.0 mechanism at analysis point
1 and 2. Red: Zeldovich, Green: N2O, Black: NO2, Blue:
Fenimore.
011503-6 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

about 10%. Beyond the reaction zone at analysis point 3 the
Fenimore-NO decreases and simultaneously the relative impor-
tance of Zeldovich- and N2O–NO is increased. NO and NO2 are
almost counterbalanced in the respective reactions. The percent-
age values at point 3 seem to be representative for the remainder
of the combustion chamber. This is evident from the comparison
of the global integrated values with the results of point 3. As
mentioned above Zeldovich- or thermal NO becomes dominant in
the case of high temperatures. Obviously the FLOX®-combustion
is characterized by a temperature level where NO produced from
the Zeldovich-, Fenimore-, and N2O-mechanisms is of the same
order of magnitude.
Conclusions
In the present paper results of the numerical simulation of the
FLOX®-combustion at 20 bar and =2.16 were presented and
validated using experimental data from the DLR test facility. For
this purpose the highly optimized DLR-combustion code IGNIS
was presented and used throughout the computations in a coupled
unsteady mode with the commercial code Fluent. The computa-
tional results are in good agreement with the experimental data.
In the reaction zone the turbulent Damköhler number is in the
range of unity indicating equal importance of the ﬁnite rate chem-
istry and the turbulence/chemistry interaction model. In this re-
gard we successfully applied the GRI3.0 reaction mechanism in
combination with the PaSR model. With respect to the NO forma-
tion we found that the contribution from the three NO formation
mechanisms: Zeldovich, Fenimore, and N2O is approximately of
equal measure. However, in the case of incomplete mixing the
PaSR model has to be improved with respect to the inhomoge-
neous composition in the turbulent substructures within the com-
putational cells. Furthermore it was found, that the turbulent mix-
ing process between the high-velocity fuel/air jet and the
recirculating hot ﬂue gases is deﬁciently described by the k-e
turbulence model leaving some potential for further improvement.
Acknowledgment
This work presented was ﬁnancially supported in part by the
European Community within the Project New Combustion Sys-
tems for Gas Turbines NGT under Contract No. ENK5-CT-
2001-00564.
Nomenclature
air  stoichiometric coefﬁcients of educt species in re-
action r
bir  stoichiometric coefﬁcients of product species in
reaction r
ci  molar concentration of species i
ci
r  molar concentration of species i in reaction r
ci  mean concentration of species i in the cell
Cmix  PaSR model constant
DaT  turbulent Damköhler number
DaT
r  turbulent Damköhler number deﬁned for reaction
r
Fi
r  reaction rate of species i in reaction r
k  turbulent kinetic energy
kfr  Arrhenius coefﬁcients for forward reactions
kbr  Arrhenius coefﬁcients for backward reactions
Q  the internal energy
ReT  turbulent Reynolds number
Greek
  dissipation rate of k
hi
0  heat of formation of species i at absolute zero
  reactive volume fraction of the computational cell
  kinematic viscosity
  inﬁnitesimal time step
chem
r
 characteristic chemistry time of reaction r
chem  integral characteristic chemistry time
mix  integral characteristic turbulent mixing time
K  Kolmogorov time scale
T  Taylor time scale
Subscripts
i  species counter
r  elementary reaction counter
K  indicates reference species
Superscripts
r  elementary reaction counter
N  indicates quantity in nonreacting volume fraction
of the cell also indicates preceding time level
R  indicates quantity in the reacting volume fraction
of the cell
Appendix A: Reference Species Technique
Each combustion process is described by the solution of a sys-
tem of elementary chemical reactions of the form
dci
dt =
r
dci
r
dt =
r
Fi
rcj
A1
where ci is the molar concentration of species i and Fi
r is the rth
reaction rate deﬁned as
Fi
rcj = bir −air	fr −	br
A2
with
	fr ª kfr
j
cj
ajr
and 	br ª kbr
j
cj
bjr
A3
.
In Eqs. A2 and A3, air and bir are the stoichiometric coef-
ﬁcients and kfr and bfr are the Arrhenius-type reaction coefﬁcients
for forward and backward reactions, respectively. Equation A1
is a strongly nonlinear system of equations whose fully implicit
solution, applying the Newton linearization is very tedious. In
contrast, although the explicit solution is very simple it is time
step dependent and frequently leads to an unphysical composition
negative species densities.
In the IGNIS code, a semi-implicit solution procedure accord-
ing to the so-called “reference species technique” 3 is applied,
which displays a very fast and stable solution behavior. The basic
idea is to linearize Eq. A1 with respect to the species K which
for each reaction r is in greatest danger of being driven negative.
This species is deﬁned to be the reference species cK
r following
from the condition
cK
r =	ci
r
dci
r
dt
ci
r = minimum i
A4
Performing Taylor series expansion of Fi
r around Fi
rN the
upper index N denotes the preceding time level and neglecting all
Table 3
Relative amount of the NO formation mechanisms at
the three analysis points indicated in Fig. 13 and Integrated
over all computational cells „global…
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Global
Zeldovich
0.0%
7.8%
30.5%
40.7%
Fenimore prompt
−9.8%
67.3%
33.5%
26.6%
N2O
0.1%
10.1%
34.2%
31.7%
NO2
−90.1%
14.8%
−1.8%
−1.0%
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011503-7
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

derivatives in the Jacobian matrix except those with respect to the
reference species cK
r leads to the following semi-implicit form of
Eq. A1
dci
dt =
r
dci
r
dt 
r
bir −air
˙ r
*
A5
with

˙ r
* = 	fr
N −	br
N
1 +

chem
r
A6
where chem
r
is the characteristic chemistry time for each elemen-
tary reaction, viz.,
chem
r
ª
cK
rN
aKr −bKraKr	fr
N −bKr	br
N
A7
and  is an inﬁnitesimal time step used to approximate the tem-
poral derivative of the reference species.
In analogy to Eq. A5 the source term in the internal energy
equation reads
dQ
dt = −
r 
i
bir −airhi
0
˙ r
*
A8
where Q is the internal energy and hi
0 is the heat of formation of
species i at absolute zero.
In order to specify an expression for a characteristic chemistry
time chem representative for all elementary reactions in a compu-
tational cell we found it reasonable to derive this from Eq. A8 as
a heat release weighted average of the form
chem =

r
Qr
chem
r
 + chem
r

r
Qr
1
 + chem
r
A9
with
Qr ª
i
bir −airhi
0	fr
N −	br
N
A10
Appendix B: Partially Stirred Reactor Model (PaSR)
This model is based upon the fundamental assumption that
within a computational cell chemical reaction may occur only in
the volume fraction  of the cell where reactants are mixed on a
molecular level. The mean concentration ci of each involved spe-
cies in the considered cell is then given by the simple linear rela-
tion
ci = 1 −ci
N + ci
R;
  0,1
B1
Here the upper indices R and N denote the reactive and nonre-
active part of the cell, respectively. Equation B1 may be inter-
preted as a temporal process where ci
N is the initial concentration
and ci is the mean concentration after the lapse of an inﬁnitesimal
time .
In a turbulent ﬂow, the reactive composition is generated by
turbulent dispersion and molecular diffusion. The turbulent disper-
sion is a very complex process proceeding simultaneously on all
turbulent length scales with an inherent spectrum of characteristic
mixing times.
In the present model the temporal decay of turbulent eddies up
to the Kolmogorov-scale is described by a single integral mixing
time mix which will be explained later. It is evident that  is
proportional to  molecular diffusion and also proportional to
1−mix turbulent dispersion. Assuming equal proportionality Eq.
B1 may be written in the form
ci −ci
N

= ci
R −ci
mix
 Fi
R
B2
Equation B2 is graphically displayed in Fig. 15 where it is
further assumed that the slope of the curve is equal to the reaction
rate Fi
R in the reactive part  of the cell. In Fig. 15 we distinguish
two parallel processes I and II:
I During reaction time tchem=+mix the initial molar con-
centration in the reactive fraction  changes from ci
N to ci
R;
II The reactive fraction is mixed by turbulence with the non-
reactive fraction resulting in the averaged concentration ci.
Equation B2 written for the reference species K of reaction r
and Taylor-series expansion of FK
r R around FK
r  leads to the
implicit form
cK
r  −cK
r N

= rFK
r 
B3
with
r ª
1
1 + DaT
r
and DaT
r ª mix
chem
r
B4
In Eq. B4 a turbulent Damköhler number DaT
r for reaction r was
introduced as the ratio of a characteristic turbulent mixing time
related to a characteristic chemistry time.
Semi-implicit formulation of Eq. B3 using the reference spe-
cies technique and summing up over all elementary reaction ﬁ-
nally yields
dci
dt  ci −ci
N

=
r
rbir −air
˙ r
*
B5
with

˙ r
* = 	fr
N −	br
N
1 + r

chem
r
B6
Comparing Eqs. B5 and B6 with Eqs. A5 and A6 reveals
that the turbulence/chemistry interaction is accounted for through
the term r, which depends on the turbulent Damköhler number as
speciﬁed in Eq. B4. chem
r
is given by Eq. A7 and with deﬁni-
tion of the Kolmogorov time scale K/, the Taylor time
scale Tk/, and the turbulent Reynolds number ReTªk2/v
=T/K2 the following expressions for mix are found in the lit-
erature.
According to the model of Byggstøyl and Magnussen 11
Fig. 15
Graphical representation of Eq. „12…
011503-8 / Vol. 130, JANUARY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

mix =
1
23.6
k2
v
1/4k
 =
1
23.6ReT1/4T
B7
mix increases with increasing turbulent Reynolds number which
results in the unphysical fact that the amount of the reactive vol-
ume fraction  decreases.
An alternative approach is given by Karlsson and Chomiak 12
as the geometrical mean of the Kolmogorov and the Taylor time
scales, viz.,
mix = CmixTK = CmixReT−1/4T
B8
Kjäldman 12 reported that best results were obtained by simply
using the Taylor time scale
mix = CmixT
B9
Cmix is a model constant which lies in the range of Cmix=0.001
−0.3 depending on the ﬂow considered.
For a better interpretation of the computational results it is use-
ful to deﬁne global expressions for the ﬁne structure volume frac-
tion  and the turbulent Damköhler number representative for all
reactions in each computational cell. Using Eq. A9 we may de-
ﬁne analogously to Eq. B4,
DaT ª mix
chem
B10
and
 ª
1
1 + DaT
or DaT ª 1 −

B11
Finally, we recognize from Eq. B11 that within the PaSR-
model the Damköhler number may be interpreted as the ratio of
the nonreacting, coarse-structured volume fraction related to the
reacting, ﬁne-structured volume fraction of each computational
cell.
References
1 Wünning, J. A., Patent EP 0463218.
2 Vaz, D. C., Borges, A. R. J., van Buijtenen, J. P., and Spliethoff, H., 2004, “On
the Stability Range of a Cylindrical Combustor in the Flameless Oxidation
Regime,” GT2004–53790, Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo 2004, June
14–17, Vienna, Austria.
3 Amsden, A. A., O’Rourke, P. J., and Butler, T. D., 1989, KIVA-II: A computer
Program for Chemically Reactive Flows with Sprays. LA-11560-MS.
4 Smith, G. P., Golden, D. M., Frenklach, M., Moriarty, N. W., Eiteneer, B.,
Goldenberg, M., Bowman, C. T., Hanson, R. K., Song, S., Gardiner, W. C. Jr.,
Lissianski, V. V., and Qin, Z., 1999, “GRI3.0 mechanism version 3.07/30/99,”
see http://www.me.berkley.edu/gri_mech.
5 Nordin, P. A. N., 1995, “Complex Chemistry Modelling of Diesel Sprays,”
Ph.D. thesis, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg.
6 Karlsson, J. A. J., 1995, “Modelling Auto-Ignition, Flame Propagation and
Combustion in Non-Stationary Turbulent Sprays,” Ph.D. thesis, Chalmers Uni-
versity of Technology, Göteborg.
7 Warnatz, J., Maas, U., and Dibble, R. W., 1997, Verbrennung, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin Heidelberg, 2. Auﬂage.
8 Lückerath, R., Schütz, H., Noll, B., and Aigner, M., 2005, “Experimental
Investigations of FLOX®-Combustion at High Pressure,” Flameless Combus-
tion Workshop, Lund, Sweden, June 19–21.
9 Meier, U. E., Wolff-Gaßmann, D., and Stricker, W., 2000, “LIF Imaging and
2D Temperature Mapping in a Model Combustor at Elevated Pressure,”
Aerosp. Sci. Technol., 4, pp. 403–414.
10 Leonard, G., and Stegmaier, J., 1993, “Development of an Aeroderivative Gas
Turbine Dry Low Emission Combustion System,” ASME Paper No. 93-GT-
288.
11 Byggstøyl, S., and Magnussen, B. F., 1985, “A Model for Flame Extinction in
Turbulent Flow,” 4th Symposium on Turbulent Shear Flows, pp. 381–395.
12 Karlsson, J. A. J., and Chomiak, J., 1995, “Physical and Chemical Effects in
Diesel Spray Ignition,” 21st Congress of CIMAC, Interlaken Switzerland, May
15–18.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2008, Vol. 130 / 011503-9
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
