
--- Page 1 ---

MODELING NATURAL GAS CQMBUStldN DYNAMICS
By David Wagman
A
n ongoing challenge for natural gas turtine mantrfacttfrers is to
simtiitaneously achieve low NO, emissions and flame stability. The
balancing act depends on ainning a lean fuel mixture during combustion.
Too rich a mi)fture and the unit risks exceeding air quality compliance
standards. Too lean a mixture and the turbine can suffer loss of ignition,
"Gas turtjines run near tfie edge of lean blowoff vi/here the flame is
always on the hairy edge," said Bernie Rosenthai, CEO of Reaction Design.
The Califomia-based company, founded in 1997 by ^o MIT professors,
markets sofhA^are that helps turbine designers tjnderstand ttie chemical
reactions that occur when natural gas is bumed in a combustion turbine.
Some 350 commercial customers are currently using Reaction Design's
Chemkin product, whose original use was to measure rocket engine
combustion chemistry.
Chemkin is based in part on a fuel chemistry database, which consists
of fundamental chemical descriptions. By altering variables such as
catalysts, temperature and pressure, the model can predict not only what
types of emissions are formed when the natural gas bums, but where in
the combustion process emissions will emerge and when.
Natural gas is a fairly basic molecule, Rosenthai said, and the prediction
can be fairly straightforward. The models grow in complexity, however, as
synthetic and alternative natural gas sources are bumed.
"As you add combinations of fuels, ttie effect becomes less well
understood," he said. Mixing natural gas witli syngas can create effects
not seen before. Those unseen effects drive an interest to understand
what is happening during combustion.
Rosenthai said he sees Chemkin as a tool to fill a knowledge gap that
exists for turbine designers and engineers,
"One potential game-changing innovation is ttie idea that you can map your
geometry and CFD (computational fluid dynamics) results to an equivalent
reactor network," he said. Chemists use different reactor models as a way to
understand what is happening in the combustion chamber. The models allow
for detailed snapshots of mixing, flame, recirculation and post-flame segments
within the chamber.
"You can start to see when emissions are created and flame stability with
regard to regions where certain chemical reactions take place," he said.
The chemical analysis has potential application in pulverized coal
combustion boilers as well as in gas turbines. In the case of coal, unbumed
hydrocarbons and particulates are primary issues. With carbon regulation seen
as almost inevitable, the ability to predict how much carbon dioxide will be
produced through combustion is important.
Rosenthai said many basic fuels are already welt understood, btrt only to
the extent that we know how natural gas is being bumed. "There's a mytfi
that we really understand what's going on at the chemical level" in gas turbine
combustors. A great deal of empirical understanding exists virfien it comes to
combustion chemistry, but relatively little scientifically-based knowledge is
available. With new fuels (such as syngas and landfill gas) experimental data
can be gathered on an ever-widening universe of fuel options, but typically at
the expense of time and money.
"There is a real interest on ttie part of turbine manufecturers to understand
those dynamics with computer modeling," Rosenthai said. Software such as
that developed and marketed by Reaction Design may help accelerate the
process of understanding the implications of combusting fuels in turbines.
Capstone MicroTurbine"
Your Green and Clean Building Energy Solution
Provides Building Heating, Cooling
or Hot Water
• Provides Continuous Electric Power
With or Without the Electric Utility
• High Efficiency System lowers
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
• Air Beorinqs Eiiminate Liquid Lubricants
& Disposal of Hazordous Moterials
• Extremely Low NOx Emissions
• Qualifies for LEED Points for LEED
Certification
Reduces Your Energy Costs and
Increoses Power Security
Thousands of Units Shipped Worldwide
Millions of Documented Runtime
Operating Hours
Operates Unottended and Lowers
Maintenance Costs
Backed by Capstone Foctory Service
Meets Local Building Codes, Utility
Interconnection & Air-Permitting
Requirements
Power When and Where ^'ou Need it. Clean and Simple.
Call Now To Learn How Capstone MicroTurbines™ Can Help You
866.422.7786 
• www.microturbine.com
For info, http://powereng.hotims.com RS# 29
^Capstone


--- Page 2 ---

