
--- Page 1 ---

Abdellatif M. Sadiq
Thermoﬂuids Group, Department of Mechanical
and Industrial Engineering
College of Engineering, Qatar University,
P.O. Box 2713,
Doha, Qatar
e-mail: as1004958@student.qu.edu.qa
Ahmad K. Sleiti1
Thermoﬂuids Group, Department of Mechanical
and Industrial Engineering,
College of Engineering, Qatar University,
P.O. Box 2713,
Doha, Qatar
e-mail: asleiti@qu.edu.qa
Samer F. Ahmed
Thermoﬂuids Group, Mechanical and Industrial
Engineering Department,
College of Engineering, Qatar University,
P.O. Box 2713,
Doha, Qatar
e-mail: sahmed@qu.edu.qa
Turbulent Flames in Enclosed
Combustion Chambers:
Characteristics and
Visualization—A Review
Remarkable progress has been achieved in measuring the ﬂame propagation rate accu-
rately under laminar conditions, which can be used to predict turbulent ﬂame propagation
rates using some correlations ﬁtted to experimental data. However, such propagation rates,
unlike the laminar case, cannot be unambiguously determined. Nevertheless, the advance-
ment of laser imaging techniques has led to several deﬁnitions of turbulent burning rates
(Roshan et al., 2010, “Simulation of Global Warming Effect on Outdoor Thermal
Comfort Conditions,” Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 7(3), pp. 571–580). Recently, a
uniﬁed scaling factor has been successfully demonstrated using data gathered from
several fan-stirred bombs. Such results are promising in compiling a comprehensive data-
base of turbulent propagation rates for potential and common fuels of interest to internal
combustion engines (ICEs) and gas turbines alike. The strict worldwide legislation to
reduce emissions has forced many industries to look into alternative fuels with less emis-
sions. One such alternative fuel that has gained much interest recently is the gas-to-
liquid (GTL) fuel, which is being used in blended forms in several combustion applications.
However, detailed combustion characteristic investigations are required before using this
new alternative fuel widely in engines (Business, 2018, “Qatar’s Exporters Directory
2018”). In this study, the signiﬁcant issues associated with the use of fan-stirred bombs
are investigated. First, the effect of varying fan speed and geometry is reviewed, and
then, the measurement techniques that are commonly used to track ﬂame propagation
are discussed. This is followed by the study of the effect of using different types of fuels
on combustion characteristics. Furthermore, the use of diesel and gasoline optical
engine setups as advanced ﬂame visualization tools have been reviewed extensively.
[DOI: 10.1115/1.4046460]
Keywords: air emissions from fossil fuel combustion, fuel combustion, natural gas
technology
1
Introduction
Remarkable progress has been achieved in measuring the ﬂame
propagation rate accurately under laminar conditions for several
fuels and fuel blends including gas-to-liquid (GTL) fuel [1]. The
laminar ﬂame speed is one of the combustible mixture properties
that depends entirely on the system temperature, pressure, and
equivalence ratio Ф (both Ф and ϕ symbols are used in literature).
The measured laminar ﬂame speeds (corrected for ﬂame-stretch and
geometry-induced effects) can be used in the validation of chemical
kinetic mechanisms. Besides, laminar ﬂame speeds can be used to
predict turbulent ﬂame propagation rates using some correlations
that are almost ﬁtted to a particular experimental database.
However, such propagation rates, unlike the laminar case, cannot
be unambiguously determined. In spark-ignited engines, ﬂame
speed inﬂuences knocking events and plays an essential role in
determining their performance and emission rates. Laminar
burning velocity is the governing physicochemical parameter for
the deﬂagration wave, indicating the diffusivity, reactivity, and exo-
thermicity for a combustible mixture. Thus, the study of such
parameter is fundamental to validate relevant kinetic mechanisms,
which characterizes the combustion of future fuels. Furthermore,
the study of both laminar and turbulent ﬂame speeds is essential
in modeling and designing efﬁcient engines, in addition to other
predictive computational modeling tools [1–5].
The advancement of laser imaging techniques has led to several
deﬁnitions of turbulent burning rates [6]. Recently, a uniﬁed scaling
factor has been successfully demonstrated using data gathered from
several fan-stirred bombs. In addition, a self-similar scaling for
spherically expanding ﬂames could be effectively derived [7,8].
Such results are promising in compiling a comprehensive database
of turbulent propagation rates for potential and common fuels of
interest to internal combustion engines (ICEs) and gas turbines
alike. Fan-stirred bombs are commonly used to study premixed tur-
bulent ﬂame geometry. These vessels allow the ﬂame propagation
rates to be measured conveniently under turbulent conditions,
where a wide range of intensity levels u′ can be obtained, and
they are well controlled. This feature is exceptionally advantageous
in comparison with a burner-type setup, as the latter requires an
increase in the level of turbulence intensity by an additional increase
in the axial ﬂowrate. When the ﬂowrate is high, the use of stabiliz-
ing mechanisms such as recirculation zones, pilot ﬂame, or the bluff
body becomes necessary to prevent ﬂashback. Nevertheless, the
design of fan-stirred vessels is cost-effective and does not allow
laser-based planar measurements to be used ﬂexibly [6].
In the past 20 years, there has been a great deal of research and
effort on minimizing environmental damages due to global
warming. Human activities like the excessive use of fossil fuels
can promote global warming and accelerate climate change destruc-
tively, and there is a need to control it [9]. The strict legislations in
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the Advanced Energy Systems Division of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENERGY RESOURCES TECHNOLOGY. Manuscript received December 4,
2019; ﬁnal manuscript received January 28, 2020; published online February 25,
2020. Assoc. Editor: Hameed Metghalchi.
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
AUGUST 2020, Vol. 142 / 080801-1
Copyright © 2020 by ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 2 ---

the European Union and in the USA to reduce emissions have
forced many industries to look into alternative fuels with less emis-
sion production. One such alternative fuel that has gained much
interest recently is the GTL fuel.
Currently, Qatar is the largest producer and exporter of GTL
products, with a production rate of 140,000 barrels per day of high-
quality GTL products [10]. The GTL fuels have not replaced con-
ventional fuels yet entirely, but they are in use in blended forms
in several combustion applications, mainly ICEs. This puts a
responsibility on researchers to ﬁnd out the optimum conditions
and characteristics of GTL fuel, and to examine its suitability for
use in ICEs. GTL fuel can provide a solution for the high emissions
level of combustion engines. However, detailed combustion charac-
teristic investigations are required only before using this new alter-
native fuel widely in engines.
In this literature review study, the signiﬁcant issues associated
with the use of fan-stirred bombs for turbulent ﬂame speed measure-
ments and characterization are reviewed and discussed. First, the
effect of varying fan speed and geometry is looked at in detail.
After that, the measurement techniques that are commonly used
to track the ﬂame propagation are discussed. This is followed by
the study of the effect of using different types of fuels on combus-
tion characteristics. Furthermore, this literature review aims to
investigate in detail the use of diesel/gasoline optical engine setup
as an advanced ﬂame visualization tool.
2
Combustion Bomb
The use of fan-stirred bombs is one of the measurement tech-
niques for investigating premixed turbulent ﬂame geometry.
These vessels allow the ﬂame propagation rates to be measured con-
veniently under turbulent conditions, where a wide range of inten-
sity levels u′ can be obtained, and they are well controlled. In this
literature review, the signiﬁcant issues associated with the use of
fan-stirred bombs are discussed as follows. First, the effect of
varying fan speed and geometry is reviewed and discussed. After
that, the measurement techniques that are commonly used to track
the ﬂame propagation are discussed. This is followed by the
study of the effect of using different types of fuels on combustion
characteristics.
The ﬁrst use of fan-stirred vessels for the measurement of turbu-
lent ﬂame speed ST (in literature, both ST and St symbols are used
for turbulent ﬂame speed) is credited to Semenov [11]. Later,
many researchers have considered the fan-stirred vessels to conduct
their experiments. In the spherical combustion vessel, the ﬂame ini-
tiates at the center of the vessel, and it propagates radially outward
in all directions with uniform turbulence. Laser tomography, high-
speed imaging cameras, and pressure trace measurements are three
of the most commonly employed methods to diagnose the ﬂame
propagation rate [12]. With the use of this conﬁguration, several
advantages can be offered in comparison with the burner type,
where the intensity level has to be achieved with a high mean veloc-
ity, in addition to some difﬁculties in stabilizing high laminar ﬂame
speeds SL at the top of the burner surface [13]. The use of fan-stirred
vessels overcomes all of these disadvantages, which are correlated
with the system as it allows for the measurement of ﬂame speeds in
near homogeneous and isotropic turbulence (HIT) conditions with
the use of high values of u′. On the other hand, the spherical com-
bustion chamber suffers from some deﬁciencies as it is extremely
challenging to develop them, and it is prohibitive to build them
besides being very expensive. Furthermore, the problem of time-
varying ﬂame propagation is accompanied by the absence of a well-
deﬁned surface, which can be treated as a reference for the mea-
sured burning velocity [14]. Nevertheless, some previous studies
claimed that these difﬁculties could be counteracted by making
some appropriate assumptions [15,16]. For premixed turbulent
combustion, the two major parameters used to characterize such
ﬂow ﬁelds are the integral length scale LT and the turbulence inten-
sity u′. The integral length scale is deﬁned as the largest eddy that
exists within the ﬂow, while the turbulence intensity is used to char-
acterize the level of turbulence. In this section, the effect of varying
the fan speed and geometry is discussed ﬁrst. After that, the discus-
sion is dedicated to the effect of using different turbulent ﬂame
speed measurement techniques to track the ﬂame propagation.
Finally, the effect of varying the fuel type on the combustion char-
acteristics is handled in the last subsection.
2.1
Fan Speed and Geometry. This subsection aims to
review and study the literature on the effect of varying the fan
speed on maintaining HIT condition and turbulent ﬂame speed
ST. In addition, the effect of varying the fan geometry such as the
pitch angle and the number of blades is studied as well.
2.1.1
Fan Speed. There is a clear contribution to the variation
of turbulence intensity u′ on the turbulence ﬂame speed ST. In
the beginning, ST starts to increase with u′ until it reaches a
maximum level; after that, it drops down until the ﬂame quenching
occurs. When the turbulence intensity level u′ is lower than the
laminar ﬂame speed SL (u′ < SL), the ﬂame wrinkling that results
from turbulence is dominated by ﬂame propagation, and this
regime is not considered relevant to any industrial system. On the
other hand, at higher turbulent intensity levels (u′ > SL), there is a
signiﬁcant increment in the ﬂame speed due to the enhanced mass
and heat transfer rates that result in the turbulent diffusion. Most
of the apparatus, which were used to study the turbulent ﬂame
speed in the combustion vessels, emphasize that there is a
uniform distribution of velocity ﬁelds in the center of the vessel.
However, two studies have revoked these two observations
[17,18] and indicated that there is a non-linear distribution of veloc-
ity ﬁelds exists in the spherical combustion bomb. The observation
of these anomalies can be referred to some speciﬁcities of the mea-
surement setup; nonetheless, it is highly important to maintain HIT
conditions within the spherical combustion vessel having a radius
that is equal to the maximum size of the ﬂame.
Birouk et al. [19] have studied the effect of fan speed variation on
turbulence intensity and the integral length scale under HIT condi-
tions. They have observed a gradual increase in u′ when increasing
the fan speed and turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) that ranges
between 0.1 and 1.45 m2/s2. The instantaneous velocity probability
density function (PDF) had a zero skewness (a measure of the sym-
metry of the probability distribution for a random variable about its
mean), and a kurtosis (a measure of whether the data are light-tailed
or heavy-tailed with respect to a normal distribution) of value three
at all fan speeds, which further conﬁrm that HIT conditions have
been successfully achieved inside the chamber. In addition, the isot-
ropy and homogeneity ratios have been computed and found to be
within ±5% of the ideal value required to maintain a perfect HIT
condition. The integral length scale could be obtained by integrating
the lateral spatial correlation coefﬁcient curve (was found to be
8.6 mm) and, unlike the turbulence intensity, LT was observed to
be constant at all fan speeds. Hwangand Eaton [20] have replaced
the fans by eight pulsed-jet actuation system in a similar Plexiglas
chamber and under HIT conditions. These fans were controlled at
a precise rate to generate the required isotropy and homogeneity.
A spatial map inside an area of 1600 mm2 in the middle of the
chamber was generated. It was found that the isotropy ratio varies
between 0.88 and 1.24, and the homogeneity ratio had a ﬂuctuation
of ±10% of their spatially averaged value. The turbulent kinetic
energy dissipation rate has been estimated using a large eddy simu-
lation (LES) technique, and thus, other turbulence parameters such
as Kolmogorov, Euler, and Taylor scales could be evaluated [21]. A
considerable variation in the previous turbulence statistics was
observed due to errors in evaluating the velocity derivatives. In
addition, it was observed that the integral length scale, however,
remains the same and spatially distributed in the space at all fan
speeds.
2.1.2
Fan Geometry. Kwon et al. [22] varied the impeller’s
pitch angle from 45 deg (primarily used by Fansler and Groff
080801-2 / Vol. 142, AUGUST 2020
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 3 ---

[23]) to 30 deg and observed a decrement of 50% in LT noting that
the turbulence intensity level u′ was maintained the same in the two
cases. It was concluded that the impeller geometry affects the size of
the turbulent eddies, therefore inﬂuencing the scale of LT; however,
HIT conditions have not been appropriately met due to misalign-
ment in the impellers. In another later study [15], the misalignment
of the impeller inside the combustion vessel has been considered
and ﬁxed; therefore, the mean ﬂow has reduced from about
0.3–0.6u′ to around 0.1u′, which is almost a negligible mean
ﬂow. Leisenheimer and Leukel [17] used two vessels, which have
different sizes (ɸ 50 cm and ɸ 130 cm, where ɸ is the diameter
of the vessel) to vary LT, and concluded that LT depends mainly
on the dimensions of the vessel rather than on the geometry of
the impeller. Shy et al. [24] have considered the use of a perforated
plate located in front of the impellers to eliminate any large vorticity
formation in the ﬂow and thus promote a rapid mixing. Liu [25] has
studied the effect of such plates on the downstream turbulent ﬁeld
ﬂow that takes place inside a wind tunnel. He has concluded that
both LT and u′ can be varied individually by changing the oriﬁce
size in addition to the solidity ratio (a ratio between the area frac-
tions of the plate’s solid portions). In another study [26], four
high-speed central-symmetric fans were installed inside a spherical
combustion bomb, and three different fan designs that have radial
shape instead of an axial one have been used in order to ﬁnd the
optimum impeller design to generate isotropic and homogeneous
turbulence inside the combustion bomb. It was noticed that there
is no remarkable variation in the intensity level when using different
impeller designs, and the velocity probability density function for
the three models was found to follow a Gaussian proﬁle. The homo-
geneity of the ﬂow ﬁeld was found to be slightly dependent on the
geometry of the impeller. However, the isotropy was observed to be
sensitive to the geometry of the fan. As the number of blades
increases (six blades instead of four), there is a higher deviation
observed from the isotropic turbulence. As was discussed by
Kwon et al. [22], the variation in blade pitch angle affects the inte-
gral length scale. However, this variation in LT can occur while
maintaining the near HIT conditions within the combustion vessel.
2.2
Measurement Techniques. In this subsection, the various
techniques employed for turbulent ﬂame speed measurements are
discussed.
2.2.1
Schlieren Imaging. Schlieren imaging is one of the most
common techniques used for laminar ﬂame speed measurement and
can be used to conduct turbulent combustion studies. In the laminar
case, the ﬂame starts to propagate outwardly after ignition in the
radial direction. Consequently, the ﬂame can be assumed to propa-
gate in one direction and the Schlieren techniques despite seen as an
integrated line-of-sight measurement method; it can be applied for
conﬁguration of such geometry. In the turbulent case, ﬂame wrin-
kling results in a high anisotropy even in a well-controlled HIT
environment, such as in the spherical combustion chamber. Thus,
the propagation speed in the axial (out-of-plane) and the radial
(in-plane) directions is not the same for any planar kernel. Neverthe-
less, it was demonstrated by Bradley et al. [14] that based on the
kernel area found inside the Schlieren silhouette, the average
radius corresponds to a reaction progress variable 〈c〉≈0.1 (〈c〉is
an isotherm that indicates for the percentage of combustion comple-
tion determined at the surface). Different conﬁgurations of Schlie-
ren setup can be used depending on various factors such as the
available space, the experimental setup, and the objective behind
the imaging technique. However, most of the past researches have
considered the use of Z-type Schlieren setup [26–28]. This setup
consists typically of two aluminized mirrors of spherical shape, a
high-speed camera, a sharp blade knife-edge, and a single light-
emitting diode (LED) spotlight. Typically, in this conﬁguration,
the LED light beam is emitted from the light source and is directed
into the ﬁrst mirror that is located in the same line of the LED
source. After that, the reﬂected beam passes through the spherical
chamber and continues toward the second spherical mirror where
the light converges at the second mirror focal point until it hits
the knife-edge where the dark background light white is cut off,
and the rest of the light continues traveling to the high-speed
camera. Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram for the Schlieren
setup.
2.2.2
Pressure Trace. The second most widely used diagnostic
technique for the measurement of ﬂame speed is the use of dynamic
pressure trace of high frequency [28]. This technique is inexpensive
and does not need any optical ports to access the ﬂame propagation.
Inside the constant-volume vessel, the pressure keeps constant for
a certain period, and then isentropic compression occurs for the
unburnt gases before the ﬂame initiates, which causes a pressure
rise. However, the signiﬁcant pressure rise is not reached until the
ﬂame propagates to a large diameter. Although this setup has its
advantages, some deﬁciencies are associated with its use [14].
First, it is challenging to keep the spherical shape at large ﬂame
radii due to the conﬁnement effects of the chamber. Second, the uni-
formity of turbulent conditions can no longer be maintained at large
radii (close to the fans). Third, the isentropic compression of the
unburned gas results in a large increment in the temperature and
pressure; thus, ﬂame speeds are not captured at the initial unburned
premixed conditions. Moreover, ﬂame visualization is not available
when using this technique, which makes it an unattractive measure-
ment technique. This technique was employed by Samim [1] for the
measurement of GTL laminar ﬂame speeds in a cylindrical combus-
tion bomb, which has been designed at Qatar University. Although
the vessel was designed for high-speed imaging through the quartz
glass, only a normal video camera that captures 60 frames per
second was used. The pressure data collected from the pressure
sensor were used primarily to measure the ﬂame speed using
some equations designed for that purpose, which were proposed
by Lewis and Von Elbe [29]. The proposed model has also been
used in another similar research to compare the ﬂame speed of
Jojoba methyl ester with diesel fuel using a cylindrical vessel and
relying on pressure transducer signals [30]. In addition, this tech-
nique has been employed by Ruelas et al. [31] to measure the
laminar ﬂame speeds for natural gas/hydrogen blends.
2.2.3
Laser Tomography. The instantaneous ﬂame surfaces
can also be determined using 2D planar, single-sheet laser
imaging for the measurement of burning velocity. Nevertheless,
there are many drawbacks associated with their use [26,32]. It is
still unclear whether the assumption of considering the in-plane
and out-of-plane rates to be similar for turbulent ﬂames, and this
issue is still questionable. In addition, the spark which initiates in
the middle of the vessel is randomly convicted by large eddies,
which results in a kernel displacement away from the laser-sheet
imaging path. Consequently, the exact location of the kernel relative
to the laser sheet cannot be accurately determined. Schlieren pho-
tography technique is more preferred than laser-sheet techniques
Fig. 1
Schematic diagram for Z-type Schlieren setup [28]
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
AUGUST 2020, Vol. 142 / 080801-3
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 4 ---

because they almost give the same accuracy for ﬂame propagation
rates besides being less expensive and requiring less equipment
[33–35].
One of the standard techniques used in laser tomography for
measuring the velocity of particles inside the combustion vessel is
the laser doppler velocimetry (LDV). In this technique, two laser
beams are directed and focused on one point according to the
desired velocity magnitude. The two laser beams share the same
wavelength, and their intersection creates a volume of interference
called the probe volume [28]. This technique was employed by
Refs. [36–39] to conﬁrm the particle image velocimetry (PIV) mea-
surements with those of LDV in a spherical combustion vessel,
where the interrogation area in the LDV system is expanded here
into a 3D volume. Figure 2 shows a schematic diagram for the
LDV setup.
2.3
Fuel Type. As the fuel characteristics (reactivity, diffusiv-
ity, and exothermicity) play a signiﬁcant role in determining the
fuel-air combustion characteristics [40–42], it is with high impor-
tance to study the effect of using different types of fuels on the
ﬂame propagation rates. Several experiments were conducted in lit-
erature utilizing the spherical/cylindrical combustion bomb to
match this demand. In this context, the role of this subsection
comes to look at the most recent researches that have investigated
the effect of different fuel properties on the mixture combustion
characteristics; namely, four types of fuels are included in this liter-
ature: alkanes, natural gas blends, isooctane, and biogas.
2.3.1
Alkanes (C1-C3). Turbulent ﬂame speeds for alkanes,
particularly for methane, ethane, and propane, were measured
over a wide range of equivalence ratios by Ravi [26]. It was
observed that turbulent ﬂame propagation is profoundly affected
by non-unity Lewis numbers, Le (Le is a dimensionless number
that represents the ratio between thermal diffusivity and species
mass diffusivity); such that displacement speeds were noticed
to be higher for mixtures with Le < 1 in comparison with those of
Le > 1 at the same equivalence ratio. Subsequently, methane was
characterized by a higher turbulent ﬂame speed than ethane and
propane when running at lean conditions. However, rich methane
had a lower displacement speed than ethane and propane. Thus, it
was concluded that for mixtures characterized with Le < 1, the dis-
placement speeds are augmented by an increment in both ﬂamelet
surface area and local burning rate. Figure 3 shows the variation
in turbulent ﬂame speed as a function of turbulence intensity for
methane and ethane.
2.3.2
Natural Gas and Natural Gas–Hydrogen Blends. As
the natural gas composition varies depending on the origin of
the fuel source, turbulent displacement speed for a natural gas
surrogate (NG2: 1.25% n-C5H12 + 2.5% C4H10 + 5% C3H8 + 10%
C2H6 + 81.25% CH4) has been investigated by Ravi [26] over a
wide range of equivalence ratios. The displacement speeds for the
C1−C3 alkanes and NG2 were all compared by using the same com-
bustion vessel under different equivalence ratios Ф (Fig. 4). When
Ф = 0.7, the turbulent ﬂame speeds for methane were the highest,
followed by ethane and then propane. At this condition, NG2 is
noticed to have a very close trend to CH4, as NG2 is predominantly
methane. On the other hand, rich methane is characterized by lower
displacement speeds than rich ethane and propane, and this can be
referred to the impact of Lewis number on turbulent ﬂame propaga-
tion. When Le > 1 (Le < 1), the local burning velocity is reduced
(enhanced) due to the enhanced (reduced) heat loss in the sections
which are positively curved [43]. The probability of ﬁnding curved
ﬂamelets, positively stretched (convex into the direction of unburnt
gases), is higher with a premixed turbulent reacting ﬂow as the
mean curvature and the mean strain rate are both positive at the
ﬂame leading edge [44]. In this case, turbulent eddies cause more
stretching in the laminar ﬂamelets, which results in a remarkable
deviation between the unstretched laminar ﬂame speed and the
local burning rate. Subsequently, for mixtures having Le < 1, the
displacement speeds are augmented by an increased local burning
rate and increased ﬂamelet surface area. These effects interpret
the higher turbulent ﬂame speeds for rich ethane and rich propane
(or lean methane), which have Le < 1. Such trends have also been
previously documented by other studies [18,44].
Blending hydrocarbon fuels with hydrogen is essential for gas-
turbine combustor designers. This is due to the higher laminar
ﬂame speeds, which can be obtained at ultra-lean conditions,
which are outside hydrocarbons lean-ﬂammability limit. However,
the tendency to ﬂashback or auto-ignite increases as the fraction of
hydrocarbons in the mixture increases as a result of the augmented
laminar ﬂame speeds (the turbulent ﬂame speeds as well).
Fig. 2
Schematic diagram for the LDV setup [39]
Fig. 3
Turbulent ﬂame speeds of C1, C2 alkanes/air mixtures as a function of the effective turbulence
intensity. The individual curves are the spline averages of three repetitions at each condition. The
average scatter is estimated to be ±10 cm/s [26].
080801-4 / Vol. 142, AUGUST 2020
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 5 ---

The increased concentration of hydrogen radicals in the mix is the
primary mechanism for laminar ﬂame speed augmentation, which
is purely a kinematic effect. Laminar and turbulent ﬂame speeds
for two different mixtures (25/75 and 50/50 (by volume) blends
of H2/NG2) at different equivalence ratio Ф and hydrogen levels
was investigated by Ravi [26] and are plotted in Fig. 5. It can be
observed that there is no difference in the laminar ﬂame speeds
between CH4 and NG2 for the case of high-hydrogen content
(50% H2). In addition, it is clear how the turbulent ﬂame speed
ST has increased for both fuels with hydrogen addition, and it is fol-
lowing the same trend found with the laminar ﬂame speeds.
2.3.3
Isooctane. Brequigny et al. [36] have experimentally
investigated turbulent ﬂame speeds for isooctane–air mixture.
Figure 6 [36] illustrates the corrected turbulent ﬂame speed as a
function of the corrected equivalent radius. As can be noticed, the
ﬂame speed is increasing gradually while the ﬂame radius is
increasing, and this can be referred to the increase in the wrinkling
ratio. The increase in turbulence intensity is responsible for the rise
in wrinkling and, thus, the turbulent ﬂame speed. Typically, the
increase in wrinkling ratio is provoked by a decrease in small, tur-
bulent scales, as was already shown by Mazellier et al. [37] on the
same combustion vessel.
2.3.4
Biogas. Turbulent ﬂame speeds for three different biogas
surrogates have been experimentally investigated by Ayache and
Birouk [28]. It was observed that when adding more CH4 into the
mixture, the peak value for ST (= 50 cm/s) shifts away from the
nearly lean equivalence ratio side into the stoichiometric value
(Fig. 7). In addition, it can be noticed that all the curves are “bell-
shaped” where the maximum burning velocity occurs at a certain
equivalence ratio and diminishes at the higher and lower ones
[28]. The slowest burning velocity among all the surrogates mix-
tures was observed when using the 50% CH4 biogas ﬂame, with a
peak burning velocity of 27.5 cm/s at ∅= 0.9. When more CH4 is
added into the mixture, the peak has shifted away slightly toward
the stoichiometric equivalence ratio, where the peak was noticed
at 39 cm/s at ∅= 0.98 for 70% CH4. For the mixture (70% CH4
and 30% CO2), the rich and lean turbulent ﬂame speeds were
faster than those of 60% and 50% by 5 cm/s.
2.3.5
Syngas. Different
researches
have
investigated
the
laminar ﬂame speeds for syngas over the past decades [45–51].
Among these large databases, the laminar ﬂame speeds for syngas
have been reported at the same operating conditions and then com-
pared together, as shown in Fig. 8. It is clearly noticed that large dis-
parities exist between the measured laminar ﬂame speeds for
syngas/air mixtures at normal temperature and pressure, and those
calculated by updated chemical reaction mechanism by Li et al.
[51]. Also, it can be noticed that the curve of laminar ﬂame
speeds for syngas is “bell-shaped” where the maximum burning
velocity occurs at a certain equivalence ratio (Ф = 2.15) and dimin-
ishes at the higher and lower ones. Li mechanism slightly overpre-
dicts the whole measurements at lean operating conditions.
However, when Ф > 2.0, large disparities exist between the mea-
surements of different researches. When ϕ increases more, the dis-
crepancy becomes even larger. This is considered as an important
issue as the accuracy of laminar ﬂame speeds measurement plays
a major role in building and validating chemical kinetic models.
The reason behind this discrepancy among these different groups
can be attributed to several reasons as follows. The ﬁrst one is the
difference in spherical ﬂame radius ranges which is chosen for non-
linear or linear extrapolation. Subsequently, this instills a responsi-
bility on the researches who should determine the lower and upper
bound accurately beforehand. The second reason is the methodol-
ogy that is used to extrapolate laminar ﬂame speeds readings. For
example, the stretch rate can highly inﬂuence the ﬂame speed
when the laminar ﬂame propagates in the spherical combustion
chamber and thus causes a remarkable difference in the obtained
results. Another possible reason is the existence of carbonyl com-
pounds inside CO2 gas cylinder [52].
Fig. 4
Displacement speeds of alkanes and NG2 at the fuel-lean
condition. Mixtures with Le >1 have lower turbulent ﬂame speeds
(lean-ethane and propane, and rich-methane) due to the reduc-
tion in the stretched laminar ﬂame speeds from the unstretched
values [26].
Fig. 5
(a) Laminar ﬂame speeds (curves are model predictions) of NG2 and CH4 with varying levels
of H2. (b) Turbulent displacement speed for these mixtures measured herein. Turbulence intensity
was estimated separately for each fuel. No appreciable difference is observed between the high-
hydrogen-content mixtures of methane and NG2 [26].
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
AUGUST 2020, Vol. 142 / 080801-5
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 6 ---

2.3.6
Diesel. Laminar ﬂame speeds for diesel fuel have been
investigated by Samim [1] using a cylindrical bomb test rig that
has been designed at Qatar University. It was observed that
the ﬂame speed is slightly low at lean conditions (Φ = 0.7–0.9),
which further increases and peaks near stoichiometric conditions
(Φ = 1.0–1.1). When the mixture becomes rich (Φ = 1.2–1.3),
the ﬂame speed starts to decrease slightly below the maximum
laminar ﬂame speed (SL = 83 cm/s) as indicated in Fig. 9. At low
equivalence ratios, the excessive amount of air causes ﬂame quench-
ing, and the ﬂame becomes unstable. As a result, the laminar ﬂame
speed is found to be low. On the other hand, using an excessive
amount of fuel in the air–fuel mixture causes the combustion to be
incomplete which causes the ﬂames speed to drop down.
2.3.7
Gas-to-Liquid Fuel Blends. Laminar ﬂame speeds of
GTL, diesel, and 50/50 diesel-GTL fuel blends have been measured
over a wide range of equivalence ratios by Samim [1], as shown
in Fig. 10. It was observed that GTL fuel has the highest laminar
ﬂame speeds near stoichiometric conditions (ϕ = 1.0), which
might be attributed to its highest caloriﬁc value. However, when
the mixture equivalence ratio becomes further away from the stoi-
chiometric condition, the ﬂame speed of GTL gets slightly lower
than pure diesel. Thus, it can be deduced that GTL fuel can
replace diesel in applications where the operating conditions are
close to stoichiometric condition, and as such, this will result in a
higher fuel laminar ﬂame speed.
The 50/50 blend starts with the lowest laminar ﬂame speed at the
low equivalence ratios (Ф = 0.7–0.9) and maintains this behavior
until it equalizes the readings of conventional diesel at Ф = 1.0.
When ϕ = 1.1, the ﬂame speed for the 50/50 blend is only higher
than the conventional diesel by 2–3 cm/s. After that, the ﬂame
speed starts to drop lower than both fuels. It can be observed that
the 50/50 blend is exhibiting lower ﬂame speeds than both pure
Fig. 6
Corrected ﬂame speed as a function of ﬂame radius for
different turbulent intensities obtained from the corrected Schlie-
ren data: P = 0.1 MPa, T = 423 K, and Φ = 1.0 [36].
Fig. 7
Biogas turbulent burning velocity for three biogas compositions at ﬁxed turbulence
intensity. For all compositions, the curve ﬁts of the experimental data are “bell-shaped”
with the burning velocity peaking at some equivalence ratios and diminishing at lower
and higher ones [28].
Fig. 8
Laminar ﬂame speeds of H2/CO mixtures at atmospheric
pressure and standard temperature: comparison between exper-
imental data sets and numerical predictions [45–51]
080801-6 / Vol. 142, AUGUST 2020
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 7 ---

fuels away from the stoichiometric conditions. However, near
stoichiometric conditions, the readings for the 50/50 blend are
very close to those of diesel fuel, which indicates that this blend
can replace diesel fuel in industry to reduce exhaust emissions
and keeps the environment cleaner. For the three tested fuels, the
readings for the laminar ﬂame speed at the lean conditions (e.g.,
excess air) is observed to be low due to ﬂame quenching. On the
other hand, the excessive use of fuel at rich conditions causes the
combustion to be incomplete which results in a lower ﬂame speed.
Discussion
Laminar ﬂame speed SL is deﬁned as the propagation velocity of
the ﬂame front into the premixed unburned gas mixture. It was
clearly noticed that using different types of fuels results in a remark-
able variation in the ﬂame speed (e.g., GTL has a higher laminar
ﬂame speed than diesel fuel at different equivalence ratios). In
addition, it was observed that the laminar ﬂame speed reaches its
maximum value near stoichiometric conditions for hydrocarbon
fuels such as diesel, GTL, and 50/50 diesel-GTL fuel blend. Fur-
thermore, the laminar ﬂame speed depends on other factors such
as the temperature and pressure inside the combustion vessel.
Turbulence causes ﬂame propagation to be promoted, causing
the ﬂame speed to be considerably higher than the laminar one.
The impact of turbulence intensity on the ﬂame speed is also
dependent on the stoichiometry and on the fuel type. The effect
of using different types of fuels is often explained by the impact
of molecular and thermal diffusivity for the fuel on the evolution
of corrugated ﬂamelets, which can be captured by Lewis number
(a ratio between thermal diffusivity and molecular diffusivity).
For example, it has been noticed how methane and natural gas
are characterized by a higher turbulent ﬂame speed than ethane
and propane when running at lean conditions. However, rich
methane had a lower displacement speed than ethane and propane
(Fig. 4). Also, it was observed how the mixtures of higher hydrogen
content are characterized by a higher turbulent ﬂame speed (Fig. 5).
This can be referred to the lower Le number of hydrogen when com-
pared with other hydrocarbons. Moreover, it was noticed how the
increase in turbulence intensity causes the ﬂame speed to be aug-
mented due to the increase in the wrinkling ratio, which results in
more turbulence within the mixture (Fig. 6).
In an internal combustion engine, the ﬂame speed is one of the
fuel properties which determines its ability to be combusted
without detonation. Subsequently, a high-ﬂame speed combustion
process should reﬂect in higher engine efﬁciencies and lower emis-
sions due to the enhanced ﬂame diffusivity and stability, which can
thus result in more complete combustion. In fact, the speed at which
laminar or turbulent premixed ﬂames propagate is a fundamental
parameter that is used in many practical combustion applications,
such as gas turbines and engines to validate relevant kinetic mech-
anisms, which characterizes the combustion behavior of the fuel
[30,31].
An accurate description of the combustion phenomena is
highly requested to assess the effect of using a certain type of
fuel on the engine performance. Besides, this can highly assist in
the development of advanced engine concepts for alternative fuels
and petroleum-derived. Diesel, gasoline, and jet fuels are composed
of several chemical compounds, and thus, making detailed predica-
tion and modeling for real fuels is very complex. In addition, the
lack of fundamental thermochemical, physical, and kinetic data
for the components found in real fuels makes the study of ﬂame
speed very essential to predict engine performance and emission
rates [28].
Summary
Table 1 provides a summary of literature studies of vessel shape
and geometry, measurement techniques, fan details, turbulent char-
acterization techniques, and fuel type.
3
Optical Engine
The use of thermodynamics single-cylinder engines (TSCE) in
Research and Development (R&D) applications provides a versatile
environment for testing the primary process and modules related
to engine operation. Diagnostic instrumentation of optical single-
cylinder engines (OSCE) is less complicated as compared to a
multi-cylinder engine (MCE), and the simpler mechanical structure
provides more ﬂexibility in applying reﬁned diagnostic access [53].
OSCEs offer speciﬁc opportunities for higher diagnostics of engine
phenomena. This has been considered as a driving motivation
to engage them in research projects. As modern engine systems
are being reﬁned, and their complexity is growing when achieving
the required emission targets and fuel efﬁciency, it becomes vital to
use OSCE in the application of research projects. Moreover, diag-
nostic instrumentation of OSCE is less sophisticated in comparison
with other MCEs, and the simple mechanical design offers more
ﬂexibility when applying reﬁned diagnostic access [54]. Since
OSCE can only duplicate the behavior of MCE partially, care
should be taken when deciding the most inﬂuential usage of
OSCE in engine development tasks. In this aspect, the priority for
using OSCE comes in providing data, which can depict the behavior
of a normal MCE such as in fuel injection and the simulation of
intake airﬂow. Both applications of research and development
beneﬁt from each other as the use of optical engines promotes
progress, and new analysis techniques are occupied. OSCE is
Fig. 9
Laminar ﬂame speeds of diesel fuel at different equiva-
lence ratios [1]
Fig. 10
Conventional diesel, GTL, and 50–50 blend (laminar
ﬂame speed, SN versus Ф) [1]
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
AUGUST 2020, Vol. 142 / 080801-7
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 8 ---

combined with large optical windows that allow for optical imaging
and a large ﬁeld of view through the combustion chamber [55].
The OSCE consists of different elementary design components
that are accompanied by a photography system for the gasoline
direct injection (GDI) engine and elongated piston modules [56].
The extended crankcase design is employed to access the combus-
tion chamber from the bottom side using a 45-deg mirror. Besides, it
allows for the separation of the base engine’s lube oil from the “dry”
zone of the combustion chamber [57]. Figure 11 shows a schematic
diagram for the major components that a single-cylinder optical
engine consists of.
In general, optical engines are known to have high ﬂexibility in
their operation due to the separation of many peripheral modules
like the coolant pumps, heat exchangers, and fuel supply systems
in addition to the lube oil from the engine [58]. Optical pistons,
which consist of the piston rod, base piston, and piston crown,
are occupied with a ﬂat window entry as clariﬁed in Fig. 12.
These pistons are characterized by the following [59]:
• Piston crown is covered with a gasket ring that has a contact
only to the metal liner part.
• Oil drainage on the base piston.
• Piston rods which have high mechanical stiffness.
• Lateral piston motion is minimized by using piston guide
rings.
• Thermal piston expansion is accounted for by cylinder to liner
clearance.
The piston crown is designed to vary according to GDI applica-
tions [58]. In addition, the gasket rings are installed on the piston
crown’s lower end and glide on the liner part of the metal only.
Subsequently, this leads to a remarkable reduction in the engine
compression ratio [60]. Figure 12 shows a schematic for the
piston components in a GDI single-cylinder optical engine.
Piston rings are located on the lower position rather than on the
normal position in OSCE. The use of this low ring position along
with 0.5-mm clearance between the cylinder and linear reduces
the compression ratio of about two units and adds to the combustion
chamber’s dead volume [61]. In diesel OSCE, this reduction in the
compression ratio has a noticeable impact on ignition delay and
combustion. However, in spark ignition (SI) engine, this reduction
in the compression ratio is more acceptable as the main purpose of
OSCE is to analyze the mixture formation during the compression
and intake stroke [59].
The operation of an OSCE is performed using a modular testbed,
which consists of different modules, as shown in Fig. 13. The major
parts of such system are the dyno and engine; however, productive
test operation usually consists of many different peripheral compo-
nents such as [59] the following:
• engine and measurement modules with control of dyno;
• engine conditioning;
• control software and safety actuators;
• media conditioning and supply;
• fuel injection system; and
• user interface to access all actuators and signals.
Flame propagation in GDI conﬁgurations can be evaluated using
OSCE that can provide the most useful information about ﬂame
propagation, diffusion, and combustion [59]. In OSCE, the features
of the ﬂame can be recorded with single-shot or high-speed
cameras, which results in several ﬂame imaging information as
illustrated in Fig. 14. Diffusion and premixed ﬂames can be
easily distinguished because of their speciﬁc radiation features.
Obviously, for engineering purposes, it is necessary to use an
image that provides statistical information to make a decision
about the best operating variables.
Thus, it is clear how OSCE can highly enhance many features in
the ﬁeld of engine combustion and emission, in addition to the con-
tribution in different research and development applications. OSCE
measurement instrumentation may consist of complex thermody-
namics, optical, or emission diagnostic techniques. The efﬁcient
Table 1
Summary of literature survey on spherical and cylindrical combustion bombs
Reference
Fansler Groff
[23]
Kwon et al. [22]
Leisenhei-mer and
Leukel [17]
Weib et al.
[18]
Shy et al. [24]
Bradley et al.
[14]
Ravi [26]
Vessel shape
Cylindrical
Cylindrical
Spherical
Cuboid with
spherical
cavity at center
Intersection of
two cylinders
Spherical
Cylindrical
ID (cm)
26
26
Vessel 1 (V1):
d = 50
11.8
Cubic volume
of 15 × 15 ×
15 cm3
38
30.5
IL (cm)
26
26
Vessel 2 (V2):
d = 130.2
11.8
38
35.6
No. of optical ports
2
2 + 2 Laser ports
2
4
4
3
2
Optical port Size
(cm)
9.2 (8 cm: max.
ﬂame dia.)
9.2; 10 mm
Not provided
10
10
15
12.7
Meas. technique
Schlieren
imaging
Schlieren imaging
and laser
tomography
Pressure trace
Pressure trace
Laser
tomography
Schlieren
imaging and
pressure trace
Schlieren imaging
and pressure trace
No. of fans
4
4
V1: 2,4,8; V2: 4
8
2
4
4
Fan dia. (cm)
13.5
13.5
V1: 25; V2:42
4.5
11.6
Not provided
7.62
Fan blades
8
Not provided
6
8
8
3
Pitch angle (deg)
45
30
Not provided
22.5
Not provided
Not provided
20
Fan width (cm)
2.3
Not provided
0.6
4
Not provided
3.8
Turb. Char. Tech.
LDV
LDV
Five-hole pitot
probe and Hot wire
Anemometer
LDV/PIV
LDV/PIV
LDV
PIV
Max u′ (m/s)
2
V1: 1.54 m/s;
V2: 2.4 m/s
∼3.7
4.5
12
3.5
Longitudinal LT
(mm)
25 mm w/u′;
40 mm using
3D Gaussian u′
12.5; 19.15 mm
with 3D Gaussian
u′
V1: 9 ± 1 mm; V2:
24 ± 2 mm
3.9
15–48
20
50
Fuel
Not provided
Hydrogen + air +
nitrogen
Not provided
Methane–air
and propane–
air and
hydrogen
Methane–air
Ethanol–air
and propane–
air
Alkanes (C1-C3)
and natural gas
and natural
gas–hydrogen
blends
080801-8 / Vol. 142, AUGUST 2020
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 9 ---

use of these complex systems can be simpliﬁed by the proper usage
of the diagnostic methods and with the adaption of different
modular arrangements in that platform.
3.1
Diesel Optical Engine. Diesel engines that are widely
used as power generators, mechanical engines, or in mobile
drives ﬁnd an extensive spread use in construction equipment, auto-
mobiles, locomotives, and countless industrial applications. Their
realm involves almost all industries and can be clearly observed
daily at several applications [62]. Due to this importance, many
researches are continuously developing in order to study their per-
formance characteristics and lower their emission rates. One of the
most reliable research tools to match this demand is the use of an
optical single cylinder engine (OSCE), which has different visuali-
zation and measurement capabilities. Subsequently, it is considered
as a powerful tool to predict, to a very close extent, the performance
and emission characteristics of the real multi-cylinder diesel engine.
Different researches have adopted this idea in several studies, and
they have considered the use of OSCE to study the effect of
varying some parameters on the engine’s combustion characteris-
tics. This subsection aims to lay a literature review on the most
recent researches that have utilized diesel optical engine to
conduct experimental studies in different aspects (ignition delay
time, in-cylinder pressure, heat release rate, and ﬂame luminosity).
3.1.1
Ignition Delay Time. Ahmad et al. [63] investigated the
combustion characteristics of diesel–methane dual fuel (DF),
more speciﬁcally the ignition delay time (IDT) and the combustion
duration (CD) as a function of methane equivalence ratio (ΦCH4).
Figure 15 shows the effect of varying methane equivalence ratio
ФCH4 on the ignition delay time at three different top dead center
temperatures (TTDC). It can be noticed that IDT increases as ϕCH4
increases due to the increasing effect of the inhibiting methane on
the ignition of pilot diesel [64–66].
In the same principle, it was found that the CD increases when
ϕCH4 in the mixture increases. However, the CD starts to decrease
at ϕCH4 = 0.85, which can be attributed to the existence of local fuel-
rich zones at advanced (second and third) combustion stages. The
combustion chamber is widened due to the presence of pilot diesel-
rich zones, which causes the premixed methane–air mixture to start
burning rapidly at the end of the second stage and during the high-
intensity third stage.
Cheng et al. [67] evaluated the cycle-to-cycle variation (CCV)
using an optically accessible heavy-duty diesel engine fueled with
methane (main fuel) and diesel (pilot fuel). Figure 16 shows the var-
iation of global intensity (bottom) and intensity-based coefﬁcient of
variance (COV) (top) at different λCH4. It can be noticed that
decreasing λCH4 in the fuel mixture results in a monotonic decrease
in the global intensity. The addition of CH4 has an increasingly high
effect on high- and low-temperature reactions in CH4–diesel–air
Fig. 11
Speciﬁc modules and complete assembly of an OSCE [58]
Fig. 12
Elongated piston for OSCE. Load analysis for the piston
rod, piston components for a GDI application. Notice the low
position of piston gasket ring [59].
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
AUGUST 2020, Vol. 142 / 080801-9
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 10 ---

mixture, which can result in more luminous soot formation and a
longer IDT.
3.1.2
In-cylinder Pressure. Lee et al. [68] searched out the
effect of varying the injection timing on the in-cylinder pressure
rise using a diesel optical single-cylinder engine. In addition, a com-
parison between the experimental and simulation results was con-
ducted. It was found that the maximum in-cylinder pressure
decreases more when the injection timing is retarded and the simu-
lation results have approved well the same. Cheng et al. [67] eval-
uated the cylinder-pressure as a function of λCH4 using an optically
accessible heavy-duty diesel engine fueled with methane (main
fuel) and diesel (pilot fuel). It was observed that CH4 plays as an
inhibiting factor for combustion in the mixture. As a result,
adding more CH4 into the mixture causes the peak pressure to be
higher. Pastor et al. [69] measured the cylinder’s mechanical defor-
mation of a diesel optical single-cylinder engine at two different
intake pressures (1.1 and 2.7 bar) that correspond to two different
top dead center (TDC) cylinder pressures (31 and 80 bar),
respectively. When the intake pressure was 1.1 bar, the maximum
in-cylinder pressure was found to be 31 bar with a 0.03 mm defor-
mation at TDC. It was noticed for this condition that the mechanical
deformation and the in-cylinder volume were almost negligible. On
the other hand, when the intake pressure was selected to be 2.7 bar,
the maximum in-cylinder pressure was 80 bar with a maximum
TDC deformation that is equal to 0.5 mm. It can be deduced that
as the in-cylinder pressure rises, the mechanical deformation
becomes more signiﬁcant. For the latter conﬁguration, the deforma-
tion coefﬁcient was found to be 2.25.
3.1.3
Heat Release Rate. Ahmad et al. [63] stated that dual-
fuel combustion is a complex process to analyze, and it depends
on the chemical and physical properties of pilot-fuel sprays, in addi-
tion to the concentration of each gas in the premixed mixture. In
diesel–methane DF combustion, pilot diesel is injected during the
compression stroke close to the TDC, which provides sufﬁcient
Fig. 13
Schematic of a testbed platform system, an example of a “compact testbed” conﬁguration dedicated to the
SCE operation [59]
Fig. 14
Flame analysis shows a premixed combustion situation
(left hand) and appearance of soot clouds because of wall ﬁlm
combustion. Imaging and data evaluation procedures provide a
statistic image evaluation [59].
Fig. 15
IDT trend at three different TDC temperatures [63]
080801-10 / Vol. 142, AUGUST 2020
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 11 ---

energy for the ignition of the premixed mixture. Subsequently, the
characteristics of heat release constitute complex chemical and
physical interactions. Therefore, the process of DF combustion
can be viewed as a combination of three overlapping stages as clar-
iﬁed in Karim’s model earlier Karim et al. [70]:
(1) First-stage combustion, θ1, is due to the combustion of some
premixed methane–air mixture in addition to pilot diesel.
(2) Second-stage combustion, θ2, is due to the combustion of
premixed methane–air mixture in the surrounding of pilot
diesel.
Fig. 16
Effect of pilot fuel ratio on the global intensity and intensity-based COV [67]
Fig. 17
Characterization and identiﬁcation of three overlapping combustion stages of a
typical DF combustion representative case by the second derivative of HRR: CAD, crack
angle degree
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
AUGUST 2020, Vol. 142 / 080801-11
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 12 ---

(3) Third-stage combustion, θ3, is caused by the turbulent ﬂame
propagation with the remaining diluted unburned methane–
air mixture.
Some studies have identiﬁed the DF combustion process depend-
ing on combustion modes and stages, requesting further investiga-
tion [71–74]. The three overlapping stages could be identiﬁed and
separated using the second derivative of the heat release rate
(HRR) in which features of natural luminosity (NL) images recog-
nize combustion mechanisms. The second derivative of HRR indi-
cates for the inﬂection points, which is more challenging to
highlight using only the ﬁrst derivative and desires further thresh-
olding. A typical DF combustion HRR proﬁle is illustrated in
Fig. 17 along with the accumulate heat release (AccQ) in addition
to the second derivative of HRR (SDHRR). The local maximum
value of SDHRR is θ1, θ2, θ3a, and θ3b, indicating for ﬁrst-,
second-, and third-stage combustion, respectively.
Ahmad et al. [63] investigated the effect of ϕCH4 and TTDC on DF
combustion and obtained HRR and AccQ using the same combus-
tion model. HRR proﬁles were observed to have multiple peaks
(M-shaped), which vary in their magnitude depending on the
amount of CH4 in the fuel mixture. Such proﬁles of HRR have
been reported in different investigations [71–75]. As ϕCH4 is
increasing, the shape of the HRR curve is brought to change
from multiple peaks (M-shape) gradually to a quasi-single peak
(bell-shaped). Meanwhile, the combustion stages remain to interact
with the increase of ϕCH4. The HRR data were analyzed using the
second derivative method to make the study deeper and expand
the inﬂuence of increasing ϕCH4 on the characteristics of DF heat
release. The combustion stages θ1, θ2, θ3a, and θ3b along with θ90
were highlighted on the respective AccQ curves for every ϕCH4
case at several TTDC [76].
Cheng et al. [67] evaluated the HRR as a function of λCH4 using
an optically accessible heavy-duty diesel engine fuel with methane
(main fuel) and diesel (pilot fuel). The inhibiting effect for the addi-
tion of CH4 was clearly observed in HRR. This can be referred to
the weak ﬂammability of the air–CH4 mixture for the ultra-lean
CH4 condition. There is unstable combustion and a slow ﬂame
speed, which results in a lower HRR.
3.1.4
Flame Natural Luminosity. Lee et al. [68] used the visu-
alization kit that lies between the cylinder head and the block to
perform visualization experiments. It was found that the ﬂame lumi-
nosity increases more when the injection timing is advanced.
Figure 18 illustrates the variation of NL as a function of the crank
angle at ﬁve different injection timings (including the baseline
case).
Ahmad et al. [63] gathered intensity distribution and NL images
that take place during the second-stage combustion θ2 (Fig. 19). A
high-speed camera (Photron Fastcam APX-RS 250 K) that is
Fig. 18
Flame luminosity as a function of injection timing sweep for ﬁve different cases [68]
Fig. 19
Representative NL images and intensity distribution images immediately after the start of the combustion stages for the
entire range of test points investigated in the study (effect of ϕCH4 and TTDC on DF combustion)
080801-12 / Vol. 142, AUGUST 2020
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 13 ---

equipped with a Nikon AF-Nikkor 70 mm/3.5 objective lens
recorded temporally and spatially resolved NL images. As the
increased temperature plays a vital role in enhancing the pilot-diesel
evaporation rate [77,78], there is almost no, or few local fuel-rich
zones visualized near the periphery when ϕCH4 = 0.57 and 0.63 at
higher temperatures (O2 concentration is slightly high). However,
it was observed that when ϕCH4 = 0.72 and 0.85, even at higher
temperatures, local fuel-rich zones are visualized to be intense
owing to inadequate O2 concentration, which leads to more soot for-
mation. Moreover, fuel-rich zones in the middle of the combustion
chamber are assumed to result from injector dribbling [63]. For
more details about ﬂame propagation and dribbling in DF combus-
tion, the reader is directed to other previous researches [63,78,79].
Summary
A summary of studies using diesel optical engine is provided in
Table 2 for the convenience of the reader.
3.2
Gasoline
Optical
Engine. Gasoline
optical
engines
behave as a representative tool in the research and development
of new concepts for combustion in SI engines. This is due to their
capabilities in allowing for the application of quantitative and qual-
itative diagnostic techniques, which can be used to study combus-
tion and emissions, mixing, and in-cylinder ﬂow characteristics
[80]. Such experimental measurements are not only essential for
validating the computational model; however, they can also be pro-
cessed to provide detailed information about the physical processes
that take place inside the cylinders. Subsequently, they are useful in
developing new combustion strategies as the GDI [81]. In this
context, the role of this section comes to give a glance about the
past researches, which have utilized gasoline optical single-cylinder
engine as a research tool to perform combustion studies.
3.2.1
In-cylinder Pressure. Boggio et al. [82] used an accessi-
ble optical single-cylinder spark-ignition engine to carry out mea-
surements that show the effect of adding low levels of hydrogen
to methane (5%, 10%, and 20% volumetric basis) on the in-cylinder
pressure under lean-burn and stoichiometric conditions. Thermody-
namic results illustrated an increase in the maximum in-cylinder
pressure as more hydrogen is added to methane fuel, and this
effect becomes more evident while operating the engine in the
leanest condition. Giovani et al. [83] have also studied the
combustion characteristics using thermodynamic (heat release)
depicted from in-cylinder pressure measurements. Three different
fuels were used in the optically accessible single-cylinder gasoline
engine: pure gasoline (G100), pure ethanol (E100), and 50%
ethanol/gasoline blend (B50). As expected, the use of pure
ethanol has resulted in the highest maximum in-cylinder pressure
at both operating conditions, while the lowest belongs to pure gas-
oline. In addition, it was observed that the time at which the peak
in-cylinder pressure is reached is in advance for pure ethanol
when compared with other tested fuels. Consequently, it can be
deduced that faster combustion than other fuels characterizes
ethanol. Considering the 50% blend, it behaves as noticed with
intermediate
characteristics
in
comparison
with
pure
fuels;
however, during the combustion early stages, it shows trends that
are closer to the pure ethanol fuel.
Id et al. [84] investigated the combustion characteristics of gaso-
line fuel at ﬁve different air-fuel ratios utilizing an optically acces-
sible direct injection spark ignition (DISI) single-cylinder engine.
Lean and stoichiometric operations were studied through a com-
bined optical and thermodynamic approach. The results of the
average in-cylinder pressure at ﬁve different fuel–air ratios were
obtained using a pressure sensor. The highest peak pressure was
detected during the stoichiometric operation and during the expan-
sion process. The operation of the engine at points close to
maximum brake torque (MBT) can be evidenced by the location
of the peak pressure that is reached with the same range for all
air-fuel ratios.
3.2.2
Flame Propagation Rate. Yang et al. [85] designed two
tumble deﬂectors that have two different tumble ratio (TR = 1.5 and
2.2) using computational ﬂuid dynamics and computer-aided
design. Afterward, they were 3D-printed and then installed on the
optical engine intake ports, and then, the ﬁring tests were performed
(Fig. 20). The tumble deﬂectors were used to direct the ﬂow into the
intake ports so that changing the deﬂector thickness causes a varia-
tion in the level of the tumble.
The use of the ﬁrst (TR = 1.5) and second (TR = 2.2) tumble
deﬂectors have resulted in a 13.9% and 34.5% increment in the
ﬂame propagation rate, respectively (Fig. 21). This can be inter-
preted by the increase in TKE, which facilitates the mass-heat
transfer between the unburnt and burnt zone, which results in a
shorter combustion duration and an earlier heat release. Besides, a
Table 2
Summary of literature survey on the diesel optical engine
Diesel optical engine
Reference
Ahmad et al., 2019 [63]
Cheng et al., 2019 [67]
Lee et al., 2019 [68]
Pastor et al. 2018 [69]
Fuel
Diesel/methane
Diesel/methane
Diesel/air/EGR air
Diesel
Equivalence ratio
0.57, 0.63, 0.72, 0.85
0.50, 0.56, 0.625
–
1.0
Engine temperature (K)
353
298, 318, 328
–
323
Engine speed (rpm)
1400
1400
1500
1200
Compression ratio
13.5:1
17.9:1
16.0:1
13.7:1
Intake air pressure (bar)
1
1.1
–
1.1, 1.5, 1.9, 2.2, 2.7
IMEP (bar)
9–10
10
6
–
Swirl ratio
2.7
2.7
2.4
–
Optical access
Bowditch-designed optical access
Bowditch-designed optical
access
Bowditch-designed optical
access
Bowditch-designed optical
access
Pressure sensor type
Kistler type 6125C
Kistler type 6125C
Kistler type 6125C
Kistler 4603B10
Camera type
Photron Fastcam APX-RS 250 K
Photron Fastcam APX-RS)
Mini AX-100, PHOTRON
Photron SA-X2
Frame rate
9000
9000
100
21,000
Main measurements
Heat release rate
Pressure-based COV
In-cylinder pressure
Piston displacement
Natural luminosity
Heat release rate
Heat release rate
Heat release rate
Ignition delay time
In-cylinder pressure
Ignition delay time
In-cylinder pressure
Combustion duration
Global intensity
Combustion duration
In-cylinder volume
CAD at injection
356 deg aTDC
−15 deg aTDC
−22.24 deg aTDC
–
CAD at exhaust
150 deg aTDC
–
126 deg aTDC
–
No. of averaged cycles
150
150
–
50
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
AUGUST 2020, Vol. 142 / 080801-13
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 14 ---

delayed and less appearance of yellow ﬂame was originated, which
indicates a reduced soot formation.
Boggio et al. [82] also investigated the ﬂame growth speed and
ﬂame development for both ethanol and gasoline. It can be
clearly observed from Fig. 22 that ethanol fuel is characterized
by faster combustion when compared to gasoline. Moreover, the
ﬂame growth speed was obtained for both fuels by deriving the
interpolating curves, which further conﬁrmed the quick develop-
ment of ethanol ﬂame upon ignition.
3.2.2.1
Indicated Mean Effective Pressure. Chen et al. [86]
investigated the effect of using different spark plug types and spark
ignition energy on the optical engine indicated mean effective pres-
sure (IMEP) that operates with natural gas. Synchronous ﬂame
images and in-cylinder pressure track were used to discuss early
ﬂame development and cycle-to-cycle variations while addressing
the role of ignition energy and spark plugs. As for IMEP, it is
evident in Fig. 23 that there is a particular crank angle where the
highest IMEP is achieved for each spark plug conﬁguration. The
maximum IMEP is 5.87 bar obtained for the single-claw spark plug
at a spark timing of −20 °CA, while the maximum IMEP (IMEP =
6.32) for the multi-claw spark plug is achieved at a spark timing of
−14 °CA. Thus, it is indicated that when running the engine under
50 mJ ignition energy, the thermal efﬁciency of the engine can be
improved with the use of a multi-claw spark plug as it can enhance
the combustion stability and hence optimizes the combustion phase.
Yang et al. [85] also considered the effect of using the three
different tumble deﬂectors on the optical engine IMEP from
100 consecutive cycles. It was noticed that the average IMEP of
TR = 0.5 was about 2.59 bar, and with the use of the tumble deﬂec-
tors, it increased to 2.81 bar and 3.02 for the TR = 1.5 and TR = 2.2
deﬂectors respectively. This can be referred to the increased TKE
and ﬂow velocity found in the same work. Besides, this can also
be explained by the faster ﬂame propagation with the use of the
tumble deﬂectors.
Id et al. [85] found that as the air-fuel ratio was augmented, the
IMEP has decreased as the amount of fuel injected was reduced
in comparison with the stoichiometric case. At the limit of lean
combustion (λ = 1.6), COV was found to be reduced by around
30% concerning the stoichiometric condition (λ = 1.0).
3.2.2.2
Unburned Hydrocarbons and NOx Emission. Boggio
et al. [82] have considered the analysis of exhaust gases, namely,
UHC (unburned hydrocarbon) and NOx, as they provide valuable
information about the chemistry of combustion. At the same
air-to-fuel ratio, UHC emissions decrease when adding more hydro-
gen in the blend, which is the same conclusion found in another
study [87]. The reason behind that can be referred to the reduction
of
methane
volume
percentage
in
the
air–fuel
mixture.
Fig. 20
Experimental setup for the high-speed imaging of
in-cylinder combustion [85]
Fig. 21
Growth rate of ﬂow velocity and TKE (spatial averaged
at the spark timing of 15 deg bTDC), as well as ﬂame speed (char-
acterized as ﬂame area at 7.15 deg aTDC) and indicated mean
effective pressure (IMEP) with increased tumble ratios. Flow
velocity and TKE are acquired from the computational ﬂuid
dynamics model, while ﬂame speed and IMEP are experimental
results [85].
Fig. 22
Flame radius for gasoline and ethanol at different crank
angles [82]
Fig.
23
Covariance
of
indicated
mean effective
pressure
(COVIMEP)
and
indicated
mean
effective
pressure
(IMEP)
observed with three spark plug types and 50 mJ ignition
energy [86]
080801-14 / Vol. 142, AUGUST 2020
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 15 ---

Subsequently, the composition of the unburned gas that is trapped
in the crevices reduces the methane emission rate. Besides, there
is a shorter quenching distance for hydrogen when compared with
methane. The increase in the air-to-fuel ratio results in reduced
overall combustion efﬁciency, and hence, UHC emission was
higher for the same proportion of hydrogen.
Increasing the amount of hydrogen in the blend causes an
increase in NOx emission rates, especially for the stoichiometric
case. As expected, when operating at the leaner case, the NOx con-
centration has signiﬁcantly decreased. This can be directly related to
the reduced in-cylinder temperature and pressure that were found
in the same work. A signiﬁcant result that can be also extracted
from the same study that the lean combustion process can drasti-
cally decrease NOx emission, and that was clearly noticed when
running the engine at λ = 1.0 case.
Id et al. [84] have reached the same conclusion when operating
the gasoline optical engine with different air–gasoline fuel ratios.
As the lean ﬂammability limit was approached, an increased
amount of hydrocarbon (HC) emission has been detected. This
can be related to the prominent phenomenon of quenching close
to the cylinder walls. Nonetheless, this phenomenon is responsible
for reducing the overall efﬁciency.
The highest value for NOx was reordered when operating with
the stoichiometric combustion condition. The high evolution of
nitrogen oxides at that condition can be related to the thermal
effect [88]. When operating with lean mixtures, two competing
factors (low-burned gas temperature and high concentration of
oxygen) which possess different weights, taking into consideration
that temperature has a more dominating effect result in less NOx for-
mation. NOx concentration was found to be reduced by 95% when
operating at the leanest case, and this value is very close to the efﬁ-
ciency of a three-way catalytic converter [89]. Thus, it is highly
emphasized to run the engine with a lean operation to reduce emis-
sions and increase the efﬁciency, while paying attention to the use
of catalytic converter in reducing HC and CO when operating at this
condition [90].
Summary
A summary of studies using a gasoline optical engine is provided
in Table 3 for the convenience of the reader.
4
Conclusions
It is clear from the above discussions that turbulent and
laminar ﬂames of different fuels have been studied extensively
by using a fan-stirred cylindrical/spherical combustion bomb.
This technique has proved to be a reliable one in measuring
the laminar and turbulent premixed ﬂame speeds at different
initial conditions. The combustion bomb technique allows for
easy-control of the initial temperature, pressure, and turbulent
intensity. The latter can be controlled by changing the fan geom-
etry and speed. In addition, previous investigations have shown
that ﬂame visualization can be done using Schlieren imaging
and laser tomography. However, none of the previous studies
has considered the use of OH-chemiluminescence as a measure-
ment technique despite being one of the efﬁcient available tech-
niques. Consequently, this measurement tool can be used for
tracking ﬂame development under turbulent conditions in future
research. Moreover, the combustion bomb technique is ﬂexible
in measuring ﬂame speeds of different kinds of gaseous and
liquid fuels such as alkanes (C1-C3), natural gas, biogas, and
isooctane.
An optical engine is a new and advanced method to investigate
turbulent ﬂames in realistic practical conditions. Recently, diesel
and gasoline optical engines have been used in few investigations
to study the ﬂame and combustion characteristics of different
fuels. For example, diesel optical engines were used to study igni-
tion delay time, in-cylinder pressure, and heat release rate for a
number of heavy diesel fuels. In addition, ﬂame visualization and
luminosity inside the engine have been observed to study the
effect of the injection timing on ﬂame propagation and characteris-
tics. Similarly, gasoline optical engines have been considered as an
excellent tool to investigate deeply the turbulent premixed ﬂame
behavior in actual conditions. This is due to their capabilities in
allowing for the application of quantitative and qualitative diagnos-
tic techniques, which can be used to study combustion, emissions,
mixing, and in-cylinder ﬂame characteristics. Such experimental
measurements are not only essential for validating the computa-
tional model but can also be processed to provide detailed informa-
tion about the physical processes that take place inside the
cylinders.
As Qatar is the largest producer and exporter of GTL, it is highly
important to measure its combustion characteristics, which have not
been fully studied until now. Subsequently, this demand can be met
by using the cylindrical/spherical combustion bomb technique, and
the results can be deepened and validated using the optical engine as
a strong ﬂame visualization tool.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank Qatar University for their support.
Table 3
Summary of literature survey on the gasoline optical engine
Gasoline optical engine
Author
Peñaranda and Boggio, 2018 [82]
Yang et al., 2019 [85]
Chen et al., 2019 [86]
Id et al., 2017 [84]
Fuel
Methane/hydrogen blends
95 Gasoline
Methane
Gasoline
Equivalence ratio
1.0, 0.71
1.0, 0.71
1.0
1, 0.77, 0.71, 0.67, 0.625
Engine temperature (K)
330–335
298
368
330–335
Engine speed (rpm)
900
1200
800
1000
Compression ratio
–
11:1
13:1
10:1
Optical access
Bowditch-designed optical
access
Bowditch-designed optical
access
Bowditch-designed optical
access
Bowditch-designed optical
access
Pressure sensor type
Quartz pressure transducer
Kistler type 6125C
Kistler type 6125C
–
Camera type
PCO Dimax S1
High-speed color NAC CMOS
Photron SA-Z
Optronis CamRecord 5000
Frame rate
5400
–
5000
5000
Main measurements
In-cylinder pressure
Tumble ratio
In-cylinder pressure
Fuel conversion efﬁciency
UHC, CO, and NOx emission
Turbulent kinetic energy
Mass fraction burned
In-cylinder pressure
Flame propagation rate
Swirl ratio
Flame development
Heat release rate
Maximum ﬂame penetration
Indicated mean effective
pressure
Indicated mean effective
pressure
Indicated mean effective
pressure
CAD at spark
−14 CAD ATDC
15 CAD BTDC
−18 CAD ATDC
10,15,20,25,30 CAD BTDC
No. of averaged cycles
200
100
150
200
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
AUGUST 2020, Vol. 142 / 080801-15
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 16 ---

References
[1] Samim, S., 2016, “Investigation of Laminar Flame Speed of Alternative Liquid
Fuel Blends,” Master’s Thesis, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar. http://hdl.handle.
net/10576/5075.
[2] Bai, Z., Wang, Z., Yu, G., Yang, Y., and Metghalchi, H., 2019, “Experimental
Study of Laminar Burning Speed for Premixed Biomass/Air Flame,” ASME
J. Energy Resour. Technol., 141(2), p. 022206.
[3] Rokni, E., Moghaddas, A., Askari, O., and Metghalchi, H., 2014, “Measurement
of Laminar Burning Speeds and Investigation of Flame Stability of Acetylene
(C2H2)/Air Mixtures,” ASME J. Energy Resour. Technol., 137(1), p. 012204.
[4] Samim, S., Sadeq, A. M., and Ahmed, S. F., 2016, “Measurements of Laminar
Flame Speeds of Gas-to-Liquid-Diesel Fuel Blends,” ASME J. Energy Resour.
Technol., 138(5), p. 052213.
[5] Yelishala, S. C., Wang, Z., Metghalchi, H., Levendis, Y. A., Kannaiyan, K., and
Sadr, R., 2019, “Effect of Carbon Dioxide on the Laminar Burning Speed of
Propane–Air Mixtures,” ASME J. Energy Resour. Technol., 141(8), p. 082205.
[6] Bradley,D.,Haq,M.Z.,Hicks,R.A.,Kitagawa,T.,Lawes,M.,Sheppard,C.G.,and
Woolley, R., 2003, “Turbulent Burning Velocity, Burned Gas Distribution, and
Associated Flame Surface Deﬁnition,” Combust. Flame, 133(4), pp. 415–430.
[7] Zhang, G., Li, G., Li, H., and Jiang, Y., 2019, “ScienceDirect Experimental
Investigation on the Self-Acceleration of 10% H 2/90% CO/Air Turbulent
Expanding Premixed Flame,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 44(44), pp. 24321–24330.
[8] Chakraborty, N., 2014, “Modeling of Entropy Generation in Turbulent Premixed
Flames for Reynolds Averaged Navier–Stokes Simulations: A Direct Numerical
Simulation Analysis,” ASME J. Energy Resour. Technol., 137(3), p. 032201.
[9] Roshan, G. R., Ranjbar, F., and Orosa, J. A., 2010, “Simulation of Global
Warming Effect on Outdoor Thermal Comfort Conditions,” Int. J. Environ. Sci.
Technol., 7(3), pp. 571–580.
[10] QDB, 2018, “Report: Qatar’s Exporters Directory 2018”. https://www.qdb.qa/en/
Documents/QDB_Tasdeer_Exporter-2018-English.pdf.
[11] Semenov, E. S., 1966, “Measurement of Turbulence Characteristics in a Closed
Volume With Artiﬁcial Turbulence,” Combust. Explos. Shock Waves, 1(2),
pp. 57–62.
[12] Ehn, A., Zhu, J., Li, X., and Kiefer, J., 2017, “Advanced Laser-Based Techniques
for Gas-Phase Diagnostics in Combustion and Aerospace Engineering,” Appl.
Spectrosc., 71(3), pp. 341–366.
[13] Huang, Y., 2008, “Combustion Dynamics of Swirl-Stabilized Lean Premixed
Flames in an Acoustically-Driven Environment,” Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy)
thesis, University of Iowa.
[14] Bradley, D., Lawes, M., and Mansour, M. S., 2011, “The Problems of the
Turbulent Burning Velocity,” Flow Turbul. Combust., 87(2–3), pp. 191–204.
[15] Brutscher, T., Zarzalis, N., and Bockhorn, H., 2002, “An Experimentally Based
Approach for the Space-Averaged Laminar Burning Velocity Used for
Modeling Premixed Turbulent Combustion,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 29(2),
pp. 1825–1832.
[16] Zhen, G., and Leuckel, W., 1997, “Effects of Ignitors and Turbulence on Dust
Explosions,” J. Loss Prev. Process Ind., 10(5–6), pp. 317–324.
[17] Leisenheimer,B., and Leukel, W., 2007, “Self-Generated Acceleration of Conﬁned
Deﬂagrative Flame Fronts,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 118(1–3), pp. 147–164.
[18] Weiß, M., Zarzalis, N., and Suntz, R., 2008, “Experimental Study of Markstein
Number Effects on Laminar Flamelet Velocity in Turbulent Premixed Flames,”
Combust. Flame, 154(4), pp. 671–691.
[19] Birouk, M., Sarh, B., and Gökalp, I., 2003, “An Attempt to Realize Experimental
Isotropic Turbulence at Low Reynolds Number,” Flow Turbul. Combust., 70(1–
4), pp. 325–348.
[20] Hwang, W., and Eaton, J. K., 2004, “Creating Homogeneous and Isotropic
Turbulence Without a Mean Flow,” Exp Fluids., 36(3), pp. 444–454.
[21] Sheikhi, M. R. H., Safari, M., and Metghalchi, H., 2012, “Large Eddy Simulation
for Local Entropy Generation Analysis of Turbulent Flows,” ASME J. Energy
Resour. Technol., 134(4), p. 041603.
[22] Kwon, S., Wu, M. S., Driscoll, J. F., and Faeth, G. M., 1992, “Flame Surface
Properties of Premixed Flames in Isotropic Turbulence: Measurements and
Numerical Simulations,” Combust. Flame, 88(2), pp. 221–238.
[23] Fansler, T. D., and Groff, E. G., 1990, “Turbulence Characteristics of a fan-Stirred
Combustion Vessel,” Combust. Flame, 80(3–4), pp. 350–354.
[24] Shy, S. S., I, W. K., and Lin, M. L., 2000, “A New Cruciform Burner and Its
Turbulence Measurements for Premixed Turbulent Combustion Study,” Exp.
Therm. Fluid Sci., 20(3–4), pp. 105–114.
[25] Liu, C., 2015, Self-Contradictions in Current Turbulence Theory, Technical
Report 2015-06. University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington.
[26] Ravi, S., 2014, Measurement of Turbulent Flame Speeds of Hydrogen and
Natural Gas Blends (C1-C5 Alkanes) using a Newly Developed Fan-Stirred
Vessel, Doctoral dissertation, Texas A & M University. http://hdl.handle.net/
1969.1/152731.
[27] Vancoillie, J., Sharpe, G., and Lawes, M., 2014, “The Turbulent Burning Velocity
of Methanol-Air Mixtures,” Fuel, 130, pp. 76–91.
[28] Ayache, A., and Birouk, M., 2018, “Experimental Study of Turbulent Burning
Velocity of Premixed Biogas Flame,” ASME J. Energy Resour. Technol.,
141(3), p. 032202.
[29] Lewis, B., and Von Elbe, G., 1951, Combustion Flames and Explosion of Gases,
Academic Press, New York.
[30] Al Omari, S. A. B., Hamdan, M. O., Ye, M., and Elnajjar, E., 2019, “Combustion
of Jojoba-oil/Diesel Blends in a Small Scale Furnace,” Renew. Energy, 131, pp.
678–688.
[31] Morones, A., Ravi, S., Plichta, D., Petersen, E. L., Donohoe, N., Heufer, A.,
Curran, H. J., Güthe, F., and Wind, T., 2014, “Laminar and Turbulent Flame
Speeds for Natural Gas/Hydrogen Blends,” Proceedings of the ASME Turbo
Expo 2014: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition. Volume 4B:
Combustion, Fuels and Emissions. Düsseldorf, Germany, June 16–20, p.
V04BT04A039. ASME. .
[32] El-Adawy, M., Heikal, M. R., and Aziz, A. R. A., 2018, “Stereoscopic Particle
Image Velocimetry Measurements and Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
Analysis of the In-Cylinder Flow of Gasoline Direct Injection Engine,” ASME
J. Energy Resour. Technol., 141(4), p. 042204.
[33] Settles, G. S., and Hargather, M. J., 2017, “A Review of Recent Developments in
Schlieren and Shadowgraph Techniques,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 28(4), p. 42001.
[34] Harker, M. R., Hattrell, T., Lawes, M., Sheppard, C. G. W., and Tripathi, N.,
2012, “Measurements of the Three-Dimensional Structure of Flames at Low
Turbulence,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 184(10–11), pp. 1818–1837.
[35] Hara, T., and Tanoue, K., 2006, “Laminar Flame Speeds of Ethanol, n-Heptane,
Iso-Octane Air Mixtures,” FISITA 2006 Student Congr., 19(2–3), pp. 181–186.
[36] Brequigny, P., Endouard, C., Mounaïm-rousselle, C., and Foucher, F., 2018, “An
Experimental
Study
on
Turbulent
Premixed
Expanding
Flames
Using
Simultaneously Schlieren and Tomography Techniques,” Exp. Therm. Fluid
Sci., 95, pp. 11–17.
[37] Galmiche, B., Mazellier, N., Halter, F., and Foucher, F., 2014, “Turbulence
Characterization of a High-Pressure High-Temperature Fan-Stirred Combustion
Vessel Using LDV, PIV and TR-PIV Measurements,”. Exp. Fluids, 55, p. 1636.
[38] Nathan, H., and Richard, S., 2014, “Laminar Burning Velocity Measurements of
Methane
and
Carbon
Dioxide
Mixtures
(Biogas)
over
Wide
Ranging
Temperatures and Pressures,” Fuel, 116, pp. 743–750.
[39] Morones Ruelas, A., 2015, “Turbulence Measurements in a Fan-Stirred Flame
Bomb Using Laser Doppler Velocimetry,” Master’s thesis, Texas A & M
University. http://hdl.handle.net /1969.1/155689.
[40] Yi, W., 2016, “Experimental Investigation of Laminar Flame Speeds of Kerosene
Fuel and Second Generation Biofuels in Elevated Conditions of Pressure and
Preheat Temperature,” Chemical Physics [physics.chem-ph]. INSA de Rouen,
2016. English. ⟨NNT : 2016ISAM0011⟩.
[41] Awakem, D., Obounou, M., and Noume, H. C., 2018, “Application of
the Computational Singular Perturbation Method to a Turbulent Diffusion
CH4/H2/N2 Flame Using OpenFOAM,” ASME J. Energy Resour. Technol.,
141(4), p. 042201.
[42] Yu, G., Metghalchi, H., Askari, O., and Wang, Z., 2019, “Combustion Simulation
of Propane/Oxygen (With Nitrogen/Argon) Mixtures Using Rate-Controlled
Constrained-Equilibrium,” ASME J. Energy Resour. Technol., 141(2), p. 022204.
[43] Gomez Casanova, C. A., 2016, “Experimental Measurement of Laminar Flame
Speed of a Novel Liquid Biofuel 1,3 Dimethoxyoctane,” M.S. Thesis,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
[44] Kido, H., Nakahara, M., Nakashima, K., and Hashimoto, J. U. N., 2002,
“Inﬂuence of Local Flame Displacement Velocity on Turbulent Burning
Velocity,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 29(2), pp. 1855–1861.
[45] Bouvet, N., Chauveau, C., Gökalp, I., and Halter, F., 2011, “Experimental Studies
of the Fundamental Flame Speeds of Syngas (H 2/CO)/air Mixtures,” Proc.
Combust. Inst., 33(1), pp. 913–920.
[46] Michel, R., Rapagnà, S., Di Marcello, M., Burg, P., Matt, M., Courson, C., and
Gruber, R., 2011, “Catalytic Steam Gasiﬁcation of Miscanthus X Giganteus in
Fluidised Bed Reactor on Olivine Based Catalysts,” Fuel Process. Technol.,
92(6), pp. 1169–1177.
[47] Pang, G. A., Davidson, D. F., and Hanson, R. K., 2009, “Experimental Study and
Modeling of Shock Tube Ignition Delay Times for Hydrogen-Oxygen-Argon
Mixtures at Low Temperatures,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 32(1), pp. 181–188.
[48] Natarajan, J., Lieuwen, T., and Seitzman, J., 2007, “Laminar Flame Speeds of H2/
CO Mixtures: Effect of CO2 Dilution, Preheat Temperature, and Pressure,”
Combust. Flame, 151(1–2), pp. 104–119.
[49] Davis, S. G., Joshi, A. V., Wang, H., and Egolfopoulos, F., 2005, “An Optimized
Kinetic Model of H2/CO Combustion,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 30(1), pp. 1283–
1292.
[50] Wang, B. L., Olivier, H., and Grönig, H., 2003, “Ignition of Shock-Heated H
2-Air-Steam Mixtures,” Combust. Flame, 133(1–2), pp. 93–106.
[51] Higman, C., 2008, Combustion Engineering Issues for Solid Fuel Systems,
Academic Press, pp. 423–468.
[52] Lee, H. C., Jiang, L. Y., and Mohamad, A. A., 2014, “A Review on the Laminar
Flame Speed and Ignition Delay Time of Syngas Mixtures,” Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy, 39(2), pp. 1105–1121.
[53] Sajjad, H., Masjuki, H. H., Varman, M., Kalam, M. A., Arbab, M. I., Imtenan, S.,
and Rahman, S. A., 2014, “Engine Combustion, Performance and Emission
Characteristics of Gas to Liquid (GTL) Fuels and Its Blends With Diesel and
Bio-Diesel,” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 30, pp. 961–986.
[54] Agarwal, A. K., Singh, A. P., and Agarwal, A., 2016, “Evolution, Trends and
Applications of Endoscopy in Internal Combustion Engines,” J. Energy
Environ. Sustainability, 1, pp. 56–66.
[55] Kalghatgi, G., 2019, “Development of Fuel/Engine Systems—The Way Forward
to Sustainable Transport,” Engineering, 5(3), pp. 510–518.
[56] Connor, J. O., and Musculus, M., 2013, “Of Engine Research Combustion
Phasing”.
[57] Bevan, J., Russell, B., and Marshall, B., “A New Approach to OSCE Preparation
—PrOSCEs,” BMC Med. Educ., 19(1), p. 126.
[58] Perini, F., Zha, K., Busch, S., Kurtz, E., Peterson, R. C., Warey, A., and Reitz, R.
D., 2018, “Piston Geometry Effects in a Light-Duty, Swirl-Supported Diesel
Engine: Flow Structure Characterization”, Int. J. Eng. Res., 19(10), pp. 1079–
1098.
[59] Winklhofer, E., and Hopfner, W., 2013, “Optical Single Cylinder Engines in
Engine Research and Development,” Combust. Eng., 1(152), pp. 71–78.
080801-16 / Vol. 142, AUGUST 2020
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026


--- Page 17 ---

[60] Yin, C., Zhang, Z., Sun, Y., Sun, T., and Zhang, R., 2016, “Effect of the Piston
Top Contour on the Tumble Flow and Combustion Features of a GDI Engine
With a CMCV : A CFD Study,” Eng. Appl. Comput. Fluid Mech., 10(1),
pp. 311–329.
[61] Koszalka, G., and Suchecki, A., 2017, “Analysis of Design Parameters of
Pistons and Piston Rings of a Combustion Engine,” MATEC Web Conf., 118,
p. 00013.
[62] Zhang, X., 2012, “Power Control of Diesel Engine-Generator Set Subject to
Emission Constraints,” Electronic Theses and Dissertations, 5357.
[63] Ahmad, Z., Kaario, O., Qiang, C., Vuorinen, V., and Larmi, M., 2019, “A
Parametric Investigation of Diesel/Methane Dual-Fuel Combustion Progression/
Stages in a Heavy-Duty Optical Engine,” Appl. Energy, 251, pp. 113191.
[64] Han, S., Hyun, S., and Sik, C., 2014, “Bioethanol and Gasoline Premixing Effect
on Combustion and Emission Characteristics in Biodiesel Dual-Fuel Combustion
Engine,” Appl. Energy, 135, pp. 286–298.
[65] Shim, E., Park, H., and Bae, C., 2018, “Intake Air Strategy for Low HC and CO
Emissions in Dual-Fuel (CNG-Diesel) Premixed Charge Compression Ignition
Engine,” Appl. Energy, 225, pp. 1068–1077.
[66] Liu, J., Yang, F., Wang, H., Ouyang, M., and Hao, S., 2013, “Effects of Pilot Fuel
Quantity on the Emissions Characteristics of a CNG/Diesel Dual Fuel Engine
With Optimized Pilot Injection Timing,” Appl. Energy, 110, pp. 201–206.
[67] Cheng, Q., Ahmad, Z., Kaario, O., and Martti, L., 2019, “Cycle-to-Cycle
Variations of Dual-Fuel Combustion in an Optically Accessible Engine,” Appl.
Energy, 254, p. 113611.
[68] Lee, S., Yoon, S., Kwon, H., Lee, J., and Park, S., 2019, “Effects of Engine
Operating Conditions on Flame Propagation Processes in a Compression
Ignition Optical Engine,” Appl. Energy, 254, p. 113642.
[69] Pastor, J. V., Olmeda, P., Mart, J., and Lewiski, F., 2018, “Methodology for
Optical Engine Characterization by Means of the Combination of Experimental
and Modeling Techniques,” Appl. Sci., 12, pp. 1–17.
[70] Karim, G. A., 2015, Dual-fuel diesel engines, Taylor & Francis.
[71] Mustaﬁ, N. N., Raine, R. R., and Verhelst, S., 2013, “Combustion and Emissions
Characteristics of a Dual Fuel Engine Operated on Alternative Gaseous Fuels,”
Fuel, 109, pp. 669–678.
[72] Li, W., Liu, Z., and Wang, Z., 2016, “Experimental and Theoretical Analysis of
the Combustion Process at low Loads of a Diesel Natural Gas Dual-Fuel Engine,”
Energy, 94, pp. 728–741.
[73] Lee, J., Chu, S., Min, K., Kim, M., Jung, H., and Kim, H., 2017, “Classiﬁcation of
Diesel and Gasoline Dual-Fuel Combustion Modes by the Analysis of Heat
Release Rate Shapes in a Compression Ignition Engine,” Fuel, 209(1 December
2017), pp. 587–597.
[74] Muhammad, A., Gulzar, A., and Javaid, M. N., 2017, “Empirical Asessment of
Climate Change on Agricultural Crops: Panel Data Analysis in Pakistan,”
Int. J. Food Agric. Econ., 5(2), pp. 59–68.
[75] Shiao, Y., and Moskwa, J. J., 1995, “Cylinder Pressure and Combustion Heat
Release Estimation for SI Engine Diagnostics Using Nonlinear Sliding
Observers,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., 3(1), pp. 70–78.
[76] Liu, Z., and Karim, G. A., 1998, “An Examination of the Ignition Delay Period
in Gas-Fueled Diesel Engines,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 120(1),
pp. 225–231.
[77] Wang, Q., Yao, C., Dou, Z., Wang, B., and Wu, T., 2015, ““Effect of
Intake Pre-Heating and Injection Timing on Combustion and Emission
Characteristics of a Methanol Fumigated Diesel Engine at Part Load,” Fuel,
159, pp. 796–802.
[78] Dronniou, N., Kashdan, J., Lecointe, B., Sauve, K., and Soleri, D., 2014, “Optical
Investigation of Dual-fuel CNG/Diesel Combustion Strategies to Reduce CO2
Emissions,” SAE International Journal of Engines, 7(2), pp. 873–887.
[79] Wolff, A., 2012, “Inﬂuence of Engine Load on Piston Ring Pack Operation of a
Marine Two-Stroke Engine,” J. KONES, 19(2), pp. 557–568.
[80] Kashdan, J., and Thirouard, B., 2011, “Optical Engines as Representative Tools in
the Development of New Combustion Engine Concepts,” Oil Gas Sci. Technol. –
Rev. IFP Energies nouvelles, 66(5), pp. 759–777.
[81] Hagos, F. Y., Aziz, A. R. A., and Sulaiman, S. A., 2014, “Effect of Air-Fuel Ratio
on the Combustion Characteristics of Syngas (H2:CO) in Direct-Injection
Spark-Ignition Engine,” Energy Procedia, 61, pp. 2567–2571.
[82] Peñaranda, A., Boggio, S. M., Lacava, P. T., Merola, S., and Irimescu, A., 2018,
“ScienceDirect Characterization of Flame Front Propagation During Early and
Late Combustion for Methane-Hydrogen Fueling of an Optically Accessible SI
Engine,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 43(52), pp. 23538–23557.
[83] Giovanni, D., Claudio, P., Lorenzo, R., Carlo, G., Matteo, D., and Nazario, B.,
2014, “Combustion Analysis in an Optical Access Engine,” Energy Procedia,
45(2014), pp. 959–966.
[84] Martinez, S., Irimescu, A., Merola, S. S., Lacava, P., and Curto-Riso, P., 2017,
“Flame Front Propagation in an Optical GDI Engine under Stoichiometric and
Lean Burn Conditions,” Energies, 10, p. 1337.
[85] Yang, J., Dong, X., Wu, Q., and Xu, M., 2019, “Effects of Enhanced Tumble
Ratios on the In-Cylinder Performance of a Gasoline Direct Injection Optical
Engine,” Appl. Energy, 236, pp. 137–146.
[86] Chen, L., Wei, H., Zhang, R., Pan, J., Zhou, L., and Feng, D., 2019, “Effects of
Spark Plug Type and Ignition Energy on Combustion Performance in an Optical
SI Engine Fueled With Methane,” Appl. Therm. Eng., 148, pp. 188–195.
[87] Ragadia, S. Y., and Iyer, R. C., 2015, “A Review Paper on Theoretical &
Experimental Investigations of a Biogas Engine Technology,” IJSRD –
International Journal for Scientiﬁc Research & Development|, 3(6), pp. 864–869.
[88] Söder, M., 2013, "Numerical Investigation of Internal Combustion Engine
Related Flows, Licentiate dissertation", Stockholm, 2013..
[89] Merola, S. S., Tornatore, C., Irimescu, A., Marchitto, L., and Valentino, G., 2016,
“Optical Diagnostics of Early Flame Development in a DISI (Direct Injection
Spark Ignition) Engine Fueled with n-Butanol and Gasoline,” Energy, 108, pp.
50–62.
[90] Liu, H., Wang, X., Zhang, D., Dong, F., Liu, X., Yang, Y., Huang, H., Wang, Y.,
Wang, Q., and Zheng, Z., 2019, “Investigation on Blending Effects of Gasoline
Fuel with N-Butanol, DMF, and Ethanol on the Fuel Consumption and
Harmful Emissions in a GDI Vehicle,” Energies, 12(10), pp. 1845.
Journal of Energy Resources Technology
AUGUST 2020, Vol. 142 / 080801-17
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/energyresources/article-pdf/142/8/080801/6515878/jert_142_8_080801.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 01 January 2026
