
--- Page 1 ---

J. F. Carrotte 
D. W. Bailey 
Department of Transport Technology, 
Loughborough University, 
Loughborough, Leics, United Kingdom 
C. W. Frodsham 
Department of Combustion, 
Rolls Royce plc, 
Brislol, United Kingdom 
Detailed Measurements on a 
Modern Combustor Dump 
Diffuser System 
An experimental investigation has been carried out to determine the flow characteris- 
tics and aerodynamic performance of a modern gas turbine combustor dump diffuser 
The system comprised a straight walled prediffuser, of area ratio 1.35, which pro- 
jected into a dump cavity where the flow divided to pass either into the flame tube 
or surrounding feed annuli. In addition, a limited amount of air was removed to 
simulate flow used for turbine cooling. The flame tube was relatively deep, having a 
radial depth 5.5 times that of the passage height at prediffuser inlet, and incorporated 
burner feed arms, cowl head porosity, cooling rings, and primary ports. Representa- 
tive inlet conditions to the diffuser system were generated by a single-stage axial 
flow compressor Results are presented for the datum configuration, and for a further 
three geometries in which the distance between prediffuser exit and the head of the 
flame tube ( i. e., dump gap) was reduced. Relatively high values of stagnation pressure 
loss were indicated, with further significant increases occurring at smaller dump 
gaps. These high losses, which suggest a correlation with other published data, are 
due to the relatively deep flame tube and short diffuser length. Furthermore, the 
results also focus attention on how the presence of a small degree of diffuser inlet 
swirl, typical of that which may be found within a gas turbine engine, can result in 
large swirl angles being generated farther downstream around the flame tube. This 
is particularly true forflow passing to the inner annulus. 
Introduction 
The primary function of a gas turbine diffuser system is to 
decelerate air issuing from the compressor and to distribute this 
flow in a uniform and stable manner around the flame tube. 
This also needs to be achieved with a minimal loss of stagnation 
pressure due to the effect on specific fuel consumption and the 
penetration of flow entering the flame tube. In current advanced 
core engines these objectives are usually met with dump diffuser 
systems, which incorporate a prediffuser followed by a recircu- 
lating dump region surrounding the flame tube head. Although 
such systems have relatively high losses, they are favored be- 
cause of their inherent flow stability and insensitivity to manu- 
facturing tolerances and thermal expansions. 
Fishenden and Stevens [1] initially investigated the overall per- 
formance of a dump system by varying several parameters, includ- 
ing the mass flow split to each feed annuli, prediffuser area ratio, 
and the distance between prediffuser exit and the flame tube head 
(i.e., dump gap D/h2). All tests were conducted with a flame tube 
that had a radial depth, expressed in terms of the passage height at 
prediffuser inlet (W/hl) of 3.5. It was concluded that the principal 
determinants of stagnation pressure loss in such systems are the 
amount of diffusion being attempted and the radius of curvature 
undertaken by the flow as it passes around the flame tube. This 
latter effect is a function of the size and shape of the flame tube 
and the dump gap. With this in mind it is interesting to note the 
more recent works of several authors [2-6], which illustrate the 
trend for flame tubes of increasing depth, with values (W/h~) in 
excess of 4.0. In addition, this trend is likely to continue as stricter 
emission regulations are introduced. For aircraft applications there 
is also a constant desire to reduce weight, resulting in the demand 
for shorter length diffusers. These trends imply that, in a modern 
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute and presented at the 39th 
International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exposition, The Hague, 
The Netherlands, June 13-16, 1994. Manuscript received by the International 
Gas Turbine Institute February 26, 1994. Paper No. 94-GT-299. Associate Techni- 
cal Editor: E. M. Greitzer. 
dump diffuser system, relatively large amounts of flow turning 
and curvature are required in the vicinity of the flame tube head, 
which has a significant effect on diffuser performance. It should 
also be noted that investigations by several authors have shown 
how the performance of any diffuser is affected by the flow condi- 
tions at inlet to the system. For example, Stevens et al. [7], Stevens 
and Wray [8], and Klein [9] noted the effects on diffuser perfor- 
mance due to wakes from upstream compressor outlet guide vanes. 
In addition, Lohmann et al. [10] considered tangential momentum 
within a prediffuser and showed that inlet swirl angles can increase 
as the flow is diffused due to reductions in axial velocity and flow 
radius. This latter effect may be of significance when considering 
the large changes in radius that must be undeaaken by flow when 
passing around the head of the flame tube. It is therefore thought 
that as performance becomes more critical and designs less conser- 
vative, so it is necessary when investigating such systems to simu- 
late accurately the inlet conditions that are typically generated by 
an upstream compressor. 
This paper presents detailed measurements of the mean flow 
field and pressure distribution within a dump diffuser incorpo- 
rating a flame tube of radial depth 5.5 times the passage height 
at pre-diffuser inlet (W/hl). With the exception of Stevens et 
al. [ 2 ], this represents a significant increase in depth, and hence 
flow curvature, relative to other published data. In addition to 
the datum configuration, results are also presented for three 
other dump gaps. Thus, an assessment can be made of the 
performance penalty that will be incurred in such a system when 
the diffuser length is shortened by reducing the dump gap. All 
measurements were obtained on a fully annular facility with 
the diffuser located downstream of a single-stage axial flow 
compressor. This gave a good representation of the secondary 
flows, blade wakes, turbulence characteristics, rotor tip leakage, 
and other effects that are present at the inlet of a diffuser system 
operating within a gas turbine engine. 
Experimental Facility 
A comprehensive description of the experimental facility is 
given by Wray et al. [11]. Air is drawn from atmosphere into 
678 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Copyright © 1995 by ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/117/4/678/5889011/678_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 2 ---

I 
et 
ire 
mb Flow 
,=rlel • 
sop 
Section 
Fig. 1 Experimental facility 
a large plenum, above the vertically mounted facility, prior to 
passing through the entry flare, which also contains a honey- 
comb flow straightener (Fig. 1). The pressure rise required to 
draw air through the facility is provided by the single-stage axial 
flow compressor located immediately upstream of the working 
section: It consists of stationary inlet and outlet guide vane rows 
and a rotor, this being driven by a 45 k W DC motor sited in 
the exhaust plenum below the test rig.rThe rotor is operated at 
a constant nondimensional speed (N/VT) of 168.7, which, at a 
typical ambient temperature of 291 K, results in a rotor speed 
of 2880 rpm. This provides approximately 46 deg of inlet swirl 
to the compressor outlet guide vanes (OGVs), which are fully 
shrouded and representative of current engine design practice. 
Their operational Reynolds number of 2.6 x 105, based on 
blade true chord, together with the turbulence effects associated 
with the upstream rotor, means the blades are well above their 
critical transition value. 
The inlet of the combustor diffuser system is located at the 
trailing edge of the OGVs where the passage height (h~) is 36.6 
mm with a radius of 375 mm at midpassage height (Fig. 2). 
For a mass flow of 4.6 kg/s, this gives a mean velocity at inlet 
to the prediffuser of approximately 45 m/s (Mach No. ~ 0.13 ). 
The prediffuser is of area ratio 1.35 and has an axial length 1.5 
I 
r=37 
,n,n 
/! 
-~ 
~ hl 
11o ~ 
6.4% 
20.6% 
24.3% 
Pre-diffuser inlet height (Ill) 
= 
36.6mm 
Pre-diffuser exit height (h2/h I) 
= 
1.35 
Inner annulus height (hl/hl) 
= 
1.41 
Outer annulus height (ho/b l) 
= 
0.67 
Flame tube radial depth 
= 
5.5 
Fig. 2 Diffuser geometry 
times the inlet height (h~). At prediffuser exit the flow enters 
the dump cavity, where it divides to pass into either the outer 
and inner feed annuli or flame tube. In addition, the results of 
Stevens et al. [ 2 ] have shown that removal of turbine cooling air 
from the dump region can significantly affect the flow properties 
within the feed annuli. Consequently a limited amount of air is 
removed through a series of plunged holes (~b43.5 mm) within 
the inner dump casing. 
In its datum configuration, the distance between the exit of 
the prediffuser and the flame tube cowl corresponds to the 
annulus height at prediffuser exit (i.e., dump gap, D/h2 = 1.0). 
Since the diffuser system is not canted, additional dump gaps 
of 0.80, 0.65, and 0.50 were obtained merely by raising the 
Nomenclature 
A = area 
C~, = static pressure recovery coeffi- 
cient 
D = dump gas distance (Fig. 2) 
h = annulus passage height 
L = diffuser axial length (Fig. 14) 
m = mass flow 
N = compressor rotor speed 
OGV = compressor outlet guide vane 
p = local static pressure 
P = local stagnation pressure 
r = radius relative to rig centreline 
ri = inner casing radius relative to rig 
centerline 
ro = outer casing radius relative to rig 
centerline 
T = ambient temperature, K 
U = axial velocity 
U, = tangential velocity 
W = flame tube radial depth 
W' = radial flow deflection (Fig. 14) 
h = stagnation pressure loss coefficient 
p = fluid density 
0 = flow swirl angle 
Superscripts 
- = area-weighted spatial 
mean value 
= mass-weighted spatial 
mean value 
c = circumferentially 
weighted mean value 
Subscripts 
1, 2 = stations at prediffuser 
inlet, exit (Fig. 2) 
O1, 02, 03 = stations within outer 
annulus (Fig. 2) 
I1, 12, 13 = stations within inner 
annulus (Fig. 2) 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 679 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/117/4/678/5889011/678_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 3 ---

complete flame tube unit by the required distance. Porosity 
through the cowl head is provided by holes (~b79.5 ram) in each 
of the 20 burner sectors, this flow then entering the combustor 
primary zone through the cowl backplate. Also located within 
the center of each cowl hole is a burner, with representative 
porosity, and an attached fuel feed arm. Flow can also enter the 
flame tube through primary cooling nngs, primary ports, and 
secondary cooling rings located in both the outer and inner feed 
annuli. At the entry plane to each annulus the radial depth of 
the flame tube is 5.5 times the passage height at prediffuser 
inlet; however, this ratio increases to 6.3 downstream of the 
second cooling ring. A seres of throttles located below the 
working section allowed, for a given geometry, the correct mass 
flow split and overall mass flow to be set. All results presented 
in this paper were obtained for a mass flow split of: 
Outer feed annulus 
24.3% 
Inner feed annulus 
20.6% 
Turbine bleed passage 
6.4% 
(Flame tube) 
48.7% 
[N.B. Food annulus and flame tube mass flows measured down- 
stream of second cooling rings]. 
The division of mass flow to the turbine bleed passage and 
feed annuli were maintained to within ±0.1 and ±0.5 percent 
of their respective nominal values. The flow, having passed 
through the working section and throttle system, was expelled 
to atmosphere via the exhaust plenum below the facility. 
Instrumentation 
Data presented in this paper were mainly derived from mea- 
surements with miniature five-hole pressure probes of overall 
diameter 1.7 mm, hole bore 0.25 mm, which were used in a 
nonnulled mode as outlined by Wray et al, [11]. Measurements 
were made 2 mm downstream of the OGV trailing edge, 1 mm 
downstream of prediffuser exit, and at up to three planes within 
each feed annulus (Fig. 2). At all these stations area traverses 
were performed. For measurements within the prediffuser and 
outer annulus, radial movement of the instrumentation was ob- 
tained by attaching the probes to stepper motors located on the 
outer casing. In addition, to avoid numerous circumferential 
instrumentation locations, the OGV row and flame tube could 
be indexed around to provide the required circumferential 
movement. For measurements within the inner annulus a tra- 
versing mechanism was mounted inside the flame tube. As de- 
scribed by Wray et al. [11] this could be rotated circumferen- 
tially, independent of the flame tube, while also providing radial 
movement of the probe. Using these techniques, data were re- 
corded at 20 radial positions, and this was repeated at 21 circum- 
ferential locations for each traverse plane. The area traversed 
either corresponded to one OGV blade space, as at prediffuser 
inlet, or one burner sector for measurements within the feed 
annuli. At prediffuser exit measurements were made across an 
OGV space and a burner sector in order to define accurately 
the blade wakes and assess the influence of cowl head geometry 
at this location. Numerous static tappings were also located 
within the dump cavity, around the flame tube head, and on the 
casing walls within the feed annuli and turbine bleed passage. 
Stagnation pressure levels within the turbine bleed passage were 
derived from fixed pitot rakes. Operation of the test rig, position- 
ing of the instrumentation, and digitizing of all pressure trans- 
ducer signals was controlled by a Personal Computer (PC). 
Data Reduction 
At each traverse point, five-hole probes provide information 
on stagnation and static pressure in addition to velocity magni- 
tude and direction. From this information the overall mean ve- 
locity at a traverse plane was calculated using an area-weighted 
method so that: 
1 f UdA 
Cr=~ 
(1) 
with the mass flow rate through a traverse plane being defined 
as 
m = f pUdA = pOA 
(2) 
Spatially averaged values of stagnation and static pressures at 
a traverse plane were defined by mass weighting the appropriate 
individual values, i.e., 
p lfPdmiJ If 
.
.
.
.
 
pdm 
(3) 
m 
m 
For radial distributions of circumferentially averaged quanti- 
fies, this weighting was performed in the circumferential direc- 
tion only. All flow angles presented were derived from the 
mass-weighted tangential and area-weighted axial velocity com- 
ponents as outlined by Dring and Spear [12]. It should also be 
noted that all of these averaged quantities were derived by 
numerical integration of the data to which had been fitted a 
spline curve. 
Changes in the spatially averaged pressures between various 
planes within the diffuser system are expressed in terms of the 
stagnation pressure loss (K) and static pressure recovery (Cp) 
coefficients: 
P,, - Pb 
Pb -P. 
= p° _ ¢o 
cp = L--- 
(4) 
where "a" and "b" are the upstream and downstream planes, 
respectively. 
Estimate of Experimental Errors 
At a given data point the experimental accuracy is influenced 
by: 
(i) 
the spatial error associated with the finite distance be- 
tween the five holes on the probe tip; this was elimi- 
nated by radial and circumferential interpolation of the 
side pressures onto the central measurement hole [11]. 
(ii) 
the proximity of casing surfaces to a measurement 
location. 
(iii) 
recording of the pressure signals via transducers and 
an analogue to digital convertor. 
(iv) 
maintaining the compressor on its correct operating 
point. 
Discrepancies in mass flow of less than 2 percent were recorded 
between the pre-diffuser inlet and exit planes due to these 
sources of error. Based on these values and the repeatability of 
test data it was estimated that the stagnation pressure loss (~) 
and static pressure recovery (Cp) coefficients were accurate to 
within 0.01 of their true values. Flow angles were thought to 
be in error by up to 1 deg. 
Results and Discussion 
Results are presented for the diffuser in its datum configura- 
tion, with a dump gap of 1.0, and at three additional dump gaps 
of 0.80, 0.65, and 0.50. 
Inlet Conditions. 
Axial velocity contours indicate the cir- 
cumferential and radial distribution of fluid at inlet to the dif- 
fuser system (Fig. 3). As well as boundary layers on each 
casing, well-defined blade wakes are present from the upstream 
compressor outlet guide vanes. Within experimental error, these 
inlet conditions were the same for all the geometries tested. 
Several authors have noted how the performance of a diffuser 
system varies with inlet conditions. For example, Stevens et al. 
[8 ] have shown that blade wakes can have a favorable effect 
by re-energizing boundary layer flow due to enhanced mixing. 
680 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/117/4/678/5889011/678_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 4 ---

Outer Casing 
Contours U/U 
(0.1 Intervals) 
Inner Casing 
Fig. 3 Axial velocity distribution at prediffuser inlet 
However, the presence and mixing out of such flow nonunifor- 
mities will lead to an increase in the diffuser system's mass- 
weighted pressure loss. To try and reduce this loss variation 
with inlet conditions Klein [ 9] defines diffuser performance in 
terms of momentum mix weighted values. In this case, overall 
stagnation and static pressures at the inlet and exit planes are 
those which would occur if the respective velocity profiles were 
to mix out in a frictionless duct of constant area. However, 
within a diffuser system the flow area increases and, as outlined 
by Denton [13], the resulting positive pressure gradient in- 
creases the mixing losses, which are not accounted for in the 
momentum mix approach. 
It should be noted that all performance data presented in this 
paper are in terms of mass-weighted pressures and therefore 
include not only the favorable effects of wake mixing, on 
boundary layer flow, but also any mixing loss associated with 
the nonuniform inlet flow. 
Datum Configuration. 
The stagnation pressure losses (h) 
between prediffuser inlet (X 1 ) and the outer (X O3) and inner 
(XI3) feed annuli are 0.483 and 0.430, respectively. Since the 
loss within the prediffuser is 0.068, this implies that a large 
proportion of the loss occurs downstream of the prediffuser as 
the flow passes around the flame tube head and enters the feed 
annuli. It is also interesting to note the relatively high stagnation 
pressure loss (h), of 0.664, that is associated with the flow 
entering the turbine bleed passage. This represents low-energy 
high-loss flow that is drawn through the bleed ports from the 
inner dump cavity. The remaining flow passes to the inner 
annulus and so, by removing low-energy air, this may account 
for the relatively low loss within this annulus relative to the 
outer feed annulus. With this in mind it is interesting to note 
the combined mass weighted inner annulus and turbine bleed 
loss of 0.485 is virtually the same as the outer feed annulus 
loss of 0.483. 
The prediffuser static pressure recovery coefficient (Cp) of 
0.373 is a significant proportion of the total static pressure 
recovery values of 0.448 and 0.510 recorded between predif- 
fuser inlet and the outer (X O3) and inner (X 13) feed annuli. 
Although there is a relatively large velocity reduction between 
prediffuser exit (~33 m/s) and the feed annuli (~ 11 m/s), the 
static pressure rise is significantly reduced by the relatively high 
stagnation pressure loss around the flame tube head. It can 
therefore be seen that in terms of overall diffuser performance, 
the majority of the static pressure rise occurs within the predif- 
fuser. 
It should be noted that diffuser performance is based on the 
overall mean flow properties at each traverse plane. However, 
there will be slight variations between these values and the 
actual loss and diffusion incurred along each flow path. This 
is because the actual values depend on which portion of the 
prediffuser flow passes into the feed annuli or turbine bleed 
passage. For example, assuming it is the 24.3 percent of the 
flow closest to the prediffuser outer casing that passes to the 
outer feed annuli, then a dividing streamline can be obtained 
and mass-weighted pressures for that streamtube calculated. 
This yields, for the flow passing to the outer annulus, a loss of 
0.082 within the prediffuser (houh_2) and a total loss of 0.459 
(houtl_03). Applying a similar technique to the inner annulus 
flow gives, for the prediffuser and total loss, values of 0.048 
(hint_2) and 0.408 ( hin~_13 ), respectively. Comparison with the 
data based on overall mean flow properties indicates some dif- 
ferences, but variations are relatively small and show the same 
trend of high losses around the flame tube head. Similarity of 
the results is thought to reflect the lack of large radial flow 
distortions at inlet to, and within, the prediffuser as well as a 
comparable stagnation pressure loss at different radii. In addi- 
tion, this streamtube method was first used by Fishenden and 
Stevens [1] whose flame tube incorporated no porosity. How- 
ever, the head porosity in this investigation means that, as well 
as radial location, the flow path at prediffuser exit is also deter- 
mined by whether it is in line with, or between, cowl holes. 
Thus, flow entering each feed annuli is more uniformly distrib- 
uted at prediffuser exit and is not confined to streamtubes adja- 
cent to each casing. 
Flow Field Characteristics. 
Comparison of the axial ve- 
locity contours at prediffuser inlet (Fig. 3) and exit (Fig. 4) 
indicates decay of the compressor OGV blade wakes within the 
prediffuser. As discussed by Hill et al. [14], in large positive 
gradients the pressure forces can increase the velocity gradients 
since the momentum of the slower moving fluid undergoes a 
greater reduction compared with the faster moving fluid. How- 
ever, decay of the blade wakes means that in this geometry it 
is the flow shear forces, rather than the pressure forces, which 
are predominant. The radial distribution of flow at inlet (X 1 ) 
and exit (X 2) from the prediffuser is more clearly indicated by 
the circumferentially averaged axial velocity profiles (Fig. 5). 
These are nondimensionalized by the calculated mean velocity 
at each plane and comparison of the profiles indicates the bound- 
ary layer growth that occurs along each prediffuser casing. This 
leads to a radial redistribution of fluid so that, at prediffuser 
exit, there is a relative increase in the amount of flow in the 
center of the prediffuser (between 10 and 90 percent of annulus 
height). The boundary layer growth is promoted by the positive 
pressure gradient within the prediffuser due to the increasing 
flow area. This pressure rise is shown by the static pressure 
profiles at each plane, which are nondimensionalized by the 
conditions at prediffuser inlet (Fig. 5). It should also be noted 
[ 
I 
i 
t 
t 
i 
t 
t 
i 
.! 
Outer Casing 
Contours U/O 
(0.1 Intervals) 
Dump 
Gap = I.O 
lrlncr Casing 
Fig. 4 Axial velocity distribution at prediffuser exit 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 681 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/117/4/678/5889011/678_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 5 ---

1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
Inner 
Fig. 5 
fi 
i 
Dump Gap (D/h=) = 1.0 
[] 
Velocity Profile (Xl) 
" 
1.4 
0 
Velocity Profile (X2) 
• 
Static Pressure Prorde (X1) 
X 
Static Pressure Prorfle (X2) 
1.2 
...... ~
:
'
 
1.0 
: 
~ 
VeloCity !~o f'd~ 
: 
: 
'; ..................... : ..... : ..... : .... : ..... :'= 
0.8 
• : ...... : ..... i ..... • ...... i ..... i ..... : ............... 
: 
i 
: 
i 
: 
: 
...... ' ..... : ..... ! ..... : ...... : ..... ! ..... : ...... : ..... :"' 
0.6 
.... : .... : ..... : ..... :. .... 3 ..... i ..... i ..... 3 ..... i .... 
: 
: 
Pt~-dlff~ser~'.,x|t ! 
: .~ : 
..... i ..... ~
"
~
~
"
 
:'. -".~ .... 0.4 
.... : ...... : ..... : ..... : ...... : ..... : ..... : ...... i ..... ! .... 
..... :~ .... i ..... i ..... ~ .... i ..... i ..... ! ..... i ..... :: .... 
0.2 
.... i ...... i ..... i ..... ~ .... ~ ..... i ..... i ..... ~ ..... ; .... 
: 
i 
Pr~.diff:userlnlet : 
: ~: 
• 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
(r- r~)/(ro - r~) 
Outer 
Axial velocity and static pressure profiles 
i 
that due to gradients of pressure in the radial direction, the 
pressure increase along each casing is different. This is thought 
to contribute to the more pronounced growth of the boundary 
layer along the outer casing. 
At prediffuser exit the flow separates to form a recirculation 
zone in the dump cavity. This region bounds the mainstream flow, 
which is discharged into the dump region and impinges on the 
flame tube head. The flow accelerates around the head, away from 
the stagnation point, giving rise to high velocities adjacent to the 
cowl surface (Fig. 6). This is reflected by the measured static 
pressure distribution on this surface that is presented later (Fig. 
12). The maximum velocity acquired is determined mainly by the 
curvature undertaken by the flow as it passes around the head and 
into the feed annuli. Measurements by Carrotte et al. [6] and 
Stevens et al. [2] have also shown how the velocity away from 
the cowl, toward the recirculation region, decreases rapidly. It is the 
high-velocity gradients in this region where a significant amount of 
turbulence, and hence stagnation pressure loss, is generated [6]. 
At entry to each feed annulus the flow distribution is still biased 
toward the flame tube, as shown for the outer feed annuli by the 
circumferentially averaged axial velocity profile at plane X 
O1 
(Fig. 7). However, due to the unstable nature of the flow passing 
around the head, this bias rapidly changes toward the outer casing, 
as measured at plane X 02 downstream of the first cooling ring 
(Fig. 7). The turbulence in this region is relatively high and, in 
Vortex 
1~o~ 
Boundary 
| 
~FIo W 
Streamline. 
~ 
Dividing 
Streamllm 
• 
ing Flown 
Flame'S, Main Stream. 
Fig. 6 Flow field downstream of pra-dlffuser 
Fig. 7 
1.6 
1.4 
! 
: 
: 
. 
: 
: 
: 
: 
1.2 
1.0 
i 
0.8 
.... " .
.
.
.
.
 
0.6 
............................................ 
; 
i 
i 
.L 
Plane XO2 
0.2 
• 
Plane XO3 
...... ; ..... : ..... ~ ..... i ..... i ..... ~ ..... ! ..... : ..... ~... 
0.0 
~ 
a 
~ 
I 
, 
i 
; 
i 
; 
-50 
-40 
-30 
-20 
-10 
0 
Distance from outer easlng (ram) 
Outer 
Outer annulus axial velocity profiles (dump gap = 1.0) 
• several other investigations, has led to rapid mixing out of the 
velocity profile. Comparison of the profiles at stations X 02 and 
X 03 shows this is not apparent in the present investigation. How- 
ever, it is thought the passage of air into the flame tube through 
primary ports and the secondary cooling ring helps maintain the 
distorted profile down the feed annulus, features that are often not 
simulated in other investigations. Although not presented, similar 
bias characteristics and axial velocity profiles have been measured 
for the flow passing down the inner annulus. 
As well as the radial distribution of flow, significant varia- 
tions in the swirl angle were found as the flow passed through 
the diffuser system (Fig. 8). At prediffuser inlet the increased 
swirl angles close to each casing (within 10 percent of the 
passage height) reflect the presence of flow overturning due to 
classical secondary flow within the upstream OGV passage. 
This is a usual occurrence within the stationary blade rows of 
axial compressors. Flow overturning by the OGVs, of approxi- 
mately 3 deg, is also indicated within the central region of the 
passage. The presence of this tangential momentum at inlet to 
the system leads to significant changes in the swirl angles (0) 
farther downstream, particularly for the flow passing to the inner 
annulus (Fig. 8). This is due to the change in radius, relative 
to the engine centerline, that is undertaken by the flow within 
the diffuser system and the reduction in axial velocity. For 
example, if tangential momentum is conserved, then the product 
of a particle's tangential velocity and radius (U,r) 
is constant 
so that, as tan O = U,/U, 
then tan 0 ~ 1/Ur. Within the predif- 
fuser, the mean radius is constant and so the increase of swirl 
angle at prediffuser exit is mainly due to the reduction in axial 
velocity (U). For flow passing to the outer annulus, a further 
reduction in axial velocity occurs, but this is also accompanied 
by an increase in radius (r) leading to minimal change in swirl 
angle. In contrast, flow entering the inner feed annulus under- 
goes both a reduction in axial velocity and radius so that flow 
swirl significantly increases. This effect may be enhanced fur- 
ther if the flow close to the inner casing of the prediffuser, 
which has been overturned within the OGV passage, passes into 
the inner annulus. The calculated tangential momentum per unit 
mass flow at prediffuser inlet (0.85 m 2 s-]), exit (0.83 m 2 s-l), 
and within the outer (0.36 m 2 s-1) and inner (0.49 m 2 s-l) feed 
682 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 
1995 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/117/4/678/5889011/678_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 6 ---

25.0 
20.0 
• 15.0 
) 
10.0 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Inner 
i i'//', 
i i i',' i" ii'"i ii',',":/','"::'" ' ' 
.... i ..... i ..... :: ...... i ..... i ..... :: ..... ! ..... i'" [ 
1 
• 
' 'l~te-diffuser iniet (X 1) 
.t 
Pre-diffuser Exit (X 2) 
¢ 
Outer Feed Annulus (XO3) 
# 
Inner Feed Annulus (XI3) 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
(r- rj) / (r - r t) 
Outer 
Fig. 8 
Swirl angle profiles through the diffuser (dump gap = 1.0) 
annuli was calculated using a similar method to that outlined 
by Dring [15]. Due to friction it can be seen that a relative 
decrease of tangential momentum occurs through the diffuser 
system. Although this reduces the magnitude of the swirl, angles 
in excess of 15 deg are still recorded within the inner annulus. 
The presence of such swirl is thought to have only a minor effect 
on the diffuser's static pressure rise and stagnation pressure loss. 
However, of greater significance is thought to be its effect on 
the discharge coefficients for the inner annulus cooling rings, 
primary and dilution ports as well as the behavior and stability 
of the flow passing through these features. Carrotte and Stevens 
[ 16 ] have already indicated how vortices and other flow instabil- 
ities can develop within dilution holes and affect mixing within 
the combustion chamber. It should also be noted that as radial 
flame tube depth increases, so this amplification of swirl angle 
will become greater. Furthermore, for a given geometry the 
magnitude of the angles within the inner annulus is determined 
by the swirl at diffuser inlet, and in a gas turbine engine this 
will vary with engine speed. 
Effects of Dump Gap Variation. 
The variation of stagna- 
tion pressure loss to the turbine bleed passage (Xb), outer 
(X O3), and inner (X 13) feed annuli increases significantly as 
the dump gap is reduced (Fig. 9a). For example, at a dump 
gap of 0.50 the loss to the inner and outer feed annuli increases 
by 48 and 32 percent, respectively, relative to the datum con- 
figuration. Since the overall performance of the prediffuser does 
not vary significantly and the loss within each feed annulus is 
small, virtually all the increase in stagnation pressure loss occurs 
within the vicinity of the flame tube head (i.e., between stations 
X 2 and X O1, X I1). In addition to the increased stagnation 
pressure loss, there is also a corresponding decrease in static 
pressure recovery (Fig. 9b). Although a small proportion of 
this reduction is associated with more distorted velocity profiles 
within each feed annulus, the majority of this effect is due to 
the higher stagnation loss. For all the geometries tested, the 
static pressure rise within the prediffuser is virtually the same, 
while at large dump gaps there is an additional pressure rise 
between prediffuser exit (X 2) and the feed annuli. As the dump 
gap reduces, the increased stagnation pressure loss around the 
head reduces the static pressure rise. Eventually, at dump gaps 
less than approximately 0.65, the loss is of sufficient magnitude 
that the static pressure falls downstream of prediffuser exit. 
Pred~Cfuser Performance. The overall prediffuser perfor- 
mance does not vary significantly with dump gap, but changes 
to the flow field do occur in this region. At prediffuser exit 
the circumferentially averaged radial static pressure profiles, 
nondimensionalized by the mean flow properties at the inlet 
plane, indicate that reducing the dump gap causes an increase 
of static pressure in the central region of the passage and a 
decrease toward each casing (Fig. 10). This reflects the pressure 
distribution that is generated by flow curvature around the flame 
tube head, which, due to the flame tube's upstream influence, 
becomes apparent at prediffuser exit when the dump gap is 
small. Fishenden and Stevens [1] also noted this effect and, 
since inlet conditions are not affected, means that diffusion is 
increased along the center streamtube of the prediffuser but 
decreased close to each casing. These effects are also reflected 
by the axial velocity profiles at prediffuser exit (Fig. 11 ), the 
midpassage velocities decreasing with a corresponding rise in 
velocity close to each casing. 
The lower static pressure gradient along the prediffuser cas- 
ings at small dump gaps reduces boundary layer growth. Hence, 
as dump gap is reduced, it should be possible to introduce 
corresponding increases in prediffuser area ratio, within the 
same axial length, and not adversely affect the condition of the 
boundary layers on each casing. This should increase the static 
pressure recovery within the prediffuser and help offset the 
larger stagnation pressure losses around the flame tube head. 
With this in mind it is also interesting to note the work of 
Hestermann et al. [ 5 ], who unstalled a prediffuser by operating 
the system at a reduced dump gap. 
Dump Cavity Flow. It is in the region surrounding the flame 
tube head where most of the loss increase occurs as the dump 
gap is reduced. Although instrumentation is limited, cowl sur- 
0.50 
i li ii 
0.25 
000 ...... i 
0.50 
0.75 
1.00 
Dump Gap - D/h 2 
a) Stagnation Pressure Loss (L) 
...... !---.!.-,.i ---~{-.-..!---I --~-{--. .!---~---{----}---i---~ 
........ 
== 
Ii..-.i,.,,,,,.i,-,.,,i,.,...i,..-..,'.-,-, 
;.-..,~.,-. ,~.,....,i..,,-.i,..,..,i... ,,.i,.., .,~ ........ 
.- 
r 
" 
{ 
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
000 
i 
i 
i 
i 
~ i 
i 
i 
i 
~ i 
i 
i 
0.50 
0.75 
1 .(DO 
Dump Gap - D/h= 
b) Static Pressure Rise (Cp) 
Fig. 9 Effect of dump gap on diffuser performance 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 
1995, Vol. 117 / 683 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/117/4/678/5889011/678_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 7 ---

1.0 ~ 
• 
ere.diffuserexlt- D/h 2 = 1.ooT=" 
-'_ 
.lb. 
ere-diffuser exlt - D/ks = 0.80[,i ,,. 
Pre-diffuser exlt- D/h 2 = 0.65[ ..... 
. 
0.8 
- 
. 
D/h, =._.o...[ 
~,~ 0.6 
et 
,~ 0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
-0.2 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
Inner 
(r - ri)/(r o - r t) 
Outer 
Fig. 10 
Prediffuser exit static pressure profiles 
face tappings allow the static pressure distribution, averaged 
over one OGV blade space, to be determined around the head. 
It can be seen that away from the stagnation point, the pressure 
decreases rapidly to a minimum before undergoing a rise in 
pressure prior to entering each feed annulus (Fig. 12). This 
static pressure distribution reflects the velocities adjacent to the 
cowl surface, which accelerate from zero at the stagnation point 
up to a maximum value, at the minimum pressure location, 
prior to diffusing into the downstream annuli. In addition, as 
measured by Carrotte et al. [6] away from the flame tube head, 
toward the recirculation region, the velocity decreases rapidly 
giving rise to steep velocity gradients. It is these gradients where 
turbulent energy is produced and the stagnation pressure loss 
generated. As the dump gap is reduced the minimum pressure 
on the head decreases, indicating higher velocities adjacent to 
the surface. A corresponding increase of the velocity gradients 
around the head must therefore occur, thus explaining the in- 
crease in stagnation pressure loss. The higher velocities and 
1.2 
1.0 
,~ 0.8 
• 
D/h= = 1.00 
& 
D/h= = 0.80 
0.4 
¢ 
D/h~ = 0.65 
* 
Dlh 2 = 0.50 
0.2 ..... i. ..... i ..... ~ ..... i ..... i ..... ~ ..... i ..... ~. .... :,., ,, 
! 
! 
! 
i 
i 
i 
i 
! 
..... ? ..... : ..... 
~ ..... 
?,,,,,: ..... 
~ ..... 
! .... ,? .... £ ..... 
0.0 
; 
i 
; 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
Inner 
(r- rl)/O; - r t) 
Outer 
Fig. 11 
Prediffuser exit axial velocity profiles 
2 
,2 
,L 
v 
II 
1.00 
0.75 
0.50 
0.25 
0.00 
-o2 ; o 
Fig. 12 
D/h 2 = 1.00 
D/h z = 0.80 
• 
D,~ z = 0.fig 
4 
D/h z = 0.50 
X13 
X12 xn 
I 
II 
Inner 
~ 
Outer 
Annulus I
~
l
 
Annulus 
XII -- 
--X01 
XI3 -- 
--X03 
xot xo2 
xo3 
Outer 
Annulus 
-200 
-100 
0 
t00 
200 
300 
Distance from cowl head center-line (mrn) 
Flame tube head static pressure distribution 
steeper velocity gradients are due to the greater curvature and 
more rapid rates of deflection that must be undertaken by the 
flow, at small dump gaps, in order to pass around the flame 
tube head and into the feed annuli. These more distorted profiles 
are also indicated by the axial velocity profiles within the down- 
stream annuli (Fig. 13). It should also be noted that as dump 
gap is reduced, the stagnation pressure loss incurred by fluid 
passing to the inner annulus increases at a greater rate compared 
with the outer annulus flow. This is also reflected by the greater 
reduction in minimum static pressure on the inner annulus side 
of the cowl surface (Fig. 12). One possible reason for this 
effect is that flow passing to the outer annulus is subjected to 
an increasing radius and can therefore diffuse circumferentially 
around the head. This is in contrast to flow passing to the inner 
annulus where the decreasing radius may lead to higher cowl 
velocities, steeper velocity gradients, and increased losses. Fur- 
thermore, downstream of the minimum pressure location the 
rapid rise in pressure, at small dump gaps, means the flow in 
this region is prone to separate from the cowl surface. 
5 
2.0 
n 
1.8- 
1.6 1 
1.4 i 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 i 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
Inner 
Fig. 13 
) 
ii I 
. : ............... 
) 
.i .... 
i 
i 
a 
D/h= = 1.00 
A 
' D/h== 0.50 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
(r- ~)/(r o - rj) 
Flame 
Inner annulus axial velocity profiles (X13) 
684 / Vol. 117, OCTOBER 
1995 
Transactions 
of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/117/4/678/5889011/678_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 8 ---

0.75 
m 
~0.~ 
~0.I~ 
1 
r~ 
-o.~ -o.o 
- - •- - Pbl~ridon & 81~vem .n 
Pn~ented Result • • Pces~rl~d Ruulk 
• 
Slev~ eL 
" 
• 
Caffol~ et. ~ =1 
v 
Clmtrolle el. d. 161 
Fmh~d Syslem V ~ _ ~ 1 1 " - - - -  
Dump Dlffmer 
v 
~ 
~ 
FId~d Dfffmer 
(k~ & Out~') 
1.0 
2.0 
3,0 
4.0 
5.0 
Mean Deflection Ratio (IJW') 
Fig. 14 
Comparison of combustor diffuser system losses 
Comparison With Other Data. The stagnation pressure 
losses from a variety of published data are presented (Fig. 14) 
relative to the ratio of diffuser length (L) to flow deflection (W'). 
Diffuser length is defined as the axial distance between prediffuser 
inlet and the combustor primary ports, whereas flow deflection is 
based on the radial distance between the diffuser centerline and the 
mean radial location of each feed annulus. This latter parameter is 
therefore mainly a function of the flame tube radial depth. The 
diagram contains a wide variety of results from various diffuser 
systems with differing inlet conditions, various amounts of diffusion, 
flame tubes with and without porosity, etc. In addition, the definition 
of diffuser length and deflection can be somewhat subjective, partic- 
ularly for systems with large cant angles. However, a correlation is 
suggested between the results, although for a given geometry, minor 
loss variations will occur due to changes in mass flow split, predif- 
fuser area ratio, cowl shape, etc. The general trend indicates that 
for diffusers with relatively long lengths and narrow flame tubes, 
the losses are relatively low and of comparable magnitude to those 
of a faired system [1]. However, the deeper flame tubes and shorter 
lengths inherent to more modem systems result in larger flow de- 
flections and a more severe radius of curvature as the flow passes 
around the head. As already discussed and demonstrated by the 
results, this leads to increased pressure losses. For diffusers typical 
of the geometry tested in this paper, any further reductions in length 
or increases in flame tube depth will lead to relatively large pressure 
loss penalties. Hence, any potential benefits in terms of weight 
reduction, for example, may be more than offset by the adverse 
effect on engine specific fuel consumption. 
Included in the comparison are the results of Carrotte et al. 
[6] obtained for a short faired system. This indicates that for 
relatively short diffusers with deep flame tubes, there are large 
differences in loss performance between dump and faired sys- 
tems. Due to their stability characteristics, it is not thought 
practical or desirable to operate such faired systems within a 
gas turbine engine. However, as diffuser systems become 
shorter and flame tubes deeper, it may be desirable to investigate 
a possible hybrid or compromise system. This would utilize 
some of the potential loss reduction offered by a faired system 
while still achieving acceptable stability performance. 
Conclusions 
An experimental investigation has been undertaken on a mod- 
ern dump diffuser system with inlet conditions being generated 
by an axial flow compressor. Measurements were obtained at a 
dump gap of 1.0 (datum configuration) and at three other dump 
gaps (0.80, 0.65, and 0.50). The following conclusions have 
been drawn: 
• For the datum configuration, the stagnation pressure loss 
coefficients (~) between prediffuser inlet and the outer and 
inner feed annuli were 0.483 and 0.430, respectively. The major- 
ity of this loss was generated around the flame tube head while 
most of the static pressure rise occurred within the prediffuser. 
• The stagnation pressure losses increased by 32 (outer) and 
48 percent (inner) as the dump gap was reduced from 1.0 
(datum) to 0.50. 
• The high losses were associated with the relatively deep 
flame tube and short system length. This increases the amount 
of flow curvature around the flame tube head, which becomes 
more severe as dump gap is reduced. 
• For all the geometries tested, relatively high swirl angles 
(~15 deg) were observed within the inner feed annulus com- 
pared with those at prediffuser inlet (~3 deg). This amplifica- 
tion is due to the decrease in axial velocity and radius that is 
undertaken by the flow passing to the inner annulus. 
Acknowledgments 
This work has been carried out with the support of Rolls 
Royce PLC, Bristol, and the Defence Research Agency, Pye- 
stock. The authors would also like to acknowledge Messrs. R. 
Marson, D. Glover, L. Monk, and W. Nivin for their assistance 
in the manufacture of the test rig and to Mr. A. P. Wray for his 
help in the design of this facility. 
References 
1 Fishenden, C. R., and Stevens, S. J., "Performance of Annular Combustor- 
Dump Diffusers," J. Aircraft, Vol. 14, No. 1, Jan. 1977. 
2 Stevens, S. J., Wray, A. P., and Price, P. D., "The Aerodynamic Performance of 
a Modem Vaponsing Combustor Dump Diffuser," Paper No. AIAA-88-3273 1988. 
3 Young, K. F., Wray, A. P., and Stevens, S. J., "An Integrated Approach to the 
Design of Compressor OGVs and Combustor Pre-diffusers," Dept. of Transport 
Technology, Loughborough University, TT89R03, 1989. 
4 Snnivasan, R., Freeman, G., Grahmann, J., and Coleman, E., "Parametric 
Evaluation of the Aerodynamic Performance of an Annular Combustor-Diffuser 
System," Paper No. AIAA-90-2163, 1990. 
5 Hestermann, R., Kim, S., and Wittig, S., "Geometrical Dependence of the 
Fluid Dynamic Performance Parameters of Plane Combustor Model Diffusers," 
AIAA ISABE 91-7105, 1991. 
6 Carrotte, J. F., Denman, P. A., Wray, A. P., and Fry, P., "Detailed Performance 
Comparison of a Dump and Short Faired Combustor Diffuser System," ASME Jotra- 
NAL OF ENGIt,,~ERING mR GAS TUREI~S AND POWER, Vol. 116, 1994, pp. 517-526. 
7 Stevens, S. J., Harasgama, S. P., and Wray, A. P., "The Influence of Blade 
Wakes on the Performance of Combustor Shortened Prediffusers," AIAA J. of 
Aircraft, Vol. 21, No. 9, 1984. 
8 Stevens, S. J., and Wray, Ai P., "The Influence of Blade Wakes on the 
Performance of Outwardly Curved Combustor Pre-diflSsers," Paper No. AIAA- 
85-1291, 1985. 
9 Klein, A., "The Relation Between Losses and Entry-Flow Conditions in 
Short Dump Diffusers for Combustors," Z. Flugwiss. Weltraumforsch, Dec. 1988. 
10 Lohmann, R. P., Markowski, S. J., and Brookman, E. T., "Swirling Flow 
Through Annular Diffusers With Conical Walls," ASME Journal of Fluids Engi- 
neering, Vol. I01, June 1979. 
11 Wray, A. P., Carrotte, J. F., and Wilson, C. W., "The Development of a 
Large Annular Facility for Testing Gas Turbine Combustor Diffuser Systems," 
Paper No. AIAA-93-2546 1993. 
12 Dring, R. P., and Spear, D. A., "The Effects of Wake Mixing on Compres- 
sor Aerodynamics," ASME Journal of Turbomachinery, Vol. 113, 1991, pp. 
600-607. 
13 Denton, J. D., "Loss Mechanisms in Turbomachines," ASME Journal of 
Turbomachiner); Vol. 115, 1993, pp. 621-656. 
14 Hill, P. G., Seaub, U. W., and Senoo, Y., "Turbulent Wakes in Pressure 
Gradients," ASME Journal of Applied Mechanics, Vol. 85, 1963. 
15 Dring, R. P., "Radial Transport and Momentum Exchange in an Axial Com- 
pressor," ASME Journal ofTurbomachinety, Vol. 115, 1993, pp. 477-486. 
16 Carrotte, J. F., and Stevens, S. J., "The Influence of Dilution Hole Geometry 
on Jet Mixing," ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER, 
Vol. 112, January 1990. 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
OCTOBER 1995, Vol. 117 / 685 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/117/4/678/5889011/678_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026
