
--- Page 1 ---

Temperature, Velocity, and NOx/CO Emission Measurements
in Turbulent Flames: Effects of Partial Premixing with
Central Fuel Injection
T.-W. LEE,* A. MITROVIC, and T. WANG
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ USA
Characteristics of methane–air turbulent partially premixed ﬂames have been determined through ﬂame
imaging, ﬂow velocity, and temperature. NOx/CO emission indices from these ﬂames were also measured.
Varying amounts of fuel were added to a main premixed stream to control the overall stoichiometry. At
equivalence ratios from 1.4 to 2.4, the turbulent partially premixed ﬂames exhibit a double-ﬂame structure with
a premixed ﬂame near the burner exit and a secondary diffusion ﬂame at a downstream location. This structure
persists even with the ﬂame tip opening as the fuel is added coaxially to increase the overall equivalence ratio.
The premixed ﬂame near the burner exit tends to keep the temperature at a high level in the region between
the two ﬂames. With the ﬂame tip opening, the temperature in this region decreases. The above ﬂame structure
has an important effect on the pollutant emission characteristics from these ﬂames. The NOx emission index
(EINOx) continues to increase gradually for overall equivalence ratio starting from 1.5 up to 10. The CO
emission index (EICO), on the other hand, remains nearly constant with respect to the variations in the
equivalence ratio, and shows a substantial difference depending on the mixing characteristics of the fuel with
the main premixed stream.
© 2000 by The Combustion Institute
INTRODUCTION
Nonuniformity in the local fuel–air ratio is a
ubiquitous occurrence in practical combustion
devices. This results in a burning mode, which
may consist of intermittent combinations of
premixed and nonpremixed ﬂames. For exam-
ple, in Diesel engines, if the injection timing is
moved ahead of the compression ignition con-
dition, some portion of the fuel has time to
vaporize and premix with air, while the main
fuel jet is subject to spray burning. In particular,
recent developments in direct-injection engines
require new understanding of the fuel injection
and combustion phenomena. In the peripheral
region of the fuel jet, for example, the equiva-
lence ratio achieved may support premixed
combustion, while there remains a fuel-rich
region near the center of the jet.
For this reason, partially premixed ﬂames
have received recent attention from several
research groups [1–11]. NOx emission and
global ﬂame characteristics have been investi-
gated in turbulent partially premixed ﬂames, in
which the fuel stream has been diluted with air
to lower the equivalence ratio [1, 7]. Also,
chemical species concentrations, CO and NOx
emission have been measured in coﬂow laminar
partially premixed ﬂames [2, 3]. Due to the
signiﬁcance of pollutant emission problems, the
CO and NOx emission studies have important
applications to combustion systems involving
partial premixing. Fundamental properties of
these ﬂames in both laminar and turbulent ﬂows
have been investigated [4–6]. In this laboratory,
global ﬂame characteristics, ﬂame temperature
distributions, and soot formation characteristics
have been investigated in laminar and turbulent
partially premixed ﬂames, considering both the
fuel equivalence ratio and mixing effects [8–10].
As explained subsequently, the mixing effect
here refers to the process where the mixing of
fuel and air streams causes nonuniform equiva-
lence ratio in the ﬂow ﬁeld.
The work described herein is one in a se-
quence of studies on partially premixed com-
bustion from this laboratory, where we have
considered a range of fuel–air mixing condi-
tions. These include the conventional partially
premixed ﬂames, which involve a fuel stream
diluted with air [8, 9]. Also, we have considered
the effects of variable mixing states between the
fuel and air streams. For example, premixed
ﬂames in which an air stream was locally intro-
duced to induce locally fuel-lean conditions
were considered, which exhibited enhanced
* Corresponding author. E-mail: attwl@asu.edu.
COMBUSTION AND FLAME 121:378–385 (2000)
0010-2180/00/$–see front matter
© 2000 by The Combustion Institute
PII 0010-2180(99)00123-6
Published by Elsevier Science Inc.


--- Page 2 ---

burning limits for low overall equivalence ratios
and reduced ﬂame temperatures [10].
In the current investigation, we consider par-
tially premixed ﬂames, where a fuel stream is
added to a main premixed reactant stream, to
cause local enrichment of the mixture. The term
“partially premixed ﬂames” has been typically
used to refer to a group of ﬂames where the
equivalence ratio is set between the rich ﬂam-
mability limit and inﬁnity, the latter correspond-
ing to a nonpremixed ﬂame. The current ﬂame
conﬁguration involves a main premixed ﬂame,
with a central injection of fuel so that there is a
region in the ﬂame where the equivalence ratio
ﬂuctuates within the above range. Thus, in this
sense the ﬂames exhibit local ﬂuctuations in the
equivalence ratio and therefore are referred to
as “partially premixed ﬂames.” Indeed, as noted
earlier, it is one of the purposes of this paper to
consider this type of localized partially pre-
mixed ﬂame phenomena as the nonuniform
mixing in practical combustion devices can lead
to similar processes. For some combustion sys-
tems (e.g., direct-injection engines), extreme
nonhomogeneities in the local equivalence ratio
can lead to local partially premixed ﬂames as
well as regions of premixed and nonpremixed
burning due to fuel leakage through extin-
guished premixed ﬂamelets. We consider the
velocity ﬁeld, temperature proﬁles, and pollut-
ant emission characteristics of these ﬂames.
Partially premixed ﬂames, while present in
many practical combustion devices as noted
above, present a complex ﬂame environment for
a deﬁnitive characterization. While the situation
is somewhat simpler for conventional laminar
partially premixed ﬂames, where the effects of
the convection velocity and chemical effects are
decoupled, turbulent partially premixed ﬂames
as considered in this study involve variations in
the ﬂow velocity, global and local fuel–air mix-
ing. Thus far, we have focused on the global
ﬂame behavior as partial premixing parameters
are varied.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
A coaxial jet ﬂame burner has been used in the
current investigation. The same burner has been
used for studying various aspects of turbulent
partially premixed ﬂames in this laboratory
[8–10], and details have been described therein.
The burner was of modular design and con-
sisted of two mixing chambers, ﬁlled with glass
beads. Outer and inner tubes were attached
separately to these chambers. The outer tube
diameter (Do) was 8 mm, while the inner tube
diameter (Di) was 2 mm.
In the current experiment, a premixed reac-
tant stream of methane and air was sent through
the outer tube, with its equivalence ratio rang-
ing from 1.4 to 1.7, while additional methane
was added to the inner tube to cause nonhomo-
geneities in the local fuel–air ratios toward the
fuel-rich side. In addition, the fuel addition
made the overall equivalence ratio higher,
based on the total fuel and air ﬂow rates. The
maximum overall equivalence ratio was 2.4 for
temperature measurements, which was just be-
low the point where the sooting in the ﬂames
prevented
Rayleigh
temperature
measure-
ments. Although, ﬂame luminescence from soot
is observable for equivalence ratio above 2.2,
Rayleigh measurements along the centerline
were possible up to equivalence ratio of 2.4. For
NOx and CO measurements, however, equiva-
lence ratios up to 10 were considered. Methane
was used as the fuel in all of the experiments.
For characterization of the velocity ﬁeld, a
laser Doppler velocimeter (LDV) was used. The
LDV system provided the mean and ﬂuctuating
velocity proﬁles. A 3.5-W argon ion laser beam,
split to a spacing of 78 mm, was focused using a
lens of f-number of 3, resulting in a probe
diameter and length of 50 and 500 mm, respec-
tively. A 40-MHz frequency shift was used to
remove velocity ambiguity and to increase the
data rate. The detection of the LDV signal was
also obtained via a f/3 collection lens, along with
a signal processor (TSI 1990C) interfaced with a
data acquisition system on a personal computer.
For velocity measurements, typically 3000 sam-
ples were collected at a given position, while
radial proﬁles of mean and ﬂuctuating velocities
were obtained from the burner exit to 8 diam-
eters downstream. Silicon oil smoke particles
(ca. 1 mm diameter) and alumina particles
(nominal 1 mm diameter) were used as seeding
particles, in the cold ﬂows and in the ﬂames,
respectively.
Temperature measurements were made using
379
TURBULENT PARTIALLY PREMIXED FLAMES


--- Page 3 ---

Rayleigh
scattering.
The
second-harmonic
beam (532 nm) of a Nd:YAG laser (Spectra-
Physics GCR 130-10) was focused to a spot of
approximately 500 mm. The detection was via a
monochromator (Instruments SA, H-20) set at
the Nd:YAG laser wavelength of 532 nm, and a
photomultiplier tube. The slit width of the
monochromator and a unit magniﬁcation in the
receiving optics resulted in probe dimensions of
0.5 3 0.5 mm. The Rayleigh cross section
changes by less than 10% from the reactant to
the product, so that this is estimated to be the
extent of uncertainty in the current Rayleigh
temperature measurements. A high signal-to-
noise ratio in the signal was achieved using a
boxcar gate generator (Stanford Research Sys-
tems, SR250/SR280), which allowed passage of
the signal only during the laser pulse. Two
thousand temperature samples were taken at
each spatial location for the mean, rms ﬂuctua-
tion, and probability density function of the
temperature. Further details of the Rayleigh
scattering setup and calibration can be found in
Lee and Mitrovic [9].
In addition, CO and NOx emissions from
these ﬂames were measured using water-cooled
stainless and quartz probes, respectively. The
sampled gas was analyzed via nondispersive
(CO) and chemiluminescence analyzers (NOx).
The gas was sampled in the over-ﬁre region at
the centerline. CO2 concentrations were also
measured in order to obtain the emission indi-
ces for these gases, following the usual proce-
dure (see for example, Turns and Lovett [7]). A
circular duct of 20 cm diameter was used as a
sheath around the burner to minimize mixing
and perturbations from the ambient air.
Test conditions involved a variation of the
outer jet velocity, from 1.90 to 2.75 m/s, which
corresponded to the outer jet equivalence ratio
from 1.4 to 1.7, for methane/air mixture. The
test parameters are given in Table 1. As noted
above, methane was sent through the inner tube
at velocities up to 2 m/s for temperature mea-
surements and higher for CO/NOx measure-
ments. The overall equivalence ratio was calcu-
lated by summing the total fuel ﬂow rates in the
outer and inner tube ﬂows for the ﬁxed mass
ﬂow rate of air in the reactant stream.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figures 1a–e show the photographic images of
the turbulent partially premixed ﬂames. Figure
1a shows the initial premixed ﬂame with an
equivalence ratio at 1.4 (outer jet velocity of 1.9
m/s in Table 1). As noted above, a fuel stream is
added in varying mass ﬂow rates to this pre-
mixed reactant stream in order to produce
partially premixed ﬂames with nonuniform fu-
el–air ratios. Figure 1a shows a stable inner
TABLE 1
Test Conditions
Outer Jet
Velocity,
Uo (m/s)
Outer Jet
Equivalence
ratio, wo
Inner Jet
Velocity,
Ui (m/s)
Total
Equivalence
Ratio, wT
Reynolds
Number
Based on
Outer Jet
Flow
2.75
1.70
0.00
1.70
1400
2.75
1.70
0.50
1.88
1400
2.75
1.70
1.00
2.06
1400
2.75
1.70
1.50
2.24
1400
2.75
1.70
2.00
2.42
1400
2.35
1.50
0.00
1.50
1200
2.35
1.50
0.50
1.71
1200
2.35
1.50
1.00
1.91
1200
2.35
1.50
1.50
2.12
1200
2.35
1.50
2.00
2.33
1200
1.90
1.40
0.00
1.40
970
1.90
1.40
0.40
1.60
970
1.90
1.40
0.80
1.81
970
1.90
1.40
1.20
2.01
970
1.90
1.40
1.60
2.21
970
Fig. 1. Photographic images of turbulent partially premixed
ﬂames (the scale is 50 mm from top to bottom of the image).
Uo 5 1.9 m/s. The inner jet velocity varies from 0 to 1.6 m/s
from (a) to (e) (see Table 1).
380
T.-W. LEE ET AL.


--- Page 4 ---

premixed ﬂame, with the excess fuel being
burned in a secondary nonpremixed ﬂame. Ad-
dition of fuel to this reactant stream causes the
premixed ﬂame tip to be opened (Fig. 1b), while
a peripheral premixed ﬂame at the base of the
ﬂame is still observed near the burner exit.
Although the overall equivalence ratio is below
2.5 in all of the images shown, the region
directly above the ﬂame tip is likely to be more
fuel-rich due to the location of the fuel jet. Near
the burner exit, one can observe a double-ﬂame
structure that involves an inner premixed ﬂame
and an outer nonpremixed ﬂame. The heat and
mass diffusing from this region toward the
downstream locations are expected to affect the
overall behavior of the entire ﬂame, which is
discussed later. Similar ﬂame shapes as those
shown in Fig. 1 are observed for “conventional”
partially premixed ﬂames where the ﬂow has a
uniform equivalence ratio [3], as opposed to the
spatially nonuniform case considered in this
study. The reason is as follows: Even for reac-
tant streams with a uniform equivalence ratio,
the ﬂow velocity is at the maximum at the
centerline, and therefore is most susceptible to
local “blow-off” for the premixed ﬂame. The
ﬂame speed cannot match the incident ﬂow
speed near the centerline, where as the ﬂow
speed is less and the ﬂame angle is more acute
with respect to the ﬂow in the peripheral region.
This effect is more pronounced in the current
ﬂame conﬁguration due to the location of the
fuel jet.
The premixed burning zone, or the lumines-
cent region in Fig. 1, at zero inner jet velocity,
extends to x/Do of 3 to 4 for various outer jet
velocities, while the secondary ﬂame height
tends to increase with increasing inner jet veloc-
ity. This is simply due to longer residence time
required to burn out the excess fuel. Once the
ﬂame tip is opened at an overall equivalence
ratio of 1.6, the extent of the base premixed
ﬂame remains roughly the same for higher
equivalence ratios. While the ﬂame is mostly
nonsooting at these equivalence ratio, soot lu-
minescence becomes observable if the fuel ﬂow
rate is increased to an overall equivalence ratio
of approximately 2.2. However, as noted above,
the local equivalence ratio is higher due to the
fuel stream directed along the centerline.
Figures 2 and 3 show the typical mean and the
ﬂuctuating components of the axial velocity in
these ﬂames, measured at the centerline. Also,
the cold ﬂow mean velocities are shown in Fig.
2. It can be observed that the mean velocities in
the cold ﬂows and the ﬂames are nearly identi-
cal up to x/Do of 2, and then at this point the
ﬂow velocities in the ﬂames start to increase due
to the volumetric expansion effects. This aspect
is similar to other premixed ﬂames. The level of
acceleration is not very high due to the jet
streamlines spreading radially to compensate
for the volumetric expansion. In contrast, the
cold ﬂow velocity follows the usual jet decay. It
is interesting that there is a ﬂow acceleration
even when the premixed ﬂame tip opens up.
Apparently, heat release from the double-ﬂame
structure at the base of the ﬂame is sufﬁcient to
cause a similar level of ﬂow acceleration at
higher equivalence ratios. Also, in the near
burner region, lower velocities are observed at
the centerline for low inner jet velocities (Ui)
even though the outer jet velocity is ﬁxed. This
is due to the fact that the slower inner jet has
not fully mixed with the faster outer jet stream
near the burner exit. Except near the burner
exit, however, the ﬂow behavior is nearly the
same at all inner jet velocities as the outer jet
momentum dominates the ﬂow for the most
part of the ﬂow. The inner jet velocity is always
less than the outer jet velocity for the current
test conditions.
The root-mean-square (rms) ﬂuctuating ve-
locities in Fig. 3 show a decay to x/Do of
approximately 8 and then increase gradually
from this point onward. The level of the velocity
Fig. 2. Typical mean axial velocities at the centerline as a
function of the axial distance.
381
TURBULENT PARTIALLY PREMIXED FLAMES


--- Page 5 ---

ﬂuctuations appears to decrease slightly with
increasing equivalence ratios. The slight in-
crease in the rms velocities in the downstream
region is attributable to the volumetric expan-
sion being subject to the ﬂame oscillations that
result in higher intermittency for the observed
ﬂow velocity. In addition to the ﬂow velocity
ﬂuctuations, the ﬂame oscillations can add sig-
niﬁcantly to unconditioned velocity statistics.
Since more reactant passes through the pre-
mixed part of the ﬂame at higher equivalence
ratios, without undergoing chemical reaction,
the level of velocity ﬂuctuations is higher.
The mean and the rms temperature, mea-
sured at the centerline using Rayleigh ther-
mometry, are shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respec-
tively. At inner jet velocity (Ui) of zero, there is
a premixed ﬂame which exhibits the usual steep
transition from the reactant to the product
mean temperature. Subsequent fuel addition to
the reactant stream makes the premixed ﬂame
unstable at the ﬂame tip, which leads to the
ﬂame tip opening as shown in the images in Fig.
1. In spite of the ﬂame tip opening, the mean
temperature reaches a maximum close to 2000
K at equivalence ratios of 1.4 to 1.7. However,
this maximum is observed at a further down-
stream location since the high mean tempera-
ture at the centerline is due the heat release
from the double-ﬂame structure at the base of
the ﬂame. The double-ﬂame structure is close
enough to the centerline for the heat to diffuse
to the centerline to result in a relatively high
temperature. The peak in the mean tempera-
ture then decreases with increasing inner fuel
addition, to approximately 1500 K at the highest
equivalence ratio, as more reactant passes
through the base ﬂame region without burning.
The peak in the mean temperature is observed
at progressively further downstream locations
due to increased mixing distance (or residence
time) required between the hot product gas and
the relatively cold stream passing through the
opened ﬂame tip. At small inner jet velocities,
the separation between the premixed ﬂame and
the secondary ﬂame is small, and a level region
in the mean temperature proﬁle is observed. As
the inner jet velocity increases and the overall
equivalence ratio consequently increases, the
secondary ﬂame height rapidly increases, which
Fig. 3. Typical rms ﬂuctuation velocities at the centerline as
a function of the axial distance.
Fig. 4. Mean temperature at the centerline as a function of
the axial distance.
382
T.-W. LEE ET AL.


--- Page 6 ---

leads to more gradual mean temperature pro-
ﬁles in the axial direction.
The rms temperature shows a large ﬂuctua-
tion at the ﬂame location for zero fuel addition.
This is due to the premixed ﬂame oscillations.
Once the ﬂame tip opens to allow the fuel to
leak through, the large ﬂuctuation is no longer
observed and the rms temperature stays nearly
constant as a function of the axial distance for a
given inner jet velocity.
Pollutant emission emanating from combus-
tion systems continues to be an important topic
from both fundamental and practical view-
points. In particular, as nonuniformities in the
equivalence ratio almost always exist in practical
combustion devices, it is of great interest to
determine the effects of nonuniform fuel–air
ratio in partially premixed ﬂames on pollutant
emission rates. CO and NOx emission have been
measured, and have been converted to emission
indices by normalizing by the amount of fuel
burned as characterized by the CO2 concentra-
tion at the same condition and probe location
[7]. Figure 6 shows the CO and NOx emission
indices (EICO and EINOx), respectively, as a
function of the overall equivalence ratios. Two
sets of data are provided for both EICO and
EINOx. One set is based on the same ﬂame
conﬁguration considered thus far in this study.
Since the current setup involves local nonuni-
formities in the equivalence ratio as caused by
the mixing of two different streams, this set is
referred to as the “mixing effect,” to differenti-
ate from the second set as described below. A
second set of data has been obtained by achiev-
ing the same overall equivalence ratio (based
upon the total fuel and air ﬂow rates) by mixing
the fuel and air in the upstream mixing cham-
ber. This is the typical partially premixed ﬂame
conﬁguration that has been investigated re-
cently by several authors [1–3], where the equiv-
alence ratio is ﬁxed throughout the ﬂow ﬁeld.
Since this ﬂame setup essentially looks at the
equivalence ratio effect, this set is referred to as
the “equivalence ratio effect” in Fig. 6. The
purpose of generating this additional data set is,
of course, to compare with the “mixing effect”
data and also to consider the pollutant emission
behavior in the context of existing data on
partially premixed ﬂames. For the pollutant
emission data, a larger range of equivalence
Fig. 5. Rms ﬂuctuation in the temperature as a function of
the axial distance.
Fig. 6. EINOx and EICO at various equivalence ratios.
383
TURBULENT PARTIALLY PREMIXED FLAMES


--- Page 7 ---

ratio has been considered up to 10. The central
injection of fuel as in “mixing effect” conﬁgura-
tion introduces a variation in the ﬂow velocity as
the amount of injected fuel increases, and there-
fore the partial premixing and ﬂuid dynamic
effects are not necessarily decoupled. The
“equivalence ratio effect” conﬁguration serves
as a reference case where the internal ﬂuid
dynamic effects are minimized.
There exists a coupling of equivalence ratio
and velocity effects in most conﬁgurations for
partially premixed ﬂames. For example, in order
to vary the equivalence ratio, a typical approach
is to either ﬁx the air ﬂow rate and increase the
fuel ﬂow rate or keep the total ﬂow rate con-
stant and vary the relative ﬂow rates of fuel and
air. In the ﬁrst instance, the ﬂow rate continues
to increase as more fuel is added; in the second,
the residence time changes since the ﬂame
height will be altered with varying equivalence
ratio. The comparison of two ﬂame conﬁgura-
tions as described above is an attempt to under-
stand the coupling of these effects, ﬁrst by
allowing the fuel to mix in the ﬂame region
(primarily mixing effect) and then by premixing
the fuel far upstream (primarily equivalence
ratio effect).
It can be observed in Fig. 6 that there is an
increase in the NOx emission as the overall
equivalence ratio is increased. The overall in-
crease is relatively gradual, except at equiva-
lence ratios below 3 for the mixing effect data.
The decrease in ﬂame temperature would re-
duce the thermal NOx formation and compen-
sate for the increased residence time or ﬂame
height at higher equivalence ratios. Also, be-
yond equivalence ratio of 3, there is almost no
difference between the mixing and equivalence
ratio effects. This indicates that the NOx emis-
sion is more affected in these ﬂames by the
global effects such as the ﬂame temperature and
residence time, and less by the detailed ﬂame
processes which are expected to be different for
these two data sets.
It is of interest to compare the current NOx
emission results to those of laminar partially
premixed ﬂame [2, 3, 6, 11], where the equiva-
lence ratio effects have been considered. For
example, Tanoff et al. [6] have shown a broad-
ened region of NO production for rich pre-
mixed ﬂames in their computational study due
to the double-ﬂame structure. A similar behav-
ior is observable in Kim et al. [3] and Nishioka
et al. [11], where the NO concentration [3] and
temperature proﬁles [11] becomes narrower
when equivalence ratio is set above 1.7. The
observed decrease in EINOx in their study was,
however, explained on the basis of increased
temperature at low equivalence ratios (below
1.7) and increased residence time at high equiv-
alence ratios (above 3.3) [3]. The EINOx in the
current study exhibit roughly similar behavior
for the laminar CH4 [2], C2H6 [3], and the
current
CH4
turbulent
partially
premixed
ﬂames. For example, the qualitative trend is
similar in that there is a gradual increase in the
EINOx beyond equivalence ratio of 2 in all of
the above studies. The transition from the rich
premixed ﬂame to partially premixed ﬂame
cannot be observed in the current ﬂames since
we start from the equivalence ratio of 1.7.
However, the temperature does decrease in the
ﬂame region as the equivalence ratio is in-
creased, as noted in Fig. 4. In addition, as shown
by the ﬂame height the residence time signiﬁ-
cantly increases with increasing equivalence ra-
tio, which results in increased NOx production
as shown in Fig. 6. Therefore, the increased
residence time is more than sufﬁcient to offset
the effect of decreased temperature at high
equivalence ratios. This is perhaps the reason
that both the mixing and equivalence ratio yield
similar EINOx, since most of the NOx produc-
tion occurs in the postﬂame region. The de-
tailed ﬂame structure close to the burner exit
therefore plays a relatively minor role in the
NOx production of these ﬂames. For these
reasons, the NOx production in partially pre-
mixed ﬂames with equivalence ratio above 3 has
been attributed to thermal NOx mechanism [3].
The counterﬂow ﬂames by Nishioka et al. [11]
exhibit an initial increase of the thermal NO
contribution at equivalence ratio above 1.5 and
a subsequent increase in the contribution of the
prompt NO contribution at higher equivalence
ratios. The total NO emission levels off at
equivalence ratio of approximately 1.75 for lam-
inar methane–air ﬂames in a counterﬂow geom-
etry [11].
For the CO emission index, there is a sub-
stantial difference between the equivalence ra-
tio and mixing effects, as shown in Fig. 6. There
384
T.-W. LEE ET AL.


--- Page 8 ---

is signiﬁcantly less emission of CO if the addi-
tional fuel is injected at the burner exit level.
For these conditions, there exists an inner pre-
mixed ﬂame, which can facilitate complete com-
bustion in the peripheral region. This effect
appears to reduce the CO emission for the
mixing effect data set. As the premixed ﬂames
can no longer be supported at equivalence ratio
beyond approximately 1.5, the burning process
is not as complete at higher equivalence ratios.
Both data sets show a nearly level EICO beyond
equivalence ratio of 3. This again is qualitatively
similar to the laminar CH4 and C2H6 partially
premixed ﬂame results [2, 3], for which the
EICO also levels off at an equivalence ratio of
about 10 and 3, respectively. However, the
maximum CO emission index is similar between
the laminar and the current turbulent partially
premixed ﬂames, when we look at the equiva-
lence ratio effect. This is reasonable since the
ﬂame geometry is similar other than the fact
that the ﬂow is turbulent in the current ﬂames.
CONCLUSIONS
For the current ﬂame conﬁguration, at low
equivalence ratios the turbulent partially pre-
mixed ﬂames can be characterized by a double-
ﬂame structure with a premixed ﬂame near the
burner exit and a secondary diffusion ﬂame at a
downstream location. This structure persists
even with the ﬂame tip opening as the fuel is
added coaxially to increase the overall equiva-
lence ratio.
The base premixed ﬂame tends to keep the
temperature at a high level in the region be-
tween the two ﬂames. With the ﬂame tip open-
ing, the temperature in this region decreases
while the overall ﬂame height continues to
increase with increasing equivalence ratio.
The above ﬂame structure has an important
effect on the pollutant emission characteristics
from these ﬂames. EINOx continues to increase
gradually for overall equivalence ratio starting
from 1.5 up to 10. Similar behavior in NOx
emission has been observed in laminar partially
premixed ﬂames, and is attributable to the
increased residence time at high equivalence
ratios in spite of the decrease in the ﬂame
temperature as noted above. EICO, on the
other hand, remains nearly constant with re-
spect to the variations in the equivalence ratio,
and shows a substantial difference depending
on the mixing of fuel with the main reactant
stream. These observations indicate that the CO
emission is more signiﬁcantly affected by the
detailed ﬂame processes.
The support for this research, provided in part
by the National Science Foundation under Grant
CTS-9409639, is gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
1.
Rokke, N. A., Hustad, J. E., and Sonju, O. K., Com-
bust. Flame 97:88 (1994).
2.
Gore, J. P., and Zhan, N. J., Combust. Flame 105:414
(1996).
3.
Kim, T. W., Alder, B. J., Laurendeau, N. M., and Gore,
J. P., Combust. Sci. Technol. 110:361 (1995).
4.
Muller, C. M., Breitbach, H., and Peters, N., Twenty-
Fifth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1994, p. 1099.
5.
Domingo, P., and Vervisch, L., Twenty-Sixth Sympo-
sium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, 1996, p. 233.
6.
Tanoff, M. A., Smooke, M. D., Osborne, R. J., Brown,
T. M., and Pitz, R. W., Twenty-Sixth Symposium (In-
ternational) on Combustion, 1996, p. 1121.
7.
Turns, S. R., and Lovett, J. A., Combust. Flame 66:233
(1989).
8.
Lee, T.-W., Fenton, M., and Shankland, R., Combust.
Flame 109:536 (1997).
9.
Lee, T.-W., and Mitrovic, A., Combust. Flame, 115:437
(1998).
10.
Lee, T.-W., and Mitrovic, A., Combust. Sci. Technol.
127:231 (1997).
11.
Nishioka, M., Nakagawa, S., Ishikawa, Y., and Takeno,
T., Combust. Flame 98:127 (1994).
Received 1 July 1998; revised 16 August 1999; accepted 23
August 1999
385
TURBULENT PARTIALLY PREMIXED FLAMES
