
--- Page 1 ---

Adrian Spencer
James J. McGuirk
Department of Aeronautical and Automotive
Engineering,
Loughborough University,
Loughborough, Leicestershire LE11 3TU, U.K.
Kris Midgley
Renault F1 Team Ltd,
Enstone, Oxfordshire, OX74EE U.K.
e-mail: j.j.mcguirk@lboro.ac.uk
Vortex Breakdown in Swirling
Fuel Injector Flows
It is well known that the process of vortex breakdown plays an important role in estab-
lishing the near-ﬁeld aerodynamic characteristics of fuel injectors, inﬂuencing fuel/air
mixing and ﬂame stability. The precise nature of the vortex breakdown can take on
several forms, which have been shown in previous papers to include both a precessing
vortex core (PVC) and the appearance of multiple helical vortices formed in the swirl
stream shear layer. The unsteady dynamics of these particular features can play an
important role in combustion induced oscillations. The present paper reports an experi-
mental investigation, using particle image velocimetry (PIV) and hot-wire anemometry, to
document variations in the relative strength of PVC and helical vortex patterns as the
conﬁguration of a generic fuel injector is altered. Examples of geometric changes that
have been investigated include: the combination of an annular swirl stream with and
without a central jet; variation in geometric details of the swirler passage, e.g., alteration
in the swirler entry slots to change swirl number, and variations in the area ratio of the
swirler passage. The results show that these geometric variations can inﬂuence: the axial
location of the origin of the helical vortices (from inside to outside the fuel injector), and
the strength of the PVC. For example, in a conﬁguration with no central jet (swirl
number S=0.72), the helical vortex pattern was much less coherent, but the PVC was
much stronger than when a central jet was present. These changes modify the magnitude
of the turbulence energy in the fuel injector near ﬁeld dramatically, and hence have an
important inﬂuence on fuel air mixing patterns. DOI: 10.1115/1.2799530
Introduction
Although vortex breakdown was ﬁrst observed in a study of
delta wing leading edge aerodynamics Peckham and Atkinson
1, the relevance to the highly swirling ﬂows produced by gas
turbine combustion system fuel injectors soon became apparent
e.g., Gupta et al. 2. The term vortex breakdown refers to: “an
abrupt and drastic change in ﬂow structure which is characterised
by a sudden axial deceleration that occurs above a certain level of
swirl, leading to the formation of a free stagnation point followed
by a separation region with turbulence behind it,” Wang and Ru-
sak 3. Because of the complex nature of the phenomenon and its
signiﬁcance for several important engineering applications, it has
received considerable attention in the literature for the last 50
years, covering experimental, theoretical, and computational in-
vestigations. Two comprehensive reviews have been produced by
Escudier 4 and Lucca-Negro and O’Doherty 5. Nevertheless,
there is still no general theory of vortex breakdown or agreement
on its fundamental nature.
Experimentally, Sarpkaya 6 and Leibovich 7 discovered
seven distinct types of vortex breakdown; however, in turbulent
ﬂows only two, the spiral and bubble modes, were observed. Sar-
pkaya 6 also showed that the effect of an adverse axial pressure
gradient was to move the vortex breakdown further upstream, or if
extreme enough, even to initiate it. In addition to the appearance
of a recirculation region in the bubble mode, evidence has been
gathered that vortex breakdown can display strongly time-
dependent characteristics, whereby the recirculation zone itself
becomes unstable and starts to precess about its own axis a pre-
cessing vortex core PVC, Syred and Beer 8. Finally, an im-
portant concept that appears in most explanations of vortex break-
down is the idea of “criticality” Benjamin 9, i.e., whether the
ﬂow axial velocity is, throughout the ﬂow, greater than the phase
velocity of longitudinal inertial instability waves supercritical, or
less than this subcritical. In the latter case, a mechanism exists
whereby the downstream conditions may affect the upstream ﬂow.
Indeed, perhaps a useful analogy for the occurrence of vortex
breakdown is that it allows a supercritical ﬂow to transition to a
subcritical one, so that it may then gradually adjust to downstream
conditions, in the same way that a supersonic ﬂow requires a
shock wave to be formed, so that a subsonic ﬂow is created that
can then sense the downstream pressure ﬁeld. It is for this reason
that care has to be taken in both experimental and numerical stud-
ies of vortex breakdown to pay attention to the region of inﬂuence
of downstream conditions. Escudier et al. 10 have recently
shown the importance of this for highly swirling ﬂows down-
stream of a nozzle or oriﬁce.
The signiﬁcance of vortex breakdown for the design of gas
turbine fuel injectors that employ high swirl for ﬂame stabilization
reasons is well known. Li and Gutmark 11, in measurements on
a triple annular swirler typical of future fuel lean module injec-
tors, have shown that the dynamics of vortex breakdown cause
interactions between vortical structures in the ﬂow associated with
breakdown and acoustical instability modes. The measurements
show that the vortical structures are highly dependent on swirler
geometry. The fundamentally unsteady nature of vortex break-
down and its association with instability modes of the ﬂow has
attracted the attention of computational ﬂuid dynamics CFD
model developers, particularly using large eddy simulation LES.
Studies of highly swirling ﬂow in conﬁned Wegner et al. 12
and unconﬁned Garcia-Villalba and Froehlich 13 geometries
have recently been reported. The former noted the appearance of
what was described as “a double-cell precessing vortex core,” but
it is not clear whether this phrase is mixing up the appearance of
rotating spiral vortex structures and a genuine PVC. The latter
study observed that the introduction of a central pilot jet inside an
annular swirl stream had little inﬂuence on the average ﬂow, but
spectra extracted from the LES predictions indicated dramatic ef-
fects on the instantaneous spiral vortex structures. This result is
very signiﬁcant, but it needs to be conﬁrmed that it is correct for
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute IGTI of ASME for pub-
lication in the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript
received May 1, 2007; ﬁnal manuscript received July 4, 2007; published online
January 22, 2008. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the
ASME Turbo Expo 2007: Land, Sea, and Air GT2007, Montreal, Quebec, Canada,
May 14–17, 2007.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2008, Vol. 130 / 021503-1
Copyright © 2008 by ASME
Downloaded 15 May 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

more practically relevant conﬁned swirl ﬂow. Finally, in a detailed
experimental study that included both a central jet and an annular
swirl stream, Midgley et al. 14,15 deduced from PIV measure-
ments that multiple spiral vortex structures were observed
wrapped around a central recirculation zone CRZ. This should
perhaps be interpreted as a vortex breakdown in which both spiral
and bubble modes occurred simultaneously. The origin of the spi-
raling vortex structures was traced to a separation event inside the
fuel injector, and the “two strong/two-weak” double helix form of
the spiral vortices was explained by the need for the secondary
ﬂowﬁeld of the vortex structures to satisfy continuity within the
annulus. As noted in other works, the near fuel injector turbulence
ﬁeld was strongly inﬂuenced by the appearance of the spiraling
vortex structures. Based on the above, the measurements of Mid-
gley et al. 15 have been extended to explore the inﬂuence of a
central jet in a conﬁned ﬂow, and the effect of the swirl and swirl
passage geometry on vortex breakdown.
Test Facility
The test rig used for the present measurements is the same as in
the study reported by Midgley et al. 15; details are given in Refs.
14,15. Tests were conducted in both water and air ﬂow, but
superior PIV data were obtained in water ﬂow and these are re-
ported here, with hot wire data from airﬂow tests. The radially fed
swirler 1230 deg angled slots produced an annular swirl-
stream outer diameter Ds=37.63 mm at fuel injector exit Fig.
1. The inner diameter of the annulus was formed by the outer
wall of a central jet nozzle inner diameter Dj=5.4 mm. The
standard test condition corresponded to swirler and jet Reynolds
numbers of 8104 and 2.63104 deﬁned using Ds and Dj and
the bulk mean velocities based on geometrical exit areas: Vx,j
=4.88 m/s, Vx,s=2.13 m/s. Note, however, that the discharge co-
efﬁcient of the swirl passage was measured at 0.5, so the peak
swirlstream velocity was about 1.5 Vx,s. In the data reported in
15, the central jet had always been present; the current experi-
ments concentrated initially on the case with no central jet, but an
unchanged swirlstream condition. To allow further exploration of
changes in the swirlstream conditions, a modular injector was
designed Fig. 2. This allowed changes to the radial swirler slot
angle 1, and the angles of the central and outer body 2,3 to
assess the effects of swirl passage shape. In all tests with the
modular injector, no central jet was present. Note also that the
annular swirl passage in the modular geometry did not contain an
internal corner, as present in the datum geometry. This was inten-
tional to allow assessment of whether the presence of this internal
corner in the datum geometry was a “trigger” to the internal vor-
tex breakdown, as suggested in 15. By selecting 2=17 deg and
3=9.5 deg, Case 1 the injector exit plane bulk axial and swirl
velocities of the swirlstream were the same in datum and modular
fuel injectors. By varying 2,3, the bulk average axial velocity
ratio of the swirl passage ﬂow between outlet and inlet
Vx,so/Vx,si, and similarly the swirl velocity ratio Vt,so/Vt,si,
could be altered to investigate the effect of different levels of
acceleration and “spin up” within the swirlstream passage on the
ﬂow produced. Table 1 shows the various cases considered. Case
6 used central body and outer body modules of constant radius
14/25 mm to provide a parallel swirl passage conﬁguration. Fi-
nally, to assess the impact of the swirl number on the ﬂow, differ-
ent radial slot modules were constructed with various values of
1. Table 2 shows the resulting swirl numbers as deduced from
exit plane PIV measurements.
Instrumentation
The PIV instrument comprised a LaVision system with a twin
Nd: YAG laser generating a 1 mm thick light sheet via spherical
and cylindrical lenses, and a Kodak Megaplus ES 1.0 camera with
1008976 pixel resolution, running at 15 Hz a few measure-
ments at 1 kHz were also made with an upgraded camera/PIV
system. Laser/camera synchronization, image acquisition, and
data processing using the cross-correlation technique were con-
trolled by Davis software running on a dual processor Pentium III
PC. 20 m polyamide particles almost neutrally buoyant in wa-
ter were used as light scattering particles. The PIV instrumenta-
Fig. 1
Datum fuel injector geometry
Fig. 2
Modular fuel injector geometry
Table 1
Modular injector geometry parameters
2
deg
3
deg
Vx,so/Vx,si
Vt,so/Vt,si
Case 1
17
9.5
1.25
1.56
Case 2
20.5
8.5
1.3
1.56
Case 3
13.5
11.5
1.43
1.56
Case 4
13.5
8.5
1.29
1.65
Case 5
20.5
11.5
1.21
1.43
Case 6
0
0
1.0
1.0
Table 2
Radial swirl module slot angles and swirl numbers
1
deg
S
30
0.72
20
0.57
10
0.47
0
0
021503-2 / Vol. 130, MARCH 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 May 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

tion parameter setup was selected following the recommendations
of Keane and Adrian 16. Laser power and optical system/data
collection parameters were optimized by minimizing the inter-
frame time t to reduce truncation errors in velocity evaluation,
but not setting t so small as to incur precision errors in particle
location due to subpixel interpolation. The interframe time par-
ticle shift was set so that the inplane displacement was less than
1/4 of the PIV interrogation cell used for cross correlation and,
where possible, led to out-of-plane motion less than z/4, where
z is the camera depth of ﬁeld. The optimum particle image di-
ameter is around 2 pixels. For 20 m particles, this was achieved
in the present experiment when the ﬁeld of view FoV was
smaller than 8080 mm2. In most data collected, there were at
least ten particle pairs per interrogation window. The interrogation
cell used a deformed multipass grid LaVision 17 of initial size
6464 pixels, reducing to a ﬁnal size of 3232 pixels with 50%
overlap. The interframe delay time was around 500 s for the
larger FoV images used for initial identiﬁcation of ﬂow structures
160160 mm2 and 20–50 s for the smallest FoV 20
20 mm2. This minimized out-of-plane data loss and maximized
the inplane displacement, which was typically from 3–8 pixels.
The same approach to data validation was applied as described in
15; a range of FoVs was used that allowed optimization of PIV
system parameters to the length scale of local dynamically impor-
tant ﬂow structures. The local turbulence length scales were esti-
mated using the technique developed by Spencer and Hollis 18,
and the measured turbulence levels corrected increased using the
formula proposed in 18 if the size of the PIV interrogation cell
was not small enough, relative to the local integral length scale. In
all the data presented here for statistical quantities, time averaging
over 650 PIV frames has been carried out.
Results and Discussion
Comparison of Flowﬁeld With and Without Central Jet.
Figure 3 presents the mean velocity vectors in the x-r plane mea-
sured in the datum injector geometry. In comparison with the
overall ﬂow structure for the case with a central jet shown in Fig.
3a 15, the no jet case in Fig. 3b shows that the central recir-
culation zone CRZ extends right up to the injector exit plane, the
corner recirculation is weaker and less well deﬁned, with the swirl
cone attachment point on the outer wall further downstream
x/Ds=1.5 compared to the value x/Ds=1.2, reported in 15.
The absence of the central jet changes the turbulence structure in
the centerline region in the ﬁrst 2–3 swirler diameters dramati-
cally. Figure 4 compares measured radial RMS turbulence inten-
Fig. 3
Overall ﬂow structure; datum injector „a… with fuel jet; „b… without fuel
jet
Fig. 4
Radial RMS proﬁles; „top… with central jet; „bottom… no
central jet
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2008, Vol. 130 / 021503-3
Downloaded 15 May 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

sity proﬁles in this region for ﬂows with and without a central jet
similar changes are observed in axial and circumferential RMS
data. Outboard of r/Ds0.3, the results are quite similar in the
two ﬂows. A striking difference is observed, however, closer to
the centerline. With a central jet, the turbulence levels start low,
rise to a peak at x/Ds0.5 and then decay rapidly beyond this.
This structure is connected to the high axial velocity gradients in
the region of x/Ds=0.5–1.0 associated with the free stagnation
point between forward ﬂowing central jet and backﬂow in the
CRZ. Of course with no central jet, as noted above, the CRZ
reaches back to the injector exit plane. The turbulence levels in
the no-jet case are quite different. Figure 4 shows that these start
high and remain very high 45% right down to x/Ds3. Com-
parison with measured axial and circumferential turbulence inten-
sities Midgley 19, indicates that the radial and circumferential
turbulence levels are signiﬁcantly higher a factor of 2 com-
pared to the axial data. This is recognizable as an effect of the
unsteady ﬂuctuations associated with a PVC that would inﬂuence
radial and tangential motions more than axial, which are picked
up by the time-averaging process as “turbulence.” The implication
is that the presence of a central jet stabilizes the CRZ and damps
its tendency to precess; more measurements to conﬁrm that the no
central jet case does have a strong PVC will be presented below.
Further illustration of the changed ﬂuctuating velocity ﬁeld
brought about in the near-injector region by the omission of the
central jet is provided in Fig. 5, which compares the measured
turbulence kinetic energy ﬁelds. In both cases, the peak turbulence
levels are associated initially with the inner edge of the swirl-
stream shear layer and identiﬁed in 15 as caused by the rotating
multiple vortex system. For no central jet, however, the maxi-
mum value is lower 0.6 compared to 0.75. The swirl shear layer
is clearly more diffused in the no jet case, and the streak of high
ﬂuctuations measured on the centerline and stretching down-
stream is again the contribution from the PVC, which is clearly
stronger in the no jet case. It is important to note again here that,
for the high values measured in the shear layer edge, and on the
centerline in the no jet case, these should not be considered as
genuine turbulence, since a large contribution is due to high en-
ergy periodic events. A further piece of evidence that shows the
no-jet case is markedly more unstable than the central jet case is
contained in Fig. 6; this shows the PDF of the outer wall attach-
ment point of the swirl cone. The larger variance in this x/Ds
=0.5–2.5 than when a central jet is present x/Ds=0.75–1.75
Fig. 5
Turbulence kinetic energy contours; „top… with central
jet; „bottom… no central jet
Fig. 6
PDF of spatial attachment point of swirl cone
021503-4 / Vol. 130, MARCH 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 May 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

indicates a more vigorous “ﬂapping” of the swirl stream cone,
once again probably induced by the strong PVC. Finally, Fig. 7
compares power spectral density PSD measurements of the axial
velocity taken at a point within the inner swirlstream shear layer
edge at injector exit x/Ds=0.27, r/Ds=0.27, =0 deg. These
data were taken in an airﬂow experiment with a hot wire at
10 kHz resolution, and also in the water ﬂow experiment with
high speed PIV 1 kHz; good agreement between the two experi-
mental techniques is seen.
Strongly periodic events are identiﬁable in both spectra. In the
ﬂow with a central jet, the Strouhal numbers at which these occur
St=1.32 and 2.71 were identiﬁed in 15, with the rotation of a
two strong/two weak double vortex pair system originating with a
breakdown event inside the fuel injector. With no central jet, the
largest peaks appear at Strouhal numbers of 0.6 and 1.2. The
energy is also distributed over a broader range of frequencies near
these peaks. The appearance of multiple peaks conﬁrms that a
vortex pair system must still be present in the no jet case, although
probably weaker as was seen in the reduced turbulence energy
maximum value in Fig. 5. Following the technique described in
15, conditionally averaged vectors were derived for the two
cases at injector exit and are shown in Fig. 8, superimposed on a
swirl strength parameter. The two strong/two weak vortex pattern
is very obvious in the central jet data; with no central jet, only two
vortices can be clearly identiﬁed, and these are also much less
coherent with quite unequal swirl strength parameters. As a con-
sequence of this, the main periodic feature identiﬁed as these
structures rotate is the passage of the strongest vortex past the
measurement point, with a weaker signal from the passage of the
vortex pair since these are less coherent, and a much weaker
signal from the hardly visible second vortex pair. This explains
why the Strouhal peaks in the no jet case are at half the value of
the with jet data.
Further, an additional periodic event is now present in the no jet
case that was not present with a jet, namely the PVC. In order to
extract quantitative details on the PVC, the decision was taken to
look further downstream at x/Ds=2.65, where evidence for a
PVC had ﬁrst been seen in the turbulence statistics. Instantaneous
PIV data of velocity vectors in the r– plane are shown in Fig. 9
at two instants of time. The aerodynamic center of the swirling
ﬂow can be easily identiﬁed, and is clearly precessing in time
about the geometric center identiﬁed by the black dot. The varia-
tion in time of the angular location of the aerodynamic center was
taken from the instantaneous PIV data and is shown in Fig. 10.
The sawtooth pattern indicates a coherent rotational motion at the
very low frequency of around 0.75 Hz, a Strouhal number of only
0.01, as deﬁned in the above data using swirl passage exit pa-
rameters. If the Strouhal number is redeﬁned Stduct using the
downstream duct diameter 140 mm as a length scale and the
associated bulk mean velocity, then Stduct takes on a value of
0.7, which is in good agreement with the data of Syred 20 on
PVC characteristics at a bulk swirl number of around 0.75, as in
the present case.
Fig. 7
PSD of axial velocity in swirlstream shear layer „top…
with central jet; „bottom… no central jet
Fig. 8
Conditionally averaged velocity vectors in r− plane at
x/Ds=0.0; „top… with central jet; „bottom… no central jet
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2008, Vol. 130 / 021503-5
Downloaded 15 May 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

Modular Injector Geometry Data. The ﬁrst data taken with
the modular injector were for Case 1, which was set up to be the
same as the no jet ﬂow case discussed above, except for the re-
moval of the internal corner. Figure 11 presents a series of spectra
measured at x/Ds=0.27 with a hot wire in airﬂow for Case 1 at
25 kHz resolution with swirl slots at 1=30 deg. Two spikes in
the spectra are observed at the same Strouhal numbers as in the
datum injector geometry at all radial locations measured. This
result shows conclusively that the separation event inside the in-
jector identiﬁed in 15 as the origin of the double vortex pair was
not associated with the internal corner. By reducing the swirl slot
angle 1, and hence swirl number, the change in spectral char-
acteristics may be observed in Fig. 12. The intensity of the domi-
nant spikes reduces with swirl level until at 1=10 deg, where no
spikes are observed. Although the data are shown here for the
Case 1 swirl passage geometry, the same result was obtained for
all Cases studied. The swirl number clearly affects the appearance
of the internal vortex breakdown, creating the multiple vortex
structures, but the passage geometry has no discernible inﬂuence.
Measurements reported in 15 with the datum injector had sug-
gested that the origin of the vortex structures was inside the in-
jector. Using the modular injector geometry, the improved optical
access allowed this to be conﬁrmed, see, Fig. 13, where the mean
separation point is measured as x/Ds=−0.25. This separation
point is also mainly determined by the swirl number, moving
downstream to x/Ds=−0.1 for 1=20 deg, and by 1=10 deg
there is no internal separation Fig. 14. This unequivocally links
Fig. 9
Instantaneous velocity vectors in r− plane at x/Ds
=2.65, no central jet
Fig. 10
Angular location of swirl pattern aerodynamic center
at x/Ds=2.65, no central jet
Fig. 11
PSD in modular injector, Case 1, x/Ds=0.27; 1
=30 deg
Fig. 12
PSD in modular injector, Case 1; various slot angles
021503-6 / Vol. 130, MARCH 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 May 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

the internal ﬂow separation and the multiple spiraling vortex
structures. As a ﬁnal piece of evidence, Fig. 15 shows the mea-
sured velocity vectors for Case 6 with a parallel walled swirl
passage, superimposed on the turbulence energy contours. For
1=30 deg and a parallel passage, the resulting swirl number was
higher than used before at 0.95. However, there is now no sepa-
ration inside the injector and the peak turbulence level at 0.35 at
the injector exit plane is half that observed previously. From hot
wire data taken at x/Ds=0.27, providing the PSD data shown in
Fig. 16, evidence was found of spikes in the spectra but for this
geometry only for 120 deg. The implication is that the spiral-
ing vortices have still appeared at high enough swirl numbers, but
their origin is now outside the injector. The most likely explana-
tion is that the formation point of the vortices is determined by an
interaction between the forward ﬂow in the swirlstream passage
and the backﬂow occurring in the CRZ, with the swirl number
being the dominant parameter controlling this, and the swirl pas-
sage geometry playing an indirect role, since changes here will
inﬂuence the precise swirl number at injector exit.
Conclusions
A detailed experimental study has been reported of the near-
ﬁeld injector ﬂowﬁelds created as various ﬂow and geometric pa-
rameters of the injector were varied. The main emphasis was on
the effect of the presence or absence of a central nonswirling jet in
addition to the annular swirlstream. The absence of the jet was
shown to lead to large destabilization of the ﬂow. The CRZ began
to precess creating a PVC, and large levels of velocity ﬂuctuations
were measured as a consequence on the centerline for a signiﬁcant
region downstream of the injector exit plane. The PVC unsteadi-
ness inﬂuenced the precise nature of the vortex breakdown, which
was conﬁrmed to occur inside the injector for the baseline ﬂow
conditions studies. The swirler cone itself also became more un-
stable without a central jet, producing a large increase in the varia-
tion in time of its attachment location on the conﬁning geometry
outer wall. Geometry variations in the swirl passage were exam-
ined but had only minor inﬂuence on the ﬂow characteristics,
except for their inﬂuence on the injector exit swirl number, which
was the dominating parameter. Variations in the swirl number
were shown to lead always to a spiral form of vortex breakdown
with multiple vortex structures wrapped around the CRZ. Depend-
Fig. 14
Velocity vectors, modular injector, Case 1; „top… 1
=20 deg; „bottom… 1=10 deg
Fig. 15
Velocity vectors and k contours, modular injector,
Case 6; 1=30 deg
Fig. 13
Velocity vectors, modular injector, Case 1; 1=30 deg
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2008, Vol. 130 / 021503-7
Downloaded 15 May 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

ing on the geometry, the precise value of swirl number at which
these spiraling structures appeared varied, as did the location of
their ﬁrst appearance, which could be both inside and outside the
injector.
Acknowledgment
The work reported here was carried out in the Loughborough
UTC in Combustion Aerodynamics with funding provided by EU
project “MOLECULES” No. G4RD-CT-2000-00402.
Nomenclature
D  cylindrical combustor duct diameter
Dj  central jet diameter
Ds  annular swirler passage diameter
f  frequency of periodic peaks in PSD data
k  turbulence kinetic energy, or direction k
Lij
k  length scale of i/ j velocity ﬂuctuation correla-
tion in k direction
r  separation vector
Rij  spatial correlation function
S  swirl number
St  dimensionless Strouhal number fDs/Vx,s
ui, uj  velocity ﬂuctuations in i, j directions
Vx, Vr, Vt  time-mean velocities in x, r,  directions
Vx,j  bulk axial velocity of central jet stream
Vx,s  bulk axial velocity of annular swirl stream
vx, vr, vt  ﬂuctuating RMS in x, r,  directions
x, r,   cylindrical polar coordinates
t  interframe time
z  camera depth of ﬁeld
References
1 Peckham, D. H., and Atkinson, S. A., 1957, “Preliminary Results of Low
Speed Wind Tunnel Tests on a Gothic Wing of Aspect Ratio 1.0,” ARC Tech-
nical Report CP No. 508, TN No. Aero 2504.
2 Gupta, A. K., Lilley, D. G., and Syred, N., 1984, Swirl Flows, Abacus Press,
Cambridge, MA.
3 Wang, S., and Rusak, Z., 1997, “The Dynamics of a Swirling Flow in a Pipe
and Transition to Axisymmetric Vortex Breakdown,” J. Fluid Mech., 3, pp.
177–223.
4 Escudier, M., 1988, “Vortex Breakdown: Observations and Explanations,”
Prog. Aerosp. Sci., 25, pp. 189–229.
5 Lucca-Negro, O., and O’Doherty, T., 2001, “Vortex Breakdown: A Review,”
Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 27, pp. 431–481.
6 Sarpkaya, T., 1971, “On Stationary and Travelling Vortex Breakdowns,” J.
Fluid Mech., 45, pp. 545–559.
7 Leibovich, S., 1978, “The Structure of Vortex Breakdown,” Annu. Rev. Fluid
Mech., 10, pp. 221–246.
8 Syred, N., and Beer, J. M., 1972, “The Damping of Precessing Vortex Cores by
Combustion in Swirl Generation,” Astronaut. Acta, 17, pp. 783–801.
9 Benjamin, T. B., 1962, “Theory of the Vortex Breakdown Phenomenon,” J.
Fluid Mech., 14, pp. 593–629.
10 Escudier, M., Nickson, K., and Poole, R., 2006, “Intensely Swirling Turbulent
Pipe Flow Downstream of an Oriﬁce: The Inﬂuence of an Outlet Contraction,”
13th Int. Symp. on Appl. of Laser Techniques in Fluid Mechanics, Lisbon,
Portugal.
11 Li, G., and Gutmark, E. J., 2003, “Geometry Effects on the Flow Field and the
Spectral Characteristics of a Triple Annular Swirler,” ASME Paper No. GT-
2003-38799.
12 Wegner, B., Janis, B., Sadiki, A., Dreizler, A., and Janicka, J., 2005, “Study of
Flow and Mixing in a Generic GT Combustor Using LES,” Eng. Turb. Mod-
elling and Measurements 6, W. Rodi, ed., Elsevier Ltd., Oxford, U.K., pp.
731–739.
13 Garcia-Villalba, M., and Froehlich, J., 2005, “On the Sensitivity of a Free
Annular Swirling Jet to the Level of Swirl and a Pilot Jet,” Eng. Turb. Mod-
elling and Measurements 6, W. Rodi, ed., Elsevier Ltd., Oxford, U.K., pp.
845–854.
14 Midgley, K., Spencer, A., and McGuirk, J. J., 2003, “PIV Measurements of
Conﬁned Swirling Flow,” Proc. of 3rd TSFP Symposium, Sendai, Japan.
15 Midgley, K., Spencer, A., and McGuirk, J. J., 2005, “Unsteady Flow Struc-
tures in Radial Swirler Fed Fuel Injectors,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power, 127, pp. 755–764.
16 Keane, R. D., and Adrian, R. J., 1992, “Theory of Cross-Correlation Analysis
of PIV Images,” Appl. Sci. Res., 49, pp. 191–215.
17 LaVision GmbH, 2000, “PIV Flowmaster Manual.”
18 Spencer, A., and Hollis, D., 2005, “Correcting for Sub-Grid Filtering Effects in
Particle Image Velocimetry Data,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 16, pp. 2323–2335.
19 Midgley, K., 2005, “An Isothermal Experimental Study of the Unsteady Fluid
Mechanics of Gas Turbine Fuel Injector Flowﬁelds,” Ph.D. thesis, Loughbor-
ough University.
20 Syred, N., O’Doherty, T., and Froud, D., 1994, “The Interaction of the Pre-
cessing Vortex Core and Reverse Flow Zone in the Exhaust of a Swirl Burner,”
Bussei Kenkyu, 208, pp. 27–35.
Fig. 16
PSD for modular injector, Case 6; various slot angles
021503-8 / Vol. 130, MARCH 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 May 2009 to 129.137.5.42. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
