
--- Page 1 ---

Citation: Molière, M. The Fuel
Flexibility of Gas Turbines: A Review
and Retrospective Outlook. Energies
2023, 16, 3962. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en16093962
Academic Editor: Andrea De Pascale
Received: 17 March 2023
Revised: 18 April 2023
Accepted: 2 May 2023
Published: 8 May 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
energies
Review
The Fuel Flexibility of Gas Turbines: A Review and
Retrospective Outlook
Michel Molière
Laboratoire Réactions et Génie des Procédés, Université de Lorraine, 54000 Nancy, France;
michel.moliere@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract: Land-based gas turbines (GTs) are continuous-ﬂow engines that run with permanent ﬂames
once started and at stationary pressure, temperature, and ﬂows at stabilized load. Combustors
operate without any moving parts and their substantial air excess enables complete combustion.
These features provide signiﬁcant space for designing efﬁcient and versatile combustion systems. In
particular, as heavy-duty gas turbines have moderate compression ratios and ample stall margins,
they can burn not only high- and medium-BTU fuels but also low-BTU ones. As a result, these
machines have gained remarkable fuel ﬂexibility. Dry Low Emissions combustors, which were
initially conﬁned to burning standard natural gas, have been gradually adapted to an increasing
number of alternative gaseous fuels. The paper ﬁrst delivers essential technical considerations that
underlie this important fuel portfolio. It then reviews the spectrum of alternative GT fuels which
currently extends from lean gases (coal bed, coke oven, blast furnace gases . . . ) to rich reﬁnery
streams (LPG, oleﬁns) and from volatile liquids (naphtha) to heavy hydrocarbons. This “fuel diet”
also includes biogenic products (biogas, biodiesel, and ethanol) and especially blended and pure
hydrogen, the fuel of the future. The paper also outlines how, historically, land-based GTs have
gradually gained new fuel territories thanks to continuous engineering work, lab testing, experience
extrapolation, and validation on the ﬁeld.
Keywords: gas turbine; fuel ﬂexibility; alternative fuels; combustion; low emissions; hydrogen; fossil
fuels; biofuels
1. Introduction
The current decade will see disruptive changes in the energy scene as a dramatic
abatement of GHG emissions, especially those of CO2, has become a global, inescapable
necessity [1]. However, as pointed out by the IEA [2], the thermal power segment will
survive, initially, in order to deliver the massive power additions that will be required by
the upcoming electriﬁcation of the economies, particularly, that of the transportation sector.
Then, the thermal sector will continue to play a critical role since electrical grids will need
dispatchable units and “spinning reserves” to support the grids and offset the intermittency
of renewables. Currently, among thermal power facilities, land-based gas turbines are
serious candidates to support the energy transition as they meet all the requisites, including
efﬁciency, reliability, controlled emissions, and peak shaving capability, with fast start and
ramp-up ability [3]. The irreplaceable role played by gas turbines in the reliability of power
grids and their potential contribution to a decarbonized economy in conjunction with the
advent of hydrogen as an energy vector has been discussed elsewhere [4,5].
In addition, gas turbines have the additional advantage of being highly fuel ﬂexible, a
key asset in addressing the volatile and uncertain fuel market of the future. Indeed, they
have managed to build a wide fuel portfolio, starting from natural gas and light distillate—
which are their historical fuels—and now encompassing a large variety of alternative gases
and liquids.
This paper aims to review the vast fuel territories that have been successfully explored
and occupied by land-based gas turbines over the years, drawing in particular on the
Energies 2023, 16, 3962. https://doi.org/10.3390/en16093962
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies


--- Page 2 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
2 of 29
author’s own experience. To better understand the reasons for this success, it will ﬁrst set
out some key aspects that pertain to the technology of these machines. It will also highlight
some interesting milestones in this fuel ﬂex expansion process.
2. Essential Technical Considerations
2.1. The Value of Fuel Flex in the Power Generation Market
Generically, fuel ﬂexibility is the ability not only to accommodate a plurality of fuels
but also to achieve reliable fuel changeovers. In modern power plants, these must be
performed either automatically or upon simple “push-button” orders. The simplest and
most common case of fuel ﬂex is dual fuel capability, which usually involves natural
gas (NG) and light distillate oil (LD) for gas turbines [6]. However, two cases should
be distinguished because the expectations from a prime mover depend on to the type of
service it provides:
-
Peak-shaving service is characterized by few operation hours but a constraint of
permanent “dispatchability”, which is the ability to respond to changes in power
demand over time, and which requires faultless startups and fast access to the targeted
load; here, the plant operator’s attention is essentially focused on maintenance costs;
-
Base-load or “semi-base-load” service implies longer operation periods, during which
the operator focuses on fuel cost which represents up to 60% of his O&M expenses.
Figure 1 shows the “pyramid of merits” of gas turbines intended for peak-shaving
and base-load service, respectively. In both cases, the objective is to maximize the gain per
kWh generated and the load factor of the unit.
 
Common Objective:
Gain per kWh
Max. Load Factor
Control 
Costs of
Maintenance
Control
Fuel Cost
Fast Ramp-Up
Plant Efficiency
Security of
Fuel Supply
Startup
Readiness
Fuel Availability
Safety & Emission Compliance
Safety & Emission Compliance
The Prerequisites
Distinct
attributes
Figure 1. The “pyramid of merits” for peak-shaving and base-load gas turbines.
For a peak-shaving service, the required qualities are: (i) startup readiness, with, at
best, a black-start capability; (ii) secured access to fuel, implying a backup fuel; (iii) fast
ramp-up time; and (iv) containment of maintenance costs since operating in peak-shaving
mode considerably increases the “maintenance factor” due to multiple startups/shutdowns,
fast load changes, and peak-load excursions. Here, a dual fuel capability represents an
additional security as it will avoid the ﬁnancial losses potentially caused by failures to
start upon a requisition from the dispatch center. For a GT normally burning NG, which
represents most cases, the second fuel can simply be a light distillate, which will be rarely
used. However, in some areas lacking natural gas and light distillate (e.g., in some remote
islands), the possibility to start with an alternative fuel, such as a liqueﬁed petroleum gas,
is highly desirable. However, efﬁciency remains an important consideration.


--- Page 3 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
3 of 29
For a base-load or a semi-base-load service, fuel availability is also essential, but the
focus is more on securing an uninterrupted supply of large fuel volumes and on minimizing
fuel cost. Indeed, GTs serving large industrial plants such as reﬁneries, petrochemical plants,
or ironworks, usually operate for long periods of time, sometimes non-stop for an entire
year. It is where the access to an alternative but also economic fuel acquires its full value.
The purpose of this paper is therefore to explore fuel ﬂexibility in all its forms by
highlighting the gains it can bring to many industrial sectors, especially when this quality is
combined with efﬁcient energy conversion methods, including cogeneration and combined
cycles, and smart uses of residual or low-grade secondary energies [7].
2.2. Inherent Strengths of Gas Turbines Favoring Fuel Flex
Contemporary gas turbines operate according to the Brayton cycle, in which the heat
addition step is made by combusting a fuel in a continuous ﬂow of air [8]. For several
reasons, this cycle is very propitious for fuel ﬂexibility. At ﬁrst, the three cycle steps
(compression; combustion; expansion) are performed sequentially and in separate sections
of the machines. Once the targeted load is reached, both air and fuel enter the combustors
at constant ﬂow, temperatures, and pressure, creating stationary aerodynamic and thermal
patterns that greatly aid ﬂame stability. These stable conditions and the absence of any
moving part in the combustors provide a fairly large amount of room to conceive versatile
combustion systems capable of matching a plurality of objectives, the most important being
complete combustion, low NOx emissions, and multifuel capability, which is the focus
of this article. In addition, a large portion of the combustion testing activity can be made
on single combustor assemblies, separately from the rest of the machine, which enables
accelerated developments of new combustion concepts or designs [9,10].
Boilers also feature continuous ﬂow and permanent ﬂames [11] and are greatly fuel
ﬂexible. However, a main difference is that GTs operate under pressure (up to 30 bars)
and use hot combustion air, resulting in faster and more complete combustion kinetics,
even when dealing with difﬁcult fuels. The ﬂames are therefore shorter, so the combustion
chambers are of much smaller size. Moreover, the combustion heat is directly converted into
mechanical power as the combustion gases themselves act as the driving ﬂuid that rotates
the machine shaft. On the contrary, the energy conversion in boilers proceeds through
several heat exchanges that require very large surface areas, entailing strong thermal inertia
and large transient expansions/contractions, imposing much slower temperature changes,
i.e., slower load changes. These differences are also important because the much smaller hot
parts of GTs can be fabricated using advanced materials, such as single crystal superalloys
that are internally cooled and coated with thermal barriers [12–17]. The small, sophisticated
turbine blades and vanes can withstand much higher mechanical strains and temperatures
than boiler tubes, as well as steeper thermal transients, opening the way to (i) elevated
cycle pressures/temperatures and hence high efﬁciencies that are essential for base-load
operation; and (ii) fast starts/load changes that are key for peak-load service [18,19]. Finally,
the compactness and modularity of gas turbine units are additional advantages that explain
their high power-to-weight ratio and their short fabrication and erection times [20].
Turning to reciprocating engines, their combustion process is intermittent with alterna-
tions of several strokes and intermediate ignition events [21]. Due to the need of repetitive
ignitions, those engines are specialized for certain classes of fuels with speciﬁc ignition
properties. While spark-ignited (gasoline and gas) engines require fuels that are resistant
to auto-ignition (i.e., with high octane indices) to avoid knocking [22,23], diesel engines
need autoignitable fuels (i.e., fuels with high cetane indices) to avoid difﬁcult startups
and smoke emissions [24–26]. Gas turbines are free of these constraints as they operate
with permanent ﬂames and with large air excesses. Consequently, they emit no smoke
and virtually no CO/UHC—even when they burn difﬁcult liquid fuels—thanks to their air
atomization systems. The PM content at the exhaust of gas-ﬁred GTs is very low and has
even been found to be lower than in ambient air, owing to the air ﬁlters at the compressor
inlet [27]. While the rotary movement of reciprocating engines is created by pistons whose


--- Page 4 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
4 of 29
rings rub against cylinder walls, GT shafts rotate on hydrodynamic, friction-free journal
bearings [28]. Another difference is that GT combustion liners are air-ﬁlm cooled, which
largely prevents ﬂame quenching effects on their walls [29]. Although internal combustion
engines boast interesting efﬁciencies as stand-alone machines [30,31], they release exhaust
gases at medium temperature levels, which allows for only moderately or weakly efﬁcient
heat recoveries [32]. In contrast, gas turbines of the heavy-duty family (“HDGT”) that are
designed with moderate compression ratios have relatively high exhaust temperatures
(550–620 ◦C). Therefore, they can drive “topping” cycles and discharge their combustion
gas into heat recovery boilers to deliver heat to “bottoming” steam cycles or cogeneration
units, resulting in high overall efﬁciencies [33,34]. However, a deﬁnitive advantage of
reciprocating engines is that their fuel does not need to have been compressed before
injection in the engine.
Finally, the low fuel/air ratios and the large stall margins of HDGTs allow them
to accommodate large fuel ﬂowrates, thus enabling the combustion of low-BTU fuels in
addition to medium- and high-BTU fuels [35,36]. All these design factors that favor the
fuel ﬂexibility of gas turbines represent the basic capital on which it has been possible,
historically, to build a large fuel portfolio [37], thanks to continuous efforts made over years
in designing and testing. As a result, these machines have gained wide fuel ﬂexibility and
have been sometimes nicknamed the “omnivorous” prime movers [38].
2.3. Technologies and Designs Underlying Fuel Flex
Validating the use of an alternative fuel in a gas turbine requires a somewhat holistic
approach as one must address multiple and often interrelated design and operational
aspects. Figure 2 sketches a gas turbine unit with its main fuel accessories and lists the
essential operational functions to perform [39].
 
Exhaust:
Liq. Fuel Storage
Safety; Purity;
Stability…
Combustion: 
GT Enclosure:
GT Performance: 
Dual Liquid/Gas Fuel Auxiliary System 
Gas Detection; Ventilation…
Tf; Control Strategy; 
Turbine cleanliness…
Safety; Emissions
Liquid Fuels
HRSG
Flue 
Gas
Duct
Safety
Safety (purges); Flow control,            gas nozzle sets…
Gas
Fuels
AA*
*AA: Air Atomization
Figure 2. Sketch of a dual fuel GT unit (two gases; two liquids or one gas and one liquid).
Adding a second fuel needs not only a dual fuel system [6] but must also meet addi-
tional requirements, which are (i) performing successful fuel changeovers [40]; (ii) keeping
operation safe; (iii) protecting machine integrity; and (iv) staying emission compliant.
All these four aspects deserve speciﬁc considerations.
2.3.1. Reliable Operation with Dual Fuel Systems
Gas turbines are generally qualiﬁed as “dual gas” when they burn two gases and
“dual fuel” when they burn one gas and one liquid. However, “dual fuel” is also a generic
terminology to designate the capability to burn two fuels, regardless of their physical states.


--- Page 5 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
5 of 29
•
Dual Gas Systems
An essential datapoint for the reliable and safe combustion of any gaseous fuel is
its “Wobbe Index”, and more precisely, its “Modiﬁed Wobbe Index”, which governs the
sizing of the gas fuel system [41] and more generally the interchangeability of gas fuels in
industrial and domestic applications [42]. These indices are deﬁned as follows:
WI = LHV/SG0.5
(1)
MWI = LHV/(SG0.5 × Tg0.5),
(2)
where SG is the speciﬁc gravity of the fuel (a dimensionless property, independent of
the temperature) and Tg its absolute temperature (Kelvin). The MWI decreases when the
temperature increases.
The MWI is a key datapoint to properly manage the use of different fuel gases in a
given piece of combustion equipment. Indeed, the caloriﬁc power being transported by
the gas, which determines the power output of the GT, is a function of (i) its MWI; (ii) the
nozzle pressure drop (i.e., essentially the gas feed pressure); and (iii) the total section area
of the set of oriﬁces of the gas nozzles (i.e., the diameter and number of these oriﬁces).
Since the gas feed pressure is limited in a certain range, and the geometry of the nozzle
oriﬁces is ﬁxed for a deﬁned hardware, if the MWI of the alternative gas differs too much
from that of the ﬁrst gas, there is a need to add secondary nozzle caps with suitable oriﬁce
diameters. Incidentally, the combustor plates of gas turbines are large enough to allow
for such additions, which is an advantage of GT construction. More speciﬁcally, a sound
engineering practice recommends limiting the MWI variations to ±5% for a given set of gas
nozzles as a measure to avoid any damage of combustor subcomponents [43,44]. Indeed,
the nozzle pressure drop is proportional to the kinetic energy of the injected gas; thus, for a
given nozzle set, setting the MWI around a deﬁned value and controlling the gas pressure
keeps the ﬂame at a suitable distance from (i) the gas nozzle tip and (ii) the end portion of
the combustion chamber, namely, the transition pieces. The MWI also conditions both the
aerothermal patterns and the heat release process; it consequently affects ﬂame stability
and thermoacoustic activity [45,46].
When the MWI numbers of two gas fuels differ by slightly more than 5%, it is possible
to reduce this difference by heating the higher caloriﬁc gas. If, for example, the MWI gap is
6%, the necessary temperature increase, ∆Tg, given by Equation (2), will equal:
∆Tg = 2 × Tg × ∆(MWI)/MWI ≈2 × 300 × 0.06 = 36 K.
More generally, one will use a dual-gas system, which consists of a set of double-gas
nozzles and possibly two gas manifolds and two sets of gas valves (Figure 3) [47].
 
Figure 3. (a) Typical dual gas system; (b) double set of gas nozzles [47].


--- Page 6 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
6 of 29
•
Liquid Fuel (LF) Systems [39]
The high-pressure portion of the LF circuit is fed by a low-pressure forwarding circuit.
It comprises a positive displacement HP pump, the ﬂow rate of which is adjusted by
recirculation through a by-pass valve. In some designs, a mechanical device called “ﬂow
divider” is used to distribute equal fuel ﬂows to all combustors; they can be of the linear
type, as represented in Figure 4, or circular.
Figure 4. Simpliﬁed diagram of liquid fuel line.
Some atomization air is bled from the GT compressor and boosted by an auxiliary
compressor to have the liquid fuel ﬁnely sprayed into the combustor and to suppress soot
formation [48].
Virtually all liquid fuels, including biodiesel but excepting alcohols, have relatively
close heating values; this dispenses from changing the fuel accessories and the fuel injectors
when passing, for instance, from a naphtha to a No.2 distillate fuel.
Viscous LFs can be heated (in the upstream low-pressure section) to reduce their
viscosity and enable their proper atomization into the combustors, thus preventing smoke
emissions [39]. However, the heating temperature must not exceed the incipient pyrolyzing
temperature of the fuel, which depends on its composition, the usual maximum being
130–140 ◦C [43].
Conversely, some light liquids (naphtha, alcohols) are low-viscosity fuels and have
poor “lubricity”, a property which is evaluated via the “HFRR test” [49,50]. If it is insufﬁ-
ciently “lubricious”, dosing a lubricity improving additive may prove necessary.
2.3.2. Ensuring Operation Safety
•
Essential safety measures
As indicated in Figure 2, GT enclosures must be equipped with adequate ventilation
and fuel leak detection systems, as well as CO2 inerting systems in emergency case.
The essential safety data for fuels are (i) the lower and upper explosion limits (LEL-
UEL), the LEL being the critical datum; (ii) the autoignition temperature (AIT); (iii) the
minimum ignition energy (MIE); and, for liquids, (iv) the boiling point and (v) the vapor
pressure (measured at e.g., 38 ◦C) [51]. The LEL of gas or vapor mixtures can be estimated
by Le Chatelier’s law in the absence of inert compounds [52] and based on empirical models
in presence of inerts [53]. It is mandatory to verify that the installed gas detectors ﬁt with
the vapors of the fuel being burned [54,55]. The prediction of the AITs of gas mixtures in
GT conditions, i.e., at elevated temperatures and pressures, is a complex subject on which
interesting progress is nevertheless being made thanks to Artiﬁcial Intelligence [56].
In the case of a dual gas machine, a gas changeover is preceded by a purge of the
fuel circuit using compressed air extracted at the GT compressor discharge. Since this
compressed air is hot, nitrogen is used instead for purging if the gas has a low AIT or
MIE. This point will be revisited when dealing with hydrogen applications. Similarly,
before transferring from a volatile liquid to a gaseous backup fuel, and vice versa, a
purge of the liquid fuel line by a light distillate is performed to avoid uncontrolled ﬂash
vaporization of the volatile liquid. In case of leaks, LPGs (butane/propane) and volatile


--- Page 7 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
7 of 29
fuels (naphtha/NGL) can generate hazardous liquid pools and vapor clouds that are denser
than air and may stagnate at low points [57], requiring highly sensitive vapor detectors [55].
As far as product and operational safety is concerned, an international safety standard
(ISO 21789:2022) has been developed at the initiative of the UK HSE and implemented
in the late 2000s to facilitate the integration of some recent EU regulations in GT designs,
especially the Explosive Atmosphere (ATEX) and Pressure Equipment (PED) Directives.
This ISO standard has been updated in 2022 [58].
•
Safe Fuel temperature range
If the alternative fuel is a volatile liquid, it is a sound engineering practice to keep its
temperature at about 56 ◦C below its bubble point to prevent vapor locks and the associated
risk of pump cavitation, which is conducive to uncontrolled or hazardous operation. It
is the case with naphtha, gas condensates (GC), or “natural gas liquids” (NGL) [59]. This
measure is illustrated by Figure 5.
ΔT requirement
Operation on 
Liquid Fuel (LF) is 
free of vapor locks
Operation on
Gaseous Fuel (GF) is 
free of Hydrocarbon 
(HC) condensation
Max. LF temp      Bubble point      HC Dew Point      Min. GF temp  
Fuel Temperature
28°C
56°C
Figure 5. Safe temperature ranges for volatile liquids and condensable gases.
Conversely, if it is a partly condensable gas, then its temperature must be brought to
about 28 ◦C above its dew point [43] to prevent the occurrence of a “blowpipe effect” that
would devastate the combustors and possibly some turbine parts. This would occur if one
were to burn incompletely vaporized LPG or a C3+ rich natural gas.
2.3.3. Staying Emission Compliant
Emission compliance is now mandatory worldwide, whatever the fuel burned.
SOx emissions and “organic” NOx emissions (generated by the fuel-bound nitrogen)
are directly related to the sulfur and nitrogen contents of the fuel, respectively; these must
be kept below appropriate levels. Flue gas desulfurization or “DeSOx” post-combustion
technologies exist [60,61], but they are expensive and reserved in practice for boilers as
they entail elevated pressure drops at equipment exhaust and GT performance penalties.
As pointed out above, gas turbines release minute CO, UHC, and smoke emis-
sions, even with difﬁcult fuels, including highly aromatic by-products, which will be
discussed later.
Due to the ﬁring temperature and pressure developed in their combustors, GTs tend,
however, to generate high thermal NOx when they operate with diffusion ﬂames, which is
the historical combustion mode of these machines; each fuel has an own NOx index that
depends on its composition and is approximately an exponential function of its (adiabatic)
stoichiometric combustion temperature, “Tad,st” [62]. This must be carefully considered
when envisaging an alternative fuel [63,64].
To reduce the NOx emission, up until the late 1980s, OEMs applied a “wet control”,
which consisted in injecting a diluent (most often liquid water or steam) in the combustors
to reduce the temperature peak (Tad,st) in the ﬂame. However, major developments con-
ducted in the 1980s–90s in combustion laboratories led to the design of inherently-low-NOx


--- Page 8 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
8 of 29
systems that prevent GT users from injecting any diluent or installing expensive post-
combustion DeNOx systems when burning natural gas. The solution, referred to as “Dry
Low NOx” (DLN) (or “Dry Low Emissions”, DLE) technologies, is based on the combustion
of premixed gas/air mixtures [65–68]. Successful DLN designs must overcome a set of com-
plex difﬁculties, namely, (i) avoiding lean blowouts (LBO) and ﬂashbacks; (ii) containing
CO emissions; and (iii) controlling combustion dynamics [69] while (iv) keeping hardware
durability (Figure 6a).
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6. (a) Operation boundaries of DLN systems; (b) typical historical progress in NOx emissions
on natural gas.
Flame ﬂashbacks possibly occur according to different mechanisms: by autoignition in
the premixed zone due to a too-low AIT of the fuel or combustion instabilities (combustion
dynamics); and by retro-propagation in the core ﬂow or through boundary layers [70].
Combustion dynamics are due to an interaction between unsteady aerodynamics and
heat release ﬂuctuation processes causing pressure oscillations that can resonate in the
combustor cavities and cause mechanical wear/damage [71]. Since premixed ﬂames have,
by design, a narrow lean richness range, they are more sensitive to dynamics than diffusion
ﬂames that have broad richness ranges with lower risks of simultaneous extinction of all
points of the ﬂame front.
A typical evolution of NOx control is outlined in Figure 6b. Ongoing efforts are being
made with success to improve the operability of DLN systems, namely, in two directions:
(i) expanding the range of emission compliance to lower GT loads, the so-called “Minimum
Emissions Compliance Load” (MECL) or, more simply, the “Turn Down” (see inset in
Figure 6a); and, as regards fuel ﬂexibility, (ii) extending the capability of those systems to
non-NG fuels by improving the aerothermal patterns of the combustors to counteract the
adverse combustion effects described above [72].
Regarding low NOx systems for liquid fuels, it must be noted that C5+ hydrocarbons
have low AIT data as compared, e.g., to methane. Therefore, “Dry Oil NOx” systems are
very challenging to design for trouble-free operation. For some alternative fuels, the sole
option is therefore to inject a diluent (most often liquid water or steam) in the combustors
to reduce the temperature peak in the ﬂame and correlatively the emission of NOx.
2.3.4. Ensuring Machine Integrity
The design and operational measures covered in Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 enable the
avoidance of defective combustion and associated component damages in dual fuel con-
ﬁgurations. However, many alternative fuels contain impurities. Some of them (e.g., coke
oven and blast furnace gases: COG; BFG) contain inorganic particles that must be removed
by proper ﬁltration as they can inﬂict severe erosion to turbine parts [43]. Some others
contain sulfur (e.g., sour natural gases) leading to polluting SOx emissions. Finally, some
liquid fuels (crude and residual oils) contain both sulfur and traces of alkaline metals
(Na, K) and vanadium (V), leading to corrosive, low-melting point salts or oxides (mainly
sodium sulfate: Na2SO4; and vanadium pentoxide: V2O5) [73]. Reference [41] gives a


--- Page 9 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
9 of 29
comprehensive review of the adverse effects of fuel impurities on turbine parts and the
corrective pretreatments, including ﬁltration, desalination, and corrosion inhibition.
2.3.5. Measures Speciﬁc to the Operation on Hydrogen-Rich Gases
Additional measures relating to the combustion of hydrogen taken to suppress the
risk of hot parts overheating and material embrittlement will be addressed in Section 4.
3. Creation and Growth of the Fuel Portfolio
3.1. General Overview
Since the 1960s, land-based gas turbines have gradually occupied a wide space of
alternative fuels [37,38,74–78]. Figure 7 gives a synoptic view of the current extension of
that fuel portfolio.
Figure 7. Current extension of the gas turbine fuel map.
To be able to bring together both gaseous and liquid fuels in a same chart, the chosen
ordinate is the mass percentage of hydrogen, the abscissa being the mass LHV. Since
the dihydrogen molecule has both the highest mass LHV (120 MJ/kg) and contains, by
deﬁnition, 100% elemental hydrogen, it occupies the top right corner of that chart.
Table 1 lists most of these fuels along with the following data: (i) their origins; (ii) the
acronyms used in this paper; (iii) their gaseous/liquid state; and (iv) their level of pu-
rity, namely, their ash-free or ash-forming character. This table also includes the two
conventional fuels (natural gas and light distillate).
Historically, the acquisition of this portfolio started from pipeline NG and LD and
has been a gradual process that took place over several decades. The additions of the
different fuels generally were/are in response to speciﬁc demands from industrial actors.
The most frequent opportunities are related to by-products of industrial processes available
in substantial volumes. These come from multiple economy branches: the oil and gas,
petrochemical, and metallurgical sectors; the processing and gasiﬁcation of coal, of biomass
or even municipal solid wastes.
The plants in demand typically generate streams of combustible by-products that
have valuable energetic potentials but were previously either wasted—e.g., by ﬂaring—or
used in few proﬁtable applications, until more cost-effective usages became feasible [79].
Conversion to heat and power is one of them: thermal power is generally used to cover
domestic needs (chemical, petrochemical, or food processes), while the electric power is
intended for self-consumption and sometimes for export.


--- Page 10 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
10 of 29
Table 1. List of alternative GT fuels, along with conventional NG and LD [78].
Economy
Branches
Origin
Process
Fuel Name
Acronym
State (L/G)
Main Features
Ash-Less or
Ash-Forming
Oil Production
& reﬁning
Extraction
Distillation
Catalytic
Cracking
Crude oil
Liq. Petr. Gas
Naphtha
Kerosene
Light Distil’te
Heavy Dist’te
Heavy Oil
Light Cycle oil
Ref Fuel Gas
CO
LPG
-
-
LD
-
HFO
LCO
RFG
L
L/G1
L
L
L
L
L
L
G
Light to Heavy
HCV2
Volatile
Ultra Pure
Conventional
Liq.
Viscous
Impurities
Aromatic
H2 & Cn
AL
AL
AL
AL
AL
Slight. AF
Strong. AF
AL
AL
Gas
Exploration
& processing
NG extraction
NG reforming
Natural Gas
Gas Cond’sate
Nat. Gas Liq
Hydrogen
NG
GC
NGL
H2
G
L
L
G
Rich/weak/Soft/sour
Light to heavy
Low viscosity
Highly ﬂamm.
AL
AL
AL
AL
Coal Mining &
Processing
Coal mining
Coal
gasiﬁcation
Coalbed gas
Syngas
Substitute NG
Methanol
Hydrogen
CBG
SG
SNG
MeOH
H2
G
G
G
G
G
LCV3
MCV4/LCV
MCV/LCV
Highly volatile
Highly ﬂamm.
Slight. AF
AF
AL
AL
AL
Metallurgy
Coal pyrolysis
Metal oxide
reduction
Coke Oven Gas
Blast Furnace
Gas
COG
BFG
G
G
MCV
LCV
AF
AF
Petrochemistry
Naphtha
Cracking
Aromatisation
Butadiene unit
Oleﬁn-rich Pet.
Gas
H2 Pet Net G.
C3/C4 Pet Net
G
PNG
PNG
PNG
G
G
G
Var. oleﬁn %
Var. H2 content
Var. C3 & C4%
AL
AL
AL
Farming
Aerobic
fermentation
Biogas
BG
G
Var. N2-CO2%
AL/sligh AF
Biomass
Vegetables
processing
Biodiesel
Bioethanol
Dimethyl Ether
BD
EtOH
DME
L
L
L
Analog. to LD
Analog. to naph
Analog. to LPG
AL
AL
AL
Historically, the beneﬁciation options involved the combustion of these by-products
in utility boilers, but more efﬁcient GT-driven cogeneration units gradually displaced these


--- Page 11 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
11 of 29
boilers. This displacement began around the 1970s in the USA, where GT started their
brisk development (with efﬁciencies reaching then exceeding 25%), then roughly in the
1980s in Europe and during the 1990 s in Asia. It was accelerated by emerging regulations
encouraging cogeneration as a virtuous tool for improving energy effectiveness [80].
Recently, gaseous and liquid biofuels, resulting from the processing of a wide variety
of biomass feedstocks, have emerged as potential GT fuels. The reference [81] offers a
thorough technical coverage of the raw materials and processing technologies that are
currently involved in the production of biofuels.
Before a given candidate becomes “entitled” as an actual alternative GT fuel, it
must pass rigorous analyses and lab combustion tests, but subsequent pilot ﬁeld tests
are also highly advisable. These tests became increasingly focused on emission compliance
due to the rise of environmental regulations worldwide. In the 1970s, the ﬁrst USEPA
recommendations—the so-called Clean Air Act—began setting a NOx emission limit of
75 ppm to ﬁght against the episodes of “smogs” in big cities and enforced more stringent
limits (42 or 25 ppm) in critical “non-attainment areas” (California, Texas) [82]. Since DLN
technologies were industrially available only in the early 1990s (see Section 2.3.3), DeNOx
was formerly achieved in GTs by steam injection. To that end, medium-pressure steam
was extracted from the heat recovery steam generators. Resorting to the SCR (Selective
Catalytic Reduction) technology was necessary to reach the lowest NOx codes [83].
When the pilot tests of an alternative fuel candidate prove successful, they result
in “win–win” opportunities for both the requesting industrial partner and the GT OEM.
Sometimes, it becomes the starting point for a closer relationship. For instance, the power
generator Groupe E (formerly ENSA), which has its headquarters in Neuchatel (Switzer-
land), has greatly contributed to the successful testing of several alternative fuels [84–86].
3.2. The Gas Fuel Portfolio
Figure 8 illustrates the way the map of gaseous GT fuels has been extending over the
years. The MWI Index (Equation (2)) has been taken as ordinate and the mass LHV as
abscissa. In this new representation, hydrogen has the highest mass LHV and lies on the
right borderline while butane has the highest MWI and marks the higher boundary.
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
C4H8
C3H8
C2H6
CH4
BFG & Air blown SG island
Lean NG
island
LNG island
LPG island
H2−rich island
Increasing H content
Conv. NG
island
LHV (MJ/kg)
20
30
40
120
50
Biogas 
island
C4H10
Increasing 
Refinery/Petrochem. island
H2
Content
MWI @ 15 C 
(MJ.Nm−3.K−0.5)
Increasing 
Heavy HCs
Olefin island
Inerts
COG & O2−blown SG island
Figure 8. Expansion of the gas fuel map towards miscellaneous by-product gases.
Fuel gases can be classiﬁed as HCV fuels (having LHV ranging from 50 to
120 MJ/Nm3), MCV (11 to 50 MJ/Nm3) and LCV ones (below 11 and possibly down


--- Page 12 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
12 of 29
to 3 MJ/Nm3). It is worth mentioning that this classiﬁcation is not an absolute one as some
GT OEMs use different scales.
In addition, this classiﬁcation would change if one would consider mass-based LHVs
instead of volume-based ones: for instance, hydrogen would pass from the LCV to the
HCV category since its LHV is 120 MJ per kg but hardly 11.7 MJ per Nm3.
Since the 1960s, the sphere of gaseous GT fuels has been expanding, starting from
the historic “island” of natural gas, which consists essentially in methane and traces of
C2+ hydrocarbons. It currently embraces HCV, MCV, and LCV gases. The backup fuel is
generally a light distillate.
The expansion of this gas portfolio has occurred in three directions: towards higher
and lower caloriﬁc fuels and higher hydrogen contents.
•
Expansion towards high-caloriﬁc fuels:
This family includes the following products:
-
Commercial LPGs (propane, butane, and mixtures thereof) mainly come from the
processing of NG and the atmospheric distillation of crudes. They are generally
burned after vaporization. Their combustion in variable amounts in GTs is interesting
as it allows matching the offer to the demand of LPGs namely in summer [87];
-
Reﬁnery fuel gases (RFG) [88] as well as petrochemical net gases (PNG) [87–90] mainly
contain C2 to C4 alkanes and/or oleﬁns, in addition to variable amounts of H2; they
stem from ﬂuid catalytic cracking (FCC) or steam catalytic cracking (SCC) units. They
are produced continuously and yield high GT performances.
•
Expansion towards low-caloriﬁc fuels:
This family involves gaseous streams in which the combustible species (mainly CH4,
CO, and H2) are diluted by elevated amounts of N2, H2O, and/or CO2. Their main
representatives are the following:
-
“Lean natural gases” stem from some NG wells or coal mines and contain CH4, N2,
and CO2 [37]; they are medium- or low-BTU fuels; their combustion after compression
is interesting if the sale of the kWhs exceeds the cost of compression that is only partly
compensated by the extra power produced by the expansion in the turbine;
-
Biogases are produced in breeding farms or in landﬁlls; they can be cleaned (H2S
removal) and burned in microturbines to cover power self-consumption; recently, they
have been transported and injected in natural gas networks [91–94];
-
Coke oven gases (COG) come from the pyrolysis of coal for the preparation of metal-
lurgical coke and contain H2, CH4, CO, CO2, and H2O. They contain dusts that must
be ﬁltered and tars that must be removed by condensation/water scrubbing [95–97].
-
Air-blown syngases (SG) are very lean gases which contain mainly CO, N2, H2O,
and H2 and come from the gasiﬁcation of coal/lignite [98–102], or biomass [103–105],
or even solid municipal wastes [106–108]; oxygen-blow gasiﬁcation is applied to
very difﬁcult solids (HFOs and bituminous coals) and yield syngases with higher
LHVs [101]. Syngases from coals and HFOs must undergo drastic clean-up processes
to remove particles, sulfur, nitrogen, and heavy metals;
-
Blast furnace gases (BFG) are also lean fuels and are loaded with high concentrations
of CO2 and H2O; due to their high level of dust, they also need very efﬁcient clean-up
facilities before injection in GTs [109–111].
•
Expansion towards higher H2 contents:
Both steam cracking and aromatization units in petrochemical and reﬁneries release
gaseous byproducts that contain variable amounts of hydrocarbons and hydrogen. These
streams are gathered in a gas network and are called “fuel gas” or “net gas”; they are used
as secondary energies in the plant utilities equipped with gas turbines. The amount of H2
can reach 70% or even 95%: this point is important and will be brought up again when
dealing with the development of the hydrogen economy.


--- Page 13 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
13 of 29
3.3. The Liquid Fuel Portfolio
Figure 9 shows a map of most popular alternative liquids, which can be split into
fossil and biogenic products. The (non-linear) ordinate of this chart is the hydrogen content.
Biofuels have, in general, lower caloriﬁc value and do not have higher hydrogen contents
than fossil fuels, both points being due to the presence of oxygen atoms in their molecules.
 
Figure 9. Map of fossil and biogenic liquid fuels.
3.3.1. Fossil Liquids
The overwhelming majority of fossil liquids stem from O&G production, oil reﬁneries,
and, to a lesser extent, from petrochemical plants. A sketch of a typical natural gas chain is
given in Figure 10 and a diagram of a modern reﬁnery in Figure 11.
 
Figure 10. Sketch of a natural gas chain involving NG, LNG, NGL, and LPG products.


--- Page 14 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
14 of 29
REFORMING
ISOMERISATION 
RO
HCO SLURRY
AROMATICS
EXTRACTION
VAC. DISTILLATE
RESIDUAL OIL
LPG
RFG
HDS
LPG
GASOLINE
(AS FLUXANT)
LCO
MIDDLE 
DISTILLATE**
FCC
A
T
M
D
I
ST.
GASOLINE
NAPHTHA**
LCO
C9 + 
AROMATICS
BTX
#2 DIST. OIL
KEROSENE
SOFTENING
MIDDE DISTILLATE *
Customary GT designations:
*  Super-Light hydrocarbons
** Light Distillates
DEPENTANIZER
STRAIGHT
RUN
PRODUCTS 
ATM. RESIDUE
V
A
C
D
I
ST
Figure 11. Typical oil reﬁning diagram (gases are in blue; liquids in brown and black).
Fossil liquids can be categorized according to their volatility and aromatic character:
•
“Super-Light Distillates” (SLHCs) include three main products:
-
Naphtha’s that stem from the distillation of crude in reﬁneries;
-
Gas condensates (GC) that come directly from gas ﬁelds (Figure 10);
-
Natural gas liquids (NGL) that originate from the stripping of raw NGs [112].
Naphtha and NGLs are high-grade, clean fuels and belong to the same reﬁning pool
as gasoline; they yield GT performances similar to those of #2 distillate oils. GCs are
raw products that are mainly constituted by light hydrocarbons but can contain some
heavy ends, such as light crudes. All require speciﬁc safety precautions, due to their high
volatility, and the dosage of a “superlubricant” additive to make up for their low lubricity
(see Section 2.3.1) [113]. Startups and shutdowns are made using a No. 2 distillate.
Naphtha has been largely used as GT fuel in India and Pakistan, where there are
surpluses of gasoline and shortages of NG. More generally, SLHCs are “bridging fuels”
to natural gas or to LNG in regions with high development potential but a lack of NG
resources or immature pipeline networks. Incidentally, we should note that naphtha is not
named a “super light hydrocarbon” in the in the oil business but is instead categorized as a
light distillate, like gasoline (Figure 11).
•
Light distillates (LDs) are classiﬁed as “middle distillates” by the oil business. They
consist of kerosene and #2 distillate oil; their use in GTs does not require the additives
package that is necessary for aircraft and diesel cars. Kerosene’s and No. 2 distillate oils
are “straight-run” reﬁnery products that originate from the atmospheric distillation of
crudes (Figure 11); they are prime-quality, expensive GT fuels. While No. 2 distillate
is the conventional liquid fuel for heavy-duty GTs, kerosene is the preferred one for
aeroderivatives in consideration of its still-higher purity. However, the expensive
kerosene is generally used only on some rare islands where No. 2 diesel is not
demanded as car fuel. Finally, another reﬁnery cut called “light cycle oils” (LCOs)
can be integrated in this group although it is of much lower grade; LCOs are not
straight-run products as they come from the cracking of vacuum distillates (Figure 11)
and are rich in aromatics and polyaromatics. Their possible use in gas turbines is
described below in the paragraph devoted to aromatic fuels;
•
Heavy distillate Oils originate from the vacuum distillation of crudes [87]. They are
available from reﬁneries that do not have “deep conversion” units; they must be
burned after heating to reduce their viscosity for proper atomization;


--- Page 15 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
15 of 29
•
Crude oils are the raw hydrocarbons extracted from oil ﬁelds where they may be
associated with C1-C4 gases (LPGs) or C5+ condensable gases (gas condensates). Their
composition is variable as they can contain heavy hydrocarbon ends. Heavy crudes,
especially those extracted in remote areas, do not interest reﬁners as they do not yield
light cuts; they can be cleanly burned in GTs on the spots, using—if necessary—a
combustion catalyst additive, e.g., cerium derivatives [114], to avoid a slight smok-
ing trend;
•
Residual oils (RO) are very-low-grade reﬁnery cuts. These ash-forming fuels can no
longer be distilled and represent the “bottom of the barrel”. Due to their high SOx,
NOx, and PM emissions, they are disappearing from the market, being converted into
“pet-cokes” or gasiﬁed in oxygen-blown gasiﬁers to produce syngases (SG). Never-
theless, the combustion of HFOs in GT combined cycles generates signiﬁcantly fewer
polluting emissions than if using diesel engines. As mentioned in Section 2.3.4, both
crudes and ROs need to be cleaned before combustion. Some low-sulfur waxy residual
fuels, called “LSWR”, have been used in the Far East (Japan, Korea, Singapore . . . )
for power generation. Efforts have also been made to alleviate the adverse effects of
smoke and ash deposition on the performances of gas turbines [114,115];
•
Aromatic fuels belong either to the group of super light hydrocarbons (“BTX” and
“C9+ aromatics”) or to that of light distillates (Light Cycle Oil or “LCO”):
-
BTXs (Benzene–Toluene–Xylene) are C6–C8 mono-aromatics. Huge volumes
are also used as petrochemical feedstock for the synthesis of a large variety of
commodities, including polymers, paints, and solvents. They have also been used,
along with “C9+ aromatics”, as RON improvers for gasoline’s, owing to the high
AITs of aromatics. However, due to the ban of aromatics in automotive fuels,
they may be produced in surpluses in reﬁneries deprived of petrochemical units;
moreover, the exportation of such sensitive cuts represents a ﬁnancial burden
and creates EHS difﬁculties that can lead reﬁners to envisage other usages. This
is where on-site power generation becomes an interesting option. A stream of
such aromatic hydrocarbons, called BHC (for “Benzene Heart Cut”), with a BTX
composition, have been successfully tested in a 40 MWe heavy-duty GT [84].
Subsequently, based on this successful test, a C9+ aromatic cut found an industrial
application in Korea [116];
-
LCO (light cycle oil) tends to be produced in increasing amounts in modern re-
ﬁneries. Indeed, ﬂuid catalytic crackers (“FCC”) crack heavy distillate feedstocks
into lighter ones, thereby helping convert the original crude to more middle distil-
lates and gasolines with higher RON indices. LCOs contain up to 70% aromatics
(essentially in the form of di-aromatics). Their very poor cetane number and high
smoking propensity strongly limits the proportion that can be added to diesel
fuels and to domestic heating oil. In contrast, the combustion of LCO has been
successfully tested, also in a 40 MW heavy-duty GT [84,85].
3.3.2. Liquid Biofuels
Liquid biofuels represent a proliﬁc and promising family. Figure 12 summarizes
the different production processes starting from vegetable biomass. The most popular
liquid biofuels belong to three main groups: alcohols (bio-ethanol); vegetable oils (VO),
and biodiesels.
The combustion of liquid biofuels in gas turbines is not a new topic but its interest
has been renewed in the late 2000s, as energy decarbonation became an increasing con-
cern [117–124]. However, both bioethanol and biodiesel are currently produced from edible
substances: the former comes from sugars, corn, or wheat starches and the latter from oil
seeds. This “food versus fuel” competition has raised a legitimate debate [125].


--- Page 16 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
16 of 29
 
Physical
Biological
Crushing; Extraction
Filtration; Heating
Pyrolysis
Cracking
Distillation
Hydrogenation
Gazification
Fermentation
Hydrolysis
Thermal
Vegetable Oils
BTG fuels
Chemical
Esterification
Transesterification
Saponification
Biodiesels
Ethanol (& Biogas)
BIOMASS
No transformation
Wood, Straw
Figure 12. Simpliﬁed sketch of the various processes of biofuel production from biomass.
Since biodiesel and bioethanol are already used as blenders of diesel and gasoline
car fuels, respectively, it looks reasonable to consider that their use for power generation,
which consumes large volumes, should be reserved for small units.
•
Bioethanol comes from the anaerobic fermentation of natural sugars (grape, sugar beet,
sugar cane, etc.) (Figure 12) and are often produced in surplus in some agricultural
sectors and some countries. Dehydrated ethanol is fully miscible with gasoline; this
property has been exploited in a bioethanol combustion test that was carried out on
a 20 MW GT in India and in which naphtha was used as starting fuel and gradually
blended with increasing proportions of bioethanol, up to 95% [126]. This ﬁeld test
demonstrated that ethanol can be burned without any trouble with NOx emissions
lower than those of LD and close to those of NG (Figure 13). Bioethanol from sugar
cane has also been recently burned in a 40 MW GT at Saint Pierre de La Réunion (a
French ultramarine territory), although this experience is not well documented [127].
 
100% Nap
100% LD (startup)
50%Eth
100%
% Base Load
95%Eth
40%
20%
0%
shutdown) 100% LD
70%
Test progress 
30% Eth
50% Eth
100% Nap
95% Eth
70% Eth
100% Nap
130 ppm
50 ppm
130 ppm
100 ppm 80 ppm 60 ppm
LD:     #2 Diesel Fuel
Nap:   Naphtha
Eth:     Bioethanol
NOx  - ppmV
Figure 13. Summary of an Ethanol ﬁeld test: ethanol/naphtha mixtures were used [126].
Brazil is the world leader for the production of bioethanol. The “ﬁrst-generation”
bioethanol is prepared from sugar harvested from cane ﬁelds (“ﬁrst crop”). It is largely
consumed as automotive fuel in Brazil, where the ﬂeet of ﬂex-fuel cars can accept up to
E100 fuel (i.e., 0% gasoline). However, the “food versus fuel debate” has prompted the
use of a “second crop” source of ethanol, which will exploit the lignocellulose contained
in bagasse as raw matter [128]. Bagasse is the ﬁbrous substance left after the juice of the


--- Page 17 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
17 of 29
sugarcane plant has been harvested; it will be processed in “ethanolic bioreﬁneries” that
will produce “second-generation biofuels” [129].
•
Methanol was formerly prepared by the distillation/carbonization of wood (charcoal
industry) and was named “wood alcohol”. However, currently, 98% of methanol
comes from the reforming of methane and has thus a non-bio, fossil origin. It can also
be produced through the coal-to-liquid or biomass-to-liquid (CTL/BTL) routes. It
is a feedstock to produce FAME biodiesel, as discussed below. Kinetics simulations
show that it could be burned in GTs [130]. However, its high vapor pressure (13 kPa at
20 ◦C) and acute toxicity are major obstacles for this application.
•
Dimethyl-Ether
DME also originates from the CTL/BTL routes. It is gaseous at room temperature,
with a vapor pressure of 5.10 bars at 20 ◦C. It has as some analogy with LPG as a potential
fuel, as set out below, and has been used as domestic fuel in China. Kinetics simulations
are also available [130] and a successful ﬁeld test by British Petroleum on a 120 MW GT has
been performed [131].
•
Biodiesels
Biodiesels are “Fatty Acid Alkyl Esters” obtained by trans-esteriﬁcation of vegetable
oils (VOs) using methanol (FAME: fatty acid methyl esters) or, more rarely, ethanol (FAEE:
fatty acid ethyl esters). VOs are sourced from a large variety of seeds (soybean, rapeseed,
palm, coco (copra), corn, sunﬂower, cotton, peanut, sugarcane (bagasse), canola, etc.),
depending on the world regions [132]. They have variable chain lengths and double bond
numbers. This VO source is often complemented by triglycerides: “yellow greases” coming
from recycled food wastes or even by animal fats (“tallow”).
Various biodiesel ﬁeld tests were performed, namely, in 2007 in Switzerland on an
E-class GT [86], in 2009 at Duke Energy Carolinas on an F-class G, and in 2021 at Göteborg
Energi [133]. These ﬁeld tests have demonstrated the excellent behavior of FAME biodiesels,
including during “cold” and “hot” startups performed with 100% biodiesel, as shown in
Figure 14. The inset in that ﬁgure sketches a typical molecule of FAME biodiesel with a
single double bond.
Figure 14. Summary of a biodiesel ﬁeld test (inset: a typical biodiesel molecule) [86].
A question arose as to whether the thermal NOx indices of biodiesels, i.e., their
combustion temperature “Tad,st“ (see Section 2.3.3), are lower or higher than those of
No. 2 distillates. Both ﬁeld test results and detailed kinetic simulations showed that the
values of Tad,st are always slightly lower for FAMEs than for hydrocarbons with the same
degree of insaturation (alkanes, alkenes, trienes, alkylaromatics), irrespective of the chain


--- Page 18 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
18 of 29
length (Figure 15) [134]. This point is interesting as it contrasts with the results obtained
for some diesel engines, in which another physical process prevails, which is the higher
compressibility bulk modulus of biodiesel that alters the ignition time and tends to increase
NOx [135].
 
Figure 15. Flame temperatures of some organic molecules in function of the H/C ratio.
•
Vegetable Oils
So far, VOs have not been entitled as GT fuels, the main reasons being (i) their high
viscosity and the risk of chemical degradation by pyrolysis when heating them to make
them more ﬂuid; and (ii) their content of metallic contaminants (K and Ca) that often exceed
GT fuel speciﬁcations (Section 2.3.4) and cannot be completely extracted by water-washing
as they are partly oil-soluble, which makes their removal difﬁcult.
3.3.3. Similarities between Biofuels and Fossils
As regards gas turbine applications, there are some interesting commonalities between
biogenic and fossil fuels (Table 2).
For instance:
-
Bioethanol versus naphtha: Anhydrous ethanol is fully miscible with naphtha, i.e., with
gasoline. This is interesting in countries such as India where naphtha is often used
as base-load GT fuel due to the scarcity of natural gas and distillate fuels and, on an-
other hand, the fact that bioethanol is available through the fermentation of discarded
cotton [136];
-
Biodiesel versus light distillate: Biodiesel is fully miscible with light distillate oils,
i.e., with diesel fuels. It is more lubricious than diesel fuels but, due to its higher power
as solvent, it can be aggressive against certain elastomeric seals used in fuel circuits;
-
Vegetable oils versus crude oils: VOs are partly miscible with crude oils [137] and
have several similarities with them: both are unprocessed liquids that contain long
molecules with many chemical functions and are contaminated with metals. However,
there are important differences. Indeed, contrary to crude oils, vegetable oils contain
no heavy metals (vanadium, nickel) and very little sulfur and nitrogen; their metallic
contaminants are partly oil-soluble and, when they are heated, they do not distil but
tend to degrade more rapidly than petroleum cuts by pyrolysis. For these reasons,
VOs are not currently used as a GT fuel; they can be burned in boilers with some
precautions due to the generation of corrosive low-melting point salts (potassium and
calcium chlorides).


--- Page 19 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
19 of 29
Table 2. Similarities between biogenic and fossil fuels.
Biofuel
Similar
Fossil Fuel
Commonalities
Differences
(Bio Versus Fossil)
GASES
Biogas (raw)
Weak Natural Gas (raw)
- Comparable values of
%C1 & WI
- Higher CO2 & H2S contents
- siloxane contaminants
LIQUIDS
DiMethyl-Ether (DME)
LPG
- High Vapor pressure
- High vapor density
- Narrower distillation range
- burned as liquid (LPG as gas)
Bioethanol-(biomethanol)
Naphtha - Gasoline
- Intermiscible
- Good purity
- Highly volatile
- Poor lubricity
- Narrower distillation range
- Lower NOx emission
Biodiesel
Light Distillate Fuel
(#2 DF)
- Intermiscible
- Good to fair purity
- limited volatility
- Better lubricity
- Aggressive to gaskets
Vegetable Oil (VO) *
Crude oils
- Wide distillation range
- Partly intermiscible
- Metallic impurities
- Highly viscous
- No light hydrocarbon
- No aromatic species
- Less heat resistant
- oil soluble contaminants
* Not considered a GT fuel.
4. The Contribution of Gas Turbines to the Hydrogen Energy Move
Hydrogen is an energy carrier and not a primary energy as there are very scarce
natural sources thereof; the rare reservoirs of hydrogen originate from chemical reactions
inside the earth crust and are sometimes referred to as “natural H2”or “white H2” [138].
4.1. The “Hydrogen Rainbow”
The main supply of hydrogen is currently from fossil fuels via two main routes which
are (i) the steam reforming of natural gas that yields “grey” or “blue” H2, depending on
whether the resultant CO2 is captured or not; and (ii) the gasiﬁcation of coal which leads
to “black” (or “brown”) H2. These processes are very energy intensive. However, an
increasing number of projects are conducted or planned to produce H2 by the electrolytic
splitting of water into H2 and O2, using either solar power (“yellow” H2), wind/hydro
power (“green” H2), or nuclear power generated during off-peak hours (“pink” or “purple”
H2). There are in fact numerous approaches under investigation to produce hydrogen,
resulting in the so-called “H2 rainbow” (Figure 16) [139].
 
Black
Coal
Gasification
+ Shift
Grey
Natural Gas
Steam Reform.
w/o CCUS
Blue
Natural Gas
Steam Reform.
with CCUS
Green
Water
Electrolysis / 
Wind & Hydro
Yellow
Water
Electrolysis / 
Solar
Turquoise
Natural Gas
HT Pyrolysis
White
H2 Reservoirs
Extraction
Pink
Water
Electrolysis/
Nuclear
H2 type
Source
Process
Figure 16. The “H2 rainbow”: the various types and production routes of dihydrogen.


--- Page 20 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
20 of 29
The development of hydrogen as an energy vector must deal not only with its pro-
duction, but also with the delicate development of all the infrastructures that are required
for its storage and transportation, as well as its conversion into power or its adaptation to
cars. This vast theme, along with the associated feasibility and safety aspects, fall by far
beyond the scope of the present paper. This set of topics generates an exponential number
of publications. Extensive information is available from different sources, namely, from the
EU commission [140], the USDOE [141], or the UK government [142].
The advent of hydrogen of the green, yellow, or pink type as a universal substitute for
fossil fuels would procure a dramatic solution to some critical environmental problems.
Indeed, it would provide not only the sought route towards carbon-neutral economies but
also a radical solution to endemic urban pollutions by suppressing all emissions of VOCs,
CO, SOx, O3, PAH, and soot particles.
However, the development of the “hydrogen economy” must overcome several tech-
nology challenges since, apart from high R&D investment needs, hydrogen has critical
physical and chemical properties which impact the safety of its entire application chain, i.e.,
its production, storage, transportation, and end usages. With regard to the performance
and the safety of combustion, hydrogen features a set of challenging properties, which are
as follows: a wide ﬂammability range; a high diffusivity with metallurgical impacts on
materials; and a very-high ﬂame speed and low ignition energy. In this respect, Table 3
shows a comparison between hydrogen and methane [143,144].
Table 3. Compared combustion properties of hydrogen and methane.
DATA
−
FUEL
No of Molecules
of Combustion
Products
LHV
Mass
Volume
MJ/kg
MJ/Nm3
Diffusion
Coefﬁcient
1 atm; 25 ◦C
−10−6 m2s−1
LFL – UFL
Low/Up. Flam.
Lim.
−% vol
Lamin.
Flame Speed
−cm.s−1
Min. Ignition
Energy
−mJ
H2
1 (H2O)
120
10.7
7.9
4.0 - 75
265
0.018
CH4
3 (CO2 + 2 H2O)
50
35.8
0.2
5.0 - 15
33
0.033
4.2. The Possible Role of Gas Turbines
As discussed below, gas turbines can burn both pure and blended hydrogen and, as
discussed above, they boast high energy effectiveness in combined cycles as well as fast
installation. Therefore, these machines are placed in the front of the energy scene, as they
are in position to boost the deployment of hydrogen energy in the power generation sector.
Figure 17 shows a possible energy system involving gas turbines: green, yellow, or pink
hydrogen is produced in electrolysis “power-to-gas” units fed by wind, PV, and nuclear
plants; it is partly used as an automotive fuel and partly mixed with NG (and possibly with
some carbon-neutral biogas streams) in gas networks which, in turn, feed “gas-to-power”
GTCC nodes (or large Fuel Cell units) [145].
Energy wise, H2 is also a very singular fuel since; on one hand, it has a weak volume
LHV (10.7 MJ/Nm3) that would place it in the category of LCV gases; however, on the
other hand, it boasts the highest mass LHV (120 MJ/kg) of all fuels [146].
Moreover, NOx emissions pose a serious challenge due to the addition of two effects:
-
Hydrogen ﬂames are very hot (Figure 18a) [147]. Indeed, one molecule of H2 generates
three times less molecules of combustion products than does CH4 (Table 3); therefore,
its stoichiometric combustion temperature (at the ﬂame front) is much higher (2120 ◦C
versus 1950 ◦C, in E-class GT conditions) since its combustion heat is transferred to
one molecule instead of three. This is why hydrogen generates much higher NOx in
diffusion ﬂames than methane;
-
Conventional Dry Low NOx systems based on the current fuel/air premix devices are
defeated due to the very fast ﬂame speed (Figure 18b) [148] that results in very short
ﬂames (Figure 18a) but causes very difﬁcult ﬂashback issues (see Section 2.3.3).


--- Page 21 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
21 of 29
Figure 17. Projection of a possible integration of gas and power systems.
Figure 18. (a): Flame front temperatures and (b) laminar ﬂame speeds of H2-CH4 mixtures.
Therefore, the combustion of hydrogen in GTs requires innovative approaches to de-
sign appropriate DLN systems likely to avoid ﬂashbacks and secure proper ﬂame holding.
It should be noted that the combustion of ammonia (NH3) as a potential substitute of
dihydrogen is not feasible as it would generate huge amounts of organic NOx (Section 2.3.3).
Consequently, an intense activity has been deployed for several years to develop “hydrogen-
capable” low-NOx combustors. To prevent ﬂashbacks, current designs focus on multiple
small H2/air jets passing at high velocity through small injection oriﬁces and become
intimately mixed with corresponding air jets. Such devices, based on “micromix” injectors,
are very promising; they enable the ﬁne control of the spatial distribution of the fuel
richness, down to the sub-millimetric scale, and minimize the risks of both core-ﬂow and
boundary-layer ﬂashbacks (see Section 2.3.3). Figure 19 shows such a device that has been
successfully lab tested [149,150]. Other similar designs exist [151,152].
Another important speciﬁcity of hydrogen resides in the fact that due the intrinsically
high thermal conductivity of gaseous H2O at high temperature, there are intense convective
heat exchanges between the H2O-rich combustion gases and the hot parts of the expansion
turbine; this tends to increase metal skin temperatures and requires the reinforcing of the
cooling of the hot parts to avoid premature creep and thermal fatigue effects.


--- Page 22 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
22 of 29
 
Figure 19. Sketch of a GT micromix burner: a pair of H2/air oriﬁces is circled [149] (with permission
and minor changes).
Finally, hydrogen can cause the embrittlement of some metallic alloys, depending on
pressure and temperature, so compatibility testing is required [153].
4.3. Exploiting the Experience Gained with H2-rich fuels
From a historical perspective, the ability of gas turbines to handle industrially H2-rich
gases and eventually pure hydrogen is demonstrated by the wide experience that has been
gained over the years in tens of reﬁning and petrochemical plants burning by-process gases
worldwide, as discussed in Section 3.2.
For instance, Spanish, UK, Korean, and Chinese reﬁners/petrochemists have managed
major revamping programs of their utilities in the 1990s and 2000s, replacing aging reﬁnery
boilers with CHP units driven by 40 MW-class and sometimes 100 MW-class gas turbines
that can burn up to 70% H2 rich gases [87–89].
However, the “hydrogen ﬂeet leader” is a 40 MWe gas turbine installed at the Daesan
Petrochemical Plant in Korea (Figure 20) [154]. In the 1970s, this site hosted a ﬁrst petro-
chemical unit (marked as #1 Pet-Chem Unit in that ﬁgure) equipped with a naphtha cracker
along with a 25 MWe gas turbine (#1 GT), which began to burn a C3-rich “petrochemical net
gas” (PNG) coming from that cracker. Thereafter, the petrochemical company (Samsung
General Chemicals at that time) installed an aromatization reactor that generated a net gas
highly rich in H2 (H2-rich PNG) and was associated with a 40 MWe gas turbine (#2 GT)
that drove an additional power unit (marked as #2 Pet-Chem Unit). Since 1997, this second
GT has been reliably running for hundreds of thousands of hours on that H2-rich PNG
with hydrogen contents up to 90–95%. Although this machine operates with conventional
diffusion ﬂames and is equipped with DeNOx steam injection, this experience has amply
demonstrated, with a hindsight of six years at present, the feasibility of operating a GT
with nearly 100% hydrogen from both safety and reliability standpoints.
This plant also illustrates the multifaceted fuel ﬂex and the high integration potential
of heavy-duty gas turbines since (i) the two GTs use a C4-LPG as startup fuel; and (ii) the
ﬁrst one burns a C3-rich gas stream produced by the naphtha cracker and its ﬂue gas serves
as hot ﬂuid to heat the same cracking reactor.


--- Page 23 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
23 of 29
Figure 20. Sketch of the Daesan plant with the addition of the H2-rich PNG.
5. Conclusions
This paper aimed to offer an extensive view on the wide fuel ﬂexibility acquired by
land-based gas turbines in the power generation sector.
First, it has provided essential technical keys by which to understand the reasons for
this distinctive capability. To highlight the value of fuel ﬂex in modern electrical grids, this
quality has been put in perspective with the set of duties expected from modern power
generators. Furthermore, to understand how gas turbines can accept multiple fuels, basic
aspects of the Brayton cycles and GT combustion systems have been set out.
Then, this paper reviewed the various classes of products that make up the GT fuel
portfolio, as well as the corresponding applications, outlining how this fuel portfolio has
been expanding over years. The resulting range of alternative GT fuels cuts across many
sectors of the economy worldwide, overlapping with most industrial and farming activities
where gaseous or liquid combustible streams have been made available.
This outcome relies on the great adaptability of the gas turbine product but has been
made possible by intense engineering work, experience accumulation and extrapolation,
lab testing, and validation on the ﬁeld. It has also been favored by market opportunities
and fostered by the vivid development of cogeneration and combined cycles as effective
energy conversion systems.
In the future, the development of new energies, especially hydrogen and second-
generation bio-sourced fuels, is expected to preserve the assets of land-based gas turbines
in the power generation sector and reinforce their role in the energy transition. This is
despite the irresistible but indispensable rise in power of renewable energy alternatives,
which tend to displace thermal generation.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request to the corre-
sponding author.


--- Page 24 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
24 of 29
Acknowledgments: The author wishes to thank—without being able to name them all—his col-
leagues and work contacts who have participated in this “fuel ﬂex adventure”, especially M. Vierling,
M. Aboujaib, P. Montagne, F. Geiger, D. Sokolov, B. T. Nguyen, G. Morel, R. Gadiou, P. A. Glaude, R.
Bounaceur, R. Fournet, B. Sirjean, J. L. Guichard, C. Garneri, C. Racine, P. A. Maire, L. Ducrest, A.
Linder, C. Beuret, J. P. Stalder, P. Huber and R. Denolle.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Hainsch, K.; Hainsch, K.; Löfﬂer, K.; Burandt, T.; Auer, H.; del Granado, P.C.; Pisciella, P.; Zwickl, S. Energy transition scenarios:
What policies, societal attitudes, and technology developments will realize the EU Green Deal? Energy 2022, 239, 122067.
[CrossRef]
2.
IEA On-Line Report, World Energy Outlook 2022. Available online: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/830fe099-5530-48
f2-a7c1-11f35d510983/WorldEnergyOutlook2022.pdf (accessed on 17 March 2023).
3.
Farhat, H.; Farhat, H.; Salvini, C. Novel Gas Turbine Challenges to Support the Clean Energy Transition. Energies 2022, 15, 5474.
[CrossRef]
4.
IEA. Power Systems in Transition, Section: Maintaining Reliability; IEA Report; IEA: Paris, France, 2020; pp. 25–27.
5.
Capurso, T.; Stefanizzi, M.; Torresi, M.; Camporeale, S.M. Perspective of the role of hydrogen in the 21st century energy transition.
Energy Convers. Manag. 2022, 251, 114898. [CrossRef]
6.
EPRI. Report: Conversion to Dual Fuel Capability in Combustion Turbine Plants—Addition of Distillate Oil Firing for Combined Cycles;
EPRI: Washington, DC, USA, 2001.
7.
Power Engineering International On-Line Article, Flexibility Brings Economies, 18 September 2013. Available online: https:
//www.powerengineeringint.com/coal-ﬁred/equipment-coal-ﬁred/ﬂexibility-brings-economies/ (accessed on 17 March 2023).
8.
Boyce, P.B. Theoretical and Actual Cycle Analysis. In Gas Turbine Engineering Handbook, 3rd ed.; Gulf Professional Publishing:
Houston, TX, USA, 2017; Chapter 2; pp. 57–60.
9.
Correa, M.S. A Review of NOx Formation Under Gas-Turbine Combustion Conditions. Combust. Sci. Technol. 1993, 87, 329–362.
[CrossRef]
10.
Yeong, J.K.; Jae, K.Y.; Keun, L.D.; Yongmo, K. Experimental study on combustion instability and attenuation characteristics in the
lab-scale gas turbine combustor. J. Mech. Sci. Technol. 2018, 32, 1879–1887.
11.
Basu, P.; Kefa, C.; Jestin, L. General Design Considerations. In Boiler and Burner Deign and Theory; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2000; Chapter 2; pp. 15–20.
12.
Langston, L.S. Single-Crystal Turbine Blades Earn ASME Milestone Status, On-Line Publication. Available online: https://cdn.
machinedesign.com/ﬁles/base/ebm/machinedesign/document/2019/04/machinedesign_14966_engineblades.pdf (accessed on
17 March 2023).
13.
Dexin, M.A. Novel casting processes for single-crystal turbine blades of superalloys. Front. Mech. Eng. 2018, 13, 3–16.
14.
Cao, X.Q. Ceramic materials for thermal barrier coatings. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 2004, 24, 1–10. [CrossRef]
15.
Clarke, D.R.; Phillpot, S.R. Thermal barrier coating materials. Mater. Today 2005, 8, 22–29. [CrossRef]
16.
Han, J.C.; Wright, L.M. Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes, NETL DOE On-Line Publication. Available
online: https://netl.doe.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/gas-turbine-handbook/4-2-2-2.pdf (accessed on 17 March 2023).
17.
Gavali, S.; Dipali; Garad, D.S.; Yadav, J.N. Review of Cooling of Gas Turbine Blades. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 2018, 13, 43–48.
18.
Takeishi, K. Evolution of Turbine Cooled Vanes and Blades Applied for Large Industrial Gas Turbines and Its Trend toward
Carbon Neutrality. Energies 2022, 15, 8935.
19.
Harada, H. High Temperature Materials for Gas Turbines: The Present and Future. In Proceedings of the International Gas
Turbine Congress, Tokyo, Japan, 2–7 November 2003.
20.
Jansohn, P. Modern Gas Turbine Systems: High Efﬁciency, Low Emission, Fuel Flexible Power Generation; Woodhead Publishing Series
in Energy: Cambridge, UK, 2013.
21.
Ghojel, J. Practical Cycles for Reciprocating Engines. In Fundamentals of Heat Engines: Reciprocating and Gas Turbine Internal
Combustion Engines; John Wiley and Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2020; Chapter 6.
22.
Smith, J.R.; Green, R.M.; Westbrook, C.K.; Pitz, W.J. An experimental and modeling study of engine knock. Symp. Int. Combust.
1985, 20, 91–100. [CrossRef]
23.
Wang, Z.; Wang, Z.; Liu, H.; Reitz, R.D. Knocking combustion in spark-ignition engines. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 2017, 61,
78–112. [CrossRef]
24.
Tree, D.R.; Svensson, K.I. Soot processes in compression ignition engines. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 2007, 33, 273–278. [CrossRef]
25.
Omidvarborna, H. Recent studies on soot modeling for diesel combustion. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2015, 48, 635–647.
[CrossRef]
26.
Kholod, N.; Evans, M.; Kuklinski, T. Black carbon emissions: Focus on diesel sources. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 2016, 16, 11267–11281.
[CrossRef]
27.
Cipriano, D.; Sacchi, C.; Negri, A.; FIani, E.; Morelli, M.; Poulleau, J.; Lelouer, E. Balance of Micropollutants Emitted by Gas Fired
Combustion Turbines. In Proceedings of the Continuous Emission Monitoring (CEM) Conference, Stresa, Italy, 25 January 2009.


--- Page 25 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
25 of 29
28.
Boyce, M.P. Rotor Dynamics; Gulf Professional Publishing: Houston, TX, USA, 2017; Chapter 5; pp. 176–218.
29.
Bogard, D.G.; Thole, K.A. Gas turbine ﬁlm cooling. J. Propuls. Power 2006, 22, 249–270. [CrossRef]
30.
Wills, J.R.; Reuben, B.G. New local diesel power stations: An economic assessment. Util. Policy 1992, 2, 108–119. [CrossRef]
31.
Kanoglu, M.; I¸sık, S.K.; Abu¸sogolu, A. Performance characteristics of a Diesel engine power plant. Energy Convers. Manag. 2005,
46, 1692–1702. [CrossRef]
32.
Jun, L.; Laredj, A.; Tian, G. A case study of a CHP system and its energy use mapping. Energy Procedia 2017, 105, 1526–1531.
33.
Horlock, J.H. The Combined Cycle Gas Turbine. In Advanced Gas Turbine Cycles—A Brief Review of Power Generation Thermodynamics;
Pergamon Press: Oxford, UK, 2013; Chapter 7; pp. 109–129.
34.
Flin, D. Why Use Cogeneration? In Cogeneration—A User’s Guide; Institution of Engineering and Technology: London, UK, 2010;
Chapter 3; pp. 25–35.
35.
Otsuka, H.; Hiroshi, T.; Syouichi, H.; Satoshi, T.; Junji, O.; Xuewen, C. Construction and Operation Experience of 300 MW Blast
Furnace Gas Firing Combined Cycle Power Plant. MHI Tech. Rev. 2007, 44, 1–6.
36.
Yang, W.H.; Yang, W.H.; Xu, T.; Li, W.; Chen, G.; Jia, L.Y.; Guo, Y.J. Waste Gases Utilization and Power Generation in Iron and
Steel Works. In Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Intelligent Information Technology Application Workshops,
Nanchang, China, 21–22 November 2009; pp. 246–249.
37.
Molière, M. Beneﬁtting from the Wide Fuel Capability of Gas Turbines: A Review of Application Opportunities. In Proceedings
of the ASME Turbo Expo, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3–6 June 2002. Paper GT2002-30017.
38.
Molière, M. The omnivorous gas turbine: Robust designs adapt to a wide range of fuels. Turbomach. Int. 2005, 45, 21–28.
39.
Soares, C. Gas Turbines, Gas Turbine Fuel Systems and Fuels. In A Handbook of Air, Land, and Sea Applications; Butterworth-
Heinemann: Oxford, UK, 2008; Chapter 7; pp. 213–291.
40.
Feng, L.; Qiang, Y.; Xiao, L.; Ming-Jia, L.; Jun-Hui, X.; Ya-Un, L. Experimental Study on Fuel-Switching of Dual-Fuel Gas Turbine
Combustor. Front. Energy Res. 2022, 9, 792620. [CrossRef]
41.
Meher-Homji, C.B.; Zachary, J.C.B.; Bromley, A. Gas Turbine Fuels—System Design, Combustion and Operability. In Proceedings
of the 39th Turbomachinery Symposium, Houston, TX, USA, 4–7 October 2010; pp. 155–187.
42.
Klimstra, J. Interchangeability of Gaseous Fuels—The Importance of the Wobbe-Index. In Proceedings of the SAE Conference,
Warrendale, PA, USA, 10 January 1986. Technical Paper 861578.
43.
Speciﬁcation for Fuel Gases for Combustion in GE Heavy-Duty Gas; GEI 41040 G; GE Library: Singapore, 2002.
44.
Welch, M.; Igoe, B. Gas Turbine Fuel and Fuel Quality Requirements for use in Siemens Industrial Gas Turbine Combustion. In
Proceedings of the Second Middle East Turbomachinery Symposium, Doha, Qatar, 17–21 March 2013.
45.
Abbot, D.J. The Impact of Natural Gas Composition Variations on the Operation of Gas Turbines for Power Generation. In
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on the Future of Gas Turbine Technology, Brussels, Belgium, 17–18 October 2012.
46.
Liu, K.; Sanderson, V. The inﬂuence of changes in fuel caloriﬁc value to combustion performance for Siemens SGT-300 dry low
emission combustion system. Fuel 2013, 103, 239–246. [CrossRef]
47.
Jones, R.M. IGCC Gas Turbines for Reﬁnery Applications; GER 4219; GE Library: Singapore, 2003.
48.
Nakamura, S.; McDonell, V.; Samuelssen, S. The Effect of Liquid-Fuel Preparation on Gas Turbine Emissions. In Proceedings of
the GT2006 ASME Turbo Expo, Barcelona, Spain, 6–11 May 2006. Paper GT2006-90730.
49.
Agarwal, S.; Chibber, V.K.; Bhatnagar, A.K. Tribological behavior of diesel fuels and the effect of anti-wear additives. Fuel 2013,
106, 21–29. [CrossRef]
50.
Stalder, J.P.; Roberts, P. Firing Low Viscosity Liquid Fuels in Heavy Duty Gas Turbines. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo,
Atlanta, Georgia, 16–19 June 2003. Paper GT2003-38691.
51.
Nolan, P.D. Physical Properties of Hydrocarbons and Petrochemicals. In Handbook of Fire and Explosion Protection Engineering
Principles, 3rd ed.; Gulf Professional Publishing: Houston, TX, USA, 2014; Chapter 4; pp. 33–48.
52.
Machuga, C.V.; Crowl, D.A. Derivation of Le Chatelier’s mixing rule for ﬂammable limits. Process Saf. Prog. 2017, 19, 112–117.
53.
Bounaceur, R.; Glaude, P.A.; Sirjean, B.; Fournet, R.; Montagne, P.; Vierling, M.; Molière, M. Prediction of Flammability Limits of
Gas Mixtures Containing Inert Gases Under Variable Temperature and Pressure Conditions. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo
Expo, Charlotte, NC, USA, 26–30 June 2017. Paper GT2017-64172.
54.
Molière, M.; Cozzarin, P.; Bouchet, S.; Rech, P. Catalytic Detection of Fuel Leaks in Gas turbine Units: 1. Gaseous and Volatile,
Hydrocarbon based fuels. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo, Reno, NV, USA, 6–9 June 2005.
55.
Molière, M.; Cozzarin, P.; Bouchet, S.; Rech, P. Catalytic Detection of Fuel Leaks in Gas turbine Units: 2. Gas Fuels Containing
Hydrogen, Carbon Monoxide and Inert. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo, Barcelona, Spain, 6–11 May 2006.
56.
Bounaceur, R.; Heymes, R.; Glaude, P.A.; Sirjean, B.; Fournet, R.; Montagne, P.; Auvray, A.; Impellizzeri, E.; Biehler, P.; Picard,
A.M.; et al. Development of an Artiﬁcial Intelligence Model to Predict Combustion Properties with a Focus on Auto-Ignition
Delays. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo, Boston, MA, USA, 26–30 June 2023. Paper GT2023-102128 (paper accepted).
57.
Alonso, D.; Genin, G.; Heller, D.; Chabrier, B.; Molière, M. Evaporation of Volatile Liquid Pools under Forced Convection. In
Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 6–10 June 2011.
58.
ISO 21789:2022; Gas Turbine Applications—Safety, 2nd issue, §§ 5:13, 5:17 and 5:19. International Organization for Standardization:
Geneva, CH, USA, 2022.
59.
Gas Turbine Liquid Fuel Speciﬁcations; GEI 41047K; GE Library; Singapore, 2003.


--- Page 26 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
26 of 29
60.
Beychock, M.R. Comparative Economics of Advanced Regenerable Flue Gas Desulfurization Processes, EPRI Report, 1980.
Available online: https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/5451340 (accessed on 17 March 2022).
61.
Nouali, H.; Dorge, S.; Brilhac, J.F.; Habermacher, D.; Lebeau, B.; Vierling, M.; Geiger, F.; Patarin, J.; Soulard, M.; Molière, M.
Novel Regenerative Desulfurization of Power Plant Flue Gas Streams. In Proceedings of the 29th TIChE Conference, Virtual,
1–2 June 2020.
62.
Pavri, R.; Moore, G.D. Gas Turbine Emissions and Control; GER 4211; GE Library: Singapore, 2001.
63.
Lefebvre, A.H.; Ballal, D.R. Oxides of Nitrogen. In Gas Turbine Combustion: Alternative Fuels and Emissions, 3rd ed.; CRC Press:
Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2010; Chapter 9; pp. 374–381.
64.
Welch, M.; Igoe, B.; Samuelsson, M. Gas Fuel Flexibility in: DLE Combustion Systems. In Proceedings of the 8th International Gas
Turbine Conference, Brussels, Belgium, 12–13 October 2016.
65.
Bender, B. Lean Pre-Mixed Combustion (Section 3.2.1.2) in: Gas Turbine Handbook, NETL-DOE Publication. Available online:
https://netl.doe.gov/carbon-management/turbines/handbook (accessed on 17 March 2023).
66.
Davis, L.B.; Black, S.H. Dry Low NOx Combustion Systems for Heavy-Duty Gas Turbines; GER-3568G; GE Library; Singapore, 2000.
67.
Igoe, B.M. Dry Low Emissions Experience across the Range of Siemens Small Industrial Gas Turbines. Available online:
https://www.academia.edu/35139417/Dry_Low_Emissions_Experience_across_the_range_of_Siemens_Small_Industrial_
Gas_Turbines_BM_Igoe_Product_Manager_SGT-100_SGT-200_Siemens_Industrial_Turbomachinery_Limited (accessed on 3
May 2023).
68.
Tanimura, S.; Nose, M.; Ishizaka, K.; Takiguchi, S.; Rodriguez, J. Advanced Dry Low NOx Combustor for Mitsubishi G Class Gas
Turbines. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo, Berlin, Germany, 9–13 June 2008. Paper GT2008-50819.
69.
Lieuwen, T.C.; Yang, V. Combustion Dynamics Principles. In Combustion Instabilities in Gas Turbine Engines: Operational Experience,
Fundamental Mechanisms and Modeling; AIAA Publications: Reston, VA, USA, 2005; Chapter 1; pp. 3–26.
70.
Benim, A.C.; Syed, K.J. An Overview of Flashback Mechanisms. In Flashback Mechanisms in Lean Premixed Gas Turbine Combustion;
Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2015; Chapters 4–8; pp. 25–71.
71.
Candel, S. Combustion dynamics and control: Progress and challenges. Proc. Combust. Inst. 2002, 29, 1–28. [CrossRef]
72.
Thomas, L.L. E-class DLN Technology Advancements, DLN1+. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
6–10 June 2011. GT2011-45944.
73.
Rapp, R.A. Hot Corrosion by Fused Salts. In Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology, 2nd ed.; Pergamon Press: Oxford,
UK, 2001; pp. 3834–3835.
74.
Huth, M. Fuel Flexibility in Gas Turbine Systems: Impact on Burner Design and Performance. In Modern Gas Turbine Systems—
High Efﬁciency—Low Emission-Fuel Flexible Power Generation; Woodhead Publishing Series in Energy: Cambridge, UK, 2013;
pp. 635–684.
75.
Campbell, A.; Goldmeer, J.; Healy, T.; Washam, R.; Molière, M.; Citeno, J. Heavy Duty Gas Turbines Fuel Flexibility. In Proceedings
of the ASME Turbo Expo, Berlin, Germany, 9–13 June 2008. Paper 98GT-231.
76.
Rahm, S.; Goldmeer, J.; Molière, M.; Eranki, A. Addressing Gas Turbine Fuel Flexibility; GER 4601; GE Library: Singapore, 2009.
77.
Asai, T.; Miura, K.; Matsubara, Y.; Akiyama, Y.; Karishuku, M.; Dodo, S.; Okazaki, T.; Tanimura, S. Development of Gas
Turbine Combustors for Fuel Flexibility. In Proceedings of the 8th International Gas Turbine Conference, Brussels, Belgium,
12–13 October 2016.
78.
Moliere, M. Expanding Fuel Flexibility of Gas Turbines. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part A J. Power Energy 2005, 219, 109–119. [CrossRef]
79.
Molière, M. Mobilizing Gas Turbine Units to Reduce Flaring. In Proceedings of the Global Forum on Flaring Reduction and
Associated Gas Utilization, Paris, France, 13–16 December 2006.
80.
European Commission Publication On-Line Publication, Cogeneration of Heat and Power. Available online: https://energy.ec.
europa.eu/topics/energy-efﬁciency/cogeneration-heat-and-power_en (accessed on 17 March 2023).
81.
Demirbas, A. Biofuels. In Biofuels—Securing the Planet’s Future Energy Needs; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2009;
Chapter 3; pp. 87–101.
82.
USEPA Article, EPA History: Clean Air Act of 1970/1977. Available online: https://www.epa.gov/history/epa-history-clean-air-
act-19701977 (accessed on 17 March 2023).
83.
Agazzani, A.; Massardo, A.F.; Frangopoulos, C.A. Environmental Inﬂuence on the Thermoeconomic Optimization of a Combined
Plant with NOx Abatement. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 1998, 120, 557–565. [CrossRef]
84.
Molière, M.; Nguyen, B.T.; Lebreton, J.H.; Chapon, D.; Maunand, J.; Onillon, H. The Alliance of Gas Turbines and Alternative
Fuels. In Proceedings of the PowerGen Asia Conference, Ho Chi Min City, Vietnam, 25 September 2003.
85.
Geiger, F.; Molière, M. Gas Turbines in Alternative Fuel Applications: The Utilization of Highly Aromatic Fuels in Power
Generation. In Proceedings of the ASME TURBo Expo Conference, Vienna, Austria, 4–17 June 2004. Paper GT2007-53272.
86.
Molière, M.; Panarotto, E.; Aboujaib, M.; Bisseaud, J.M.; Campbell, A.; Citeno, J.; Maire, P.A.; Ducrest, L. Gas Turbines in
Alternative Fuel Applications: Biodiesel Field Test. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo Conference, Montreal, QC, Canada,
14–17 May 2007. Paper GT2007-27212.
87.
Olbes, A.; Pujol, M.; Moliere, M.; Colas, M. High Compatibility between Gas Turbine and Reﬁnery Utilities. In Proceedings of the
PowerGen Europe Conference, Madrid, Spain, 17–19 June 1997.
88.
Gonzales-Martin, J.M.; Mora, A.; Lafuente-Perez, J.M.; Moliere, M.; Martinez, M. The Achievements of the Frame 6B Gas Turbine
in Reﬁnery Cogenerations. In Proceedings of the PowerGen Europe Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 16–18 May 1995.


--- Page 27 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
27 of 29
89.
Skinner, T.; Powell, D.; Molière, M.; Lasne, D.; Hugonnet, M. Heavy Duty Gas Turbines Give Impetus to Large-Scale Cogens: Fuel
Flexibility as Added Value at the ESSO Fawley Plant, UK. In Proceedings of the PowerGen Asia Conference, Shenzhen, China,
September 2000.
90.
Jun, T.K.; Si, Y.Z.; Hai, C.F.; Molière, M. Gas Turbines Matching Petrochemists’ Energy Needs: CSPC’s 700 MWth-class cogen unit
(China). In Proceedings of the PowerGen Asia 2008 Conference, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 21–23 October 2008.
91.
Pointon, K.; Langan, M. OSTI Publication, Distributed Power Generation Using Biogas Fuelled Microturbines, 2002. Available
online: https://www.osti.gov/etdeweb/servlets/purl/20350865 (accessed on 17 March 2023).
92.
Cenusa, V.E.; Alexe, F. Comparative Analysis on Performances of Micro Gas Turbines Burning Biogas vs. Natural Gas. WSEAS
Trans. Environ. Dev. 2007, 3, 72–80.
93.
Rasul, M.G. Bio-gas Mixed Fuel Micro Gas Turbine Co-Generation for Meeting Power Demand in Australian Remote Areas.
Energy Procedia 2015, 75, 1065–1071. [CrossRef]
94.
Chia-Chi, C. A Case Study on the Electricity Generation Using a Micro Gas Turbine Fuelled by Biogas from a Sewage Treatment
Plant. Energies 2019, 12, 2424.
95.
Bonzani, F.; Pollarolo, G.; Rocca, F. Operating Experience of Ansaldo V94.2 K Gas Turbine Fed by Steelworks Gas. In Proceedings
of the ASME Turbo Expo, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3–6 June 2002. GT2002-30014.
96.
Weizhu, S. Performance Simulation of Gas Turbine Combined Cycle with Coke Oven Gas as Fuel. In Proceedings of the
Asia-Paciﬁc Power and Energy Engineering Conference, Wuhan, China, 28–30 March 2009; pp. 1–4.
97.
Solar Turbines On-Line Brochure: Combined Heat and Power Plant—Coke Oven Gas in Chemical Manufacturing. Available
online: https://s7d2.scene7.com/is/content/Caterpillar/CM20160211-68438-36713 (accessed on 3 May 2023).
98.
Wang, T.; Stiegel, G. The combined cycle power island and IGCC system simulations (Part IV). In Integrated Gasiﬁcation Combined
Cycle (IGCC) Technologies; Elesvier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2016.
99.
Buˇcko, Z.; Mutinsky, J.; Carros, P.; Molière, M. Gas Turbines Burning Coal-Derived Fuels: The Lignite-Gasiﬁcation, Power
Generation Plant at Vresova (Czech Republic). In Proceedings of the PowerGen Europe Conference, Budapest, Hungary, 26–28
June 1996.
100. Takeharu, H. Developments of Gas Turbine Combustors for Air-Blown and Oxygen-Blown IGCC. In Advances in Gas Turbine
Technology; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2010. [CrossRef]
101. Huth, M.; Heilos, A.; Gaio, G.; Karg, J. Operation Experiences of Siemens IGCC Gas Turbines Using Gasiﬁcation Products From
Coal and Reﬁnery Residues. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo, Munich, Germany, 8–11 May 2000. Paper 2000-GT-0026.
102. Brdar, R.D.; Jones, R.M. GE IGCC Technology and Experience with Advanced Gas Turbines; GER-4207; GE Library: Singapore, 2000.
103. Williams, R.H.; Larson, E.D. Biomass gasiﬁer gas turbine power generating technology. Biomass Bioenergy 1996, 10, 149–166.
[CrossRef]
104. Paisley, M.A.; Anson, D. Biomass Gasiﬁcation for Gas Turbine-Based Power Generation. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 1998, 120,
284–288. [CrossRef]
105. Lan, W.; Chen, G.; Zhu, X.; Wang, X.; Liu, X.; Xu, B. Biomass gasiﬁcation-gas turbine combustion for power generation system
model based on ASPEN PLUS. Sci. Total Environ. 2018, 628–629, 1278–1286. [CrossRef]
106. Yong-Chil, S. Gasiﬁcation of Municipal Solid Waste. In Gasiﬁcation for Low-Grade Feedstock; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2018;
Chapter 7; pp. 115–142.
107. Indrawan, N.; Kumar, A.; Moliere, M.; Sallam, A.K.; Huhnke, R.L. Distributed power generation via gasiﬁcation of biomass and
municipal solid waste: A review. J. Energy Inst. 2020, 93, 2293–2313. [CrossRef]
108. Machin, E.B.; Pedroso, D.T.; Acosta, D.G.; dos Santos, M.I.S.; de Carvalho, F.S.; Machín, A.B.; Ortíz, M.A.N.; Arriagada, R.S.;
Fernández, D.A.T.; Maciel, L.B.B.B.; et al. Techno-Economic and Environmental Assessment of Municipal Solid Waste Energetic
Valorization. Energies 2022, 15, 8900. [CrossRef]
109. Bertolotto, E.; Amato, A.; Guoqiang, L. Atmospheric Tests of a Full-Scale Gas Turbine Burner Fed With Blast Furnace Gas and
Coke Oven Gas. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo, Phoenix, AZ, USA, 17–21 June 2019. GT2019-91360.
110. Komori, T.; Hara, H.; Arimura, H.; Kitauchi, Y. Design for F Class Blast Furnace Gas Firing 300 MW Gas Turbine Combined Cycle
Plant. In Proceedings of the International Gas Turbine Congress, Tokyo, Japan, 2–7 November 2003.
111. Komori, T.; Yamagami, N.; Shimamura, Y. Development of Leading Technology for a Low-BTU Gas-ﬁring Gas-turbine Combined-
cycle Plant at a Steelworks. MHI Tech. Rev. 2011, 48, 24–28.
112. Morel, G.; Molière, M. Naphtha, NGL and Gas Condensates in Gas Turbine Plants: Achievements and Prospects. In Proceedings
of the PowerGen Asia Conference, Delhi, India, 18–20 November 1998.
113. Roy, G.K. Design of Gas Turbine Burning Explosive Fuels. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo, The Hague, The Netherlands,
13 June 1994. Paper 94-GT-329.
114. Vierling, M.; Molière, M.; Glaser, P.; Denolle, R.; Nayani, S.; Amadou, N.; Dutta, A.; Aboujaib, M.; Westrup, B.; Sokolov, D.; et al.
Efﬁcient Smoke Suppressant Reduces PM Emissions of Crude Oil-Fired Gas Turbines. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo
Conference, Phoenix, AZ, USA, 17–21 June 2019. GT2019-90382.
115. Marikkar, N.; Jayath, T.; Vierling, M.; Aboujaib, M.; Sokolov, D.; Guichard, J.L. Ash Deposition Control Technology: A Strong
Enabler for Performance Upgrades in HFO CCGT Plants. In Proceedings of the PowerGen Asia Conference, Bangkok, Thailand,
13–14 July 2017.


--- Page 28 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
28 of 29
116. Lee, Y.H.; Ahn, H.Y.; Molière, M. Gas Turbine Fuel Flexibility Serving the Petrochemical Industry: The Case of the Frame 6B at
Yeosu, Korea. In Proceedings of the PowerGen Asia Conference, Bangkok, Thailand, 3–5 October 2012.
117. Lupandin, V.; Thamburaj, R.; Nikolayev, A. Test results of the OGT2500 Gas Turbine Engine Running on Alternative Fuels: BioOil,
Ethanol, BioDiesel and Crude Oil, 2005. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo Conference, Reno, NV, USA, 6–9 June 2005.
Paper GT2005-68488.
118. Gupta, K.K.; Rehman, A.; Sarviya, R.M. Bio-fuels for the gas turbine: A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2010, 14, 2946–2955.
[CrossRef]
119. Do Nascimiento, M.A.R.; Dos Santos, E.C. Biofuel and Gas Turbine Engines. In Advances in Gas Turbine Technology; IntechOpen:
London, UK, 2011; Chapter 6; pp. 115–126.
120. Kallenberg, A. Liquid Bio Fuels for Gas Turbines. Master’s Thesis, Lund University On-Line Publication, Lund, Sweden, 2013.
Available online: https://www.lunduniversity.lu.se/lup/publication/3457896 (accessed on 17 March 2023).
121. Meng, C.C. Liquid Biofuels Production and Emissions Performance in Gas Turbines: A Review. Energy Convers. Manag. 2018, 173,
640–658.
122. Reinmart, B.; Ariﬁn, Z. A Fuel Testing Analysis of B20 Biodiesel for Gas Turbines in Indonesia. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci.
2020, 551, 012003. [CrossRef]
123. Cheng, T.C. Dual-Fuel Operation of Biodiesel and Natural Gas in a Model Gas Turbine Combustor. Energy Fuels 2020, 34,
3788–3796. [CrossRef]
124. Amri, K.; Kismanto, A.; Solikhah, M.D.; Pratiwi, F.T.; Arisanti, A.G. Study of biodiesel speciﬁcations for heavy-duty gas turbine
application. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2021, 1858, 012040. [CrossRef]
125. Thompson, P.B. The Agricultural Ethics of Biofuels: The Food vs. Fuel Debate. Agriculture 2012, 2, 339–358. [CrossRef]
126. Molière, M.; Vierling, M.; Aboujaib, M.; Patil, P.; Eranki, A.; Campbell, A.; Trivedi, R.; Nainani; Subhendu, R.; Pandey, N. Gas
Turbines in Alternative Fuel Applications: Bio-Ethanol Field Test. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo; Orlando, FL, USA, 8–12
June 2009, Paper GT2009-59047.
127. Turbomachinery International Article: Combustion Turbine Fueled by Sugarcane-Based Bioethanol, 27 February 2019. Avail-
able online: https://www.turbomachinerymag.com/view/albioma-commissioning-of-the-ﬁrst-peak-load-combustion-turbine-
fueled-by-sugarcane-based-bioethanol-in-la-reunion (accessed on 17 March 2023).
128. De Souza-Abud, A.K. Bioethanol Production from Food Crops: Sustainable Sources, Interventions and Challenges; Academic Press:
London, UK, 2019; Chapter 21; pp. 417–443.
129. Chandel, A.K.; Forte, M.B.S.; Gonçalves, I.S.; Milessi, T.S.; Arruda, P.V.; Carvalho, W.; Mussatto, S.I. Brazilian bioreﬁneries from
second generation biomass: Critical insights from industry and future perspectives, Brazilian bioreﬁneries from second generation
biomass: Critical insights from industry and future perspectives. Biofuels Bioreﬁn. Bioprod. 2021, 15, 1190–1208. [CrossRef]
130. Glaude, P.A.; Sirjean, B.; Fournet, R.; Bounaceur, R.; Molière, M. Combustion and Oxidation Kinetics of Alternative Gas Turbines
Fuels. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo Conference, Düsseldorf, Germany, 16–20 June 2014. Paper 2014GT25070.
131. Basu, A.; Gradassi, M.; Sills, R.; Fleisch, T.; Pur, R. Use of DME as Gas Turbine Fuel. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo
Conference, New Orleans, LA, USA, 4–7 June 2001. Paper 2001-GT-0003.
132. Haining, Z.; Lin, L. Biodiesel: An Alternative to Conventional Fuel. Energy Procedia 2012, 16, 1874–1885.
133. Siemens On-Line Brochure: Green Biofuels: A Proven Fuel for Gas Turbines, 2022. Available online: https://assets.siemens-
energy.com/siemens/assets/api/uuid:f15b4a76-64df-4b83-affe-80fe072d7233/biofuels-all.pdf (accessed on 17 March 2023).
134. Glaude, P.A.; Fournet, R.; Bounaceur, R.; Molière, M. Adiabatic ﬂame temperature from biofuels and fossil fuels and derived
effect on NOx emissions. Fuel Process. Technol. 2010, 91, 229–235. [CrossRef]
135. Ram, S.D.; Prakash, J.; Dhimanc, S.K.; Lald, A.; Kumar, A. Study of the Bulk Modulus of Compressibility of Biodiesel and its
Impact on Exhaust Emissions. Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Innov. Eng. 2015, 1, 1–7.
136. Baig, M.Z.; Dharmadhikari, S.M. Bioethanol Production from Enzymatically Hydrolyzed Cotton Stalk: One Approach towards
Sustainable Energy Development. Curr. World Environ. 2014, 9, 940. [CrossRef]
137. Al-Sabawi, M.; Chen, J. Hydroprocessing of Biomass-Derived Oils and Their Blends with Petroleum Feedstocks: A Review.
Energy Fuels 2012, 26, 5373–5399. [CrossRef]
138. Truche, L.; Bazarkina, E.F. Natural Hydrogen the Fuel of the 21st Century. In Proceedings of the E3S Web of Conferences, Jember,
Indonesia, 31 July–2 August 2019; Volume 98, p. 03006.
139. ClimaTalk Association On-Line Publication. Available online: https://climatalk.org/2022/04/18/the-hydrogen-rainbow/
(accessed on 17 March 2023).
140. Vautrin, A.; Bossmann, T.; Beaussant, O. METIS Study on Costs and Beneﬁts of a Pan-European Hydrogen Infrastructure, On-Line
Publication of the EU Commission, 2021. Available online: https://op.europa.eu/fr/publication-detail/-/publication/c50a12fc-
5eeb-11ec-9c6c-01aa75ed71a1/ (accessed on 17 March 2023).
141. Conrad, R.; Rheinardt, T. Hydrogen Strategy Enabling A Low-Carbon Economy, On-Line DOE Publication, 2020. Available online:
https://netl.doe.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/2020-12/USDOE_FE_Hydrogen_Strategy_July2020.pdf (accessed on 17 March 2023).
142. UK Government On-Line Publication, UK Hydrogen Strategy Update to the Market, 2022.
Available online:
https:
//assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ﬁle/1123751/hydrogen-
strategy-update-to-the-market-december-2022.pdf (accessed on 17 March 2023).
143. Hord, J. Is Hydrogen a Safe Fuel? Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 1978, 3, 157–176. [CrossRef]


--- Page 29 ---

Energies 2023, 16, 3962
29 of 29
144. Rigas, F.; Amiotte, P. Hydrogen Properties Associated with Hazards. In Hydrogen Safety; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2013;
Chapter 3; pp. 19–25.
145. Patel, M.; Roy, S.; Roskilly, A.P.; Smallbone, H. The techno-economics potential of hydrogen interconnectors for electrical energy
transmission and storage. J. Clean. Prod. 2022, 335, 130045. [CrossRef]
146. Molière, M.; Hugonnet, H. Hydrogen-Fueled Gas Turbines: Experience and Prospects. In Proceedings of the PowerGen Asia
Conference, Bangkok, Thailand, 22–26 November 2004.
147. Tomczak, H.J.; Benelli, G. Investigation of Gas Turbine combustion system ﬁred with mixtures of natural gas and hydrogen. IFRF
Combust. J. 2002, 19, 200–207.
148. Glaude, P.A.; Fournet, R.; Bounaceur, R.; Moliere, M. Kinetic study of the combustion of hydrogen under pressure. In Proceedings
of the Conference at Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Industries Chimiques (ENSIC), Nancy, France, 5 October 2022.
149. Ayed, A.H.; Kusterer, K.; Funke, H.H.-W.; Keinz, J.; Striegan, C.; Bohn, D. Experimental and numerical investigations of the
dry-low-NOx hydrogen micromix combustion chamber of an industrial gas turbine. Propuls. Power Res. 2015, 4, 123–131.
150. Funke, H.H.-W.; Beckmann, N.; Abanteriba, S. An overview on dry low NOx micromix combustor development for hydrogen-rich
gas turbine applications. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44, 6978–6990.7. [CrossRef]
151. Noble, D.; Wu, D.; Emerson, B.; Sheppard, S.; Lieuwen, T.; Angello, L. Assessment of Current Capabilities and Near-Term
Availability of Hydrogen-Fired Gas Turbines Considering a Low-Carbon Future. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 2021, 143, 041002.
[CrossRef]
152. Kim, D. Review on the Development Trend of Hydrogen Gas Turbine Combustion Technology. J. Korean Soc. Combust. 2019, 24,
1–10. [CrossRef]
153. Nagumo, M. Fundamentals of Hydrogen Embrittlement; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2016.
154. Molière, M.; Lallemand, R.; Chun, M.K.; Son, H.K. Heavy-Duty Gas Turbines in Petrochemical Plants: Samsung’s Daesan Plant
(Korea) Beats Fuel Flexibility Records with over 95% Hydrogen in Process Gas. In Proceedings of the PowerGen Asia Conference,
Bangkok, Thailand, 21 September 1999.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
