
--- Page 1 ---

Large-Eddy Simulation of Swirl-Stabilized Spray
Combustion
Nayan Patel∗and Suresh Menon†
School of Aerospace Engineering
Georgia Inst. of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332.
Large-Eddy Simulation of swirl-stabilized ﬂow in a laboratory combustor have been per-
formed for non-reacting and reacting conditions and both gas- and liquid-phase results are
compared with available data. Dynamic model is employed for momentum subgrid closure
in this study. Additionally, simulations with two reaction rate closures are performed and
compared. Results for non-reacting case show the presence of vortex breakdown bubble
(VBB) in the center-line region with two corner recirculation zones past the dump plane.
Non-reacting comparisons with measurements for both mean and RMS show good agree-
ment. Reacting simulations show presence of stronger but smaller VBB in the center-line
region. Overall, reacting comparisons with measurements are also in reasonable agreement.
Time-averaged ﬂow visualization in form of streamlines indicate that the non-reacting ﬂow
rotates twice as much from the inﬂow to outﬂow boundary than the reacting case. Droplet
data show good agreement for particle velocity proﬁles and reasonable trends for the SMD
variation.
I.
Introduction
D
esign and development of combustion devices has exclusively relied on empirical relations, past designs,
and rig testing. Various external forces, like government regulations, market-demand, health & safety
concerns, have presented a strong push1 for cleaner burning combustion technology without sacriﬁcing engine
characteristics like high-thrust-to-weight ratios. Complexity of combustion device added with ever tightening
pollution limits, has increasingly made the design process rely on physics-based combustion system calcu-
lations. Major impetus, according to recent article by Mongia,2 is to develop no-fudge factor combustion
design tools for achieving pre-test prediction capability which is equivalent to running the engine. The idea
here is to assess the impact of the design on the overall operating engine characteristics,2 like emissions,
dome/liner wall temperature levels, pressure losses, proﬁle and pattern factor, lean blowout and ignition,
etc., without relying on emperical correlations or rig testing.
For this idea to be fruitful, simulation of
critical design eﬀects with a reasonable (a week or less) turn-around time is essential. Besides aiding in
design process, computational studies has potential for exploring fundamental physical phenomena3 without
added complexities of hardware and measurement uncertainties especially in operational conﬁguration and
conditions.
In the current study, we focus on a laboratory swirl-cup conﬁguration being investigated by Colby et al.4,5
Previous computational studies, mostly involving Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) approach, on
similar swirl-cup conﬁguration have been performed. Tolpadi et al.6 undertook RANS computations and
validation of two-phase, non-reacting and isothermal, non-vaporizing, 2D-axisymmetric ﬂow ﬁeld for the
single annular combustor.
For the gas phase, the axisymmetric RANS calculations overpredicted mean
proﬁles (for all three components) especially for the azimuthal (or tangential) component. Also, since the
axisymmetric calculations were performed, both the radial and tangential computed proﬁles approached
zero contrary to that seen in experiments. For the liquid phase, the data was compared at the next axial
measurement location indicating fair agreement for axial and radial velocities for large to medium size (30-100
µm) droplets. The swirl component showed poor agreement due to axisymmetric assumption.
Hsiao et al.7 had led eﬀorts to assess/calibrate commercially available software – Fluent package – for
non-reacting ﬂow. Authors have advocated ”through-the-vane”(TTV) approach for the swirl cup assembly
∗Graduate Student; gte101g@mail.gatech.edu
†Professor, Associate Fellow; suresh.menon@ae.gatech.edu
1 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit
9 - 12 January 2006, Reno, Nevada
AIAA 2006-154
Copyright © 2006 by Patel and Menon. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.


--- Page 2 ---

to minimize uncertainty in specifying the inlet boundary conditions for the combustor. Comparisons for the
axial velocity showed that peaks (both negative in the recirculation zone and positive in shear layer region)
and their magnitude compared well at most axial locations however, the length of recirculation bubble was
over-predicted. For the radial component, the comparisons were fair with some overpredictions in the shear-
layer regions. Their simulations revealed a counter-rotating feature at the ﬁrst measurement location (3 mm
downstream of the ﬂare exit) which is not seen in experiments. To address the turbulence model deﬁciencies,
Hsiao et al.8 set out to study the eﬀect of ﬁve RANS turbulence models implemented in the commercially
available Fluent package. The conﬁguration used was a 90o (periodic) sector volume with hybrid domain
and compared with LDV non-reacting data.9 The authors acknowledged that all ﬁve turbulence models
predicted similar results.
Wang et al.10 had undertaken investigation of non-reacting ﬂow dynamics using Large-Eddy Simulation
(LES) technique. The computational domain they used incorporated both the primary as well as the sec-
ondary swirler ejecting the ﬂow ﬁeld in a dump combustor. Various instantaneous snapshots of pressure
and angular momentum were presented signifying the unsteady dynamics and their interactions however, no
quantitative comparisons with experiments for ﬂow characteristics were presented. In summary, their study
gave a qualitative look into the capabilities of LES.
Recently, several studies of two-phase LES in a realistic full-scale gas turbine combustors have been carried
out.
Sankaran and Menon11 investigated unsteady interactions between spray dispersion, vaporization,
fuel-air mixing, and heat release in a realistic combustor. Results showed increase in droplet dispersion
with swirl and large scale coherent structures are subjected to complex stretch eﬀects in the presence of
swirling motion. Menon and Patel12 studied spray combustion under diﬀerent operating conditions for twin
burner conﬁguration. They showed that shape of the combustor signiﬁcantly impacts three-dimensional
motions with no similarity between ﬂame structures and vortex breakdown bubbles between the two burners.
These studies gave qualitative look into the chemistry-turbulence interactions however, no measurement data
were available for comparisons mainly due to realistic (typically 20-35 atmospheres and 800-1200K preheat)
operating conditions.
This study aims to apply and investigate the ability of compressible LES approach to resolve processes for
both non-reacting and reacting (spray) ﬂow-ﬁeld in a swirl-stabilized experimental combustor4,5 operated at
atmospheric pressure. The measurements are performed by Colby et al.4,5 at Georgia Tech and will be used
in this study for validation purposes. Due to signiﬁcant diﬀerences in combustor conﬁguration and operating
conditions, no comparisons are made with previous6–8 computational studies. Unique aspect of this study
is the application of both Localized Dynamic K-equation Model (LDKM)13,14 and the Linear Eddy Mixing
(LEM)12,15,16 model for achieving momentum and scalar equation closures, respectively. The combination
results in a simulation approach that has no model parameters to adjust regardless of the physical problem
simulated. Both the gas and liquid phase validations are reported and discussed.
II.
Mathematical Formulation
The conservation equations for compressible reacting ﬂow are solved using the Large-Eddy Simulation
methodology in generalized co-ordinates.
To simulate multiphase (spray) combustion, Lagrangian spray
model is concurrently solved with Eulerian gas phase.
Eulerian-Phase LES Equations
Applying the ﬁltering operation, using a low-pass box ﬁlter, to the instantaneous Navier-Stokes equations,
the following ﬁltered LES equations are obtained:
∂¯ρ
∂t
=
e˙ρs −∂¯ρ˜uj
∂xj
∂¯ρ˜ui
∂t
=
g
˙Fs,i −
∂
∂xj
[¯ρ˜ui˜uj + ¯pδij −¯τij + τ sgs
ij ]
∂¯ρ ˜E
∂t
=
f˙Qs −∂
∂xi
[(¯ρ ˜E + ¯p)˜ui + ¯qi −˜uj¯τji + Hsgs
i
+ σsgs
i
]
∂¯ρ ˜Yk
∂t
=
g
˙Ss,k −∂
∂xi
[¯ρ ˜Yk˜ui + ¯ρ ˜Ykg
Vi,k + Y sgs
i,k + θsgs
i,k ] + ¯˙wk
(1)
2 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 3 ---

where, ρ is ﬁltered mass density, eui is the resolved velocity vector, f
Yk is the resolved species mass fraction,
g
Vi,k is the resolved species diﬀusion velocity, p ﬁltered pressure determined from ﬁltered equation of state
(shown later), eE is resolved total energy per unit mass, τij is ﬁltered viscous stress, and qi is the heat ﬂux
vector. The sub-grid terms resulting from the ﬁltering operation, denoted with super-script sgs, represent
the small-scale eﬀects upon the resolved-scales in the form of additional stresses and ﬂuxes. Subscript s
denote source terms from dispersed phase and index k for species varies from 1 to Ns, where Ns is the total
number of species present in the system.
The viscous stress tensor (τij) and heat ﬂux vector (qi) are given as:
τij
=
µ( ∂eui
∂xj
+ ∂euj
∂xi
) −2
3µ(∂f
uk
∂xk
)δij
qi
=
−κ ∂eT
∂xi
+ ¯ρ
Ns
X
k=1
˜hk ˜Ykg
Vi,k +
Ns
X
k=1
qsgs
i,k
where, the diﬀusion velocities are approximated using Fickian diﬀusion as g
Vi,k = (−¯
Dk/ ˜Yk)(∂˜Yk/∂xi),
molecular viscosity (µ) is approximated by Sutherland’s Law based on resolved temperature ( eT), and the
thermal conductivity (¯κ) is approximated as ¯κ = µ ¯Cp/Pr, where ¯Cp is the speciﬁc heat at constant pressure
for gaseous mixture and Pr is the Prandtl number.
The pressure is determined from the ﬁltered equation of state,
¯p = ¯ρRu
Ns
X
k=1
[
˜Yk ˜T
MWk
+ T sgs
k
MWk
]
(2)
where, Ru and MWk are the universal gas constant and k −th species molecular weight, respectively. The
subgrid temperature-species correlation term is deﬁned as, T sgs
k
= [ g
YkT −˜Yk ˜T].
The ﬁltered total energy per unit volume is given by ¯ρ ˜E = ¯ρ˜e+ 1
2 ¯ρ˜ui˜ui + ¯ρksgs where, the sub-grid kinetic
energy (discussed later) is deﬁned as, ksgs = (1/2)[ g
ukuk −˜uk˜uk]. The ﬁltered speciﬁc internal energy is given
by ˜e = PNs
k=1[ ˜Yk˜hk + ( g
Ykhk −˜Yk ˜hk)] −¯p/¯ρ where, f
hk = ∆ho
f,k +
R e
T
T o Cp,k(T ′)dT ′ is the speciﬁc enthalpy at
ﬁltered temperature ( eT). For calorically perfect gas, the ﬁltered speciﬁc internal energy equation simpliﬁes
to ˜e = PNs
k=1[cv,k ˜Yk ˜T + cv,kT sgs
k
+ ˜Yk∆h
′
f,k] where, ∆h
′
f,k = ∆h0
f,k −cp,kT 0 and ∆h0
f,k is the standard heat
of formation at a reference temperature T 0.
The SGS terms that require closure are: the sub-grid stress tensor, the sub-grid enthalpy ﬂux, the sub-
grid viscous work, the sub-grid convective species ﬂux, the sub-grid heat ﬂux, the sub-grid species diﬀusive
ﬂux, and the subgrid temperature-species correlation, respectively:
τ sgs
ij
=
ρ ( g
uiuj −euieuj)
Hsgs
i
=
ρ (g
Eui −eEeui) + (pui −peui)
σsgs
i
=
g
ujτij −eujτ ij
(3)
Y sgs
i,k
=
¯ρ[ g
uiYk −˜ui ˜Yk]
qsgs
i,k
=
[hkDk∂Yk/∂xi −˜hk ˜Dk∂˜Yk/∂xi]
θsgs
i,k
=
¯ρ[ g
Vi,kYk −eVi,k eYk]
T sgs
k
=
g
YkT −˜Yk ˜T
The closure of these terms in addition to the closure for the ﬁltered chemical reaction source terms (¯˙wk)
and the source terms for the dispersed phase in Eq. (1) are described below.
Momentum Transport Closure
The sub-grid stress tensor τ sgs
ij
is modeled as:
τ sgs
ij
= −2ρ νt(eSij −1
3
eSkkδij) + 2
3ρksgsδij
(4)
where, resolved strain-rate is given as f
Sij = (1/2)[ ∂e
ui
∂xj + ∂e
uj
∂xi ]. The subgrid eddy viscosity is modeled as:
νt = Cν(
√
ksgs)∆where ∆= (∆x∆y∆z)1/3 is based on local grid size (∆x, ∆y, ∆z). A transport model for
the subgrid kinetic energy (ksgs) is also solved:17–19
3 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 4 ---

∂ρ ksgs
∂t
+ ∂
∂xi
(ρ euiksgs) = P sgs −Dsgs + ∂
∂xi
µ
ρ νt
σk
∂ksgs
∂xi
¶
+ Fd
(5)
where, σk is a model constant typically equal to unity. Here, P sgs = −τ sgs
ij (∂eui/∂xj) and Dsgs = Cερ(ksgs)3/2/∆
are, respectively, the production and the dissipation of ksgs. In the above equation, Fd =
g
˜uiFs,i −euig
Fs,i is
the source term due to the particle phase (this term can be closed exactly, as shown earlier20).
The two coeﬃcients in this model, Cν and Cε are obtained dynamically as a part of the solution using
a localized dynamic technique (LDKM).18,19,21 Fully localized evaluation of these coeﬃcients in space and
time is achieved in this approach. The nominal “constant” values for these coeﬃcients are22,23 0.067 and
0.916, respectively. The dynamic procedure uses the experimental observation in high Re turbulent jet24
that the subgrid stress τ sgs
ij
at the grid ﬁlter level ∆and the Leonard’s stress Lij(= [⟨ρ eui euj⟩−⟨ρe
ui⟩⟨ρe
uj⟩]
bρ
)
at the test ﬁlter level b∆(= 2∆) are self-similar. Here (and henceforth), < f > and bf both indicate test
ﬁltering. Since Lij can be explicitly computed at the test ﬁlter level, a simple scale-similar model of the
form τ sgs
ij
= CLLij, where CL is an adjustable constant, was proposed earlier24 but was found to lack proper
dissipation.
In the LDKM model, the above observation is extended and it is assumed that Lij and the subgrid stress
bτ sgs
ij
at the test ﬁlter level are also similar (i.e., bτ sgs
ij
= c
CLLij). Using this, bτ sgs
ij
is modeled using the same
form as for τ sgs
ij
(Eqn. 4), except that all variables are deﬁned at the test ﬁlter level. We deﬁne the subgrid
kinetic energy at the test ﬁlter level as ktest = 1
2[
d
ρ e
uk
2
bρ
−c
ρeuk
2
bρ
2 ] and obtain a relation
Lij =
bτ sgs
ij
c
CL
=
1
c
CL
[−2bρCν
p
ktest b∆(⟨˜
Sij⟩−1
3⟨˜
Skk⟩δij) + 2
3
bρ ktestδij]
(6)
In the above equation, we assume c
CL = 1 and so, the only unknown is Cν. This equation is, thus,
an explicit model representation for the constant Cν in terms of quantities resolved at the test ﬁlter level.
This system of equations represents ﬁve independent equations for one unknown coeﬃcient (and hence, is
an over-determined system). The value of Cν is determined in an approximated manner by applying the
least-square method.25 Thus,
Cν = −L′
ijMij
2MijMij
(7)
In the above expression
L′
ij = Lij −2
3
bρ ktestδij
(8)
Mij = bρ
p
ktest b∆(⟨˜
Sij⟩−1
3⟨˜
Skk⟩δij)
(9)
A similar approach is used to obtain the dissipation coeﬃcient Cε such that:
Cϵ =
b∆(µ + µt)
bρ k3/2
test
[⟨f
Tij
∂euj
∂xi
⟩−c
f
Tij
d
∂euj
∂xi
]
(10)
where µ is the molecular viscosity and µt(= νt ∗ρ) is eddy viscosity at the grid ﬁlter level. The tensor f
Tij
is deﬁned as [ ∂e
ui
∂xj + ∂e
uj
∂xi −2
3
∂e
uk
∂xk δij] and c
f
Tij indicates tensor at the test-ﬁlter level.
Salient12,26 aspects, among others, of the LDKM approach are: (a) the LDKM approach does not employ
the Germano’s identity,27 (b) the self-similar approach implies that both ∆and b∆must lie in the inertial
range, and this provides a (albeit) rough estimate for the minimum grid resolution that can be used for a
given Re, (c) the evaluation of the coeﬃcients can be carried out locally (i.e., at all grid points) in space
without encountering any instability, and (d) the LDKM approach satisﬁes all the realizability conditions28
in the majority of the grid points even in complex swirling reacting ﬂows.
Energy and Scalar Transport Closure
The subgrid total enthalpy ﬂux, Hsgs
i
is modeled using the eddy viscosity and a gradient assumption as:
Hsgs
i
= −ρ νt
Prt
∂eH
∂xi
(11)
4 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 5 ---

Here, eH is the ﬁltered total enthalpy and Prt is a turbulent Prandtl number that can also be computed using
a dynamic procedure but is currently assumed to be unity. The total enthalpy term eH is evaluated as sum of
speciﬁc enthalpy of mixture, speciﬁc kinetic energy, and speciﬁc sub-grid scale energy: eH = eh + ˜ui ˜ui
2
+ ksgs,
where eh = PNs
k=1 ehk eYk.
In conventional LES (i.e., methods that solve the ﬁltered species equations seen in Eqn. (1) along with
the ﬁltered Navier-Stokes equations), the subgrid convective species ﬂux Y sgs
i,k
is modeled using the gradient
diﬀusion assumption, as well. This is used for scalar closure in eddy-breakup simulations. Thus,
Y sgs
i,k = −ρνt
Sct
∂˜Yk
∂xi
(12)
The coeﬃcient Sct is the turbulent Schmidt Number, and is taken to be unity but could be computed
dynamically. The gradient closure for the species subgrid ﬂux is more problematic than for momentum or
energy transport, since scalar mixing and diﬀusion occur at the subgrid scale.
The other terms such as σsgs
i
, qsgs
i,k , θsgs
i,k ,and T sgs
k
are neglected29 at present, but there is no clear
justiﬁcation.
Subgrid Scalar Closure in LEM
In the LEM model,30–32 the ﬁltered scalar equation shown in Eqn. (1) is not solved directly. Rather, molec-
ular diﬀusion, small- and large-scale turbulent convection, and chemical reaction are all modeled separately,
but concurrently at their respective time scales. To describe this model mathematically, we split the velocity
ﬁeld as: ui = ˜ui + (u′
i)R + (u′
i)S. Here, ˜ui is the LES-resolved velocity ﬁeld, (u′
i)R is the LES-resolved
subgrid ﬂuctuation (obtained from ksgs) and (u′
i)S is the unresolved subgrid ﬂuctuation. Then, consider the
exact species equation (i.e., without any explicit LES ﬁltering) for the k-th scalar Yk written in a slightly
diﬀerent form as:
ρ∂Yk
∂t = −ρ[ ˜ui + (u′
i)R + (u′
i)S]∂Yk
∂xi
−∂
∂xi
(ρYkVi,k) + ˙wk + ˙Ss,k
(13)
Implementation of LEM model in LES approach is called LEMLES, hereafter. In LEMLES, the above
equation is rewritten as:
Yk
∗−Yk
n
∆tLES
= −[ ˜ui + (u′
i)R]∂Yk
n
∂xi
(14)
Yk
n+1 −Yk
∗=
Z t+∆tLES
t
−1
ρ[ρ(u′
i)S ∂Yk
n
∂xi
+ ∂
∂xi
(ρYkVi,k)n −˙wn
k −˙Sn
s,k]dt′
(15)
Here, ∆tLES is the LES time-step. Equation (14) describes the large-scale 3D LES-resolved convection of the
scalar ﬁeld, and is implemented by a Lagrangian transfer of mass across the ﬁnite-volume cell surfaces.22,33
Equation (15) describes the subgrid LEM model, as viewed at the LES space and time scales. The integrand
includes four processes that occur within each LES grid, and represent, respectively, (i) subgrid molecular
diﬀusion, (ii) reaction kinetics, (iii) subgrid stirring, and (iv) phase change of the liquid fuel. These processes
are modeled on a 1D domain embedded inside each LES grid where the integrand is rewritten in terms of
the subgrid time and space scales. Descriptions for the subgrid processes (in Eq. (15)) and the 3D advection
process (in Eq. (14)) are presented at length in Menon and Patel12 and are omitted here, for brevity.
Since all the turbulent scales below the grid are resolved in this approach, both molecular diﬀusion and
chemical kinetics are closed in an exact manner. As a result, “subgrid” terms such as Y sgs
i,k , qsgs
i,k , θsgs
i,k , T sgs
k
,
and ¯˙wk do not have to be closed or modeled.
The LEM subgrid closure is similar to the closure in PDF methods34 except that molecular diﬀusion is
also included exactly in LEMLES in addition to ﬁnite-rate kinetics ( ˙wk). As in PDF methods, the large-scale
transport is modeled as a Lagrangian transport of the scalar ﬁelds across LES cells, and the subgrid stirring
is modeled. In PDF methods, a mixing model is often employed to model turbulent mixing, whereas, in
LEMLES, small-scale turbulent stirring is implemented by the triplet mapping process.
Conservation of mass, momentum and energy (at the LES level) and conservation of mass, energy and
species (at the LEM level) are fully coupled. Chemical reaction at the LEM level determines heat release
and thermal expansion at the LEM level, which at the LES level generates ﬂow motion that, in turns,
transports the species ﬁeld at the LEM level. Full coupling is maintained in the LEMLES to ensure local
mass conservation.
5 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 6 ---

Liquid-Phase Equations
The Lagrangian equation of motion governing instantaneous droplet, under the assumptions of dispersed
droplet ﬁeld leading to infrequent particle collisions and the Kolmogorov scale is of the same order or larger
than the largest droplet, can be expressed as:35,36
dxi,p
dt
=
ui,p
dui,p
dt
=
f
τV
(ui −ui,p) + gi
(16)
where, ui,p is the i-th component of the parcel velocity, ui is the i-th component of gas-phase velocity, xi,p
is the i-th component of parcel position, f is the drag factor (ratio of the drag coeﬃcient to Stokes drag),
τV is the particle velocity response time, and gi is the i-th gravity component. Subscript p represents liquid
phase quantities and unsubscribed quantities correspond to gas-phase (except as noted). Here, ui(= eui +u′′
i )
represent instantaneous gas-phase velocity components, consisting of both the LES resolved velocity eui and
a stochastic term u′′
i that is obtained using ksgs at intervals coincident with the local characteristic eddy
lifetime. Interaction of droplet with an eddy is assumed for a time taken as the smaller of either eddy lifetime
or the transit time required to traverse the eddy. The drag factor and particle velocity response time are:
f
=
CDRed
24
(17)
τV
=
ρpd2
p
18µg
(18)
where, ρp is the liquid density, dp is the parcel diameter (= 2rp, rp is parcel radius), µg is gas-phase dynamic
viscosity, νg is gas-phase kinematic viscosity (µg/ρg), CD is the drag coeﬃcient, and Red is the relative
particle Reynolds number expressed as Red = (dp/νg)
p
(ui −ui,p)(ui −ui,p).
The drag coeﬃcient accounts for the dynamic inﬂuence of pressure and viscous forces acting on droplet
surfaces. Following,37 the standard drag coeﬃcient (assuming drops retain the spherical shape) is given by:
CD =
(
24
Red (1 + 1
6Re2/3
d
)
Red ≤1000
0.4392
Red > 1000
(19)
The eﬀect of droplet distortion on the drag coeﬃcient can be accounted for in the breakup model.
The droplet mass transfer is governed by the droplet continuity equation,
dmp
dt
=
−˙
mp
(20)
where, mp is the mass of particle given by 4
3ρpπr3
p, and
˙
mp(> 0) is the net mass transfer rate (or vaporization
rate) for a droplet in a convective ﬂow ﬁeld can be expressed35 as:
˙
mp
˙mp,Red=0
=
1 + 0.278√RedSc(1/3)
[1 +
1.232
RedSc(4/3) ](1/2)
(21)
where, Red=0 is the Reynolds number for particle at rest. Under quiescent conditions, the mass transfer
rate reduces to:
˙mp,Red=0
=
2πρsDsmdpln(1 + BM)
(22)
where, ρs and Dsm respectively, are the gas mixture density and the mixture diﬀusion coeﬃcient at the
droplet surface. Also, BM is the Spalding transfer number38 given by:
BM ≡b∞−bs = (YF,s −YF,∞)
(1 −YF,s)
;
where b ≡
YF
YF,s −1
In above relations, Sc (≡νg,s/Dsm, ratio of momentum to mass transport) is the Schmidt number. Subscript
s represents quantities at droplet surface. Also, YF is the fuel species (that is evaporating) mass fraction.
The mole fraction (XF,s) at the droplet surface is obtained from Raoult’s Law,39 which assumes that the
mole fraction at the droplet surface is equal to the ratio of the partial pressure of fuel vapor (Pvap) to the
total pressure of gas-phase (P). Various correlations exist40 to evaluate the partial pressure of fuel vapor
that are typically speciﬁc for particular fuels and dependent on critical temperature and pressure of fuel
6 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 7 ---

vapor. Droplet heat transfer is governed by the droplet energy equation, which consists of external and the
internal energy, as well as, the energy associated with surface tension. The equation governing the internal
temperature distribution based on this uniform temperature model35,38 is:
mpCl
dTp
dt = ˙Qconv −˙
mpLv = hpπd2
p(T −Tp) −˙
mpLv
(23)
where,
˙
Qconv is the convective thermal energy transfer rate, mp is particle mass, Cl is liquid heat capacity,
hp is the heat transfer coeﬃcient, and Lv is the latent heat of vaporization. Additional details of this model,
including the heat transfer coeﬃcient, are given elsewhere.35,38
Equations (16, 20, 23) are integrated using a fourth-order Runge-Kutta scheme. The integration is carried
out based on the smallest of the time scales35,41 (i.e., the smallest of the particle velocity relaxation time,
the droplet life-time, the turbulent eddy interaction time, the droplet surface temperature constraint time,
and the LES gas-phase CFL time) governing the particle evolution.
Eulerian-Lagrangian Coupling
Eulerian-Lagrangian coupling is through the inter-phase exchange terms35 (not presented here, for brevity).
If np number of particles are present per parcel/group, then the volume-averaged source terms for all the
droplet parcel/group trajectories that cross a computational cell (of volume ∆V ) are computed by summing
the contribution from every parcel/group as follows:






e˙ρs
g
˙Fs,i
f˙Qs
g
˙Ss,k






=
1
∆V





P
m np[ ˙
mp]
P
m np[ ˙
mpui,p −4π
3 ρpr3
p
dui,p
dt ]
P
m np[ ˙
mphv,s −hpπd2
p(T −Tp) −ui,pmp
dui,p
dt
+ ˙
mp( 1
2u2
i,p)]
P
m np[ ˙
mp]





where, the summation index “m” is over all the droplet parcels/groups crossing a computational cell (of
volume ∆V ). Also, note that the species source term (g
˙Ss,k) for all species (k) is zero, except for the species
that is present in liquid form and evaporating.
Combustion Modeling
In this study, we have employed liquid fuel (C12H23) to approximate experimental Jet-A fuel. A three step,
seven-species, global reduced mechanism42,43 of the form:
C12H23 + (35/2)O2 −→12CO + (23/2)H2O
2CO + O2 −→2CO2
and
N2 + O2 −→2NO
is employed in this study. Global heat release eﬀects and pollutant(CO and NO) distribution in the com-
bustor can be investigated by this reduced mechanism, although with certain limitations.
The closure for the reaction rate is particularly important since it strongly impacts the LES prediction.
LES closure for ¯˙wk employed in EBULES is a conventional approach that utilizes a subgrid eddy break-
up model.44
In this model the ﬁltered reaction rate ( ¯˙wk) is computed as the minimum of the kinetic
reaction rate and the mixing rate.
For a general reaction mechanism comprising of Nr reactions given
by PNs
k=1 ν′k,jMk,j ⇀
↽PNs
k=1 ν”k,jMk,j the ﬁltered reaction rates for species “k” is computed as follows
¯˙wk = Wk
PNr
j=1 i(ν”k,j −ν′k,j) min[qmix
j
, qkin
j
] where qmix
j
and qkin
j
are the molar reaction rates based on
mixing and Arrhenius chemical kinetic rate, respectively. The Arrhenius reaction rates for step “j” is given
by, qkin
j
= kf,j
QNs
k=1[Mk]ν”
k,j −kb,j
QNs
k=1[Mk]ν′
k,j and the mixing rates for the forward and the backward
reactions are given by
qmix
j,f
=
1
τM min
³
[Mk]
ν”k,j
´
and
qmix
j,b
=
1
τM min
³
[Mk]
ν′k,j
´
(24)
Here, τM is the mixing time scale and is related to the sub-grid turbulence as follows τM = CEBU
∆
√
ksgs ,
with CEBU = 1. In this study, subgrid kinetic energy (ksgs) is evaluated dynamically and therefore, the
reaction rate closure is dynamic as well. The proportionality constant is chosen as unity44 for these studies.
The chemical rate is based on Arrhenius kinetic rate adapted from Westbrook & Dryer42 for the ﬁrst two
steps, and from Malte et al.43 for the NO mechanism. In constrast, LEMLES approach does not require a
closure for reaction rate as the instantanous species transport equation is solved directly without resorting
to ﬁltering.
7 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 8 ---

III.
Experimental Setup
The experimental study by Colby et al.4,5 used a laboratory scale combustor with a trapezoidal cross-
section having two windows on the sides for optical access. The main chamber converges gradually leading
to a smaller trapezoidal cross-section for the purposes of ﬂow acceleration to attain positive (out of the
combustor) axial velocity. The swirl cup burner is an assembly of co-axial, counter-rotating airﬂows aided
by eight-jet primary and ten-vaned secondary swirlers. The measurements, non-reacting and reacting, are
performed at atmospheric conditions with nominal (379K) pre-heat air.
Issues relevant to experimental
set-up and measurement methods are described in Colby et al.4,5 The case relevant to this study involved
total mass (air) ﬂow rate of 30.5 g/s and fuel mass ﬂow rate of 0.750 g/s. For these ﬂow conditions, the
overall equivalence ratio amounted to 0.40.
IV.
Numerical Method
For this study, we employ a compressible LES solver based on ﬁnite-volume scheme that is nominally
second-order accurate in space and time. The solver has been implemented on a parallel processing environ-
ment using Message-Passing Interface (MPI) technique and scalability studies45 performed.
Grid and Inﬂow Conditions
Figure 1 shows schematically the combustor domain used in the study, along with the grid distribution (every
other node is shown). It also shows positions (at intersection of marked lines) of probes where transient
signals are collected for spectral analysis. We have employed a two-domain, butterﬂy grid to resolve the
central core of the combustor using a Cartesian grid (185×21×21) while a body-conforming cylindrical grid
(185×74×81) is employed elsewhere. The combustor length from the dump plane (x/Ro = 0.0, equivalent
to ﬂare exit plane) to the exit is 0.278 m, the height is 0.0896 m, and the width is 0.0737 m (lower) and
0.103 m (upper). The circular inlet diameter (Do = 2Ro) at the dump plane is 0.04026 m and the actual
inlet is approximately 0.77Ro upstream of the dump plane. The swirl vanes and the internal details have
not been modeled in the this study and therefore, the inﬂow velocity proﬁles, as shown in Fig. 2(a), at
the computational inlet are considered approximate. Velocity proﬁles shown are non-dimensionalized by the
bulk ﬂow velocity (Uo = 45.9m/s). Hashed sections seen in the plot represent wall-surfaces present in the
inﬂow plane. A bluﬀ-body of 0.19Ro radius with origin at r/Ro = 0.0 is placed in the inlet section spanning
x = 0.08Ro axial distance from the inlet plane to represent constriction formed by the fuel injector.
Nominal conditions of atmospheric pressure and 379K pre-heat, the Reynolds number, ReD = U0D0/ν
is 76,212 for the combustor. At the dump plane, using the computed ksgs to estimate the subgrid velocity
ﬂuctuation u′, and an integral length scale, l ≈0.65D0, the turbulence Reynolds number Rel = u′l/ν
is estimated around 9,800 and 17,446 for non-reacting and reacting cases, respectively. The corresponding
subgrid Reynolds number, Re∆= u′∆/ν is 113 and 187, respectively. Using scaling relations, the Kolmogorov
scale η is 0.009 mm and 0.006 mm, respectively for the two cases in the high turbulence region. Analysis of
the local values of Re∆suggest that, in general, subgrid resolution used in LEMLES resolves around 2-4η
in the regions of interest. Thus, the current resolution used for LEMLES is considered quite adequate.
Spray is injected using a Stochastic Separated Flow (SSF) approach36 using parcels to represent groups
of droplets with similar properties. Typically, around 25,000 to 35,000 droplet parcels (with 1-12 particles
per group, chosen based on their size distribution function) are present, on an average. A log-normal size
distribution, as shown in Fig. 2(b), with a Sauter-Mean Diameter (SMD) of 31.2 micron is used with a droplet
cutoﬀradius (amounting to complete evaporation) of 4 µm. The particles are given initial momentum such
that they form a hollow-cone pattern (consistent with the measurements). The location of particle injection
is along the outer periphery of the center-bluﬀbody (mentioned above) approximately 1mm downstream of
the inﬂow plane.
Characteristics boundary conditions following Poinsot & Lele46 are employed at the inﬂow and outﬂow
planes.
Adiabatic no-slip conditions are employed at all surface walls.
Grid clustering is employed in
regions of shear-layers and high-gradients along with nominal (5-8%) grid stretching in streamwise and
radial directions. The minimum resolution in the inlet shear layer region is around 0.3 mm in the axial
direction, 0.26 mm in the radial direction and 0.25 mm in the azimuthal direction. With this resolution,
nearly 8-16 points are in the shear layer width, which is considered adequate. Figure 3 shows kinetic energy
spectrum for both non-reacting and reacting cases at (x/Ro, r/Ro)=(0.0, 0.308) probe location. It can be
seen that the current grid resolution is able to recover inertial range (as represented by the −5/3 slope) for
8 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 9 ---

both the cases.
Time-step restriction for two-phase ﬂow
There are many time-steps of importance in this type of problem. In addition to the usual LES time-step
(∆tLES), subgrid processes in LEMLES have additional time-steps for (a) reaction-diﬀusion (∆tLEM), (b)
subgrid stirring (∆tstir), and (c) large-scale advection (∆tsp). The LES time step, ∆tLES is the explicit time
step determined by stability consideration. To maintain strict mass conservation, ∆tsp = ∆tLES. ∆tstir is
determined from the stirring frequency,12 λ, and ∆tLEM is determined by the minimum of the chemical and
diﬀusion time within each cell needed for stable integration of the LEM equation.12
Inclusion of spray introduces more time scales in the ﬂow. To accurately calculate the particle trajectories,
size and temperature, the Lagrangian time step used for the integration has to be the smallest of the various
physical time scales. The various time scales are: (1) ∆tLES, (2) the droplet velocity relaxation time, (3) the
droplet life time, (4) the turbulent eddy droplet interaction time, and (5) the droplet surface temperature
constraint time. At any instant, the smallest of the time scales is used for particle evolution36 .
Computational Issues
Simulations are carried out using a parallel solver on a SGI Altix 3700 Linux cluster. For a single characteristic
time τ (based on Do and Uo), around 23 and 52 single-processor hours are needed for non-reacting and
EBULES cases, respectively. After the initial transients, approximately 32τ and 26τ of data is statistically
averaged for non-reacting and EBULES cases, respectively. For the LEMLES simulations, the processing
cost is approximately seven times the EBULES. Although LEMLES is expensive, due to the high parallel
scalability of the solver the turn-around time can be reduced by using a larger number of processors.
V.
Results and Discussion
Results for the non-reacting and reacting simulations are presented in the following sub-sections.
A.
Non-Reacting Simulation
Inﬂow velocity boundary conditions in this study have been approximated by a series of simulations initially
conducted to determine sensitivity of the predictions (especially the centerline axial velocity) to the speciﬁed
inﬂow proﬁles. Representative results were presented in Menon and Patel.12 It was concluded that once
axial and azimuthal proﬁles were determined based on bulk ﬂow and swirl conditions, small variations in
the radial component impacted the near ﬁeld however, the far ﬁeld remained relatively insensitive. In this
study, both the non-reacting and reacting cases use the same inﬂow velocity proﬁle.
Figure 4 the shows time-averaged streamwise velocity along the centerline of the combustor for both
non-reacting and reacting (discussed in the next section) simulations. The proﬁle is non-dimensionalized by
the bulk ﬂow velocity. For the non-reacting case, the axial velocity is consistently negative all the way to
x/Ro = 7.0, indicating the length of the recirculation bubble. The peak negative axial velocity in the bubble
is around 0.25Uo, and the axial velocity is seen to gradually increase till it reaches the outﬂow boundary.
Both the strength as well as the extent of the recirculation region is well predicted by the LES simulations.
It can also be noted that the reverse region extends all the way into the inlet pipe consistent with the
measurements.
Figure 5(a) show the streamlines and VBB region for the non-reacting simulation. It can be seen that
the bubble is a single contiguous region and the ﬂow swirls into and around the VBB. The swirl eﬀect only
weakens near the outﬂow and the ﬂow is primarily axial by the time the outﬂow is reached. Analysis of the
time evolution of the solution shows that the VBB is not stationary and oscillates in the axial direction with
very small lateral movement. The mean ﬂow rotates whole 2π from the inﬂow plane to the outﬂow boundary
as seen by the streamlines. The sense of rotation is clockwise when viewed from the outﬂow boundary and is
in the same sense as the outer/secondary swirler. Figure 5(b) shows the time-averaged streamwise velocity
contour plot in the x −y center plane. The resulting cross-sectional shape of the VBB resembles a leaf with
its stem originating at the center-body located in the inlet pipe. No separation is observed at the 45o ﬂare
expansion angle just upstream of the dump plane. The ﬂow is seen to move parallel to the inlet wall and
gradually decelerating before it impinges on the outer combustor wall at around x/Ro = 2.0.
Figures 6(a,c) show the normalized mean axial velocity proﬁles in the combustor at various axial locations.
Two center planes are shown: horizontal x −z plane (Fig. 6(a)) and a vertical x −y plane (Fig. 6(c)). The
9 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 10 ---

experimental data obtained at some of the axial locations are also shown. At the ﬁrst location where data
is available for comparison, both the peak value as well as the peak location in the shear layer region is well
predicted. The strength of the reverse ﬂow in the recirculation regions is also consistent with measurements.
The reverse ﬂow region is seen to spread (in radial direction) around x/Ro = 2.3 with peak values moving
farther away from the centerline.
Moving further downstream, the VBB quick diminishes in the radial
direction and ﬁnally terminating around x/Ro = 7.0 (as seen in Fig. 4). The comparison with measurements
at all downstream locations are in very good agreement for both the center-planes.
Figures 6(b) and 6(d) show respectively, the normalized mean azimuthal velocity proﬁles in the x −z
horizontal center-plane and the radial velocity proﬁles in the x −y vertical center-plane at various axial
locations. For these normal components, both the peak magnitude as well as peak locations in the shear
layer regions are well predicted.
Peak location of radial velocity and its rapid decay in axial direction
indicates the eﬀect of the 45o ﬂare angle. It was observed in a prior study (not presented here) that the
eﬀect of reducing the ﬂare angle was to bring the peak location closer to the center-line. It can also be seen
that the intensity of the azimuthal velocity is weaker in relation to the radial or axial components however,
its decay is not as signiﬁcant as seen for the radial component. Also, the presence of non-zero variation
of azimuthal velocity along various axial locations indicate swirling ﬂow in the combustor. This was seen
before in form of swirling streamlines. The weaker intensity seen for azimuthal velocity is contributed to its
transition to other two velocity components.
Comparisons for turbulence properties such as the streamwise, the radial, and the azimuthal RMS
velocity ﬂuctuations are presented in Figs. 7(a-d). The proﬁles are normalized by u′
0 = 20 m/sec, which
represents the peak value seen in the axial RMS proﬁles. The experimental data shows some asymmetry
in the uRMS proﬁle for both the center planes at the ﬁrst measurement location. It is noticed that for all
three components, the decay and eventual approach to uniform radial proﬁle of Reynolds (normal) stresses
as the ﬂow progresses downstream. There are two reasons for this to occur. The ﬁrst being the mean ﬂow
in axial direction eventually approaches uniform radial proﬁle going downstream. And the second reason
for uniform (but not zero) RMS proﬁle in all three components is due to the swirling mean ﬂow as seen in
Fig. 6(a-d). Overall, the normal Reynolds stress for respective components are in good agreement with the
measurements.4,5
For comparisons of RMS velocity proﬁles, we considered only the resolved (or ﬁltered) portion of the
ﬂuctuations. And good comparisons with measurements indicates the presence of most of the unsteady
motion in the large scale structures which are well resolved and predicted by the LES. These results show that
the current LES approach is capable of predicting the mixing region quite accurately. Further comparison
with data for the reacting (spray) cases will be reported in the next section.
B.
Reacting Simulation
Figure 4 presented time-averaged streamwise velocity along the centerline of the combustor for both non-
reacting and reacting simulations. As was observed for the non-reacting case, the axial velocity is consistently
negative through the inlet pipe upto the point where the VBB terminates. For the EBULES simulation, there
are two locations with negative peak velocity. Both of the values are relatively larger than seen in the non-
reacting case. The ﬁrst peak is located inside the inlet pipe with negative peak value of 0.5Uo whereas, the
other is located at x/Ro = 1.5 with negative 0.28Uo peak value. Comparison with the measurements indicate
that EBULES underpredicts the strength of the reverse ﬂow region located in the combustor by 0.04Uo. Also,
the placement of the peak is further upstream in EBULES by 0.9Ro. The rate of gradual increase in the axial
velocity past the negative peak location for EBULES is similar to that seen in measurements. The mis-match
in the placement of the peak recirculation strength causes the length of the VBB to be under-predicted by
2.1Ro for the EBULES. Major cause for this can be attributed to the approximate inﬂow velocity boundary
condition which aﬀects the placement of the ﬂame and eventual volume expansion. Further downstream, the
ﬁnal rate of increase in the axial velocity compares well with the measurements indicating that the overall
mass ﬂux and ﬂow conditions are modeled accurately. Preliminary time-averaged centerline axial velocity
proﬁle for the LEMLES simulation is also shown. Overall trend for LEMLES simulation is similar to the
EBULES. Several ripples are observed along the axial direction indicating insuﬃcient time for statistical
convergence.
Figures 8(a,c) show the normalized mean axial velocity proﬁles in the combustor at various axial locations
for two center planes. The experimental data obtained at some of the axial locations are also shown. At
the ﬁrst location, the peak locations in the shear layers are well predicted however, the overall axial velocity
proﬁle is under-predicted. This suggests a mis-match in the ﬂame location in part due to assumed inﬂow
10 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 11 ---

boundary.
However, the peak value in the reverse ﬂow region compares well with data suggesting that
the bulk ﬂow is captured accurately. Further downstream, with the formation of VBB determined by the
combustor geometry, comparison with measurements are in good agreement. This includes the radial spread
of the recirculation zone as seen at x/Ro ≈2.3. Axial proﬁles for the LEMLES simulation are also shown
in form of dashed lines. Overall variations are similar to that of EBULES. It is seen from these preliminary
LEMLES results that inspite of employing better closure for the species equation, it is unable to correctly
predict the ﬂow acceleration at the ﬁrst measurement location. This directly indicates the necessesity of
realistic inﬂow velocity boundary conditions which can be achieved only by solving through the swirler
assembly.
In comparisons with the non-reacting case, the VBB is smaller in both length and width (radial direction)
however, the reverse ﬂow is much stronger. The eﬀect of combustion is to increase the overall volume ﬂow
rate through the outﬂow boundary as can be seen by the increase in axial velocity from 0.125Uo to 0.352Uo.
It is this property of increased organized (mechanical) energy that is relied upon for extracting work via
turbines. Similar to the non-reacting case, the resulting cross-sectional shape of the VBB in the center-planes
resembles are leaf with its stem orginating in the inlet pipe. However, in the reacting case, overall size is
relatively smaller.
Figures 8(b) and 8(d) show respectively, the normalized mean tangential velocity proﬁles in the x −z
horizontal center-plane, and the radial velocity proﬁles in the x −y vertical center-plane at various axial
locations. For the azimuthal component, both the peak magnitude as well as peak locations in the shear layer
regions are well predicted. The radial component, at the ﬁrst measurement location, shows signs of under-
expansion of ﬂow, consistent with axial component. The EBULES shows good trend with measurements
but fails to achieve the peak value at the bottom (r/Ro ≈−1.5) corner. In comparison, the LEMLES radial
proﬁles are showing better agreement at the top corner and relative improvement in peak radial position in
the bottom corner. Elsewhere, the EBULES and LEMLES proﬁles are similar.
In a similar behavior to non-reacting case, the peak radial velocity rapidly decays moving downstream
achieving an uniform proﬁle. It can also be seen that the intensity of the azimuthal velocity is weaker in
relation to the radial or axial components however, its decay is not as signiﬁcant as seen for the radial
component.
Also, the presence of non-zero variation of azimuthal velocity along various axial locations
indicate presence of swirl in the combustor. As was seen in the non-reacting case, the swirl is in the same
direction as the outer swirler ﬂow.
Keeping in mind the uncertainties relating to inﬂow boundary and
chemical rate closure involved, the characteristics of VBB are reasonably predicted by both approaches.
Comparisons for turbulence properties are presented in Figs. 9(a-d). The proﬁles are normalized by
u′
0 = 30 m/sec, which represents the nominal value seen in the axial RMS proﬁles. The reacting data
shows relatively uniform proﬁles for all three components as compared to the non-reacting RMS proﬁles,
especially at the ﬁrst measurement location. In the reacting case, the shear layer region, as seen in Fig. 8(a,c)
at ﬁrst axial location, is broadly dispersed in the radial direction amounting to increase turbulence at those
locations. Turbulence variations for the LEMLES simulation is seen similar to EBULES. It is noticed that
for all three components, the decay and eventual approach to uniform radial proﬁle of Reynolds (normal)
stresses as the ﬂow progresses downstream. Except for the ﬁrst measurement location, the normal Reynolds
stress for respective components are in reasonable agreement with the data. At the ﬁrst location, there
is over-prediction in both axial and radial RMS quantities. Origin for this can be traced to the previous
inconsistencies seen in axial and radial mean proﬁles. Overall, the turbulence intensity in the reacting case
is 15 −20% larger than seen in the non-reacting simulation.
Flow visualization for EBULES simulation is shown in Fig. 10(a) in form of streamlines and VBB region.
The recirculation regions is seen to be contiguous albeit smaller than seen for the non-reacting case. The
streamline patterns are markedly diﬀerent. Here, the ﬂow is seen not to expand much radially but rather
moves downstream at relatively smaller radial angle. This happens due to volume expansion and smaller
but stronger recirculation bubble. Viewing the VBB in a cross-sectional plane, as shown in Fig. 10(b), its
size in terms of width (radial direction) and length are relatively smaller than the non-reacting case. The
ﬂow is also seen to separate at 45o expansion angle just upstream of the dump plane. Such separation was
not observed in the non-reacting simulation. The mean ﬂow is seen to rotate clockwise ≈π radians from
inﬂow to the outﬂow boundary as seen by the streamlines. Rotation is almost half than that noticed in the
non-reacting case.
Figure 10(c) shows time-averaged overall fuel reaction rate as solid-colored background super-imposed
with mean axial velocity contours in the vertical center-plane. The units for the reaction rate shown are in
the CGS system. The overall reaction rate is positioned in the shear layers between the incoming reactants
and the recirculation bubble. The reaction rate has contribution from both the mixing (based on turbulence)
11 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 12 ---

and chemical (based on Arrhenius) rates and their breakdown is shown in Fig. 10(d). The mixing rate is
limiting in recirculation bubble whereas the chemical rate is limiting in the shear layer region. Also notice
that the typical range of mixing rate is approximately 5-10 times the chemical rate. The positioning of the
overall ﬂame in the shear layers implies that the recirculating region sustains the ﬂame by providing pool of
hot products both for pre-heating the incoming reactants as well as ignition source.
C.
Spray Dynamics
Time-averaged fuel particle velocities and SMD proﬁles are compared to measurements and presented in
Fig.
11.
All three components of droplet velocities are compared in two center-planes as seen in Fig.
11(a-d). At the ﬁrst measurement location, velocities proﬁles compare reasonably well with measurements.
Both the peak value, as well as, the peak locations are captured.
The droplet axial velocity is seen to
peak in the shear layers and follows gas-phase closely. In the center region (around r/Ro ≈[−0.25, 0.25]),
measurements shows negative axial velocity indicating that the droplets are entrained in the recirculation
bubble. LES droplet proﬁle in that region shows positive axial droplet velocity albeit smaller in magnitude.
This indicates that incoming droplets are not able to slow down enough to reach negative axial velocity.
Several reasons can be attributed to this behavior. Principally, the initial velocity given to the droplets at
the inﬂow boundary is approximated which may be over-speciﬁed. Secondly, this study assumes the spray
is dilute and no atomization of droplets is taken into account. Presence of small droplets via breakup in the
center region would follow gas-phase more accurately. Inspite of these approximations/assumptions, overall
trend for droplet velocities is reasonably well predicted.
Sauter-Mean Diameter (SMD, D32) proﬁles are also compared with measurements and presented in
Fig. 11(e-f) normalized by nominal value D32,0 = 100µm seen in measurements. At the ﬁrst data location,
measurements show D32 values of O(100µm) whereas, the LES is predicting on the range of 30 µm. Colby et
al.5 have shown that low fuel injection pressure, as is the case here, could result in poor spray characteristics
and oﬀ-rated injector performance. The initial droplet distribution given to particles was based in part on
rated (at 40µm) SMD of the injector. The mis-match at the ﬁrst measurement location is expected and
seen in the proﬁles. Further downstream, error in comparisons diminishes in part due to the heat release
eﬀects and less inﬂuence of nozzle distribution. The heat release, due to droplet evaporation, changes droplet
radius distribution, and thereby signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the SMD proﬁles. Again, given the approximations
employed in this study, overall trend for the particle SMD proﬁles are reasonably captured especially at
downstream locations.
The droplets are seen to follow a hollow cone pattern as seen from both the radial proﬁles as well as ﬂow
visualization (not shown here, for brevity). The trajectory of particles is through the shear layer regions
tucked in between the 45o ﬂare angle and the re-circulation bubble. Then onwards, the particles continue
to travel the same trajectory however, at lower velocities until they ﬁnally vaporize.
The acceleration
of particles is seen just upstream of the dump plane in the shear layer regions consistent with gas-phase
speedup. Relatively few particles are seen in the recirculation bubble due to longer residence time allowing for
complete vaporization. Particles seize to exist past x/Ro = 3.3. Closer inspection of SMD proﬁles indicate
that SMD increases both moving radially outwards and downstream axially, consistent with measurements.
Lower values of SMD closer to recirculation bubble indicate the eﬀect of proximity of heat source leading
to presence of smaller droplets due to rapid particle evaporations. Also, presence of larger particles is seen
on the outer periphery owing to their centrifugal acceleration by the gas-phase swirl imparted in the inlet
pipe.
VI.
Conclusions
Large-Eddy Simulation of swirl-stabilized ﬂow in a laboratory combustor have been performed for non-
reacting and reacting conditions and both gas- and liquid-phase results are compared with available data.
Methodology employed in this study attempts to capture spray-turbulence interactions as well as subgrid
fuel-air mixing and ﬁnite rate kinetics. Results for non-reacting case show presence of vortex breakdown
bubble (VBB) in the center-line region with two corner recirculation zones past the dump plane. Non-reacting
comparisons with measurements for both mean and RMS show good agreement. Reacting simulations show
presence of stronger yet smaller VBB in the center-line region. EBULES is seen to under-predict both the
location and negative peak value of the axial velocity by 0.9Ro and 0.04Uo, respectively. Overall reacting
comparisons with measurements are in reasonable agreement. Time-averaged ﬂow visualization in form of
streamlines indicate that the non-reacting ﬂow rotates twice as much from the inﬂow to outﬂow boundary
12 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 13 ---

than the reacting case. Droplet data show good agreement for particle velocity proﬁles and reasonable trends
for the SMD variation.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported in part by General Electric Aircraft Engine Company and by NASA/GRC.
Computational time provided by NASA/GRC and Computational Combustion Laboratory (CCL) at Georgia-
Tech is greatly appreciated.
References
1Maclin, H. and Haubert, C., “Fifty Years Down - Fifty Years To Go,” AIAA Paper 2003–2788, 2003.
2Mongia, H. C., “Perspective of Combustion Modelling for Gas Turbine Combustors,” AIAA Paper 2004–0156, 2004.
3Candel, S., Thevenin, D., Darabiha, N., and Veynante, D., “Progress in Numerical Combustion,” Combustion Science
and Technology, Vol. 149, 1999, pp. 297–337.
4Colby, J., Jagoda, J., and Menon, S., “Flow Field Measurements in a Swirling Spray Combustor,” AIAA Paper AIAA-
2005–4143, 41st Joint Propulsion Conference, 2005.
5Colby, J., Menon, S., and Jagoda, J., “Spray and Emission Characteristics near Lean Blow Out in a Counter-Swirl
Stabilized Gas Turbine Combustor,” ASME Turbo Expo 2006; GT2006-90974; Submitted, 2006.
6Tolpadi, A. K., Burrus, D. L., and Lawson, R. J., “Numerical Computation and Validation of Two-Phase Flow Down-
stream of a Gas Turbine Combustor Dome Swirl Cup,” ASME Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, Vol. 117,
1995, pp. 704–712.
7Hsiao, G. and Mongia, H. C., “Swirl Cup Modelling, Part 2: Inlet Boundary Conditions,” AIAA Paper 2003–1350, 2003.
8Hsiao, G. and Mongia, H. C., “Swirl Cup Modelling, Part 3: Grid Independent Solution with Diﬀerent Turbulence
Models,” AIAA Paper 2003–1349, 2003.
9Mongia, H. C., Al-Roub, M., Danis, A., Elliott-Lewis, D., Jeng, S. M. Johnson, A., McDonell, V. G., Smauelsen, G. S.,
and Vise, S., “Swirl Cup Modelling, Part 1,” AIAA Paper 2001–3576, 2001.
10Wang, S., Yang, V., Mongia, H. C., Hsieh, S. Y., and Hsiao, G., “Modelling of Gas Turbine Swirl Cup Dynamics, Part
5: Large-Eddy Simulation of Cold Flow,” AIAA Paper 2003–0485, 2003.
11Sankaran, V. and Menon, S., “LES of Spray Combustion in Swirling Flows,” Journal of Turbulence, Vol. 3, 2002, pp. 011.
12Menon, S. and Patel, N., “Subgrid Modeling for LES of Spray Combustion in Large-Scale Combustors,” AIAA Journal
(in press, 2006), 2006.
13Kim, W.-W. and Menon, S., “Application of the localized dynamic subgrid-scale model to turbulent wall-bounded ﬂows,”
AIAA Paper 97–0210, 1997.
14Kim, W.-W., Menon, S., and Mongia, H. C., “Large-Eddy Simulation of a Gas Turbine Combustor Flow,” Combustion
Science and Technology, Vol. 143, 1999, pp. 25–62.
15Chakravarthy, V. K. and Menon, S., “Subgrid Modeling of Premixed Flames in the Flamelet Regime,” Flow, Turbulence
and Combustion, Vol. 65, 2000, pp. 133–161.
16Sankaran, V. and Menon, S., “Subgrid Combustion Modeling of 3-D Premixed Flames in the Thin-Reaction-Zone
Regime,” Proc. Combust. Inst., Vol. 30, 2005, pp. 575–582.
17Menon, S., Yeung, P. K., and Kim, W. W., “Eﬀect of subgrid models on the computed interscale energy transfer in
isotropic turbulence,” Computers and ﬂuids, Vol. 25, No. 2, 1996, pp. 165–180.
18Kim, W. W., Menon, S., and Mongia, H. C., “Large-Eddy simulation of a gas turbine combustor ﬂow,” Combustion
Science and Technology, Vol. 143, 1999, pp. 25–62.
19Menon, S. and Kim, W.-W., “High Reynolds Number Flow Simulations Using the Localized Dynamic Subgrid-Scale
Model,” AIAA-96-0425, 1996.
20Menon, S. and Pannala, S., “Subgrid Modeling of Unsteady Two-Phase Turbulent Flows,” AIAA Paper No. 97-3113,
1997.
21Kim, W.-W. and Menon, S., “A New Incompressible Solver for Large-Eddy Simulations,” International Journal of
Numerical Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 31, 1999, pp. 983–1017.
22Chakravarthy, V. K. and Menon, S., “Large-Eddy Simulations of Turbulent Premixed Flames in the Flamelet Regime,”
Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 162, 2000, pp. 175–222.
23Chakravarthy, V. K. and Menon, S., “Linear-Eddy Simulations of Reynolds and Schmidt Number Dependencies in
Turbulent Scalar Mixing,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 13, 2001, pp. 488–499.
24Liu, S., Meneveau, C., and Katz, J., “On the Properties of Similarity Subgrid-Scale Models as Deduced from Measure-
ments in a Turbulent Jet,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 275, 1994, pp. 83–119.
25Lilly, D. K., “A Proposed Modiﬁcation of the Germano Subgrid-Scale Closure Method,” Physics of Fluids A, Vol. 4,
No. 3, 1992, pp. 633–635.
26Patel, N., Stone, C., and Menon, S., “Large-Eddy Simulations of Turbulent Flow over an Axisymmetric Hill,” AIAA-03-
0967, 2003.
27Germano, M., Piomelli, U., Moin, P., and Cabot, W. H., “A Dynamic Subgrid-Scale Eddy viscosity Model,” Physics of
Fluids A, Vol. 3, No. 11, 1991, pp. 1760–1765.
28Schumann, U., “Realizability of Reynolds-Stress Turbulence Models,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 20, No. 5, 1977, pp. 721–725.
29Fureby, C. and M¨oller, S.-I., “Large-Eddy Simulation of Reacting Flows Applied to BluﬀBody Stabilized Flames,” AIAA
Journal, Vol. 33, No. 12, 1995, pp. 2339–2347.
13 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 14 ---

30Kerstein, A. R., “Linear-Eddy Model of Turbulent Transport: Part 2,” Combustion and Flame, Vol. 75, 1989, pp. 397–
413.
31Menon, S. and Kerstein, A. R., “Stochastic Simulation of the Structure and Propagation Rate of Turbulent Premixed
Flames,” Proc. Combust. Inst., Vol. 24, 1992, pp. 443–450.
32Menon, S., McMurtry, P., and Kerstein, A. R., “A Linear Eddy Mixing Model for Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent
Combustion,” LES of Complex Engineering and Geophysical Flows, edited by B. Galperin and S. Orszag, Cambridge University
Press, 1993, pp. 287–314.
33Menon, S. and Calhoon, W., “Subgrid Mixing and Molecular Transport Modeling for Large-Eddy Simulations of Turbulent
Reacting Flows,” Proc. Combust. Inst., Vol. 26, 1996, pp. 59–66.
34Pope, S. B., “PDF Methods for Turbulent Reactive Flows,” Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 1985, pp. 119–
192.
35Oefelein, J. C. and Yang, V., “Simulation of High-Pressure Spray Field Dynamics,” Recent Advances in Spray Combus-
tion:Spray Combustion and Droplet Burning Phenomena, Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics, Vol. 166, 1995, pp. 263–
304.
36Faeth, G. M., “Mixing, Transport and Combustion in Sprays,” Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, Vol. 13,
1987, pp. 293–345.
37Crowe, C. T., Sommerfeld, M., and Tsuji, Y., “Multiphase Flows with Droplets and Particles,” CRC Press LLC, Boca
Raton, FL, 1998.
38Faeth, G. M., “Evaporation and combustion of sprays,” Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, Vol. 9, 1983,
pp. 1–76.
39Chen, K. H. and Shuen, J. S., “A coupled Multi-block solution procedure for spray combustion in complex geometries,”
AIAA Paper 1993-0108, 1993.
40Reid, R. C., Prausniz, J. M., and Poling, B. E., Mcgraw Hill Publishing Company, 1988.
41Sankaran, V., “Sub-grid combustion modeling for compressible two-phase ﬂows,” Doctorate Thesis, Georgia Inst. of
Technology, Aerospace Eng., 2003.
42Westbrook, C. K. and Dryer, F. L., “Simpliﬁed Reaction Mechanisms for the Oxidation of Hydrocarbon Fuels in Flames,”
Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 27, 1981, pp. 31–43.
43Malte, P., Hamer, A., Roby, R., and Steele, R., “Development of a Five-Step Global Methane Oxidation-NO Formation
Mechanism for Lean-Premixed Gas Turbine Combustion,” Trans.
of the ASME: J. of Eng. for Gas Turbine and Power,
Vol. 121, No. April, 1999, pp. 272–280.
44Fureby, C. and L¨ofstr¨om, C., “Large-Eddy Simulations of BluﬀBody Stabilized Flames,” Proc. Combust. Inst., Vol. 25,
1994, pp. 1257–1264.
45Stone, C. and Menon, S., “Adaptive swirl control of combustion instability in gas turbine combustors,” Proc. Com-
bust. Inst., Vol. 29, 2002, pp. 155–160.
46Poinsot, T. and Lele, S., “Boundary Conditions for Direct Simulations of Compressible Viscous Flow,” Journal of
Computational Physics, Vol. 101, 1992, pp. 104–129.
(a) Schematic
(b) Computational Grid
Figure 1.
Computational domain for the combustor; outer cylindrical grid: 185×74×81 and inner cartesian
grid: 185×21×21. Schematic of the grid is shown along with probe locations (at intersection of thin lines) at
which transient signals are collected. Numbers represent distances (x/Ro, r/Ro) for the probes from the dump
plane and combustor center-line, respectively.
14 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 15 ---

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
r/Ro
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Ui/Uo
Ux
Ur
Uθ
(a) Inﬂow Proﬁles
0.0 
10.0 µ
20.0 µ
30.0 µ
40.0 µ
Particle Radius (R), meter
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
fR(R)
σ=1.0
σ=0.5
(b) Particle Size Distribution
Figure 2. Velocity inﬂow proﬁles (Ux, Ur, Uθ) normalized by the bulk ﬂow velocity (Uo) used for the simulations
are shown in (a). For droplets, a log-normal size distribution is used with a SMD of 31.2 µm.
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
Frequency (Hz)
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10
1
10
2
Kinetic Energy (m
2/s
2)
Reacting
Non-Reacting
-(5/3)
-(5/3)
(x/R0=0.0, r/R0=0.308)
Figure 3.
Kinetic energy spectrum for both the reacting and non-reacting case showing the (−5/3) slope for
decay of energy indicating attainment of inertial layer using the current grid. Probe location for the spectrum
is in the shear layer region just downstream of the dump plane.
15 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 16 ---

0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
x/Ro
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Ux/Uo
Expt--Non-Reacting
LES--Non-Reacting
Expt--Reacting
EBULES--Reacting
LEMLES--Reacting
Figure 4.
Time-averaged centerline streamwise non-dimensional velocities for the non-reacting and reacting
cases are shown.
Parameters used for non-dimensionalization are the bulk velocity (Uo) and dump plane
expansion radius (Ro).
(a) Non-Reacting VBB
(b) Non-Reacting X −Y Plane
Figure 5.
Time-averaged axial velocity iso-surface at zero velocity depicting VBB is shown in (a) for non-
reacting case. Also shown are streamlines originating from the inﬂow boundary. Mean axial velocity contours
in the horizontal plane are shown in (b) showing the cross-section as a leaf shaped structure.
16 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 17 ---

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ux/Uo
(a) Horizontal-Axial Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Uθ/Uo
(b) Horizontal-Azimuthal Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ux/Uo
(c) Vertical-Axial Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ur/Uo
(d) Vertical-Radial Mean
Figure 6. Time-averaged horizontal (X−Z) and vertical (X−Y ) plane comparisons for non-reacting simulations.
Open symbols represent measurement data points. Scaling used for non-dimensionalization is the bulk ﬂow
velocity (Uo) and the dump expansion radius (Ro) or as noted in the discussion.
17 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 18 ---

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
uRMS/uo
(a) Horizontal-Axial RMS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
vRMS/uo
(b) Horizontal-Azimuthal RMS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
uRMS/uo
(c) Vertical-Axial RMS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
vRMS/uo
(d) Vertical-Radial RMS
Figure 7. Time-averaged horizontal (X−Z) and vertical plane (X−Y ) comparisons for non-reacting simulations.
Open symbols represent measurement data points. Scaling used for non-dimensionalization is the bulk ﬂow
velocity (Uo) and the dump expansion radius (Ro) or as noted in the discussion.
18 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 19 ---

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ux/Uo
(a) Horizontal - Axial Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Uθ/Uo
(b) Horizontal - Azimuthal Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ux/Uo
(c) Vertical - Axial Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ur/Uo
(d) Vertical - Radial Mean
Figure 8.
Time-averaged horizontal (X −Z) and vertical (X −Y ) plane comparisons for reacting simulations.
Open symbols represent measurement data points. Scaling used for non-dimensionalization is the bulk ﬂow
velocity (Uo) and the dump expansion radius (Ro). Solid blue lines represent EBULES and red dashed lines
are for LEMLES simulations.
19 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 20 ---

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
uRMS/uo
(a) Horizontal - Axial RMS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
vRMS/uo
(b) Horizontal - Azimuthal RMS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
uRMS/uo
(c) Vertical - Axial RMS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
uRMS/uo
(d) Vertical - Radial RMS
Figure 9.
Time-averaged horizontal (X −Z) and vertical (X −Y ) plane RMS comparisons for reacting sim-
ulations. Open symbols represent measurement data points. Scaling used for non-dimensionalization is the
nominal axial RMS velocity (uo) and the dump expansion radius (Ro). Solid blue lines represent EBULES and
red dashed lines are for LEMLES simulations.
20 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 21 ---

(a) Reacting VBB
(b) Reacting X −Y Plane
(c) Fuel Reaction Rate
(d) Mixing and Chemical Rate
Figure 10.
Time-averaged axial velocity iso-surface at zero velocity depicting VBB is shown in (a).
Also
shown are streamlines for the EBULES simulation. Mean axial velocity contours in the horizontal plane are
shown in (b). Time-averaged fuel reaction rate (as solid contours) in the horizontal plane with axial velocity
line contours is shown in (c) for EBULES simulation. Mixing (as line contours) and chemical rate (as solid
contours) contributing to overall fuel reacting rate are shown in (d). Reaction rates are in CGS units.
21 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics


--- Page 22 ---

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ux/Uo
(a) Horizontal - Axial Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ux/Uo
(b) Vertical - Axial Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ux/Uo
(c) Horizontal - Azimuthal Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
Ux/Uo
(d) Vertical - Radial Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
D32/D32,o
(e) Horizontal - D32 Mean
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x/Ro
-2
-1
0
1
2
r/Ro
D32/D32,o
(f) Vertical - D32 Mean
Figure 11.
Time-averaged horizontal (X −Z) and vertical (X −Y ) plane droplet comparisons for reacting
EBULES simulation.
22 of 22
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
