
--- Page 1 ---

Experiments in Fluids 4, 205-213 (1986) 
Experiments in Fluids 
© Springer-Verlag 1986 
A study of a bluff-body combustor using laser sheet lighting * 
W. M. Roquemore 
Air Force Wright Aeronautical Laboratories, Aero Propulsion Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433, USA 
R. S. Tankin 
Mechanical Engineering Department, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60202, USA 
H. H. Chin and S. A. Lottes 
Mechanical Engineering Department, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60680, USA 
Abstract. Laser sheet lighting is used to study reacting flows with 
and without heat release in an axisymmetric, unducted and 
vertically mounted bluff-body combustor. The fuel, which is 
seeded with titanium tetrachloride vapor, is ejected from a jet 
located in the center of the bluff-body. The TiC14 in the dry fuel 
reacts spontaneously with the water in the annulus air to form 
titanium dioxide particles. High speed movies and visual observa- 
tions of vertically and horizontally located sheets of laser light 
provided remarkably detailed visualization (via Mie scattering) of 
the vortex dynamics in the near-wake region of the bluff-body. 
1 Introduction 
The Aero Propulsion Laboratory (APL) has developed a 
bluff body research combustor for the purposes of: 
(1) evaluating the performance of conventional probes and 
advanced laser techniques and (2) conducting experiments 
to aid in evaluating and developing combustion models. 
Numerous experiments and theoretical analyses have 
yielded a detailed understanding of many of the charac- 
teristics of this combustor (see Roquemore etal. 1983). 
High speed movies have proven to be the most useful 
technique for understanding the turbulent combusting 
flow field. They revealed the existence of large scale 
vortices shed from the bluff body. These vortices are an 
important part of the mixing process in the near and far 
wake regions. The interpretation of single point Laser 
Doppler Anemometer (LDA) and Coherent Anti-Stokes 
Raman Spectroscopy (CARS) measurements in terms of 
the large scale structures has been greatly enhanced by the 
use of high speed cine pictures. Flow visualization 
coupled with simultaneous single or multiple point mea- 
surements is believed to be essential for understanding the 
details of flows containing large scale structures. 
Sheet-lighting has been used in recent years to provide 
quantitative two-dimensional (2-D) visualization of flow 
fields. Long etal. (1981) used a Lorenz/Mie scattering 
* A version of this paper was presented at the ASME Winter 
Annual Meeting of 1984 and printed in AMD, Vol. 66 
technique in a aerosol seeded jet to study the entrainment 
and mixing processes. Escoda and Long (1983), in a 
similar study, used Rayleigh scattering to study a freon 
jet. Kychakoff et al. (1982) used fluorescence scattering to 
record the 2-D view of the OH radical formed in a flame. 
Johnson and Bennett (1981) studied turbulent mixing pro- 
cesses of coaxial jets discharging into an expanded duct 
using a fluorescent tracer in a water tunnel experiment. 
Koochesfahani etal. (1983) and Dimotakis etal. (1983) 
also used a fluorescent dye in water tunnel experiments to 
study the mixing in chemically reacting shear layers and 
jets, respectively. These studies have demonstrated the 
value of different sheet-lighting techniques for studying 
flows containing large scale structures. 
The first objective of this paper is to introduce a two- 
dimensional (2-D) sheet-lighting technique coupled with 
a fast chemically reacting system that can provide detailed 
visualization of turbulent mixing processes without heat 
release. This technique also offers the-potential for 
making simultaneous velocity and relative product con- 
centration measurements. Visualization results obtained in 
a small unducted bluff-body combustor, of similar design 
to that used by Roquemore et al. (1983), are presented 
as a demonstration of the technique. Micron size TiO2 
particles are used as the scattering media. These particles 
are formed as a product of the reaction of TIC14 and H20. 
This reaction has been used by several investigators to 
provide seed particles for LDA measurements (Moss 1980; 
Craig et al. 1984). To our knowledge, however, the poten- 
tial use of this reactive system as a tool for studying tur- 
bulent mixing processes has not been explored. The TiO2 
particle size has been reported to be fairly uniform and is 
generally in the 0.2 to 1 micron range with a small fraction 
in the 2 to 3 micron range (see Craig et al. 1984). Particles 
in this size range can follow the flow and also provide 
good Mie scattering centers. Normally, large concentra- 
tions of TiO2 particles are formed so that the prospects of 
obtaining unbiased LDA results by uniformly sampling, as 
demonstrated by Craig et al. (1984), appear good. Also, 
the work of Starner and Bilger (1980) suggests that the 


--- Page 2 ---

206 
Experiments in Fluids 4 (1986) 
scattered light intensity from a measurement volume in a 
non-reacting flow might be directly proportional to the 
TiO2 concentration. If so, this technique might also 
provide 2-D quantitative data on product concentrations 
in!'cold flOwS; however, this point needs to be carefully 
examined before such a claim can be made. This tech- 
nique cannot be used for quantitative measurements in 
combusting flows because the scattering cross section of 
Ti02 partic!es is greatly reduced in the flame (Ebrahimi & 
Kline 1977). 
The TiCi4+H20 reaction seems to be nearly instan- 
taneous since TiO2 particles begin to form just at the exit 
of a high Speed jet in which a uniform mixture of TIC14 
ar~:d dry air is injected into humid air. This indicates that 
the reaction js mixing limited and can be effectively used 
to study turbulent mixing processes. The corrosive nature 
o[ TIC14 and: HC1 may have discouraged its use in the past 
but with proper handling procedures and good ventilation 
and exhaust I SYstems, this does not appear to be a Serious 
problem. 
The 
second objective of this paper is to use the 2-D 
sheet-lighting technique to investigate the role of vortex 
shedding in, the bluff body combustor. In reacting flow 
e~perimentsl without heat release, snapshots and high 
Speed cine pictures of the near wake region behind the 
bluff body Clearly show that large scale vortices are shed 
from bot h ~the central jet and the bluff body. Much 
Smaller vortices are formed inside and Outside of the 
~arger vortices which gives the flow a 3-D character. 
Under appropriate flow conditions, these vortices can 
interact in Spectacular ways which are clearly evident in 
the high speed movies but are less discernible when 
shown by tile individual frames. Sheet-lighting is used to 
qualitatively:, examine the roles of these vortices under 
different Operating conditions. Vortex shedding from the 
outer edge Of the shear layer of the bluff body did not 
occur for :the combustion flow conditions. However, 
vortex shedding from the central jet was observed and its 
role in the mixing process is discussed. These observations 
were made possible by adding TiCI4 vapor to the propane 
and using the sheet-lighting to illuminate the soot and 
TiO2 particles formed in the combustion process. 
2 Experimental set-up 
A schematic diagram of the experimental set-up is shown 
in Fig. 1. The bluff body combustor was symmetrically 
mounted in a small vertical combustion tunnel. The fuel 
nozzle located at the center of the 60 mm diameter bluff 
body is 4.78 mm in diameter. This nozzle has a short- 
tapered contour as recommended by ASME for providing 
a flow with a flat velocity profile and low turbulence 
intensity at the exit. The combustion tunnel was also 
designed to provide low turbulence intensity and uniform 
velocity air to the test section. The tunnel, with an 80 mm 
diameter, can be operated either ducted or unducted. For 
the experiments reported in this paper, it was unducted 
and thus subject to room air currents. During the experi- 
ments, the only ventilation system operating was the 
exhaust hood which was placed about 50 cm directly 
above the tunnel. Though precautions were taken to still 
the room air, disturbances in the combustor flow field, 
attributed to room air currents, were occasionally ob- 
served, especially when the combustor was operated at 
annulus velocities of 2 m/s or less. 
• The 60 mm diameter bluff body has also been operated 
in the 254 mm diameter, ducted combustion tunnel at 
APL. Although the results from these experiments will not 
be presented in this paper, several observations are note- 
worthy. In the large ducted tunnel, the flame was attached 
to the bluff body face at annulus velocities in excess of 
20 m/s; whereas in the small unducted tunnel, the flame 
lifted from the face when the velocity exceeded about 
4 m/s. If the small tunnel was operated long enough for a 
layer of soot about 2 mm thick to form on the bluff body 
face, the flame would remain attached for velocities up to 
8 m/s. For the high annulus velocity combusting experi- 
ments reported in this paper, the soot layer was used to 
stabilize the flame. About a +2.5% variation in the 
annulus velocity at different spatial locations was noted in 
the small tunnel. This variation did cause some asymmetry 
in the flow field which could have contributed to the 
flame detachment problem. Vortex shedding from the bluff 
body was observed in the large tunnel with an annulus 
velocity of about 18 m/s but not in the small tunnel where 
the velocity was about 8 m/s; Future studies will examine 
the effects of velocity, blockage ratio, ducted vs. unducted 
test section and heat release on the vortex shedding 
process. 
The central jet flow rate was measured with calibrated 
rotameters. A pressure regulator was used to set and main- 
TiCI 4 
1 
DRYER~ 
PRESSURE 
GAGE 
ROTAMETER 
b 
I"- 8Omm-~ 
6Omm I ~- 
M[RROR 
HONEYCOMB 
AIR 
~ 
PROPANE~ 
CENT~'AL ~ 
Ix3- 
( dET ) 
"-[CYNTRAL 
( JET ) 
PRESSURE 
REGULATOR 
PRESSURE 
GAGE 
FUEL ~j) 
Fig. 1. Illustration of the experimental set-up 
CYLINDRICAL 
LENS 


--- Page 3 ---

W. M. Roquemore et al.: A study of a bluff-body cornbustor using laser sheet lighting 
207 
tain a given flow :rate of air to the annular region of the 
nozzle. A pitot tube and precision manometer were used 
to determine the velocity at the annulus exit. This deter- 
mination was made prior to each test run. 
Experiments were conducted with Shop air flowing in 
the annular region and either dry air or propane, con- 
taining small amounts of TIC14 vapor, flowing through the 
central jet. Some experiments were conducted to show the 
differences in the flow field with and without heat release. 
In these experiments, TIC14 vapor was added to the 
propane but not ignited. In some combusting experiments, 
TIC14 vapor was added to the propane to increase the 
particle concentration so that cine pictures could be made. 
The optical set-up consists of a 4-watt Argon Ion laser, 
which is operated at the 5,145 A Argon ion line. The laser 
beam strikes an 8 mm diameter quartz rod which acts as a 
cylindrical lens. The light beam fans out in a plane per- 
pendicular to the axis of the quartz rod. The angle I of 
divergence depends on the rod diameter (greater for 
smaller diameters). The thickness of the light-sheet is 
approximately equal to the diameter of the laser beam 
exiting from the laser (1.25 ram). To increase the intensity 
of the sheet-lighting of the test section, a plane front- 
surfaced mirror was placed behind the test section. The 
position of this mirror was adjusted so that the light-sheet 
is reflected back on itself. In this manner, the light 
intensity at the test section is increased nearly twofold. 
Tests were also conducted with horizontal and vertical 
sheets of light simultaneously appearing in the test sec- 
tion. To accomplish this, a beam splitter, another cylin- 
drical rod, and a mirror were added to the optical set-up. 
A variable speed @opp~r was installed at the laser output 
to allow strobing of the l~ght sheet.!iThis made it possible 
to observe, with the eye,: the dominant frequencies of the 
vortices and their length scales. 
Because of the continuum radiation from hot carbon 
particles in the propane flame, the laser light scattered by 
the cooler carbon and TiO2 particles within certain sec- 
tions of the flame zone was difficult to observe. This 
difficulty was overcome by using a narrow, band-pass 
optical filter. The filter used was centered at 5,145 A and 
had a half-width of 90 A. The light intensity at 5,145 A 
was reduced 40%. With this filter in place, the yellow 
continuum radiation from the carbon in the reaction zone 
was nearly eliminated; thus, allowing one to observe the 
sheet-lit plane within the propane flame. 
Still pictures (35 mm) and high speed motion pictures 
were taken of the sheet-lit reacting flow. At the beginning 
of each reel (or roll) of film, a target (10 mm grid) was 
mounted over the center of the nozzle, where the laser 
sheet was located. The target was used to focus the camera 
as well as provide a grid for making measurements from 
the photographs. The sheet-light intensity was sufficient 
to allow still pictures, in most instances, to be taken at 
f4.0, 1/2,000 second. Motion pictures were taken, in most 
instances, at f2.8 and 1,000 frames per second. The 
shutter speed of the motion pictures is approximately 
1/2,600 of a second. To' take pictures when the sheet-light 
is horizontal, a mirror Was installed at about 60 cm above 
the nozzle. Thus, it was possible to make photographs 
directly above the nozzle with the optical axis of the 
camera peipendicular to the horizonta! sheet-light. When 
the optical filter was in place, it was necessary to increase 
the exposure time one stop. 
Tests were conducted over a wide range of operating 
conditions. For example, in the cold flow experiments, the 
Reynolds number of the annular flow v~aried from 1,250 to 
22,500, the central jet from 1,250 to 22,500. For the 
propane experiments, the Reynolds number of the annular 
flow, calculated from 'the inlet conditions, varied from 
2,500 to 10,000; the central jet from 500 to 11,000. 
3 Results and discussions 
This section is organized into two subsections: Reacting 
Cold Flow and Combusting Flow. The results obtained 
from observing the mixing between TIC14 vapor plus dry 
air ejected from the central jet and moist air ejected from 
the annulus are presented in the reacting cold flow 
subsection. Also, the locations of the forward and aft 
stagnation points for a wide range of annulus velocities 
are presented. DescriPtions of the flow field that result for 
different fuel velocities and a trace of the time history of 
shed vortices are also. presented. The combusting flow 
fields are described in the combusting flow subsection. 
TIC14 vapor was addedlto the central propane jet to aid in 
visualizing the flow field through the -~ flame. Also, some 
photographs of the non-combusting propane and TIC14 
mixture are presented. 
3.1 Reaction coId flow 
3.1.1 Location of forward and aft stagnation points 
The bluff body combustor can be thought of as two 
widely spaced jets, an annular jet and a central fuel jet. A 
recirculation zone is established as a result of the expan- 
sion and entrainment of the annular jet. The reverse 
flowing air in the recirculation zone is in direct opposition 
to the flow of the central jet. For flow conditions at which 
the momentum of the reverse flowing air is larger than the 
momentum of the central jet, the central jet flow will be 
turned back towards the bluff body. The axial velocity of 
the central jet is zero at the point where this occurs. The 
centerline location, where the central jet is turned, is 
called the forward stagnation point. The maximum length 
of the recirculation zone along the centerline is called the 
aft stagnation point. When the momentum of the central 
jet is larger than that of the reverse flowing air, the central 
jet will penetrate the recirculation zone, and hence no 
stagnation points exist along the centerline (Fig. 3). 


--- Page 4 ---

208 
Experiments in Fluids 4 (1986) 
g 
b-c~ 
r'~o 
e,t- p,~ 
,o 
FINN VEL 
~ +
~
~
 
4' 6 m,/~ 
-÷ /m II 
"P B =/= 
~ 7,J~,'~ 
xIO ,,/= 
+ x~/~_; z 
zl2 ,,/, 
~/~ 
YI/ =ira 
+X~ 
- 
mlS =/= 
,~ /~ 
XIB ee/i 
+~i~ x- 
~ 7"z 
,X "x 
¢ ~x 
T = 1 - 1.2 
~( (l-Xl~l.8 
0 
0.20 
0.10 
0.60 
O'.eO 
i'.O0 
/,'.20 
VELOCITY OF CENTRRL JET / RNNULUS VELOCITY 
Fig. 2. Location of the forward stagnation point for different 
velocity ratios 
ANNULAR 
JET 
DOMINATE 
FORW~ ~/ 
AFTNEITHERSTAGNATfONjET 
POINT 
liiiYliiiiJiii!iiiiiiiiiiiiii!iiiii!iiiiiiiii!i!i 
 
DENTRAL ,ET 
DOMINATE 
::7:::::iii!i~i~i ~ ~ 
V j N A > 1.5 
!iiii!i ~il (Z~ 
Fig. 3. Illustrations of the time-averaged flow fields for different 
air and fuel flow rates 
The forward and aft stagnation points were measured 
over a wide range of annular and central jet velocities. 
These measurements were made by simply mounting an 
L-shaped tube on a vertical traversing mechanism and 
using it as a positioning probe that could be readily 
moved in and out of the test section. Some judgement is 
required on the mean location of the stagnation points 
because of fluctuations, but by visually averaging, the 
results appear to repeat fairly well. 
The procedure is as follows: The annular air flow is set 
at a prescribed flow (determined by pitot measurements) 
and the central fuel jet (TIC14 vapor and air) is varied 
incrementally until the jet penetrates. At each incremental 
change, the position of the forward stagnation point is 
measured. Two sets of data were collected on different 
days. Except for the lowest annular flow rates (1 to 3 m/s) 
the variation between the data points was generally less 
than 10%. A total of approximately 500 measurements 
were made. The data for each annulus velocity were 
averaged and a smooth curve was drawn through the 
points. 
The forward stagnation points normalized to the aft 
stagnation point for different central to annulus jet veloc- 
ity ratios are shown in Fig. 2. The data points were 
obtained from smooth curve fits of the averaged data as 
previously explained. The aft stagnation point was found 
to have a constant value of 49 mm for annulus velocities 
greater than 4 m/s. Using the measured aft stagnation 
point as the normalizing parameter, all the data collapse 
to a single curve. The equation for the curve is given on 
the graph. The observation that penetration occurs at a 
velocity ratio of one should not be generalized since a 
different size bluff body or central jet would very likely 
give a different result. These data suggest that the time 
average flow fields are similar for conditions where the 
ratio of annular velocity (VA) to central jet velocity (Vj) is 
a constant. 
3.1.2 Flow field description 
Of necessity, turbulent recirculating flows are usually 
described in terms of time averaged flow fields. Visual 
observations of the sheet-lit reacting cold flow field in the 
wake of the bluff body, tend to provide a time averaged 
view. Viewed by eye, flow conditions with the same 
velocity ratio (Vj/VA) appear similar. In general, one 
observes a large recirculation zone (a toroidal vortex) 
which is bound to the bluff body and is driven by the 
annular jet. The central jet flow extends into the center of 
the recirculation zone. A second recirculation zone, which 
is driven by the central jet as. it entraines fluid, appears 
narrow and is stretched along the stem of the central jet. 
In an attempt to characterize the visually observed flow 
fields, three general flow conditions were identified. They 
are consistent with those described by Roquemore et al. 
(1983) and are illustrated in Fig. 3. The first condition is 
characterized by the domination of the annular jet. The 
second is where neither jet dominates and the third is 
where the central jet dominates. Each of these will be 
discussed in the following paragraphs. 
The annular jet appears to dominate the flow field for 
small velocity ratios (Vj/VA) up to a value of about 0.4. 
For these conditions, the momentum of the reverse flow is 
sufficiently large to turn the central jet flow before it 
reaches the height of the time averaged center of the large 
recirculation zone. The vortex center is approximately 
25 mm above the bluff body. In this case, the central jet is 


--- Page 5 ---

W. M. Roquemore et al.: A study of a bluff-body combustor using laser sheet lighting 
209 
Fig. 4.a-f. Photographs for a fixed annulus velocitY of 4 m/s 
and central jet (TIC14 vapor and dry air) velocities of: a 1, b 3, 
e 6, d 8, e 12, and f15 m/s 
very unstable and moves from side to side in an erratic 
way. Figure 4a shows a snapshot of the flow field with the 
annular jet dominant. Although the snapshot does not 
represent the time averaged view shown in Fig. 3, it does 
clearly show the asymmetry of the flow field produced by 
the central jet being pushed to the left at the instance the 
picture was taken. 
Neither jet appears to dominate the flow field for 
velocity ratios between 0.4 and about 1.5. When the 
momentum of the central jet is sufficient to move the 
forward stagnation point above the axial height of the 
large vortex center, the stem of the jet does not move. 
However, the tip of the jet does fluctuate a few milli- 
meters in all directions. As the velocity ratio approaches 
one, the central jet penetrates about 50% of the time and 
at a ratio of about 1.5, it penetrates 100% of the time. 
Snapshots of the flow field, where neither jet dominates, 
are shown in Figs. 4b and 4c. 
The central jet appears to dominate the flow field for 
velocity ratios greater than 1.5. Snapshots of this case are 
shown in Figs. 4d-f. The central jet appears to entrain a 
large quantity of annulus air. The annulus air is pulled in 
around the shear layer of the annular jet and back along 
the shear layer of the central jet. This air path is clearly 
shown by the dark regions in Fig. 4f. A large central jet 
entrainment rate will also reduce the size of the recircula- 
tion zone. 
Although the velocity ratio is a good parameter to 
characterize the time averaged flow field, it is not suffi- 
cient. Flow fields at low and high velocities, but with a 
constant velocity ratio, appear very different when the 
laser sheet is chopped. Large spiral vortices are apparent 
in the shear layer of the annular jet and other vortices are 
observed in the central jet. Some of these vortices are 
captured in the photographs in Fig. 4. These vortices can 
interact in numerous ways depending on the Reynolds 
numbers of the two jets. For annulus velocities below 
1 m/s the recirculation zone appears to be laminar. At 
velocities between 1 and 8 m/s, quasi periodic spiral 
vortices are formed in the shear layer of the annular jet. 
The size of the spiral vortices is reduced as the velocity is 
increased. At 8 m/s a notable change in the noise level 
occurs and high frequency random vortex shedding "is 
apparent. We believe the flow transitions to fully devel- 
oped turbulence at this point. A similar transition from 
laminar to turbulent flow was noted in the central jet. It 
appeared laminar for velocities below 1 m/s and transi- 
tioned to turbulent flow at about 4 m/s. 
The photographs in Fig. 5 are from a high speed movie 
of the flow field with an annulus velocity of 4 m/s and a 
central jet velocity of 4 m/s. Numerous details show up in 
the high speed movie that are not clear in the photo- 
graphs. However, several points are evident from Fig. 5. 
At the beginning of the time sequence, the spiral vortices 
are not shed symmetrically, but towards the end of the 
sequence symmetrically shed vortices are noted. In the 
beginning of the sequence , the two small vortices on the 
right go through two pairing processes to form a rather 
large vortex that is mixed into the downstream wake of 
the bluff body. In this case, the vortex transported fluid 
out of the recirculation zone; it also contributed to the fuel 
and air mixing process. More study will be required to 
determine whether a significant amount of product, the 
observed particles, is formed in the large vortices as noted 
in the reacting shear layer experiments of Breidenthal 
(1981), or whether most of the product is formed before 
being rolled up in the vortices. 
Figure 6 shows the dynamic events occurring in a 
horizontal plane 37 mm above the face. In the movies, a 
radial oscillation is seen where the flow expands and 
contracts in roughly a ring shape. One cycle of the 
expansion and contraction corresponds to a large spiral 
vortex, as noted in the vertical plane, passing through the 
observation plane. In reality, the vortex has a toroidal 
shape but, within the toroid, the flow is definitely three- 
dimensional and clustering of small horizontally oriented 
vortices can be observed. Much of the complex structure 
of the toroid is due to the different ways the spiral 
vortices interact as noted in the discussions of Fig. 5. The 


--- Page 6 ---

210 
Experiments in Fluids 4 (1986) 
Fig. 6a-c. High speed cine pictures (1,000 frames/s) of a sheet- 
lit horizontal plane located 37 mm above the bluff body for an 
annulus velocity of 4 m/s and a central jet (TIC14 vapor and dry 
air) velocity of 4 m/s 
Fig. 5a-c. High speed cine pictures (1,000 frames/s, every other 
frame shown) for an annulus velocity of 4 m/s and a central jet 
(TIC14 vapor and dry air) velocity of 4 m/s 
 ETMASS 
 ETMAS  
CAPT0.E 
WAVE  / C°''AP E 
+ 
1 
GROWTH-ROLLUP COALESCENCE 
ESCAPE 
Fig. 7. Illustration of the time history of vortices shed from the 
bluff body 
dark areas shown in the photographs in Fig. 6 represent 
air that has been entrained by the spiral vortices. Con- 
siderable interaction between the vortices in the ring and 
the central jet is also occurring at this horizontal location. 
3.1.3 Time history of vortices shed form the bluff body 
The development of a toroidal (spiral) vortex in the shear 
layer of the annular jet depends on how it interacts with 
the central jet and other vortices as it is convected down- 
stream. Typical events (deduced from the study of high 
speed movies) are shown schematically in Fig. 7. The 
vortices begin as waves on the shear layer of the annular 
jet. Occasionally, these waves are observed to collapse 
before significant growth occurs. This failure to grow and 
mature is apparently caused by a reduction in the velocity 
differential across the shear layer to the point where 
exponential growth does not occur, The movies indicate 
that this happens when, by chance, recirculating mass is 
projected along the inside surface of the shear layer with 
approximately the same velocity and in the same direction 
(no appreciable radial velocity component) as the annulus 
air. Normally, however, the interfacial waves grow and 
roll up into a characteristic spiral figure. Rapid growth 
occurs just upstream of the axial location of the time- 
averaged vortex center of the recirculation zone. This 
rapid growth is attributed to a high probability that fluid 
elements, which collide with the shear layer, will have a 
large positive radial velocity component due to the turn- 
ing of the flow around the vortex center. This collision 
often causes the surface waves on the shear layer to 


--- Page 7 ---

W. M. Roquemore et al.: A study of a bluff-body combustor using laser sheet lighting 
undergo a large outward radial displacement that assists in 
the exponential growth of the wave into a toroidal vortex. 
The toroidal vortex is frequently distorted or broken up 
by interaction with mass shed from the central jet. Jet 
mass (with a large radial velocity component) streaming 
into a spiral arm may cause the arm to swell and cease 
rolling up. Mass shed from the central jet, especially near 
the jet stagnation point in nonpenetrating cases, often has 
a strong radial velocity component. In such cases the jet 
mass collides with vortices moving axially on the recircu- 
lation zone boundary, usually destroying the spiral struc- 
ture. 
Vortices also interact with each other as noted in Fig. 5. 
If the time interval between the formation of two vortices 
is short enough, the second one will r01t up through the 
base of the first as they move along the recirculation zone 
boundary. The first vortex may be cut in two as the 
second one rolls through it. Part of the cut vortex is 
pushed back into the recirculation zone and part rolls up 
with the second to become a coalesced pair which 
continues rolling about the common center as it is con- 
vected downstream. As previously noted, more than one 
paring may occur during the life of the vortices. 
As vortices approach the tip of the recirculation zone, 
they usually break up and part of their mass escapes and 
is convected downstream while the other part is captured 
by the reverse current near the tip and drawn back into 
the recirculation zone. This mechanism is postulated to be 
a primary means of mass exchange between the recircu- 
lation zone and its surroundings when vortex shedding is 
present. As spiral arms of recirculation zone fluid stretch 
and roll up, they normally engulf a large excess of fluid 
from the annular air stream. When a vortex is captured, 
either in whole or in part, near the tip of the recirculation 
zone, this engulfed air is often transported, virtually 
unmixed, deep into the recirculation zone. Thus, a prima- 
ry entrainment mechanism is governed by the dynamics of 
large scale vortices shed from the bluff body. A similar 
observation has often been noted in studies of 2-D shear 
layers (see Dimotakis et al. 1983; and Breidenthal 1981). 
211 
zone. In high speed movies, such entrainment pathways 
are observed to exist for extended periods of time com- 
pared to the period of rotation of the vortex. In a movie 
showing this flame from above, a pair of these pathways 
is frequently seen, spaced from 120 to 180 degrees apart. 
These results indicate that an axisymmetric model is in- 
adequate for this flame. The central jet also has a large 
mushroom shaped vortex near its tip where the jet is 
turned by the reverse flowing air of the recirculation zone. 
The growing vortex on the jet is eventually shed, stretched, 
and rolled up in the recirculating flow. 
The third photograph in Fig. 8 shows a sheet-lit view 
of non-combusting flow with propane and TiCI4 in the 
central jet and the same inlet conditions as the combusting 
case. In contrast to the exothermic flow, the cold flow is in 
a transition state with active vortex shedding from the 
bluff body. Comparison of the cold flow structure with 
that of the hot flow confirms that the latter flow is 
strongly affected by combustion laminarization due to the 
large increase in kinematic viscosity at higher temper- 
atures (approximately a factor of 8). A similar difference 
between cold and combusting jets has been noted by Yule 
et al. (1980). 
Figure 9 shows a propane flame with a central jet 
velocity of 4 m/s and an annulus air velocity of 1 rn/s. 
With this increase in velocities, the flame surface at the 
mixing layer between the recirculation zone and the 
annulus air exhibits a train of large amplitude interfacial 
waves. These waves are prematurely terminated at the tip 
of the recirculating wake before they mature into spiral 
vortices. The center photograph in Fig. 9 is a laser sheet- 
lit view which reveals the interior structure of this flame. 
The irregular arrangement of structures in the wake 
and upper portion of the central jet indicate that both the 
wake and jet are in a transition state. The third photo- 
graph shows the non-combusting case with the propane 
and TiCI4 in the central jet. Comparison between corn- 
3.2 Combustion flow 
3.2.1 Flow field description 
The first photograph in Fig. 8 shows a flame stabilized on 
the bluff body face where the annulus velocity is 2 m/s 
and the central propane jet velocity is 0.5 m/s. The second 
photograph shows a laser sheet-lit view of the same flame 
taken with an optical filter to eliminate light from sources 
other than the laser. The Mie scattered light from the soot 
and TiO2 particles clearly show the laminar structure of 
the flame. Surrounding the central jet is a bound toroidal 
vortex. The vortex center is located approximately 20% of 
the bluff body diameter above the base. The dark region 
on the right-hand side between jet surface and vortex ring 
shows an air entrainment pathway into the recirculation 
Fig. 8a-e. Photographs for an annulus velocity of 2 m/s and a 
central jet (propane + TiC14 vapor) velocity of 0.5 m/s. Left to 
right: the flame, sheet-lit flame, non-combusting flow 


--- Page 8 ---

212 
Experiments in Fluids 4 (1986) 
Fig. 9a-e. Photographs for an annulus velocity of 4 m/s and a 
central jet (propane mixed with TiC14 vapor) velocity of 1 m/s. 
Left to right: the flame, sheet-lit flame, sheet-lit non-combusting 
flow 
busting and noncombusting cases again demonstrates the 
strong laminarization effect induced by combustion. 
Figure 10 shows the 2-D evolution, in steps of three 
milliseconds, of a combusting flow with an annulus air 
velocity of 8 m/s and a central jet velocity of 10 m/s. The 
flow field is notably different than that shown in Fig. 8 
where the annulus velocity is lower. The recirculation 
zone is believed to be in transition between laminar and 
turbulent flow. The central jet dominates the flow field 
and the entrainment of fluid near the base of the central 
jet appears to be responsible for the large quantity of 
reverse flowing air brought in around the aft end of the 
recirculation zone. The strong reverse flow of entrained air 
induces vortex shedding from the central jet and also 
causes vortices to form on the inner surface of the shear 
layer of the recirculation zone. These vortices can be seen 
to interact and pair in several places in the movie 
sequence. These interactions appear to be an important 
mixing mechanism in the recirculation zone. Spiral vorti- 
ces are not formed in the outer shear layer of the recircu- 
lation zone as was observed in the cold experiments. Fujii 
and Eguchi (1981) also observed vortex shedding from a 
bluff body in cold flow but not in combusting flows. 
The reverse flow of recirculating fluid and entrained 
air appears to induce shedding of large vortices from the 
central jet into the recirculating wake. Two major in- 
stances of this type of shedding can be seen in the right- 
hand side of the recirculation zone in the movie sequence 
of Fig. 10. In the second frame of the middle column, a 
large vortex extends towards the center of the recircula- 
tion zone from the right side of the central jet. This vortex 
interacts with a second vortex at the aft tip of the recircu- 
lation zone (last frame in the second column) to form a 
mushroom shaped vortex. This vortex appears to have a 
large radial velocity component. However, as it approaches 
the outer shear layer of the recirculating zone, the vortex 
Fig. 10a-c. High speed cine picture of combustion (1,000 
frame/s every third frame shown) for an annulus velocity of 8 m/s 
and a central jet (propane and TiC14 vapor) velocity of 10 m/s 
is flattened and stretched axially. It does not extend into 
the shear layer. This process contrasts sharply with the 
cold flow case where mass, which is shed radially from the 
central jet, often moves out into the recirculation zone 
boundary where it deforms the vortices rolling up on that 
surface or creates new vortices. 
4 Summary and conclusions 
Laser sheet-lighting the product of a chemical reaction 
combined with photography, especially high-speed mov- 
ies, is shown to be a very valuable tool in the study of a 
bluff body combustor. In contrast to seeding the upstream 


--- Page 9 ---

W. M. Roquemore et al.: A study of a bluff-body combustor using laser sheet lighting 
213 
flow with particles for visualization, sheet-lighting the 
product of a fast chemical reaction in the flow field 
provides a view of the mixing processes and how the 
product and air species are transported. The TIC14 water 
vapor reaction proved to be an excellent choice for use in 
this new program. 
In this study, three primary modes of operation of the 
combustor with their characteristic flow structures are 
identified. These modes are a highly dominant annular jet 
mode, a highly dominant central jet mode, and an inter- 
mediate mode where the central jet penetrates the recircu- 
lation zone of the bluff body intermittently. Measurements 
of the central jet stagnation point normalized by the aft 
stagnation point of the recirculation zone are found to 
correlate with the ratio of central jet to annular jet velocity 
for the cold flow cases. Thus, the jet velocity ratio is found 
to be one of the parameters which can be used to charac- 
terize the time averaged flow field of an operating mode. 
The dynamics of large vortex structures appears to play a 
governing role in mass transport and mixing in all of the 
flows studied. Vortex shedding from the bluff body 
appears to be a primary mechanism of mass exchange 
between the recirculation zone, annular jet, and down- 
stream region for the cold flow cases. The high speed 
movies reveal that the flow fields are not axisymmetric 
and steady, but rather, highly three-dimensional and 
unsteady in terms of the dynamic evolution of large scale 
vortical structures. In combusting flows, a strong laminari- 
zation effect due to heat release with consequent increase 
in kinematic viscosity was observed. This effect appears to 
prevent vortex shedding from the bluff body for the flow 
range of this study. 
The success of this sheet-lighting visualization techni- 
que combined with high speed cine photography in this 
study opens up a wide range of possibilities for future 
studies. A few of these possibilities include: the study of 
the effect of blockage ratio on combustor operating modes 
and flow field dynamics, the study of ducted versus 
unducted flows, and a study correlating the visualization 
of vortex dynamics recorded in high speed movies with 
the results of simultaneous measurements made with 
advanced diagnostic techniques such as laser Doppler 
anemometer and coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectros- 
copy. The prospects of acoustically driving the flow and 
using a sheet-lit laser strobe for conditional sampling 
seems another attractive possibility as well as a means of 
studying instabilities in cold and combusting flows. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors wish to thank Mr. R. L. Britton and Mr. M. Russell 
for their assistance in setting up the experimental apparatus. We 
also express appreciation to Lt Abdollah S. Nejad and Mr. E. Y. 
Hahn of the Ramjet Division of APL for the use of their design 
of the TiC14 container and for useful discussions about the TiC14 
and H20 reaction. We would also like to thank Mr. C. M. Reeves 
and Ms. C. A. Obringer for assisting with the figures and Ms. 
Roma Bush for typing the manuscript. We would also like to 
acknowledge that the combustion tunnel was designed by Mr. Ed 
Dudis of UES and Dr. R. D. Ballal of UDRI and the combustor 
was designed by Mr. R. P. Bradley of APL. Special appreciation 
is given to Dr. A. J. Lightman of UDRI for valuable initial 
discussions about using TiO2 particles formed from the reaction 
of TiC14 and H20 as a means of flow visualization. This research 
was supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research/Air 
Force Systems Command, United States Air Force, under Con- 
tract F49620-82-C-0035 and under APL Work Unit 2308S705. 
References 
Breidenthal, R. 1981: Structure in turbulem mixing layers and 
wakes using a chemical reaction. J. Fluid Mech. 109, 1-24 
Craig, R. R.; Nejad, A. S.; Hahn, E. Y.; Schwartzkopf, K. G. 1984: 
A general approach for obtaining unbiased LDV data in 
highly turbulent nonreacting and reacting flows. AIAA-84- 
0366 
Dimotakis, P. E.; Broadwell, J. E.: Howard, R. D. 1983: Chemical- 
ly reacting turbulent jets. AIAA-83-0474 
Dyer, Mark J.; Crosley, David R. 1982: Two-dimensional imaging 
of OH laser-induced fluorescence in a flame. Optics Letters 7, 
382-384 
Ebrahimil I.; Kline, R. 1977: The nozzle flow concentration fluc- 
tuation field in round turbulent free jets and jet diffusion 
flames. 16th (Int.) Symposium on Combustion, The Combus- 
tion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 1711-1723 
Escoda, M. C.; .Long, M. 1983: Rayleigh scattering measurements 
of the gas concentration field in turbulent jets. AIAA J. 21, 
81-84 
Fujii, S.; Eguchi, I~ 1981: A comparison of cold and reacting 
flows around a bluff body flame stabilizer. J. Fluids Eng. 103, 
328- 334 
Johnson, B. V.; Bennett, J. C. 1981: Mass and momentum turbulent 
transport experiments 
with confined coaxial jets. NASA 
CR-165574 
Koochesfahani, M.; Dimotakis, P. E.; Broadwell, J. E. 1983: 
Chemically reacting turbulent shear layers. AIAA-83-0475 
Kychakoff, G.; Howe, Robert D.; Hanson, Ronald K.; McDaniel, 
James C. 1982: Quantitative visualization of combustion 
species in a plane. Appl. Opt. 21, 3225-3227 
Long, M. B.; Chu, B. T.; Chang, R. K. 1981: Instantaneous two- 
dimensional gas concentration measurements by light scatter- 
ing. AIAA J. 19, 1151-1157 
Moss, J. B. 1980: Simultaneous measurements of concentration 
and velocity in an open premixed turbulent flame. Comb. Sci. 
and Tech. 22, 119-129 
Roquemore, W. M.; Bradley, R. P.; Stutrud, J. S.; Reeves, C. M.; 
Obringer, C. A.; Britton, R. L. 1983: Utilization of laser 
diagnostics to evaluate combustion models. AGARD No. 353, 
19, 1151 
Roquemore, W. M.; Bradley, R. P.; Stutrud, J. S.; Reeves, C. M.; 
Krishnamurthy, L. 1980: Preliminary evaluation of cornbustor 
for use in modeling and diagnostics development. ASME 
80-FT-93 
Starner, S. H.; Bilger, R. W. 1980: Measurements of scalar- 
velocity correlations on a turbulent diffusion flame. 18th 
Symposium (Int.) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, 
Pittsburgh, PA, 921 - 930 
Yule, A. J.; Chigier, N. A.; Ralph, S.; Boulderstone, R.; Ventura, 
J. 1980: Combustion-transition interaction in a jet flame. 
AIAA J. 19, 752-760 
Received June 24, 1985 
