
--- Page 1 ---

Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
Turbulent premixed combustion: Flamelet structure and its effect on
turbulent burning velocities
James F. Driscoll
Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2140, USA
Received 16 June 2006; accepted 19 April 2007
Available online 20 July 2007
Abstract
This review paper addresses the following question: what is the structure of ﬂamelets within premixed turbulent combustion and how
does this structure affect the turbulent burning velocity? We also ask: how accurately can new models predict the ﬂamelet structure as
well as the values of turbulent burning velocity? Flamelet structure is deﬁned to include the following quantities: reaction layer surface
area per unit volume (S), the brush thickness (dT) and the stretch factor (I0). One equation that is commonly used to relate these ﬂamelet
structure parameters to the burning velocity ST is
ST
SL0
¼ I0
Z 1
1
S dZ ¼ I0SmaxdT.
Recent results obtained using laser imaging methods and direct numerical simulation (DNS) are reviewed in order to demonstrate the
relationships between ST, S, I0 and dT. Z is the direction normal to the brush. Measurements of S show that the wrinkling process is not
local but has a ‘‘memory’’ of wrinkling that occurs elsewhere. The stretch factor I0 depends on differential diffusion (Markstein number)
even at large turbulence intensities. Thus the concepts associated with the theory of ﬂame stretch have been found to be valid even for
highly turbulent ﬂames. Thin ﬂamelets exist for nearly all cases for which images of the reaction zone have been obtained. Evidence of
‘‘non-ﬂamelet’’ behavior is sparse. DNS now can successfully predict realistic values of turbulent burning velocity for laboratory-scale
Reynolds numbers and for the realistic geometries of Bunsen and V-ﬂames using complex chemistry and no empirical constants. Large
eddy simulations (LES) also have predicted reasonable values of ST, but some empirical constants are required. A number of current
research issues are discussed.
r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Turbulent; Premixed; Combustion; Burning velocity; Flamelet
Contents
1.
Introduction: Why do we need to know the structure of premixed turbulent combustion? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
1.1.
General concepts: ﬂamelet wrinkling by ﬂame–vortex interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
1.2.
Turbulent burning velocities—deﬁnitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
2.
Images of thin ﬂamelets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
2.1.
Flamelets exist for Karlovitz numbers exceeding ten. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
2.2.
Images of ﬂame–eddy interactions in turbulent ﬂames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
3.
Flamelet structure (S, dT). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
3.1.
Surface density (S)—measurements and DNS computations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
3.2.
Brush thickness (dT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
3.3.
Surface area of ﬂamelets—proportional to turbulent burning velocity?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
ARTICLE IN PRESS
www.elsevier.com/locate/pecs
0360-1285/$ - see front matter r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pecs.2007.04.002
Tel.: +1 734 936 0101; fax: +1 734 763 0578.
E-mail address: jamesfd@umich.edu


--- Page 2 ---

4.
How well can we predict the turbulent burning velocity?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
4.1.
Burning velocities predicted by DNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
4.2.
Burning velocities predicted by LES and the CFM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
4.3.
Thermodiffusive (Markstein number) effects and the stretch factor I0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
4.4.
What turbulent burning velocity measurements to use for model assessment? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
5.
Some research issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
6.
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
1. Introduction: Why do we need to know the structure of
premixed turbulent combustion?
We begin our discussion with the question: why do we
need to know the structure of the ﬂamelets that exist within
turbulent premixed ﬂames? The word ‘‘structure’’ here
refers to quantities such as S, dT and I0, which are deﬁned
to be the ﬂamelet surface area per unit volume, the brush
thickness, and a stretch factor that is deﬁned below. The
answer to our question is that we need to know the
structure
because
the
turbulent
burning
velocity
ST
depends on the ﬂamelet wrinkling process which is
geometry-dependent. That is, in real ﬂames the wrinkling
is not some ‘‘universal’’ process that depends only on the
local turbulence level. Instead wrinkling depends on the
complex geometry of shear layers, walls, ﬂame–ﬂame
interactions and the location where the ﬂame is anchored.
Wrinkling has a ‘‘memory’’ of any wrinkling that might
have occurred upstream. Therefore, models must be able to
use differential equations to relate the wrinkling process to
the burner geometry. Measurements of S, dT and I0 are
needed to determine if direct numerical simulation (DNS)
or large eddy simulation (LES) can accurately predict these
quantities
using
no
adjustable
parameters
or
a few
parameters, respectively. For a model to be considered to
be robust is not sufﬁcient to show that the predicted
burning velocity matches an experiment by adjusting some
parameters. A robust simulation must predict the correct
intermediate parameters such as S and dT as well as ST.
One may ask: is it possible for any model to correctly
predict the complex wrinkling process that occurs a real
burner that is operated at a realistic Reynolds number?
Fortunately new advances in DNS and LES provide a
positive answer to that question.
Fig. 1 illustrates DNS results of Bell et al. [1,2] and
Sankaran et al. [3]. Also shown are LES computations of
Pitsch and Duchamp de Lagenest [4]. The DNS studies
used no adjustable parameters and were able to include
complex methane–air chemistry with 20 species and 84
reactions, realistic burner dimensions (from 1 to 5 cm) and
realistic
Reynolds
numbers
that
are
associated
with
laboratory-scale burners operated at mean velocities of
3–60 m/s. Values of u0/SL0 varied between 0.69 and 10; this
is sufﬁcient to cause the extreme degree of wrinkling that is
seen in Fig. 1. The DNS and LES results are discussed in
Section 4.
An important equation that relates the turbulent burning
velocity to the ﬂamelet structure is one that has been
discussed by Bray and Cant [5]:
ST
SL0
¼ I0
Z 1
1
S dZ.
(1)
The coordinate Z is normal to the brush, and the integral in
Eq. (1) is proportional to the product of the maximum
value of S (which occurs near the center of the brush) and
the brush thickness dT. This equation indicates that to
achieve a rapidly propagating turbulent ﬂame, it is
desirable to have a large value of the product of the
maximum surface density and the brush thickness.
Because of the importance of Eq. (1) its derivation is
brieﬂy reviewed. Damko¨ hler [6] predicted that for one
regime of conditions (which is now called the ﬂamelet
regime) the primary result of turbulence is to wrinkle the
thin reaction layers, which retain the local characteristics of
a laminar ﬂame. For this regime he predicted that the ratio
of turbulent to laminar burning velocity (ST/SL0) is equal
to the area ratio (AT/AL). Fig. 2 illustrates the areas AT and
AL of a wrinkled and an unwrinkled ﬂamelet, respectively.
In Fig. 2 each point along the wrinkled surface propagates
at the ﬂamelet consumption speed SF,C which has a time-
averaged value of ¯SF;C. The time-averaged volume per
second of reactants that is traversed by a ﬂamelet is ¯SF;C
AT. The reactants have the constant density rR. Therefore,
the mass per second of reactants traversed by the wrinkled
surface inside the control volume is rR ¯SF;C AT. Now
consider the dotted line in Fig. 2; it propagates at the
turbulent burning velocity ST. The volume of reactants
traversed per second by the dotted line is ST AL and the
mass/s of reactants traversed is rR ST AL. Equating these
two values yields
ST
SL0
¼ AT
AL
¯SF;C
SL0
¼ AT
AL
I0.
(2)
Bray and Cant deﬁned the stretch factor I0 and the ﬂamelet
consumption speed to be
I0 ¼ ¯SF;C=SL0;
SF;C ¼ r1
R
Z
oR dx.
(3)
The instantaneous volumetric reaction rate is oR and x is
the direction normal to each reaction layer. A slice of the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
92


--- Page 3 ---

volume of the control volume (dV) in Fig. 2 is (ALdZ). AT is
AT ¼
Z 1
1
S dV ¼
Z 1
1
SðAL dZÞ.
(4)
Therefore, Eq. (1) is derived by combining Eqs. (2) and (4).
A major obstacle to progress in the ﬁeld of premixed
turbulent
combustion
has
been
the
expectation
that
segments of real ﬂames should have the properties of an
ideal ‘‘geometry-independent’’ turbulent ﬂame. A hypothe-
tical ideal ﬂame is shown in Fig. 3a; it is one for which the
wrinkling process (and the resulting values of ST, S and dT)
depend only on the local values of u0 and integral scale just
ahead of the segment of the brush where ST is measured.
For the ideal ﬂame the following correlation is expected to
hold:
ST
SL0
¼ f
u0
SL0
; l
dL0
; MaT


.
(5)
MaT is the turbulent Markstein number that is deﬁned
below and SL0 is the unstretched laminar burning velocity.
Eq. (5) often has been used to attempt to correlate
measured values of burning velocity. It was assumed that
the normalized burning velocities of segments along the
brush of any type of ﬂame (spherical, Bunsen, or rod-
stabilized) are identical, as long as the values of u0/SL0,
l=dL0 and MaT in front of the segments are the same.
However, experiments indicate that wrinkling process is
‘‘geometry-dependent’’ and has a ‘‘memory’’ of whatever
wrinkling occurred at upstream locations. ST, I0, S and dT
normally vary in space (or time) and they depend on the
geometry of the burner that is used. Fig. 3b and c represent
real Bunsen and spherical ﬂames. Near the base region of
the Bunsen ﬂame it is found that there is less wrinkling
(and a lower value of ST) than near the tip region, as
described in Section 3.1. This difference is due to the
boundary condition that requires the ﬂame base to be
anchored to the burner rim. Note that the values of u0 and l
may be nearly identical at the base and at the tip, yet the
values of ST are different, so the ideal ‘‘geometry-
independent’’ correlation given by Eq. (5) cannot be valid.
The degree of wrinkling at any streamwise x-location
depends on the ‘‘memory’’ of wrinkling at upstream x-
locations. For this reason, tall Bunsen ﬂames that are
stabilized on large diameter burners have more distance for
wrinkling to occur, and become more wrinkled than short
ﬂames that are stabilized on small diameter burners. Thus
burner size W can be an additional parameter. The
spherically expanding ﬂame in Fig. 3c often is subjected
to a constant value of u0 and l in the reactants, yet as time
progresses the degree of wrinkling and the value of ST both
increase [11]. For the spherical ﬂame the wrinkling process
also has a memory. It follows that Eq. (5) is not sufﬁcient;
additional parameters should be added such as the non-
dimensional burner width (W=l) or time (t/(l=u0)) so that
for a realistic geometry-dependent wrinkling process:
ST
SL0
¼ f
u0
SL0
; l
dL0
; MaT; W
l ; or
t
ðl=u0Þ


.
(6)
One argument that is often heard is that experimentalists
should create ﬂames that are closer to the ideal case, such
that wrinkling is ‘‘geometry-independent’’ and depends
only on the local u0 and l so that Eq. (5) is valid. There is
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Nomenclature
AT
area of wrinkled ﬂame surface
AL
area of unwrinkled ﬂame surface ( ¼ area of
¯c ¼ 0:5 surface)
c
reactedness ¼ (TTR)/(TPTR)
D
molecular diffusivity
DT
turbulent diffusivity
d
eddy diameter
I0
stretch factor, Eqs. (1)–(3)
K
stretch rate, Eq. (11)
Ka
Karlovitz number, Eq. (21)
l
streamwise integral scale
MaL
Markstein number of a laminar ﬂame Eq. (35)
MaF
Markstein number of ﬂamelet in a turbulent
ﬂame, Eq. (36)
MaT
turbulent Markstein number, Eq. (37)
SF,C
local consumption speed of a of a ﬂamelet, Eq.
(3)
SL0
laminar unstretched burning velocity
ST,GC
turbulent burning velocity (global consumption
speed), Eq. (15)
ST,LC
turbulent burning velocity (local consumption
speed), Eq. (16)
ST,LD
turbulent burning velocity, (local displacement
speed, Eq. (17)
u0
r.m.s. streamwise velocity ﬂuctuation
U
mean streamwise velocity
a0
thermal diffusivity of reactants
dL0
unstretched laminar ﬂame thickness
dT
turbulent brush thickness
dPRE
preheat zone average thickness
dCH
CH layer average thickness
Z
coordinate normal to ¯c ¼ 0:5 contour
GK
stretch efﬁciency factor, Eq. (13)
lmin
minimum wrinkle wavelength
S
ﬂame surface density
Smax
surface density at center of brush
x
direction normal to the ﬂamelet, Eq. (37)
oR
volumetric mean reaction rate
Subscripts
R
reactants
P
products
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
93


--- Page 4 ---

no evidence to date that veriﬁes that such conditions can be
generated. Relatively ﬂat turbulent ﬂames can be created,
but only by employing the diverging ﬂow ﬁelds that are
found in counterﬂow [12], low-swirl [13], or diffuser type
[14] burners. It has been speculated that the ﬂame brush
eventually will reach an equilibrium state and will no
longer become thicker after a certain time (in the spherical
case) or after a certain distance (in the Bunsen case). There
is no evidence that such an equilibrium state has ever been
achieved, and if it could be achieved it would not be
representative of real engines. Instead it appears that the
best strategy is to accept that real ﬂames undergo
‘‘geometry-dependent’’ wrinkling and there is a need to
develop numerical simulations that can handle each
geometry separately. Cheng and Shepherd [13] have
suggested the following names for the categories of
premixed turbulent ﬂames:
(i) envelope ﬂames: axisymmetric or 2-D Bunsen burners
[15];
(ii) oblique ﬂames: V-ﬂames [16];
ARTICLE IN PRESS
2100
1200
300
T
1.2
0.5
-0.2
U
a
b
c
d
Fig. 1. DNS results of (a) Bell et al. [1], (b) Bell et al. [2] and (c) Sankaran et al. [3] for premixed turbulent Bunsen and V-ﬂames. DNS now can simulate
the realistic Reynolds numbers that are associated with laboratory-scale burners (2.5  5.0 cm [1]) and velocities of 80 m/s [3]) with complex methane
chemistry and a grid of 62–100 mm that resolves the Kolmogorov scale: (a) 1684 K isotherm, (b) isoline of temperature gradient ¼ 1000 K/mm, (c)
isocontour of reactedness ¼ 0.65 and (d) LES of Pitsch and Duchamp de Lagenest [4] for complex methane chemistry, U ¼ 30 m/s, u0/SL0 ¼ 11.9. Left
side ¼ temperature in K, right side ¼ axial velocity in m/s.
Flamelet
consumption 
speed
the  direction
Turbulent brush consumption
speed ST, LC
 SF, C
 in the  direction
AT  = area of wrinkled flamelets
AL = area of 
the c-bar = 
0.5 surface
Flamelet
consumption 
speed
in
the ξ direction
Turbulent brush consumption
speed
 in the  direction
A = area of 
the c-bar = 
0.5 surface
η
Fig. 2. Schematic of the wrinkled area (AT) and the area of the ¯c ¼ 0:5
contour (AL). Also labeled are the ﬂamelet consumption speed (SF,C) and
the turbulent brush local consumption speed (ST,LC).
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
94


--- Page 5 ---

(iii) ﬂat ﬂames: low-swirl, counterﬂow, or diffusion burners
[12–14];
(iv) spherical ﬂames: fan-stirred chambers [17].
It is recommended that a database of values of ST, I0, S
and dT be recorded for each category using measurements
and DNS. Formulas for burning velocity such as Eq. (6)
should be modiﬁed to include the parameters that are
speciﬁc to that particular category. Only ﬂames within a
particular category should be compared, since the wrink-
ling processes associated with each category can be
inherently different.
Since experiments indicate that ﬂamelet wrinkling is
‘‘geometry-dependent’’, it follows that models must be able
to simulate wrinkling with realistic differential equations
and not rely on empirical correlations. Table 1 lists some
commonly used models and simulations. The ﬂamelet-
structure approach is deﬁned to be the use of differential
equations to obtain the ﬂame surface density. Differential
equations account for the fact that the wrinkling process
has a ‘‘memory’’ of wrinkling that occurred at upstream
locations. The ﬂamelet-structure approach includes two
Reynolds-averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) models. The
coherent ﬂamelet model (CFM) of Veynante et al. [18],
Meneveau and Poinsot [19] and others [20–29] solves the
ﬂame surface density balance equation. The other RANS
approach is that of Peters [30,31] who solves the G-
equation. Also listed in Table 1 is LES; LES submodels
that are based on the ﬂame surface density equation were
developed by Hawkes and Cant [32], Weller et al. [33] and
Charlotte et al. [34]. An LES submodel that is based on the
G-equation was developed by Pitsch [4,35]. DNS is another
way to simulate the ﬂame structure; DNS of an entire
burner has been described by Bell et al. [1,2] and Sankaran
et al. [3]. The ability of these simulations to provide
accurate predictions of the turbulent burning velocity is
discussed in Section 4.
An advantage of ﬂamelet-structure approach is that it
provides predicted proﬁles of S and brush thickness that
can be directly compared to experimental measurements.
Comparing quantities such as S and dT is a more sensitive
test of a model than simply comparing mean temperature
or velocity proﬁles. It is recommended that the following
requirement be applied to the next generation of numerical
models: the model cannot be considered to be realistic
unless it can predict ST as well as the measured structure,
such as proﬁles of S and dT.
The ﬁrst four models listed in Table 1 that are classiﬁed
as models that do not use differential equations to predict
the spatial variations of the ﬂamelet surface density. Bray
et al. [7] assumed that the mean reaction rate is propor-
tional to S. In some of their analysis they assumed that an
algebraic relation is sufﬁcient to relate S to the local
turbulence properties. One version of their algebraic
relation is
S ¼ l1 u0
SL0
¯cð1  ¯cÞCL.
(7)
Eq. (7) is based on the assumption that S depends only on
the local integral scale l and local velocity ﬂuctuations u0;
there is no memory of the wrinkling that occurred
elsewhere. Wu and Bray [12] later replaced Eq. (7) with a
differential equation for S. Another approach is one that
employs stochastic particles [36]. Each stochastic particle is
a ‘‘well-stirred reactor’’ that has a certain chemical
residence time. The residence time is predicted by an
equation for the mixing frequency that is based on some
speculative ideas rather than the conservation equations of
physics. The hope is that the time-averaged properties of
these
hypothetical
stochastic
particles
in
some
way
represent the true time-averaged properties of the actual
ﬂuid elements, even though the particles themselves do not
obey the conservation laws. No attempt is made to
incorporate the physics of the wrinkled ﬂame surface or
the stretching that is caused by vortices. The submodel
developed by Zimont is included in the commercial design
code FLUENT and is described in Refs. [37] and [38]. It is
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 1
Models of premixed turbulent combustion
A. Models with no differential equation for S
1. BML model with algebraic relation for S [7]
2. Stochastic particle/Monte Carlo concept [36]
3. Fractal model of Lindstedt–Vaos [39]
4. Zimont correlation model [37,38]
B. Flamelet structure approach—differential equations predict S
1. Flame surface density balance (CFM/RANS or LES) [18,32]
2. G-Equation models (RANS or LES) [4,30]
3. Direct numerical simulation [1–3]
ST, base
ST, tip
ST
a
b
c
Fig. 3. Schematic of (a) a hypothetical ‘‘geometry-independent’’ wrinkled
ﬂamelet structure and (b, c) realistic ‘‘geometry-dependent’’ wrinkled
structures that cause the burning velocity ST to depend on the distance (x)
for the Bunsen geometry and the time (t) for the spherical case.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
95


--- Page 6 ---

based on the following empirical correlation:
ST
SL0
¼ 1 þ A
u0
SL0

1=2 u0l
n

1=4
.
(8)
While Eq. (8) is based on empirical correlations, it has been
explained by some theoretical concepts [38].
The Lindstedt–Vaos model [39] is based on a different set
of assumptions: the ﬂamelets are assumed to be fractal and
to have fractal dimension of 7
3, the inner cutoff scale equals
the Kolmogorov scale and the outer scale is the integral
scale. It employs an algebraic equation for S that is similar
to Eq. (7) except that fractal cutoff scales appear. Both the
Zimont and Lindstedt–Vaos models are described in a
review paper by Lipatnikov and Chomiak [37]. Since the
ﬁrst four models in Table 1 do not use differential
equations to compute S they will not be discussed in this
review.
Fig. 4 illustrates one of the motivations for developing a
better model of premixed turbulent combustion. It shows a
‘‘lifted edge-ﬂame’’ that is downstream of fuel jet that has
been injected into a cross-ﬂow of air. Initially the fuel and
air
streams
are
non-premixed.
However,
a
stratiﬁed
premixed fuel–air mixture is formed within the liftoff
region between the fuel injector and the ﬂame base. The
‘‘lifted-edge ﬂame’’ in Fig. 4 is commonly found in new
engines, including lean premixed prevaporized (LPP) gas
turbine combustors [40], afterburners, scramjets, and
direct-injection internal combustion engines. In real devices
premixed combustion is important in certain regions, such
as the liftoff region. Even if the fuel and air are injected in
separate streams there may be signiﬁcant premixing prior
to combustion. To model the complex premixed and
partially combustion shown in Fig. 4 a robust model is
required. A promising approach is to determine the
amount of surface area of the reaction layers (using the
G-equation or the CFM), and then superimpose on the
layers a model for fully premixed or partially premixed
conditions. Such an approach allows some of the reaction
surface to be fully premixed while other regions are
partially premixed. It is not sufﬁcient to assume that
simple formulas for burning velocity measured in Bunsen
burners apply to complex geometries.
The purpose of this review paper is to summarize our
current
understanding
of
the
structure
of
premixed
turbulent combustion and show how this structure is
related to the turbulent burning velocity. Section 2 is a
review of recent images of ﬂamelets that describe their
shapes and thicknesses. Laser diagnostics provide images
of the reaction layers associated with CH, CO/OH, HCO,
CH2O, and heat release rate as well as the preheat zones.
Section 3 reviews the current database of properties such as
surface density, while Section 4 deals with the question:
how well can we predict the turbulent burning velocity?
Some research issues are discussed in Section 5.
Since this paper is limited to issues related to ﬂamelet
structure, the review purposely omits many measurements
and modeling results that do not provide information
about ﬂame surface density or the wrinkling process. The
only models considered are ﬂamelet-structure models
which can predict the ﬂame surface density using differ-
ential equations. The reader is referred to several review
papers that summarize other aspects of premixed turbulent
combustion. Lipatnikov and Chomiak [37] review mea-
sured and computed turbulent burning velocities and brush
thicknesses. The same authors also review molecular
transport effects [41]. Bradley [42] and Abdel-Gayed et al.
[43] have attempted to correlate measured values of
burning velocity, while Gu¨ lder et al. [44] assess the idea
of correlating burning velocities using the fractal dimension
and fractal length scales. Hydrodynamic instabilities are
reviewed by Kadowaki and Hasegawa [45]. A wide range of
modeling approaches are reviewed by Peters [9], Veynante
and Vervisch [46], Pitsch [47], Poinsot et al. [48], Poinsot
and Veynante [10], Law and Sung [49] and Williams [50].
1.1. General concepts: ﬂamelet wrinkling by ﬂame–vortex
interactions
Fig. 5 is a list of the important processes that occur in
premixed
turbulent
combustion.
The
basic
‘‘building
block’’ is the ﬂame–vortex interaction. This fact was
recognized by Damkohler [6] who modeled the ﬂame
surface area as a set of cones, each of which is created by
the passage of an eddy, as is shown at the bottom of Fig. 5.
At the bottom of the vortex the incident velocity is a
minimum, so the ﬂame propagates farther upstream. The
ﬂame–vortex interaction controls the stretch rate and the
eddy residence time during which the stretch rate is applied.
There are two paths in Fig. 5: the path on the right
indicates that the average strength of the reaction layer is
controlled by the thermodiffusive process that causes the
local consumption speed to be larger or smaller than the
unstretched speed SL0. The theory of ﬂame stretch helps to
explain this thermodiffusive process. The path on the left
side of Fig. 5 represents the wrinkling process. Each eddy
stretches the surface area A at a stretch rate K that is
deﬁned to be (1/A) dA/dt. Consider the hypothetical case
ARTICLE IN PRESS
FUEL
AIR
STRATIFIED
PREMIXED
REGION
EDGE
FLAME
LIFTED
Fig. 4. Illustration of how premixed turbulent combustion plays a major
role in lifted ﬂames that have initially non-premixed fuel and air streams.
Premixing in the lifted region occurs in new gas turbines, scramjets and
direct-injection internal combustion engines.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
96


--- Page 7 ---

for which K is constant in time; integration of the deﬁnition
of K yields
A2=A1 ¼ expðKtresÞ.
(9)
Thus, the area after the ﬂame–vortex interaction A2
depends on two quantities: the stretch rate K and the
residence time tres of the interaction. The residence time
associated
with large vortices
is likely to be large,
suggesting that large eddies should be more effective in
increasing ﬂame area than small eddies.
The ﬂame surface density balance [19] represents one
way to model the physical process listed in Fig. 5:
qS
qt þ ~U qS
qx þ ~V qS
qy ¼ nT
q2S
qy2 þ ¯KS  ¯M  ¯Q.
(10)
The convection terms in Eq. (10) simulate the way that a
ﬂame can be wrinkled at one location and this wrinkledness
can be convected downsteam. The diffusion term simulates
the observed spreading of a ﬂame brush due to turbulent
diffusion. The source of ﬂame area is the term containing
the mean stretch rate ¯K, where K is deﬁned by Poinsot et al.
[48,51] and Law and Sung [49] to be
K ¼ n  ðn  =ÞV þ =  V þ SL=Rc,
(11)
Rc is the radius of curvature of the interface. The quantity
¯Q in Eq. (10) is the mean quenching rate and the mean
merging rate ¯M has been modeled by Duclos et al. [24] as
¯M ¼
b0ðSL þ C
ﬃﬃﬃ
k
p
Þ
ð ¯Y F= ¯Y F0Þ 1  ð ¯Y F= ¯Y F0Þ

 S2,
(12)
¯Y F is the mean fuel mass fraction which has the value of
¯Y F0 upstream of the brush. Duclos set b0 equal to 1.0 and
C equal to 0.5; k is the turbulent kinetic energy. The
merging rate term was assumed to be proportional to S2 by
drawing an analogy with the rate of collisions that occurs
between molecules in a gas; if the number of ﬂamelet
segments is doubled, the number of collisions between
them should be four times larger.
The time-averaged stretch rate ¯K was determined by
Meneveau and Poinsot [19] to be
¯K ¼ ðu0=lÞGK,
(13)
GK is the stretch efﬁciency function. Ref. [19] explains how
this quantity was computed using DNS. Solutions ﬁrst
were obtained for the case of a single toroidal vortex that
interacts with a laminar ﬂat ﬂame. A range of vortex
diameters and rotational velocities were considered. It was
assumed that real turbulence can be represented by an
ensemble of toroidal vortices. The number of vortices in
each size range was selected so that the power spectrum of
the resulting vorticity ﬁeld was similar to that of isotropic
turbulence. The computations predicted how the stretch
rate varies with time during each ﬂame–vortex interaction.
An assumption was made to relate the residence time of
each ﬂame–vortex interaction to the vortex size. The mean
stretch rate exerted by the entire ensemble of vortices was
determined by averaging the stretch rate for each interac-
tion over the range of residence times and vortex sizes. Ref.
[19] contains plots of the computed values of stretch
efﬁciency GK; a reasonable ﬁt to the results is Eq. (14) for a
realistic range of integral scales between 10 and 100 times
ARTICLE IN PRESS
FLAME - VORTEX
INTERACTION
(Section 2)
S
RATE  K
(Section 2)
RESIDENCE
TIME OF EDDY
 
IN FLAME
FLAMELET
WRINKLING
 
PROCESS
(Section 1.1)
THERMO-
DIFFUSIVE
PROCESS 
(Section 4.3)
STRENGTH OF
FLAMLETS
I0
FLAMELET
AREA / VOL
(Section 3.1)
  
THEORY OF
 
FLAME
STRETCH
DAMKOHLER:
ST ~  AREA
 (Section 3.3)
FLAME
(Section 2)
STRETCH 
 
 
(Section 4.3)
  
 
ST/ SL,0=I0   Σ dη 
VORTEX
EXISTENCE OF FLAMLETS
Σ
Fig. 5. Basic physics of premixed turbulent combustion. Also shown is a
schematic of Damko¨ hler’s concept of a ﬂame–vortex interaction, from
Lewis and von Elbe [6], p. 415.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
97


--- Page 8 ---

the laminar ﬂame thickness:
GK ¼ C1
l
dL0


.
(14)
Over the range of interest GK is found to be nearly
proportional to the integral scale and is nearly independent
of the turbulent velocity ﬂuctuation level u0. Thus larger
eddies are more efﬁcient at stretching the ﬂame surface
than smaller eddies. Some improvements were added by
Charlette et al. [34] to develop an LES subgrid model based
on the stretch efﬁciency function. Their relation for GK
does not differ signiﬁcantly from Eq. (14); GK is nearly
independent of u0 and is approximately proportional to the
integral scale. Meneveau and Poinsot’s results are a good
example of how DNS can be applied to simple problems
(such as a single ﬂame–vortex interaction) in order to
develop useful submodels.
One realistic aspect of the ﬂame surface density balance
(Eq. (10)) is that it provides a simulation of a geometry-
dependent wrinkling process that retains a ‘‘memory’’ of
the wrinkling that occurred at upstream locations. For
example, it predicts that qS/qx will be positive or negative
depending on how much new surface area is created by the
stretch rate source term and how much of that new surface
area diffuses away from the center of the brush as the brush
becomes broader. At each location S depends on the values
of S at upstream locations.
1.2. Turbulent burning velocities—deﬁnitions
At this point it is useful to review three common
deﬁnitions of the turbulent burning velocity ST. There is no
single deﬁnition of the turbulent burning velocity that has
emerged from past research. To some researchers ST is an
indicator of the mass per second of reactants consumed, so
they deﬁne ST to be a consumption speed. To others ST
indicates how rapidly the leading edge of the brush will
traverse a certain distance, so they deﬁne it to be a
displacement speed:
ST;GC ¼ Global consumption speed ¼
_mR
rRA¯c¼0:5
,
(15)
ST;LC ¼ Local consumption speed ¼ SL0I0
Z 1
1
S dZ,
(16)
ST;LD ¼ Local displacement speed
¼ ðVFLAME  VGASÞLE  nLE.
ð17Þ
Before discussing these deﬁnitions, it is noted that there
is no logical reason why there should be only one
‘‘superior’’ deﬁnition of the turbulent burning velocity. It
can be argued that each of these three deﬁnitions is a valid
way to compare an experiment to a simulation that has an
identical geometry. It should be realized that for any
speciﬁc ﬂame the magnitudes of the three quantities ST,GC,
ST,LC and ST,LD are not equal, as was demonstrated by
Shepherd and Cheng [13] and Lawn and Schefer [14]. When
comparisons are made, values of consumption speeds for
example, should only be compared to other values of
consumption speeds and should not be compared to
displacement speeds. Each of the speeds above is deﬁned
precisely and there is no ambiguity. Exactly the same
algorithm can be used to determine consumption speed, for
example, from experimental and from DNS results. A ﬁrst
requirement that should be imposed on any model is that it
should predict a turbulent burning velocity that is realistic,
just as it is important for any model of a non-premixed jet
ﬂame to be able to predict a jet ﬂame length that is realistic.
Problems have arisen in the past because values of these
three
burning
velocities
were
measured
by
different
researchers and it was incorrectly assumed that the three
quantities should be equal, which resulted in graphs that
contain a large amount of scatter.
Eq. (15) deﬁnes the global consumption speed (ST,GC)
that is typically measured in Bunsen geometries. It is
proportional to the total mass ﬂow rate of reactants _mR
which is the measured total mass ﬂow rate provided to the
Bunsen burner. To use this deﬁnition it is necessary that all
of the reactants pass through the ﬂame brush. Bunsen
ﬂames meet this requirement, but reactants often ﬂow
around the edges of counterﬂow and V-ﬂames, so _mR is not
known. For this reason ST,GC is not usually reported for
counterﬂow or V-ﬂames. A¯c¼0:5 is deﬁned as the area of the
¯c ¼ 0:5 contour of the Bunsen ﬂame. To better understand
Eq. (15), consider a hypothetical ﬂat turbulent ﬂame that
has contours of ¯c that are ﬂat planes. In the time Dt the
entire brush moves forward a distance ST,GC Dt. The
volume of reactants that was traversed by the wave is ST,GC
Dt A¯c¼0:5. The mass of reactants in this volume is rR ST,GC
Dt A¯c¼0:5. Dividing this number by Dt yields the mass per
second of reactants traversed by the wave, which then is set
equal to the mass per second of reactants exiting the burner
( _mR), which leads to Eq. (15). Eq. (15) is not ambiguous;
ST,GC can be determined accurately from experimental or
DNS results in exactly the same way. It can be argued that
because the area A¯c¼0:5 is chosen, the choice of using the
¯c ¼ 0:5 contour (rather than the
¯c ¼ 0:4 contour) is
somewhat of an arbitrary decision. This decision is similar
to the decision to deﬁne the width of a jet ﬂow to be the
radius where the mean velocity, normalized by the center-
line velocity, is 0.5. The deﬁnition of jet width is precise,
unambiguous, but it involves the arbitrary decision to use a
value of 0.5.
The local consumption speed ST,LC is deﬁned by
Eq. (16). Proﬁles of surface density (S) must be measured
using laser-imaging diagnostics. Section 3 discusses recent
measurements of surface density and the resulting local
consumptions speeds. The third type of turbulent burning
velocity is the local displacement speed (ST,LD); it is deﬁned
by Eq. (17). It usually is measured in counterﬂow, low-
swirl, spherical and V-ﬂames. VFLAME is the velocity of the
ﬂame in the laboratory coordinate system; it normally is
zero because counterﬂow and V-ﬂames are stationary in
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
98


--- Page 9 ---

the lab coordinates. VGAS is the velocity in the lab frame
of the gas into which the wave is propagating. The
velocities and the normal n are deﬁned to be the values
that occur at the leading edge of the brush. For counter-
ﬂow or low-swirl burners, the reactants initially are
decelerating and heat release causes the ﬂuid elements to
accelerate after they cross the leading edge of the brush.
Therefore, the leading edge is deﬁned to be the location
where there the proﬁle of the mean velocity displays a
minimum
value.
The
deﬁnition
of
ST,LD
is
precise,
unambiguous, and is consistent with the way that the
laminar burning velocity has been deﬁned in a counterﬂow
burner. The decision to evaluate the right side of Eq. (17) at
the leading edge is an arbitrary choice but it presents no
problem as long as it is realized that ST,LD, ST,LC and
ST,GC should not have equal magnitudes. If it is desired to
determine the time that it takes the leading edge of a ﬂame
brush to traverse an engine cylinder, then the displacement
speed should be chosen. If it is desired to know the mass
per second of reactants consumed, the consumption speed
should be chosen.
Shepherd and Cheng [13] and Lawn and Schefer [14]
have compared the displacement and consumption speeds
of ﬂat ﬂames that were stabilized in a low-swirl burner and
a
diffuser
burner,
respectively.
In
both
studies
the
displacement speed is consistently 2–3 times the local
consumption speed. It is unfortunate that researchers have
not agreed to use the same deﬁnition of the leading edge of
the brush when they evaluate Eq. (17). Lawn and Schefer
deﬁne the leading edge to be the ¯c ¼ 0:02 contour. Despite
the fact that the leading edge is deﬁned in Ref. [13] to be
located at a different value of ¯c than in Ref. [14], the
conclusion is still valid that displacement speeds are 2–3
times
the
consumption
speeds.
One
reason
for
the
difference in speeds is that ﬂow divergence causes the
areas of the leading edge and trailing edge of the ﬂame
brush to differ. Consider a ﬂat turbulent ﬂame that is in a
ﬂow that has diverging streamlines, such as those in a
counterﬂow or low-swirl burner. The mean isotherms
are horizontal planes. The mass per second of reactants
that cross the leading edge of the brush is equal to the left
side of
rRST;LDALE ¼ rR ¯SF;CAT.
(18)
The right side is derived by assuming that the region
between
the
diverging
streamlines
contains
wrinkled
ﬂamelets which have a total surface area of AT. Their
average consumption speed is ¯SF;C which was deﬁned
by Eq. (3) to be equal to I0 SL0. The gas density just
ahead of each ﬂamelet is rR. Recall that Eq. (4) indicates
that the wrinkled area AT is the area of the unwrinkled
ﬂame (which would lie along the ¯c ¼ 0:5 contour) multi-
plied by the integral of S across the brush, so Eq. (18)
becomes
rRST;DLALE ¼ rRI0SL0
Z 1
1
S dZA¯c¼0:5.
(19)
The ratio of the displacement speed to the consumption
speed is determined from Eqs. (19) and (16) to be
ST;LD
ST;LC
¼ A¯c¼0:5
ALE
.
(20)
It can be concluded that one reason why displacement and
consumption speeds differ is that the areas used in the two
deﬁnitions differ. Displacement speed is based on the
properties at the leading edge, while consumption speed is
not. If the streamlines are diverging, as they are in
Shepherd and Cheng’s experiment, the displacement speed
will exceed the consumption speed. The effects of stream-
line divergence have been analyzed by Poinsot et al. [51] for
laminar ﬂames which also display differences between
consumption and displacement speeds. Lawn and Schefer
[14] argue that streamline divergence is not the only cause
for the differences in their speeds, since they make efforts
to minimize their streamline divergence and they still see a
difference. In addition to the above deﬁnitions of turbulent
burning velocity, Ghenai et al. [52] suggest that the burning
rate integral is important. It is proportional to the mass
ﬂux of reactants crossing a control volume that encloses a
segment of the brush. They measure the ﬂux of reactants
across each surface and use diagnostics to determine the
correlation term r0u0. It is not yet possible to compare
values of the burning rate integral to other results because
of the limited amount of data.
2. Images of thin ﬂamelets
In this section we address the question: what evidence do
we have that ﬂamelets exist? New laser diagnostics now
make it possible to observe ﬂamelet structure within fully
turbulent premixed combustion. Therefore twenty papers
[53–72] have been identiﬁed that report images of the
primary reaction zones or the preheat zones. The only
images that are considered are those that were obtained
with an acceptable spatial resolution of less than 250 mm,
and which use reliable markers of the temperature ﬁeld
(such as Rayleigh scattering) or the primary reaction zone
(such as CH or CH2O PLIF). Papers that are not
considered are those that image the post-ﬂame gases (using
OH PLIF, for example). In every one of the twenty papers
it is found that the reaction zones and preheat zones are
thin layers, having thicknesses between 0.5 and 4 times the
unstretched laminar ﬂame thickness.
Peters [8,9] deﬁnes a laminar ﬂamelet to be a layer that
contains a preheat and reaction zone, has gradients in the
normal direction that are signiﬁcantly larger than gradients
in the tangential direction, and has a molecular diffusivity
that is much larger than the turbulent diffusivity within the
layer. Peters also deﬁnes another regime which occurs when
the preheat zone is broadened but there is no broadening of
the reaction zone. In this regime small eddies ﬁt in the
preheat zone but do not ﬁt into the reaction zone. This
regime has been called the regime of the ‘‘broadened
preheat zone/thin reaction zone’’, or ‘‘thick layers’’ [9].
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
99


--- Page 10 ---

Unfortunately there has been no experimental veriﬁcation
that eddies are the cause of any broadening of the preheat
zone. To verify that turbulence is the cause of broadening,
images of vortices that are smaller than the layer thickness
would have to be obtained. Measurements that simply
show that the layer is thicker than the unstretched
thickness are not conclusive evidence that turbulence is
the cause of the broadening. A laminar ﬂamelet may be 3–4
times thicker than an unstrained laminar ﬂame not because
of turbulence but because of the strain rate that is applied.
It also can appear to be thicker because of the orientation
of the layer with respect to a laser light sheet, the spatial
resolution of the measurement, or because several layers
have merged together to give the appearance of a thick
reaction zone.
Section 5 contains a review of some of the very few
papers that provide experimental evidence that distributed
combustion can exist. In these cases the deviations from
ﬂamelet behavior is due to the rapid heating of reactants
caused by rapid-compression devices such as HCCI engines
and shock tubes. In these cases it is the rapid compression
(and not the large turbulence level) that raises the
temperature of the reactants above the ignition tempera-
ture and thus is the cause of the distributed reactions.
Figs. 6–9 illustrate some examples of preheat layers and
reaction layers that were imaged in Bunsen, counterﬂow
and low swirl burners. In Fig. 6 the preheat layers recorded
by Buschmann et al. [61] are shown, along with images
obtained in the Bunsen burner of Chen and Bilger [66] and
the low-swirl burner of Shepherd et al. [57]. Rayleigh
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 6. Structure of preheat zones of ﬂamelets in turbulent ﬂames: (a) Buschmann et al. [61] Bunsen ﬂame; (b, c) low-swirl ﬂat ﬂame of Shepherd et al. [57],
(d) Bunsen ﬂame of Chen and Bilger [66], propane–air, for moderate turbulence and (e) intense turbulence; (f) hydrogen–air Bunsen ﬂame of Chen and
Bilger [67]. Dimensions in mm.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
100


--- Page 11 ---

ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 7. (a–f) Structure of CH reaction layers (black layers) and turbulent eddies within the turbulent Bunsen ﬂames of Filatyev et al. [53]. Stoichiometric
methane–air; U ¼ 8 m/s, u0/SL0 ¼ 4.47: (a, b) Mie scattering from oil drops, ﬁeld of view ¼ 60 mm  100 mm, (c) simultaneous CH PLIF and PIV; red and
blue regions have vorticity magnitude exceeding 2000 s1; (d) a magniﬁed image of the boxed region in (c); (f) magniﬁed view of counter-rotating eddies in
boxed region of (e); and (g) magniﬁed view of turbulent eddies interacting with reaction layer (solid line) in the turbulent slot Bunsen ﬂame of Filatyev et
al. [53]. Flame shown in Fig. 8c was analyzed by Steinberg et al. [73] to achieve improved vorticity resolution. Blue regions of vorticity have clockwise
rotation and red regions have counterclockwise rotation. Field of view is 4.5 mm  4.5 mm.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
101


--- Page 12 ---

scattering was used to record the instantaneous tempera-
ture contours. The preheat zone thickness (dPRE) is deﬁned
as (TPTR)/(qT/qx)max; x is the direction normal to the
layer. Fig. 7 shows the reaction layers of Filatyev et al. [53]
that were imaged in a Bunsen burner using CH planar laser
induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) and simultaneous particle
image velocimetry
(PIV). The reaction zone that
is
identiﬁed by the thick black layer is the location where
the CH signal exceeds a speciﬁed value (half of its
maximum value). Fig. 7g is a magniﬁed view of Fig. 7c;
the individual eddies are observed using the improved
vorticity ﬁeld data analysis of Steinberg et al. [73]. Many
vortices are identiﬁed which are about to cross the reaction
layer. Heat release layers are seen in Fig. 8 that were
imaged by Ayoola et al. [55] using CH2O/OH PLIF
methods. One of their laser sheets was tuned to provide
formaldehyde (CH2O) ﬂuorescence, while their other laser
sheet was tuned to provide OH ﬂuorescence. Their analysis
demonstrates that the product of these two signals is
proportional to the local volumetric heat release rate. For
all cases in Fig. 8 the thickness of the heat release layer is
less than 1 mm. Their cases correspond to turbulent
counterﬂow twin ﬂames and a premixed bluff body
geometry.
Now that images of the reaction layers have become
available, what is the structure of premixed turbulent
combustion that is emerging from these observations?
Fig. 9 is a schematic of the ﬂamelets that are typically seen.
One long and nearly continuous ﬂamelet usually surrounds
the main region of reactants. Others often surround
pockets that are ﬁlled with reactants or products. If the
pocket contains reactants the surrounding ﬂamelet burns in
an inward direction; if the pocket contains products the
ﬂamelet burns outward. At some locations it is possible for
a hole in the reaction layer to occur due to local extinction,
but there are no holes seen in any of the images in Refs.
[53–72]. Unlike non-premixed ﬂames, premixed ﬂames
have hot product gases that remain close to the reactants
and quickly reignite any quenched regions. It has been
speculated that ﬂamelets are short, disconnected and
shredded layers, but shredded layers have never been
observed for fully premixed conditions. In contrast, non-
premixed and partially premixed ﬂames can become
shredded and contain many quenched regions in the
reaction surface [74].
In any discussion of the structure of premixed turbulent
combustion it is important to differentiate between the
primary reaction zone and the post-ﬂame gases. In the
post-ﬂame gases, two types of reactions often occur: those
associated with OH recombination and with NO forma-
tion. These post-ﬂame reactions always will be distributed
in space, even if the ﬂame is laminar. Some previous studies
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 8. Structure of the heat release layers of ﬂamelets in the turbulent
ﬂames of Ayoola et al. [55]: (a) premixed turbulent counterﬂow ﬂame, ﬁeld
of view ¼ 25 mm  16 mm; (b) premixed turbulent counterﬂow twin-ﬂame;
(c) premixed acoustically forced turbulent bluff-body ﬂame; and (d)
premixed turbulent bluff-body ﬂame, unforced.
Pre-
   Post-
  Flame
Zone 
   NOx
pockets
Counter-
Rotating
Eddies
CH
Heat
Release
holes
Flamelets
Zone
Heat
Fuel
Breakdown
Fig. 9. Structure of turbulent premixed ﬂames. Nearly continuous
ﬂamelets form borders around the main reactant ﬂow, around pockets
of reactants, and around pocket of products. Preheat and CH fuel
breakdown reaction layer thicknesses are less than 1 mm. Post ﬂame gases
where thermal NOx is formed are distributed NOx reaction zones, but they
are not part of the primary reaction zone.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
102


--- Page 13 ---

have erroneously reported that the presence of broad OH
concentrations within the post-ﬂame gas is an indicator
that the primary reactions are in the distributed combus-
tion regime. The post-ﬂame reactions involving water
vapor and OH will continue to occur far downstream of
the primary heat release reactions. In addition, large
concentrations of OH do not necessarily indicate that the
overall OH reaction rate is large. The overall OH reaction
rate often is zero in the post-ﬂame gases where the OH and
water vapor are in equilibrium, yet the OH concentrations
may be large. The reactions that create NO also can be
distributed in space in the post-ﬂame gases, whether the
ﬂame is laminar or turbulent. The diagnostics that have
proven to be useful in determining whether layers are thin
are those that quantify the temperature contours and the
CH contours. It has been shown that the CH contours do
indicate the boundaries of the primary heat release region,
based on numerical simulations of laminar ﬂames.
For comparison purposes, Figs. 10 and 11 are included
to show that non-premixed ﬂamelets can be shredded to
form regions of partially premixed combustion. These are
images of the thin CH layers within non-premixed ﬂames
that are subjected to very strong recirculation zones of
Ratner et al. [74] and Rasmussen et al. [76]. The shredded
ﬂame seen in Fig. 10 has many segments; the end of each
segment is believed to be an edge-ﬂame that consists of
both premixed and non-premixed reaction layers. The
shredding is due to the very large velocity ﬂuctuations of
6 m/s and the long residence times associated with the low
velocities in the recirculation zone. In Fig. 11 the CH layers
in are shredded by a strong recirculation zone in a wall
cavity that was driven by a supersonic air stream having a
velocity of 590 m/s. It is noted that when strain rates are
applied that cause the ﬂamelets to extinguish, the CH
layers are observed to remain thin; there is no evidence that
the ﬂamelets are broadened. Similar images of premixed
ﬂamelets subjected to large strain rates have not yet been
reported.
2.1. Flamelets exist for Karlovitz numbers exceeding ten
A long-standing question has been—what is the bound-
ary of the laminar ﬂamelet regime? Some researchers have
assumed that laminar ﬂamelets no longer exist when the
Karlovitz number (deﬁned below) exceeds unity because
the small eddies can ﬁt inside the ﬂamelet, increase the
diffusivity, and form thick ﬂames. However, this assump-
tion is based on theoretical speculation alone. There is no
experimental veriﬁcation that eddies actually enter the
ﬂamelet and increase the diffusivity. In contrast, a different
idea is that increasing the turbulence level favors the
formation of even thinner highly strained reaction layers;
thus the ﬂamelets may ‘‘extinguish before they broaden’’.
To date there is no experimental evidence that premixed
ﬂames can be shredded into thin disconnected ﬂamelets.
To better deﬁne the conditions of any experiment, it is
suggested that the deﬁnition of Karlovitz number that was
proposed by Peters [9] be adopted for consistency. This
would avoid the ambiguities that now exist because
different deﬁnitions of Ka are used. Peters deﬁnes Ka to
be the ratio of the ratio of the ﬂame time (a/SL,0
2 ) to the
time associated with ﬂame stretch rate. This latter time is
the inverse of (1/A)(dA/dt), which he argues is the ratio of
u0 and the Taylor scale. He shows that this time scale equals
the Kolmogorov time (ZK/uK). The Kolmogorov length
scale ZK equals lðu0l=aÞ3=4 and uK is n/ZK. The thermal
diffusivity a is a0 [(TP+TR)/2)/300 K]1.5, where a0 is the
diffusivity of nitrogen at 300 K, which is 0.15 cm2/s. It is
suggested that the temperature used to compute the
thermal diffusivity be the average temperature (i.e., the
mean of TR and TP). With these deﬁnitions the Karlovitz
number is:
Ka ¼
u0
SL0

3=2 SL0l
a0

1=2 ðTP þ TRÞ=2
300K

1=2
.
(21)
It can be shown that if Ka equals unity, the Kolmogorov
scale (ZK) equals the characteristic ﬂame thickness (a/SL0).
Table 2 lists some measured values of the average
preheat zone thicknesses (dPRE). The last two columns in
Table 2 indicate that the Karlovitz number can be large
(10.9, 25.2, 43.5) yet the average preheat zone thickness is
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 10. Shredded ﬂamelets observed in non-premixed combustion;
partially premixed conditions occur in the regions where there is local
extinction Ratner et al. [74]. CH layers appear on left, simultaneous OH
PLIF signal is on right. Flamelets are seen to ‘‘extinguish before they
broaden’’.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
103


--- Page 14 ---

measured to be no larger than the laminar value. In some
of these cases (u0/SL0) is 18.7, which is considered to be a
very intense turbulence level, yet there is no broadening
measured. Based on Table 2 the criterion that ﬂamelets
become thick when Karlovitz number exceeds unity does
not appear to be realistic. The data suggest that it is
necessary to have eddies that are much larger and stronger
than those at the Kolmogorov scale to cause deviations
from ﬂamelet structure. Recall that eddies at the Kolmo-
gorov scale are so weak that they typically are destroyed by
weak viscous forces during one eddy turnover time. In
contrast, heat release imposes a strong disturbance—the
gas expansion superimposes an additional velocity of
typically 200 cm/s to the product gases, which is much
larger than the Komogorov eddy rotational velocity. The
data in Table 2 indicate that new criteria are needed to
identify deviations from ﬂamelet behavior.
Rayleigh scattering diagnostics were used to measure the
temperature contours in the studies listed in Table 2. The
researchers who report no broadening of preheat zones due
to turbulence include Buschmann et al. [61], Dinkelacker
et al. [62], Soika et al. [63,64] Shepherd et al. [57] and Chen
and Bilger for their hydrogen cases [67]. Chen and Bilger
[66] and Mansour et al. [54] state that their preheat zones
were ‘‘lamella-like’’ at low turbulence levels and no thicker
than the unstretched laminar ﬂame thickness dL0. Dinke-
lacker et al. [62] measured preheat zone thicknesses that
were between 0.5 and 1.0 times dL0 for all six cases that
they considered.
In contrast to these ﬁndings, Mansour et al. [54], Chen et
al. [71], O’Young and Bilger [70] and Chen and Bilger [66]
reported that for several of their cases their time-averaged
preheat zone thicknesses were two to four times larger than
the unstretched laminar value. If the theoretical specula-
tions are correct, then the thickened layers of Refs. [54,66]
should correspond to large values of Karlovitz number
while the thin ﬂamelets should correspond to smaller values
of Ka; unfortunately this is not the case. Table 2 shows that
for a large value of Ka of 43.5 there is no thickening seen by
Dinkelacker et al. [62] yet for a smaller value of Ka equal to
2.2 there is substantial thickening measured by Chen and
Bilger [66].
There are several possible explanations for the fact that
the normalized preheat zone thickness (dPRE/dL0 in Table
2) is less than one in many studies, yet it exceeds one in a
few other studies. Dinkelacker [65] concludes that varia-
tions in (dPRE/dL0) are consistent with a strain rate
argument. He notes that the thickest preheat zones were
recorded when lean propane was used [66,70] while no
thickening occurred for the lean methane cases in Refs.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 2
Thicknesses of preheat zones measured using Rayleigh scattering for various Karlovitz numbers deﬁned by Eq. (21)
Authors reporting
measured preheat zone
thickness
Fuel
f
u0 (cm/s)
SL0 (cm/s)
Integral scale
(cm)
Karlovitz
number (Eq.
(21))
dPRE/dL0
Shepherd et al. [57]
Lean methane
0.7
374
20
1.50
10.9
0.9
Buschmann et al. [61]
Lean methane
0.6–0.8
220
8.5
1.76
25.2
1.0
Buschmann et al. [61]
Lean methane
0.6–0.8
13
27
0.73
0.1
0.4
Dinkelacker et al. [62]
Lean methane
0.5
900
39
1.00
13.1
0.5
Dinkelacker et al. [62]
Lean methane
0.5
370
11
1.00
43.5
0.8
Soika et al. [63]
Lean methane
0.50–0.8
36
18
0.60
0.6
0.9
Soika et al. [63]
Lean methane
0.5–0.8
26
26
0.60
0.2
0.7
Chen and Bilger [67]
Lean hydrogen
0.3–25
109
806
0.80
12.7
1.0
Chen and Bilger [66]
Lean methane
0.65–0.9
65
24
0.83
0.7
1.5
Mansour et al. [54]
Lean methane
1.0
845
40
0.48
16.4
2.5
Chen and Bilger [66]
Lean propane
0.7
110
20
0.90
2.2
3.0
O’Young, Bilger [70]
Lean propane
0.7
70
29
1.00
0.5
3.0
Note that thin ﬂamelets can exist even for Ka410.
Fig. 11. Thin ﬂamelets observed in non-premixed combustion even for highly turbulent conditions of Rasmussen et al. [76]. Supersonic velocity on top of
cavity is at 590 m/s. CH PLIF images are shown.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
104


--- Page 15 ---

[57,61–63]. It can be assumed that the net strain rate is
positive because the total area of the layers is increased by
the turbulence. It is known that if a positive strain rate is
imposed on a lean propane–air laminar ﬂame the strain will
make the ﬂamelet thicker, whereas a positively strained
lean methane–air laminar ﬂame becomes thinner. This
strain rate explanation may explain why thickening occurs
in Refs. [66,70] but does not occur in the other studies.
Another possible explanation is associated with layer
merging. When many cusps appear there will be layers
that merge together within the cusps. The layer thickness in
this merged region will be measured to be larger than its
real value, and this causes the mean thickness to be
erroneously large. Measured values of layer thickness
always will be somewhat larger than the real thickness
due to the orientation angle between the ﬂamelet and the
laser sheet. In addition, measured values can be erro-
neously
large
due
to
the
limited
spatial
resolution
associated with the laser sheet thickness.
Another argument that has been offered is that it
appears that eddies do not enter the preheat zone because
the turbulence intensity (u0/SL0) was systematically in-
creased by a factor of ﬁve in the studies of Shepherd and
Cheng [13] and Filatyev et al. [53], but there was no
measurable increase in the thickness of the preheat layers
or the CH layers, respectively. If eddies enter the preheat
zones and cause the turbulent diffusion to dominate over
molecular diffusion it would be expected that increasing
the turbulence intensity would increase both the turbulent
diffusivity and the layer thickness. Based on this argument,
the authors of Refs. [13,53] believe that the layers they
observed are laminar ﬂamelets. However, such arguments
are not conclusive since no images were presented which
identiﬁed small scale eddies. What can be concluded is that
the studies to date have demonstrated that ﬂamelets are
typically no thicker than laminar unstretched ﬂames in
most cases, but in some experiments the preheat zone is 2–4
times that of an unstretched ﬂame. The reasons for the
broadening observed in some cases is still not clear.
Possible broadening by turbulent eddies cannot be ruled
out, but the broadening instead could be due to the effects
of strain rate or due to laser sheet-layer misalignment. To
understand the role of small eddies, images with improved
spatial resolution are needed.
In two DNS studies the ﬂamelet thickness has been
computed for relatively large Karlovitz numbers and only a
small amount of broadening occurs. Sankaran et al. [3]
simulated a Bunsen burner for a very high intensity (u0/SL0)
of 10, a Karlovitz number based on Eq. (21) of 5.2, and a 3-
D grid resolution of 20 mm. The mean thickness of their
reaction layer was not increased by the turbulence but the
mean thickness of the preheat zone was about 20% larger
than the laminar unstretched value. They do not state if
this 20% thickening is due to eddies that may enter the
preheat zone or is due to stretch effects. It also may be due
to distortions of the ﬂame shape when cusps and pockets
are created. The fact that they found their preheat zone to
increase by only 20% indicates that their ﬂame is still in the
ﬂamelet regime even though their Karlovitz number is large
(5.2). Sankaran et al. also demonstrated that the proﬁles of
reactedness across each layer are remarkably similar to that
of a laminar counterﬂow ﬂame. This work supports
Damkohler’s hypothesis; even for very large turbulence
intensities (u0/SL ¼ 10) Sankaran et al. ﬁnd that the
turbulence increases the layer surface area but does not
signiﬁcantly alter the internal structure of the layers by
more than 20%. Tanahashi et al. [75] used DNS to
simulate a ﬂame wrinkled by decaying isotropic turbulence
in a box. Their 3-D code had a 20 mm grid resolution and
included complex chemistry. They concluded that their
computed reaction layers remain thin and sheet-like, even
when the turbulence intensity is large (u0/SL ¼ 3.4) and the
integral scale was less than the laminar ﬂame thickness.
Their maximum heat release rate is was much as 30%
larger than the laminar case, but they do not ﬁnd that this
is due to eddies inside the ﬂame; instead they ﬁnd that it is
associated with thermodiffusive effects in the regions of
negative curvature.
2.2. Images of ﬂame–eddy interactions in turbulent ﬂames
Some recent work has demonstrated that it is possible to
use laser diagnostics to image the ﬂame–eddy interactions
that occur within fully turbulent premixed ﬂames. Fig. 7
shows some of the images of vortices obtained by Filatyev
et al. [53] in a turbulent Bunsen ﬂame for relatively large
turbulence intensity (u0/SL0) of 4.47. The wrinkled reaction
layer (black) is identiﬁed with CH PLIF diagnostics while
the eddies are regions where the magnitude of the vorticity
was measured with PIV to exceed 2000 s1. Fig. 7f is a
magniﬁed view of two counter-rotating eddies that are near
the CH layer. Note that these velocity vectors are similar to
those in a counterﬂow burner, and the vectors also are
similar to those measured in the ﬂame–vortex experiment
of Mueller et al. [77]. Fig. 7g is a magniﬁed view of Fig. 7c;
additional eddies are identiﬁed by the improved vorticity
resolution algorithm of Ref. [73].
Fig. 12 is a set of frames from a high-speed cinema-PIV
movie of ﬂame–eddy interactions that were obtained by
Steinberg et al. [73] in a fully turbulent Bunsen ﬂame. The
time-history
information
is
important
because
single
images (such as Fig. 7) only show that an eddy might be
near a wrinkle in a ﬂamelet but it does not indicate if the
eddy actually created the wrinkle or if the wrinkle was
created at an earlier time. In Fig. 12 the vorticity ﬁeld
contours are plotted at time intervals of 1.5 ms. The
premixed slot Bunsen burner of Ref. [53] was used and fully
turbulent conditions were selected so that u0/SL0 ¼ 2.9 and
the reactants were methane and air. Two high-repetition
rate Nd:YAG lasers were pulsed at 1.3 kHz and images
were recorded every 0.75 ms with two high-speed, high-
resolution Phantom V9.0 digital cameras. The ﬂame
boundary, which is the solid black line in Fig. 12, is the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
105


--- Page 16 ---

contour of the maximum gradient in the PIV particle
density.
The top sequence of four images in Fig. 12(a) illustrate
the classical wrinkling process that was predicted by
Shchelkin and Damko¨ hler [6]. A single eddy passes over
the interface and the resulting wrinkle is approximately the
same size as the eddy. In the middle images, a wrinkle is
formed but strong ﬂame-generated vorticity (FGV) in the
products gases is observed. The blue and red vortex pair to
the right of the wrinkle is the FGV that is generated as the
gas expands and accelerates across the curved interface.
This FGV vortex pair in the products superimposes
velocity vectors that are directed toward the top of the
wrinkle and this velocity is observed to cause a rapid
attenuation of the wrinkle. Thus, FGV is a stabilizing
factor that tends to decrease the amplitude of the wrinkles
in this case. In the bottom sequence (Fig. 12c) several
strong eddies exists but they do not wrinkle the interface.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 12. Time-history of eddy–ﬂame interactions measured by Steinberg et al. [73] using cinema–stereo PIV in a fully turbulent slot Bunsen ﬂame. Time
between images ¼ 1.5 m. Flow is upward; reactants are on the left. Flame is the solid line. u0/SL0 ¼ 2.9, methane–air. Red is positive (counter clockwise)
vorticity (1600 s1); blue is negative vorticity (1600 s1).
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
106


--- Page 17 ---

This is because the eddies are so close to each other that
they counteract each other. This indicates that small eddies
having large magnitudes of vorticity may be less effective
than a single large eddy that has small peak vorticity but
has a large circulation. Circulation is deﬁned to be the
product of the average vorticity and the area of the eddy.
Large eddies can play an important role because of their
large circulation and their large residence time, even
though the magnitude of their peak vorticity may not be
as large as that of a small eddy.
The local stretch rate is another important quantity to
measure because it is a source term in the ﬂame surface
density balance (Eq. (10)) that is employed by a number of
models. Filatyev et al. [53] reported measurements of mean
stretch rates obtained in a Bunsen slot burner. The various
terms in the deﬁnition of stretch rate (Eq. (11)) were
evaluated using simultaneous CH PLIF/PIV diagnostics.
The normal to each CH reaction layer was identiﬁed and
PIV recorded the velocity vectors in the normal and
tangential directions. All measurements were made in one
plane—the plane of the laser sheet. There are three
components to the stretch rate; only the two in-plane
components were determined. Nearly diffusionally neutral
reactants were selected so that SL was nearly equal to SL0.
Table 3 lists the measured mean stretch rates which varied
from 79 to 389 s1. For all cases the mean stretch rate was
positive, as expected. The instantaneous stretch rates
oscillated between +2500 and 1000 s1. Law and Sung
[49] have shown that a stretch rate of 1800 s1 is required to
extinguish a corresponding steady counterﬂow ﬂame, but
no local extinction occurred in the turbulent ﬂames of Ref.
[53]. Extinction requires that a sufﬁciently large stretch rate
be imposed for a sufﬁciently long residence time. The
eddies passed through the turbulent Bunsen ﬂame with
large convection velocities of 3–12 m/s, so the residence
time
is
believed
to
have
been
insufﬁcient
to
cause
extinction. Previously Donbar et al. [79] imaged a non-
premixed ﬂame and also reported no extinction, even
where the strain rates were measured to be very large. They
concluded that eddies did not have sufﬁcient residence time
to complete the local extinction process.
3. Flamelet structure (R, dT)
3.1. Surface density (S)—measurements and DNS
computations
In this section we compare the structure of ﬂames that
have different geometries. There have been a number of
studies that provide direct measurements of the ﬂame
surface density S. For the case of Bunsen ﬂames, surface
density was reported by Deschamps et al. [80], Lee et al.
[81] and Chen and Bilger [66–68]. In addition, measure-
ments of S appearing in Bell et al. [1] were performed by
Filatyev et al. [53]. For V-ﬂames S was measured by
Shepherd [82] and by Veynante et al. [25,83]. Flat ﬂames
were considered by Shepherd and Cheng [13], Shepherd et
al. [57] and Lawn and Schefer [14] who used low-swirl and
diffuser type burners, respectively. Renou et al. [84] studied
a freely propagating ﬂame, while a cruciform burner was
employed by Shy et al. [85]. For partially premixed
conditions the surface density was determined in Refs.
[74] and [86]. Computations of S using DNS were
performed by Bell et al. [1] for a Bunsen geometry, by
Domingo et al. [87] for a V-ﬂame, and by Boger et al. [88]
and Chakrabory and Cant [89] for decaying turbulence
within a box. RANS and other models also have provided
predictions of S [18,23,26,28,32,90–92]; for these cases
several modeling constants were required.
In order to make meaningful comparisons it is useful to
deﬁne the quantity Smax, which is the surface density at the
center of the brush where ¯c is 0.5. Lawn and Schefer [14]
point out that nearly all studies have found that S varies
across the ﬂame brush in approximately the following
manner:
S ¼ 4Smax¯cð1  ¯cÞ.
(22)
Fig. 13 shows that Eq. (22) provides a reasonable ﬁt to the
data of Refs. [66] and [81]. It is useful to deﬁne the ﬂame
brush thickness dT using the following relation [13]:
¯c ¼
1 þ exp 4ðZ  ZmÞ
dT



1
.
(23)
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 3
Mean stretch rate ( ¯K) and the stretch efﬁciency function GK measured in the turbulent Bunsen ﬂame of Filatyev et al. [53]
Case
Height x (mm)
u0/SL0
Integral scale l
(mm)
Mean stretch rate
(s1)
Stretch efﬁciency
function GK
3b
21
0.69
5.2
79
1.57
3b
56
0.69
5.2
86
1.71
3c
13
2.14
3.1
184
0.70
3c
31
2.14
3.1
174
0.66
8b
26
1.88
12.8
223
4.00
8b
61
1.88
12.8
248
4.44
8b
96
1.88
12.8
229
4.10
8c
26
4.47
8.7
389
1.99
8c
61
4.47
8.7
232
1.19
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
107


--- Page 18 ---

The coordinate Z is normal to the brush and Zm is the value
of Z where ¯c equals 0.5. The mean reactedness ¯c is measured
using Rayleigh scattering or oil drop imaging methods. If
Eqs. (22) and (23) are inserted into Eq. (1), it follows that
ST;LC
SL0
¼ I0
Z 1
1
SdZ ¼ I0SmaxdT.
(24)
It is noted that one can better understand the physical
signiﬁcance of Smax by combining Eqs. (2) and (24) to yield
Smax ¼ 1
dT
AT
AL
.
(25)
For example, if the brush thickness is 6.0 mm and the ratio
AT/AL is 2.4, then Eq. (25) indicates that Smax is
0.40 mm1, which is in the range of values displayed in
Fig. 13. Surface density is deﬁned to be
S ¼ limDx!0
¯Af
Dx3 ,
(26)
¯Af is the time-averaged surface area of ﬂamelets within an
cubic interrogation box of size Dx. In experimental studies,
information is available only in the plane of a laser sheet so
the following 2-D approximation usually is made. The
right side of Eq. (26) is approximated to be the average
perimeter within an interrogation box of area Dx2 divided
by the area Dx2. The accuracy of this 2-D approximation
was evaluated by Bell et al. [1]. Using their 3-D DNS
results for a Bunsen ﬂame, they ﬁrst computed S using
Eq. (26) and deﬁned this value to be their 3-D result. Then
they identiﬁed one plane and computed S again after
making the 2-D approximation. Their conclusion is that
the value of S determined with the 2-D approximation
should by multiplied by 1.35 to yield the correct 3-D value.
It is now possible to compare some proﬁles of S that
have been measured for different geometries. Table 4 lists
typical values that were measured in Bunsen, V-ﬂame and
ﬂat ﬂame burners. It is seen that Smax varies from 0.12 to
0.60 mm1 and brush thickness is in the range from 6 to
35 mm. The last column in Table 4 is the estimated
normalized value of the local consumption speed (ST,LC)
that was obtained from Eq. (24); it varies from 1.3 to 7.8. It
is noted that the largest normalized consumption speeds
are in the range of 5.0–6.0 for atmospheric pressures; an
even larger value of 7.8 was achieved at 10 atm.
Fig. 14 indicates that the proﬁles of S are tall and narrow
at upstream locations in the V-ﬂame of Veynante et al. [25].
The proﬁles become shorter and wider at downstream
locations because the brush thickness increases due to
turbulent diffusion. A similar trend is observed in Fig.
15d–f, which shows measured proﬁles of S that were
reported in Ref. [1]. The curves display two sharp peaks at
the upstream locations (the thin solid line) which corre-
ARTICLE IN PRESS
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Surface Density (1/mm)
<c>
1 atm
10 atm
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
MM2
Σ (1/mm)
Fig. 13. Flame surface density measured in Bunsen ﬂames of (a) Chen and
Bilger [66] and (b) Lee et al. [81] plotted against mean reactedness.
Table 4
Flame surface density at the center of the brush (Smax), brush thickness, and local consumption speeds for several experiments
Ref.
Geometry
Smax (mm1)
Brush thickness dT (mm)
ST,LC/SL0
Deschamps et al. [80]
Bunsen
0.30
20.0
6.0
Lee et al. [81]
Bunsen
0.60
13.0
7.8
Chen and Bilger [66]
Bunsen
0.50
6.0
3.0
Bell et al. [1]
Bunsen
0.18
14.0
2.5
Shepherd [82]
V-ﬂame
0.17
10.3
1.8
Veynante et al. [25]
V-ﬂame
0.40
5.0
2.0
Shepherd and Cheng [13]
Low-swirl
0.20
30.0
6.0
Shepherd et al. [57]
Low-swirl
0.20
24.0
4.8
Lawn and Schefer [14]
Diffuser
0.12
35.0
4.2
Renou et al. [84]
Unconﬁned
0.45
6.0
2.7
Shy et al. [85]
Cruciform
0.14
9.0
1.3
Estimated to be the product (Smax)(dT)(I0).
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
108


--- Page 19 ---

spond to the two ﬂame brushes that are stabilized on the
right and left sides of the 2-D slot Bunsen burner. Farther
downstream the two peaks merge into one thick proﬁle (the
thick solid line). As the turbulence intensity u0/SL0 is
increased, Figs. 16 and 17 indicate that both Smax and dT
increase and this causes their product to increase as well.
Increasing the gas pressure was found to cause an increase
in the values of Smax that were measured in the Bunsen
burner of Lee et al. [80]. This ﬁnding is explained by their
images which show that the ﬂame surface has many more
ﬁne-grained wrinkles at 10 atm than at 1 atm. Elevated
pressure reduces the laminar ﬂame thickness and the theory
of hydrodynamic instability [45] predicts that the cell sizes
of wrinkles should decrease as the laminar ﬂame thickness
decreases.
For the case of ﬂat ﬂames, Figs. 18 and 19 show the
results of Shepherd and Cheng [13] and Lawn and Schefer
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 15. Flame surface density S reported in Bell et al. [1] for the Bunsen slot burner geometry of Filatyev et al. [53]: (a, d) measured values of S based on
values recorded in one plane; (b, e) DNS computations of S using only results tabulated for one plane of the 3-D data; and (c, f) DNS computations of S
using the full 3-D results.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
20 mm
80 mm
10 mm
30 mm
100 mm
110 mm
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Transverse coordinate (mm)
Surface density (1/mm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
x = 5 mm 
20 mm
80 mm
10 mm
30 mm
100 mm
110 mm
20 mm
80 mm
10 mm
30 mm
100 mm
110 mm
Fig. 14. Surface density measured in the V-ﬂame of Veynante et al. [25] at
different downstream locations (x).
Fig. 16. Values of the measured surface density that was integrated across
the brush of the Bunsen ﬂame of Chen and Bilger [66].
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
109


--- Page 20 ---

[14]. Since their brushes are relatively ﬂat, the proﬁles of S
remain nearly constant along the brush, unlike Bunsen or
V-ﬂames. As the turbulence level is increased, Fig. 18
indicates that the consumption speed measured by Cheng
and Shepherd increases linearly even for large values of u0/
SL0 up to 11. However, Lawn and Schefer’s data in Fig.
19b displays a different trend. Their consumption speed
increases with increasing turbulence level for u0/SL0 up to 3
and then it sharply decreases as the turbulence level is
increased. Their values of Smax display the same trend and
their brush thickness remains nearly constant. This trend
suggests that the degree of wrinkling of their ﬂamelets
eventually is limited by some mechanism, which could be
the merging or extinction process, or it could be some
geometric limitation. One question is whether or not the
ﬂat turbulent ﬂames on low-swirl and diffusion burners
have geometry-independent properties and their consump-
tion speeds depend only on (u0/SL0) and (l=dL0). If ﬂat
ﬂames are geometry-independent, the slopes of the two
curves shown in Figs. 18b and 19b should be the same since
the values of (l=dL0) for the two experiments are similar.
To compare the slopes, it is noted that Fig. 11 of Ref. [14]
indicates that their brush thickness was approximately 4.2
times the integral scale. It follows that Smax dT is
approximately 4.2 times the value plotted in Fig. 19b.
Therefore the slope of the curve in Fig. 19b (for u0/SL0 less
than 3) is about 2.5 times larger than the slope of the lower
curve in Fig. 18b. It can be concluded that even though ﬂat
turbulent ﬂames are achieved in Refs. [13] and [14], the
consumption speeds of the two ﬂames are not the same for
the same values of (u0/SL0) and (l=dL0). Even though the
mean isolines are ﬂat, the streamlines diverge and there is a
strong adverse pressure gradient which may differ in the
two experiments. There also may be some geometrical
factors that affect the freedom of the reaction layers to
oscillate in space which limits the brush thickness or the
degree of wrinkling. Flat turbulent ﬂames provide much
useful information but the evidence indicates that no
premixed turbulent ﬂame is truly geometry-independent.
To
realistically
simulate
an
experiment,
the
speciﬁc
boundary conditions of that experiment should be in-
cluded.
DNS computations of some proﬁles of surface density
appear in Figs. 15 and 20. Bell et al. [1] simulated the
Bunsen experiment of Filatyev et al. [53]; their computa-
tion was 3-D, highly resolved, and included complex
ARTICLE IN PRESS
0.8
Surface Density (1/mm)
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
x  (cm)
0
2
4
6
Present study
Deschamps et al [25]
800
700
600
500
400
300
ΣMAX (m–1)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0
K-factor (x103m-1)
Fig. 17. Flame surface density measured in Bunsen ﬂame of Lee et al. [81].
The K-factor is deﬁned to be ðu0=SL0Þl1 [5.4+2.3(u0/SL0)]/[1+2.3(u0/
SL0)].
0.0
4.0
8.0
12.0
16.0
0.0
4.0
8.0
12.0
16.0
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
(x-x0)/sigma
Normalized Flame Surface Density
Turbulence Intensity  u’/ SL0
ST / SL0
Turbulent
Displacement
Speed
ST,LD
Turbulent
Consumption Speed
ST,LC
0
4
8
12
Fig. 18. Measured ﬂame surface densities and consumptions speeds of
Shepherd and Cheng [13] in their low-swirl ﬂat ﬂame designated SWF26;
Smax is approximately 0.22 mm1 and sigma is 20 mm. Consumption speed
is determined by integrating S across the brush.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
110


--- Page 21 ---

chemistry. The proﬁles of Bell et al. in Fig. 15e can be
compared directly to the measurements that appear in Fig.
15d. In both cases the thin solid line has two distinct sharp
peaks that reach a value of 0.2 mm1. This thin line
corresponds to values of S determined at an axial location
of 3 mm. The thick solid line represents values at an axial
location of 4 cm. The peak values of this curve are about
0.15 mm1 for both the computations and experiment.
Farther downstream at 7 cm, the lowest curves have a peak
value of only about 0.05 mm1. Because the inlet boundary
conditions in the experiment are not perfectly symmetric,
the properties of the brush on the right differ somewhat
from the brush on the left. The experimental proﬁle at
x ¼ 4 cm (the thick line) is considerably narrower than that
of the DNS. Better agreement would be expected if the
boundary conditions of the experiment and the DNS are
more carefully matched. In Ref. [1] the only the spatially
averaged values of U, u0 and the streamwise integral scale
at the inlet boundary were matched. No attempt was made
to match the exact inlet proﬁles of U, u0, v0, lx, ly, lz and
the power spectrum of the turbulence. Fig. 20 is a plot of
DNS results of Domingo et al. [87] for a V-ﬂame. Their
DNS included complex chemistry but was limited to a 2-D
grid, whereas their LES was a fully 3-D computation. The
proﬁles in Fig. 20 display trends that are similar to the V-
ﬂame measurements in Fig. 14. However, the operating
conditions were not matched so the experiment has a much
narrower brush and a much larger value of Smax than the
computation.
In Fig. 21 surface density values are plotted which were
computed using the discrete-vortex model of Lam et al.
[92]. The case that is labeled M corresponds to a moderate
level of velocity ﬂuctuations (u0/U ¼ 7%) and is selected to
simulate the V-ﬂame experiment of Shepherd [82]. The
authors ﬁnd that there results are in reasonably good
agreement with the experiment; they report that the
integral of S across the brush yields a normalized
consumption speed of 1.38. Fig. 21 shows that as the
turbulence level is doubled their computed value of Smax
actually decreases slightly, but the brush becomes much
thicker. One can ﬁnd many computations of surface
density that have been obtained using the CFM. For
example, results reported by Prasad and Gore [26] appear
in Fig. 22. The three curves shown correspond to different
models for the source term in the equation for surface
ARTICLE IN PRESS
x = 47.7 mm
95.8 mm
144 mm
192 mm
240 mm
x = 47.7 mm
95.8 mm
144 mm
192 mm
240 mm
x = 47.7 mm
95.8 mm
144 mm
192 mm
240 mm
x = 47.7 mm
95.8 mm
144 mm
192 mm
240 m 
 
Flame Surface Density (mm-1)
Transverse Coordinate (mm)
u’/SL0 = 1.25
u’/SL0 = 2.5
0.1
0.05
0
0.1
0.05
0
0
50
100
0
50
100
Fig. 20. Surface density computed using DNS for a V-ﬂame geometry by
Domingo et al. [87].
Fig. 19. Measured values of Smax and ðSmaxlÞ, where l is the integral
scale, in a ﬂat ﬂame that was stabilized in the diffuser burner of Lawn and
Schefer [14]. Measured brush thicknesses were correlated by the relation:
dT ¼ 4:2 l. Solid curve in lower ﬁgure was added for clarity.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
111


--- Page 22 ---

density. It was concluded that one of the three models is
superior because it resulted in a global consumption speed
that resulted in good agreement between the computed and
measured height of the Bunsen cone.
3.2. Brush thickness (dT)
The brush thickness dT indicates the spatial region over
which the reaction layers are located, so it is important that
numerical simulations be assessed to insure that they
predict realistic values of dT. Fig. 23 is an example of data
reviewed by Lipatnikov and Chomiak [37] that shows that
the measured brush thickness in a Bunsen burner increases
in a nonlinear manner with the downstream distance. Ref.
[37] also reviews the results of Goix et al. [94] and Renou et
al. [83] and concludes that Taylor’s theory of turbulent
diffusion [93] adequately explains the brush thickness
measurements. It is often assumed that dT
2 is proportional
to the product of the turbulent diffusivity (u0l) and time, so
that
dT ¼ Aðu0lÞ1=2t1=2.
(27)
The time t in Eq. (27) is the convection time x/U for
Bunsen and rod stabilized burners, and for spherical ﬂames
t is the time measured from the ignition event. Results in
Ref. [37] agree with Eq. (27) if the time (t) is larger than the
large eddy turnover time (l=u0). For times less than the
large eddy turnover time, Taylor’s theory predicts that dT
should be proportional to u0t and the integral scale is no
longer relevant. Both of these examples are limiting cases
of the more general statement of Taylor’s theory, which is
[93]
dT ¼ ð2u0ltÞ1=2
1  l
u0t
1  exp tu0
l




	

1=2
.
(28)
Some researchers have reported that their measured values
of dT scale as t1/2 while others ﬁnd that dT is proportional
to time [37]; in both cases the measurements display
reasonable agreement with Eq. (28) for simple geometries.
For complex geometries Eq. (28) may not be adequate
because Taylor’s theory does not account for heat release
and it assumes that the turbulence is homogeneous so u0
and l do not vary in space or time.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 23. Turbulent brush thickness, normalized by Bunsen burner
diameter, measured by Prudinkov [95] as reported in Lipatnikov and
Chomiak [38]. Benzene–air mixtures, mean velocities from 35 to 75 m/s,
burner exit diameter d ¼ 150–200 mm, equivalence ratios from 0.77 to 2.0.
Fig. 21. Surface density computed in the V-ﬂame of Lam et al. [92] using a
discrete vortex method. Curves M ¼ moderate turbulence level (u0/
U ¼ 7%); corresponds to experiment of Shepherd [82]. Curves H ¼ high
turbulence level (u0/U ¼ 14%). For case M the authors report that the
integral of S across the brush yields ST,LC/SL0 ¼ 1.38.
0           6              12             18
0
  6  
12
     18
Surface Density (mm-1)
Radial Distance (mm)
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Fig. 22. Computed proﬁles of surface density for a Bunsen ﬂame; the
coherent ﬂamelet model was used by Prasad and Gore [26]. The three
curves correspond to different models used to determine the source term in
the equation for ﬂame surface density.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
112


--- Page 23 ---

3.3. Surface area of ﬂamelets—proportional to turbulent
burning velocity?
In this section some recent results are reviewed which
provide evidence that Damko¨ hler’s concept is valid in the
ﬂamelet regime: turbulence increases the turbulent burning
velocity primarily because it increases the reaction surface
area. Validation of this idea has been provided by two
recent DNS studies of a ﬂat turbulent ﬂame in a box by
Bell et al. [95] and Hawkes and Chen [96]. They considered
a ﬂat turbulent ﬂame that has 1-D mean properties and
were able to compute the magnitude of both sides of the
equation:
_mR=ðrRA¯c¼0:5Þ
SL0
¼ I0
Z 1
1
S dZ.
(29)
Eq. (29) is a combination of Eqs. (15) and (16) and it is
valid if the local and global consumption speeds are the
same. The left side is the normalized global consumption
speed; it contains the known mass per second per unit area
of reactants ﬂowing into the DNS computational domain.
Bell et al. [95] used DNS results to compute the integral in
Eq. (29) which is (AT/AL). They selected a lean methane–air
ﬂame (f ¼ 0.8) which they believed should be diffusionally
neutral. They found that at two different turbulence levels
the left side of Eq. (29) was 1.35 and 1.85 and the integral
had values of 1.23 and 1.64, respectively. The ratio of these
numbers is I0 which was 1.09 and 1.12 for the two
turbulence levels. Therefore their observed increase in the
global consumption speed is almost entirely due to the
increase in surface area. Hawkes and Chen [96] computed
I0 in a different way; they used Eq. (3) and integrated the
volumetric reaction rate across each layer for a lean
methane–air ﬂame. Their computed values of I0 for four
different turbulence levels were 1.10, 0.95, 0.98 and 1.08.
This implies that their ﬂamelets are propagating at a
velocity nearly equal to SL0, on average, so that ST/SL0 is
nearly equal to AT/AL and their DNS conditions can be
inferred to be in the ﬂamelet regime. In contrast, Chen and
Bilger [66] state that their Bunsen experiment was operated
in both the ﬂamelet and the non-ﬂamelet regimes. While
they do not compare ST/SL0 to AT/AL directly, they
analyze their measurements and conclude that ST/SL0 is
signiﬁcantly greater than AT/AL in the non-ﬂamelet regime.
They suggest that that the burning velocity along their
ﬂame surface is larger than the unstretched value in this
regime.
While DNS is capable of providing values of the stretch
factor I0, experimental determination of I0 has not yet been
possible. I0 could be measured using Eq. (29); the left side
could be evaluated for a Bunsen burner since the mass ﬂow
rate of the reactants is known. The integral in Eq. (29)
could be evaluated by integrating measured values of S
over the entire brush. Filatyev et al [53] estimated the
integral in Eq. (29) to be the quantity (PT/PL)2 where PT is
the perimeter of the wrinkled reaction layers that were
imaged in a 2-D laser sheet. They found that increasing the
turbulence level caused the global consumption speed (the
left side of Eq. (29)) to increase by a factor of four, and
there was approximately a corresponding fourfold increase
in (PT/PL)2. These ﬁndings also are indications that ST/SL0
is approximately equal to AT/AL.
4. How well can we predict the turbulent burning velocity?
Many models in the past have failed to provide adequate
predictions of turbulent burning velocity, but now some
convincing simulations are being performed using DNS
and LES. The advantage of DNS is that the three-
dimensional geometry and boundary conditions of a
speciﬁc experiment are simulated. In addition, DNS
includes complex chemistry and differential diffusion and
it employs no empirical constants.
4.1. Burning velocities predicted by DNS
Table 5 lists some impressive new DNS efforts that
include detailed chemistry and employ 3-D grids which
resolve the Kolmogorov scale. Bell et al. simulated a
Bunsen ﬂame [1], a V-ﬂame [2] and a ﬂat ﬂame [95] in a
box. Sankaran et al. [3] simulated a preheated Bunsen
ﬂame and Tanahashi et al. [75] considered a ﬂat ﬂame in a
box. The ﬁrst two studies in Table 5 are noteworthy
because they simulate the geometry and boundary condi-
tions of the experiments of Refs. [2] and [53]. Fig. 1 showed
some of the computed ﬂamelet structure. In Figs. 24–26
DNS results of Bell et al. [1] are compared to the slot
Bunsen experiment of Filatyev et al. [53]. In both studies
the reactants were stoichiometric methane and air that
issued from a 25 mm by 50 mm slot at a mean velocity of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 5
Recent DNS of premixed turbulent combustion that include complex chemistry and employ high-resolution 3-D grids
Authors
Flame type
Fuel
Grid (mm)
u0/SL0
Rel ¼ u0l=u
Bell et al. [1]
Bunsen
Methane
79
0.80
104
Bell et al. [2]
V-ﬂame
Methane
312
1.1
50
Bell et al. [95]
Flat
Methane
62
4.3
100
Sankaran et al. [3]
Bunsen
Methane
20
10
83
Tanahashi et al. [75]
Flat
Hydrogen
20
3.4
153
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
113


--- Page 24 ---

3 m/s; u0/SL0 was 0.69 and the integral scale was 5.2 mm.
The DNS also simulated two side burners which provided a
surrounding stream of hot products to eliminate unwanted
shear layers in the experiment. The DNS employed
adaptive mesh reﬁnement to resolve the Kolmogorov scale
and included a 20 species, 84 reaction chemistry mechanism
derived from GRI-Mech 1.2. The thick lines in Fig. 24a
and b are the measured and computed values of the ¯c ¼ 0:5
contour,
respectively.
This
contour
has a
height
of
approximately 4 cm for both the DNS and the experiment.
The values of normalized consumption speeds ST,CG/SL0
that were determined using Eq. 15 were 2.45 and 2.55 for
the DNS and the experiment, respectively. These two
values of burning velocity are plotted in Fig. 25. The
difference of 4% could be due to differences in boundary
conditions or experimental uncertainties. Centerline values
of u0, U and the streamwise integral scale were matched,
but several quantities were not matched, including the
lateral velocity ﬂuctuations v0, the lateral integral scale, and
the power spectrum of the turbulence. In the previous
section it was shown in Fig. 15 that the ﬂame surface
density proﬁles predicted by the DNS were in general
agreement with the experiment. Fig. 26 indicates that the
brush thickness of the Bunsen experiment and the DNS are
in agreement.
For the case of a V-ﬂame, DNS results reported by Bell
et al. [2] were compared to the experiment of Cheng and
Shepherd and some results are seen in Fig. 27. Methane–air
reactants at f ¼ 0.7 exit a 5 cm circular nozzle with a mean
velocity of 3 m/s; u0/SL0 was 1.1 and the integral scale was
3.5 mm. A 2 mm diameter rod stabilized the ﬂame. The
computed half-angle (y/2) of the brush is compared to the
experiment in Fig. 27b. An approximate value of the
normalized displacement speed (ST,DL/SL0) is (U/SL0) sin
(y/2), which is equal to 3.95 for the DNS and 3.62 cm/s for
the experiment. The two values differ by 19%. These two
values of burning velocity are plotted in Fig. 25. The
computed brush thickness in Fig. 27c also agrees with
measured values.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 24. Evidence that the DNS of Bell et al. [1] can correctly predict the
turbulent burning velocity that was measured in the Bunsen ﬂame of Ref.
[53]. The height of the ¯c ¼ 0:5 contour (thick line) is 4 cm in both the DNS
and the experiment, yielding ST/SL0 of 2.45 and 2.55 for the simulation
and experiment, respectively. Top left: the computed 1684 K isotherm that
occurs where the heat release is a maximum; top right: OH mass fraction.
NORMALIZED TURBULENT 
BURNING VELOCITY  ( ST/ SL0 )
5
4
3
2
10
0.5
1
0.5
TURBULENCE INTENSITY ( u’/ SL0 )
Expt. Filatyev et al. 2005
DNS Bell et al. 2007
Expt. Cheng et al. 2005
DNS Bell et al. 2005
Fig. 25. Comparison of turbulent burning velocities predicted by DNS of
Bell et al. [1,2] to measured values for Bunsen geometry of Filatyev et al.
[53] and V-ﬂame of Cheng [2]. The DNS matched the experimental
geometry and boundary conditions and included complex methane
chemistry.
Experiment
Height above burner (cm)
0
1
2
3
4
Turbulent Brush Thickness (mm)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Computations
Fig. 26. Comparison of the brush thickness computed by DNS of Bell et
al. [1] (solid line) compared to measurements in the Bunsen ﬂame [53].
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
114


--- Page 25 ---

It can be concluded that that it is now possible to use
DNS to predict turbulent burning velocities that differ by
4–19% from values measured in experiments that have
simple geometries [1,2]. To achieve this level of accuracy,
the simulations require measured values of the inlet
boundary conditions, including inlet proﬁles of mean
velocity, velocity ﬂuctuations and the streamwise integral
scale (l). To improve this level of accuracy it may be
necessary to specify inlet proﬁles of lateral integral scales
and the power spectrum of the inlet velocity ﬂuctuations.
4.2. Burning velocities predicted by LES and the CFM
Three types of LES methods that provide values of the
turbulent burning velocity were described by Charlette
et al. [34], Hawkes and Cant [32] and Pitsch [4]. Fig. 28
indicates some values of ST from Charlette et al. [34] for a
ﬂat ﬂame in a box. These authors compare their ﬁnding to
some of Bradley’s correlations of experimental data [42]
and agreement is observed. It is noted that their computed
curves also display a ‘‘bending’’ that is seen in many
experiments. To obtain these results Charlette et al.
modeled their subgrid turbulent diffusion with a Smagor-
insky relation, and their mean volumetric reaction rate ¯o
was set equal to
¯o ¼ rRSL0I0;SGSSG.
(30)
After the subgrid ﬂame surface density was modeled, Eq.
(30) becomes
¯o ¼ rR¯cð1  ¯cÞ expðE=R ¯TÞðA=FÞ 1 þ GKu0D
SL

b
.
(31)
Eq. (31) is based on an algebraic power law relation for
SSG which was derived by Charlette et al. by starting with
the ﬂame surface density balance equation and setting the
production term equal to the destruction term. The
quantity A is the Arrhenius pre-exponential constant, F
is a thickening factor, and GK is a modiﬁed version of the
original the stretch efﬁciency function [19]. The subgrid
turbulent velocity u0D was related to the resolved vorticity
ﬁeld using an equation that is proposed in Ref. [34], and
the exponent b was set to 0.5 to achieve best agreement
between computations and measurements. A different LES
subgrid model was developed by Hawkes and Cant [32]
who included Eq. (30) but did not use Eq. (31). They chose
to solve a differential equation that is similar to Eq. (10) to
ARTICLE IN PRESS
ST / SL0
20.0
10.0
0.0
u’ / SL0
0.0
10.0
20.0
for different filter size Δ
LES (solid lines)
experiment 
of Bradley
(dashed lines)
Fig. 28. Comparison of turbulent burning velocity predicted by the LES
of Charlette et al. [34] to experimental data of Bradley [42].
Fig. 27. Evidence provided in Bell et al. [2] that their DNS can predict a
realistic turbulent burning velocity for a V-ﬂame. ST is proportional to the
sine of the half-angle, and (b) veriﬁes that the DNS half-angle agrees with
experiment, as does the brush thickness (c).
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
115


--- Page 26 ---

compute SSG and their computed values of ST/SL0 were as
large as 2.6 for the case of a ﬂat turbulent ﬂame in a box.
A third type subgrid model is one that involves the G-
equation and has been developed by Pitsch [4,35]. Fig. 1d
showed the computed ﬂame structure that was reported in
Ref. [4] for a geometry that is identical to the Bunsen
experiment of Chen et al. [7]. The computed mean
temperature contours were found to agree with the
measurements. It also can be inferred that the LES
accurately predicts the turbulent burning velocity because
the ﬂame height computed in Ref. [4] differs by only 6%
from the measured value, and ﬂame height is directly
proportional to burning velocity. The G-equation analysis
previously was developed to simulate instabilities that
create cusps in laminar ﬂames by Kerstein et al. [97] and
Sivashinsky [98]. Ashurst [99] and Peters [9,30,31] have
done extensive work to apply the G-equation to turbulent
ﬂames. Some simple solutions to the G-equation are
discussed in Ref. [9]. The G-equation LES approach treats
the reactants as a non-reacting and constant density gas
that has a turbulent velocity ﬁeld v(x,y,z,t) which is
determined from the unsteady solution to the ﬁltered
Navier Stokes equations. Each point on the interface is
convected by the resolved velocity ﬁeld and each point
propagates in the normal direction at a speed that must be
speciﬁed by some assumed relation. The G-equation
provides a method to track the wrinkled interface. It does
not contribute any new physics and it is not a fundamental
conservation equation. It does accurately represent the
kinematics of the wrinkled interface if the formulas for the
local propagation speed and gas expansion at the interface
are realistic. For example, if an interface has a sinusoidal
shape and each point propagates normal to the surface,
Ref. [99] shows that the G-equation correctly predicts that
cusps must form and the wrinkles are attenuated by the
propagation of the
surface;
this is called kinematic
restoration or Huygens’s principle. The quantity G is a
scalar which is deﬁned near the interface only; away from
the interface G is not deﬁned uniquely so it has no physical
signiﬁcance. In this way G is different from the reactedness
(c) which is deﬁned far from the interface and obeys
fundamental conservation laws and boundary conditions.
A general form of the G-equation is [35,100]
qG
qt þ v  rG ¼ ðSL þ ST;SGÞjrGj
þ
rR
rP
 1

 SL0
2 IðGÞ.
ð32Þ
The unsteady resolved-scale velocity ﬁeld is v and the
stretched laminar burning velocity SL is determined from
SL ¼ SL0ð1  LKÞ,
(33a)
K ¼ r 
rG
rG
j
j


.
(33b)
The Markstein length ðLÞ is proportional to the Markstein
number (MaL) and K is the local curvature of the
interface. Eq. (32) is used to determine the wrinkled,
unsteady resolved scale interface (G ¼ G0), which propa-
gates normal to itself at a speed (SL+ST,SG) where ST,SG is
the subgrid contribution to the turbulent burning velocity.
The idea is that this resolved-scale wrinkled interface is a
‘‘thick’’ and moderately wrinkled spatially ﬁltered version
of the true interface. The true interface is highly wrinkled
but cannot be resolved by the grid. Pitsch [35] assumed that
ST,SG/SL0 is the ratio of the area of the true interface to the
area of the resolved scale interface and he set this ratio
equal to
ST;SG=SL0 ¼ A D  SL
D
þ
B D  SL
D

2
þ C DT
D


 
!1=2
,
(34)
where A, B and C are constants and D is diffusivity. Pitsch
argues that this function behaves in the classical manner
that was suggested by Damko¨ hler. At the thin ﬂamelet
limit dL0 is much smaller than D and Eq. (34) predicts that
ST is proportional to (u0/SL0). At the thick ﬂamelet limit
dL0 is larger than D and Eq. (34) indicates that ST is
proportional to (DT/D)1/2.
The last term in Eq. (32) accounts for the gas expansion
at the interface. The velocity ﬁeld v(x,y,z,t) corresponds to
that of non-reacting, constant density reactants upstream
of the interface. If no model for gas expansion is included
then unrealistic values of interface wrinkling would be
predicted. Sivashinsky [98] and Ashurst [99] modeled gas
expansion by distributing a series of volume sources along
the interface that have sufﬁcient strength to satisfy the
jump condition (rR UR,N ¼ rPUP,N, where N indicates the
direction normal to the interface). The volume sources
create an irrotational velocity ﬁeld that is superimposed
upon the original constant-density turbulence ﬂow ﬁeld.
I(G) in Eq. (32) is the Sivashinsky integral [98]. The new
velocity added by the gas expansion is the integral sum of
the contributions from every volume source along the
interface. The G-equation approach does attempt to
account for complex chemistry and differential diffusion
in a simple manner; these processes determine the value of
Markstein number in Eq. (33).
Several advantages of the G-equation approach are
discussed in Refs. [9] and [35]. The approach is a
computationally efﬁcient way to calculate the shape of a
wrinkled unsteady surface. The computation effort is
focused on resolving the interface structure while no
computational effort needs to be expended to solve for
chemical reaction source terms since SL and ST are
modeled. The G-equation automatically insures that the
wave propagates normal to itself. The G-equation has been
demonstrated to accurately represent the kinematics of
laminar ﬂames (i.e., instabilities, wrinkling, cusp formation
and
merging).
One
disadvantage
of
the
G-equation
approach is that it is not known if the propagation speed
of the spatially ﬁltered interface can be realistically
represented by general formulas such as Eqs. (33) and
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
116


--- Page 27 ---

(34). Eq. (33) has been veriﬁed in quasi-steady laminar
experiments but not under highly unsteady conditions. The
theory of ﬂame stretch predicts that SL will increase (if
positive stretch is applied and Markstein number is
negative) but this increase cannot continue indeﬁnitely as
the stretch rate is made arbitrarily large. Eventually SL
must decrease and extinction occurs, and this limit is not
considered when Eq. (33) is used. Gas expansion also can
be a problem. The Sivashinsky integral in Eq. (32) is based
on the idea that the ﬂame can be represented by volume
sources on the interface which create an irrotational
velocity ﬁeld. This approach neglects any ﬂame-generated
vorticity. Local ﬂame extinction could lead to other
problems because the level set approximation is not valid
unless the gas consists of only reactants and products. As
with any LES, it is important that results be demonstrated
to be independent of the selected ﬁlter size D.
RANS models also have provided several predictions of
turbulent burning velocity, some of which are shown in
Figs. 29–34. Peters [30] included the time-averaged G-
equation in his RANS model and Fig. 29 indicates the level
of agreement between his predictions and some measured
burning velocities. Fig. 30 shows that the integral scale (l)
plays an important role in his model. ST is predicted to
scale as ln where n is between 0.3 and 0.5. This result is in
general agreement with Bradley’s correlation [42]. Another
RANS approach is the CFM that has been described by
Veynante et al. [18]. CFM evolved from concepts ﬁrst
developed by Bray et al. [7] and later work by Candel,
Poinsot,
Meneveau,
Veynante,
Baritaud
and
others
[18–24,46,48]. It is an unsteady RANS model that is
contained within the KIVA code that is often used to
simulate internal combustion engines [21,22]. The con-
servation equations are time-averaged over time scales that
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 29. Comparison of turbulent burning velocity predicted by the
RANS-G-equation model of Peters [30] (solid line) to the measurements of
Abdel-Gayed et al. [43]. The model simulates a planar turbulent ﬂame
having one-dimensional mean properties.
Fig. 30. Predictions of RANS-G-equation model of Peters [30] showing
that turbulent burning velocity increases as the integral scale is increased.
This trend is in agreement with the correlation of measured values
reported by Bradley [42].
0
4
8
12
u’ (m/s)
4
2
0
Experiment of
Abdel-Gayed et al.
CFM 2b
ST / SL0
Fig. 31. Results of Duclos et al. [24] showing that the coherent ﬂamelet
model can predict the turbulent burning velocity data of Abdel-Gayed et
al. [43]. Note that CFM predicts the correct ‘‘bending’’ of this curve that is
caused by the loss of ﬂame surface area due to ﬂamelet merging and
quenching at large turbulence intensities. The model simulates a planar
turbulent ﬂame having one-dimensional mean properties.
Fig. 32. Comparison of turbulent burning velocity predicted by the
coherent ﬂamelet model of Choi and Huh [28] to the measurements of
Bradley [42]. The model considers a spherical expanding turbulent ﬂame in
a chamber.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
117


--- Page 28 ---

are associated with the turbulence, so CFM cannot provide
instantaneous images of the wrinkled ﬂame surface, such as
those predicted by LES. However, it does resolve the time
scales associated with piston movement within an engine.
Proﬁles of S are computed from the ﬂame surface density
equation (Eq. (10)) and its source terms (Eqs. (13) and
(14)). These proﬁles are integrated across the brush using
Eq. (16) to determine the turbulent burning velocity.
Fig. 31 indicates the results of Duclos et al. [24] for a
turbulent ﬂame in a box. A particular model of the source
term in Eq. (10) was selected to create a model that he
named
CFM2b
that
gave
best
agreement
with
the
measurements of Abdel-Gayed et al. [43]. The computed
curve in Fig. 31 displays the nonlinear bending that was
observed in the experiment. The bending predicted by the
model results from the fact that the merging rate is
assumed to be proportional to S2, so for large turbulence
intensities the rate of surface destruction due to merging is
larger than the rate of creation due to stretch. For a
spherical ﬂame Fig. 32 shows the results of the CFM of
Choi and Huh [28]. Relatively good agreement with
measurements [42] is achieved. For the case of a Bunsen
ﬂame, the CFM results in Fig. 33 were reported by Prasad
and Gore [26]. Their predicted height of their Bunsen cone
is approximately 100 mm since Fig. 33 shows that two
peaks appear in the temperature proﬁle at x ¼ 60 mm but
they merge together at x ¼ 100 mm. They conclude that
their predicted cone height agrees with the experiment.
Since the Bunsen cone height is inversely proportional to
ST, Fig. 33 indicates that the predicted turbulent burning
velocity is approximately in agreement with the experi-
ment. A counterﬂow premixed twin-ﬂame was modeled
using CFM by Wu and Bray [12] and their results appear in
Fig. 34. The mean reactedness reaches a maximum value
near the stagnation point (x ¼ 0) as expected, and the
predicted proﬁle is seen to agree with the measurements. In
a twin-ﬂame burner the reactants ﬂow toward each other
and two ﬂames surround the products which exist near the
stagnation point. Since the model predicts that the twin
ﬂames are located at the same positions in the counterﬂow
velocity ﬁeld as in the experiment, this implies that the
predicted turbulent burning velocity agrees with the
experiment.
One fundamental advantage of the CFM approach is
that it separates the effects of large-scale velocity gradients
(which depend on the geometry of shear layers and
recirculation zones) from small-scale effects that are
modeled in a more universal manner. The model of Prasad
and Gore [26] speciﬁcally includes large-scale and small-
scale source terms to the ﬂame surface density balance.
Complex geometries can be simulated; for example, a
diesel-engine geometry was considered by Musculus and
Rutland [21]. Another advantage to the CFM approach is
that the role of hydrodynamic instabilities can be included.
Paul and Bray [101] modeled the additional wrinkling
caused by hydrodynamic instabilities by adding an addi-
tional source term to the equation for the surface den-
sity (Eq. (10)). The CFM approach includes thermodiffu-
sive effects and complex chemistry in the stretch factor I0
that appears in Eq. (1). One concern is that the source
terms in Eq. (10) are modeled in a simple and universal
manner and these source terms depend only on three
parameters (S, u0/SL,0 and l=dL). This simple approach
may
not
be
adequate
to
account
for
the
complex
phenomenon such as ﬂame–ﬂame and ﬂame–wall interac-
tions that occur in engines.
It is clear from the above examples that impressive
progress has been made in recent efforts to predict
turbulent burning velocities for a variety of burners and
engines. While DNS has been successful for a few simple
laboratory geometries, there still is a need to systematically
vary the turbulence levels and integral scales and then
collect a DNS database of burning velocities for a single
geometry. Little research has been done to determine if the
empirical constants employed in LES and RANS models
are geometry-independent.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 33. (a) Comparison of temperature proﬁles predicted by the coherent
ﬂamelet model of Prasad and Gore [26] to thermocouple measurements
made in an identical turbulent Bunsen ﬂame. The agreement indicates that
the model is predicting a realistic ﬂame height (where the temperature
proﬁle is no longer bimodal) and a realistic turbulent burning velocity. (b)
Flame surface density across the brush of the Bunsen ﬂame computed by
Prasad and Gore.
-8
 -4
0
4
8
Axial distance x (mm)
Reynolds averaged progress variable
Fig. 34. Comparison of mean reactedness computed by the coherent
ﬂamelet model of Wu and Bray (solid and dashed lines) to the measured
values of Kostiuk and Bray [12]. CFM predicts a realistic mean location of
the ﬂame within the counterﬂow velocity ﬁeld, indicating that the
predicted turbulent burning velocity is in agreement with the experiment.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
118


--- Page 29 ---

4.3. Thermodiffusive (Markstein number) effects and the
stretch factor I0
The previous section described comparisons between
simulations and experiments; nearly all comparisons were
performed for reactant mixtures that are nearly diffusion-
ally neutral. The reactants often chosen are methane and
air having equivalence ratios between 0.7 and 1.0. To
answer the question ‘‘how well can we predict the turbulent
burning velocity?’’ it is necessary to ﬁrst answer the
question: ‘‘how important are thermodiffusive effects for
fully turbulent conditions?’’ For the case of a laminar
ﬂame, thermodiffusive effects are characterized by a
Markstein number (MaL) that appears in the following
relation:
SL
SL0
¼ 1  MaL
K
ðS2
L0=a0Þ .
(35)
The history of the development of the theory of ﬂame
stretch is described in the review paper by Law and Sung
[49]. SL is the stretched laminar burning velocity. In
turbulent ﬂames it is necessary to deﬁne two additional
Markstein numbers:
SF;C
SL0
¼ 1  MaF
K
ðS2
L0=a0Þ ,
(36)
¯SF;C
SL0
¼ I0 ¼ 1  MaT
u0=l
ðS2
L0=a0Þ .
(37)
MaF is the ﬂamelet Markstein number and MaT is the
turbulent Markstein number. It would be convenient if all
three Markstein numbers were found to be equal, but there
is not sufﬁcient evidence to say if they are equal or not. For
a ﬂamelet the value of MaF would be expected to equal the
laminar value (MaL) if conditions are quasi-steady and the
ﬂamelet truly is analogous to a counterﬂow laminar ﬂame.
However, if the scalar gradients do not respond rapidly to
the high frequency components of the imposed velocity
gradients, MaT could be signiﬁcantly smaller than MaL.
The turbulent Markstein number relates the stretch factor
I0 to the characteristic strain rate u0=l so there is no
compelling reason to expect that MaT should equal MaL.
Note that the right side of Eq. (36) contains the stretch rate
K which can be positive or negative, while the right side of
Eq. (37) contains only a characteristic stretch rate u0=l
which is always positive. In addition, the left side of Eq.
(37) contains a propagation speed that is averaged over
time and space, so it represents the sum of the competing
effects of positive and negative stretch. It might be expected
that fuel–air equivalence ratios that lead to diffusionally
neutral laminar ﬂames (MaL ¼ 0) would also lead to
neutral turbulent ﬂames (MaT ¼ 0).
Figs. 35 and 36 illustrate values of MaL that have been
measured for laminar ﬂames [51,102–109]. For metha-
ne–air mixtures the curve in Fig. 35 has a positive slope,
and for propane–air mixtures the slope of the curve in
Fig. 36 is negative, which is consistent with the theory [49].
These two curves can be represented by
MaL ¼ 3:3f  2:3 methane2air; 0:5ofo1:4,
¼  8:6f þ 12:0 propane2air; 0:5ofo1:7.
ð38Þ
Fig. 37 is a schematic diagram that helps to explain how
thermodiffusive effects alter both the propagation speed
and the ﬂamelet surface area. Theory [49] predicts that lean
hydrogen–air ﬂames are diffusionally unstable. Consider
the segment of a lean hydrogen–air ﬂamelet that is near the
dotted line in Fig. 37 and has a negative curvature—it is
convex toward the products. Hydrogen will preferentially
diffuse out of the reactants and make the reactants leaner
as they approach the reaction zone. This causes a decrease
in the local propagation speed so the segment near the
dotted line will move farther away from the mean ﬂame
position. Conversely, a segment where the curvature is
positive will propagate faster. It too will move farther away
ARTICLE IN PRESS
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
MARKSTEIN NUMBER  Ma
AUNG et al. (1995)
BRADLEY et al. (1996)
ECHEKKI and MUNGAL (1990)
DUROX et al. (2001)
POSITIVE STRETCH
(OPEN SYMBOLS)
NEGATIVE 
STRETCH
(SOLID 
SYMBOLS)
(a) METHANE
7
6
~ 
~
Fig. 35. Laminar ﬂame Markstein numbers (MaL) for methane–air
counterﬂow and spherical geometries [51,102–109].
-8
-4
0
4
8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
MARKSTEIN NUMBER  Ma
EQUIVALENCE RATIO
TZENG et al. (1993)
PALM-LEIS & STREHLOW (1969)
SUN et al. (1999)
IBARRETA & DRISCOLL (2002)
DUROX et al. (2001)
SUN et al. (1999)
NEGATIVE STRETCH
(SOLID SYMBOLS)
POSITIVE STRETCH
(OPEN SYMBOLS)
(b) PROPANE
12
16
Fig. 36. Laminar ﬂame Markstein numbers (MaL) for propane–air
counterﬂow and spherical geometries [51,102–109].
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
119


--- Page 30 ---

from the mean ﬂame position. Thus, the initial wrinkle will
be ampliﬁed, which illustrates how thermodiffusive effects
play a role in the creation of ﬂamelet surface area.
We now ask the question—does the theory of ﬂame
stretch apply to ﬂames that experience very high levels of
turbulence? The data reviewed in Section 2 indicate that the
ﬂamelet regime extends to Karlovitz numbers that exceed
20, which is larger than previous predictions. In the
ﬂamelet regime the molecular diffusion within the layers
dominates over turbulent diffusion. Therefore it is not
surprising that thermodiffusive effects (which are caused by
molecular diffusion) are observed even when the turbulence
intensity and the Karlovitz number are large. Fig. 37b is a
plot of the measurements Wu et al. [110] that verify that
thermodiffusive effects are signiﬁcant for a Bunsen ﬂame
that is subjected to large velocity ﬂuctuations (u0/SL0 ¼ 5,
Ka ¼ 1–4 based on Eq. (21), u0 ¼ 6–10 m/s, u0l=n ¼ 2300).
All conditions were held constant (including u0 and l) while
two values of equivalence ratio (0.8 and 3.57) were
considered. For these two values of f the values of SL0
for the hydrogen–air reactants were the same. The lean
(unstable) ﬂame was noticeably more wrinkled and had
much ﬁner-grained wrinkles than the rich (stable) case.
Fig. 37b shows that the turbulent burning velocity (ST,GC)
of the lean case was twice as large as the rich case,
indicating that even highly turbulent ﬂames have a strong
dependence on Markstein number. Additional evidence is
provided by Bradley [42] who showed that measured values
of burning velocity display a strong dependence on Lewis
number. He later decided to use Markstein number rather
than Lewis number to correlate the data. The review paper
of Lipatnikov and Chomiak [41] describes other studies
that found that thermodiffusive effects are important even
for highly turbulent conditions.
Numerous DNS studies also have concluded that the
theory of ﬂame stretch correctly explains some of the
general trends that were computed. Im and Chen [111] and
Hawkes and Chen [96] computed local ﬂamelet velocity
SF,C and stretch rate at many locations within their
turbulent ﬂame
in a
box.
SF,C
was
determined
by
integrating the volumetric reaction rate oR across each
ﬂamelet using Eq. (3) and the ﬂamelet Markstein number
(MaF) can be deduced from Eq. (36). They considered
diffusionally stable, neutral and unstable mixtures, and
they attempted to correlate other parameters (besides
SF,C), including the displacement speed and the curvature
and strain components of the stretch rate. They found that
in all cases the general trends were in agreement with
theory; i.e., stable and unstable mixtures yielded values of
MaF that were positive and negative, respectively. How-
ever, in only a few cases did they achieve quantitative
agreement between ﬂamelet Markstein number MaF and
the laminar value MaL.
DNS work of Bell et al. [112] also provides ﬂamelet
consumption speeds for hydrogen–air, methane–air and
propane–air reactants. Several computed trends were in
agreement with the theory (Eq. (36)). For example, Fig. 38
shows that local extinction occurred in regions of negative
curvature (where cusps point toward the products) for a
lean hydrogen–air mixture. SFC was found to decrease/
increase as the local curvature increased for stable/unstable
mixtures, respectively. It can be concluded from DNS
studies [111–117] that MaF and MaL have the same sign
and that they change from positive to negative values at
approximately the same values of f.
It is not yet possible to perform measurements of the
ﬂamelet Markstein number in turbulent ﬂames because of
difﬁculties in determining the instantaneous propagation
speed and stretch rate of a three-dimensional interface.
However, it has been possible to determine the Markstein
number of a laminar ﬂame in a ﬂame–vortex experiment
that mimics the turbulent wrinkling process. Fig. 39 shows
a single toroidal vortex interacting with the laminar ﬂame
of Sinibaldi et al. [118]. Local displacement speeds and
stretch rates could be measured as a function of time and
distance along the layer because the interaction is axisym-
metric,
two-dimensional
and
repeatable.
All
of
the
necessary information is contained in the plane of the
laser sheet. To determine the local propagation speed it was
necessary to measure the difference between the local
velocity of the ﬂame in the lab coordinates and the local
velocity of the reactants in the lab coordinates at each
location on the interface. These two velocities were
determined from shadowgraph movies and PIV. The time
history of the interaction could be obtained because the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
0
1
2
3
4
0
3
5
 
  
 
  
 
  
UNSTABLE
 
  
φ = 0.8
STABLE
φ = 3.57
TURBULENCE INTENSITY u’/SL,0
ST,C,G/ SL,0
R
P
 φ = 0.8
H2 DIFFUSES OUT 
OF REACTANTS
 
 
 
 
φ = 0.4
a
b
1
2
4
Fig. 37. (a) Schematic showing why lean hydrogen–air ﬂames are
unstable. Hydrogen diffuses away from the dotted line, so the rear
portion of the wrinkle propagates more slowly and the front propagates
more rapidly, which ampliﬁes the wrinkle magnitude. (b) Measured
turbulent burning velocities of lean and rich hydrogen–air turbulent jet
ﬂames of Wu et al. [110], showing that Markstein number effects are
important even at large Reynolds numbers.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
120


--- Page 31 ---

experiment is repeatable; for each run a different time
during the interaction was selected for the measurements.
Fig. 39 indicates that stretch rates cause large changes in
the displacement speed in the ﬂame–vortex experiment.
The displacement speed is plotted in Fig. 39b and the
stretch rate is plotted in Fig. 39a versus the tangential
distance along the interface. Displacement speed is seen to
increase to six times its unstretched value at a location
where the stretch rate reaches its largest negative value. The
general trends that were measured are consistent with the
theory [49]. That is, the stretch rate in Fig. 39a ﬁrst
decreases and then it increases toward the right (away from
the centerline). Fig. 39b shows that the local displacement
speed displays an opposite trend; it increases and then it
decreases toward the right. In this case the reactants are a
fuel-rich mixture of methane and air and they have a
positive Markstein number. Eq. (35) predicts that the
stretch rate and ﬂame speed should display opposite trends
and this is observed. A lean methane–air case also was
considered in Ref. [118] and the measured trends are
opposite to that of the rich case. While these general
ﬁndings agree with the theory, it was noted that for all
conditions the magnitude of Markstein number of the
ﬂame–vortex interaction was considerably larger than of a
steady counterﬂow ﬂame. The ﬂame–vortex interaction is
unsteady and consists of regions where the strain rate and
curvature are positive and negative. The counterﬂow case is
steady and has zero curvature and only positive strain.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
NEGATIVE
STRETCH
REGION
(b) t = 16ms
(c) t = 37ms
0
300
200
100
0
-100
-200
-300
0
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
TANGENTIAL COORDINATE (cm) 
LOCAL DISPLACEMENT SPEED (Sd/SL0)
TANGENTIAL COORDINATE (cm) 
STRETCH RATE (s-1)
Fig. 39. Assessment of the theory of ﬂame stretch by the ﬂame–vortex experiments of Sinibaldi et al. [118] and Mueller et al. [77]. Upper images: vorticity
contours as vortex moves upward through ﬂame: (a) local stretch rate is maximum on centerline, decreases then increases in the tangential direction and
(b) for rich methane, the local ﬂame speed displays the opposite trend, which is in agreement with the theory. However, the measured magnitude of
Markstein number is considerably larger than for steady counterﬂow ﬂames.
a
c
d
PROPANE
HYDROGEN
HYDROGEN
(magnified)
b
Fig. 38. DNS of turbulent ﬂames by Bell et al. [95,112] showing that the diffusionally stable lean propane–air case (a) has large wrinkles and no extinction,
while the unstable lean hydrogen–air case (b) has small wrinkles and extinction occurs in the negatively curved cusps. In (d) the ﬂamelets becomes thicker
in positive curvature regions (at bottom of image) and thinner in negative curvature regions (at top of image). All of these observations are in agreement
with the theory of ﬂame stretch.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
121


--- Page 32 ---

More research is needed in order to determine if two
Markstein numbers are required—one associated with the
strain rate and one associated with the curvature [51].
4.4. What turbulent burning velocity measurements to use
for model assessment?
There are two ways that have commonly been used to
assess the values of turbulent burning velocity predicted by
a model. One method is to compare the predictions to the
correlation curve of Bradley [42]. This correlation repre-
sents an ‘‘average over many geometries’’, since measure-
ments from Bunsen, spherical and V-ﬂame geometries are
plotted on the same graph. A second method is to compare
predictions obtained for one speciﬁc burner geometry to an
experiment that has an identical geometry and has identical
boundary conditions. The latter method is preferable
because it has been found that when correlation curves
are generated, the scatter is so large that the resulting
average value of ST may not accurately represent any one
experiment.
Fig. 40a displays the correlation that was reported by
Bradley [42]; for each curve the product of Karlovitz
number and Lewis number is constant. Fig. 40b represents
a replot of the curves in Fig 40a, but the Lewis number is
held constant for each curve. To plot Fig. 40b, ﬁrst an
acceptable curve ﬁt to Fig. 40a was generated by setting ST/
SL0 equal to 1+0.15 (Ka Le)1 (u0/SL0)2. Bradley deﬁnes
his Karlovitz number to be 0.157 (u0/SL,0)2 ðu0=l=nÞ0:5, and
combining these last two relations yields the curves plotted
in Fig. 40b, which are
ST
SL0
¼ 1 þ 0:95Le1
u0
SL0
l
dL0

1=2
.
(39)
Eq. (39) is a correlation that averages over measurements
of both consumption speeds and displacement speeds that
were obtained in Bunsen, spherical and V-ﬂame geome-
tries.
Rather than rely on correlation curves such as Eq. (39),
new
methodologies
are
needed
to
make
meaningful
comparisons of DNS and LES predictions [1–4] to the
large amount of data that have been made available by new
laser diagnostics. A more complete database of measure-
ment is required to achieve improved assessment of models.
(a) There is a need to carefully record the spatial variations
of burning velocity (ST) along the ﬂame brush, and the
spatial variations in u0 and integral scale l at many
locations upstream of the brush for Bunsen, low-swirl,
counterﬂow and V-ﬂames. For spherical ﬂames, it is
necessary to record ST, u0 and l as a function of time.
(b) Flame surface density and brush thickness need to be
determined at all locations.
(c) Boundary conditions should be measured, including
proﬁles of U, V, W, u0, v0, w0, lx, lx, lz to account for
any non-uniformities on the boundary.
To date only a small number of experiments come close to
meeting these goals. Table 6 lists a number of such studies
but there are others which have not been included. Bunsen
burners were operated by Cheng and Shepherd [119,120],
Chen and Bilger [66], Gulder et al. [121], Filatyev et al. [53],
Kobayashi et al. [122] and others [123–131].
Flat ﬂames were stabilized in low-swirl burners by
Cheng, Shepherd and coworkers [13,132] stagnation point
geometries [12,133] or in the diffuser burner of Lawn and
Schefer [14]. Measurements in V-ﬂames were provided by
Cheng and Ng [134], Goix et al. [94], Shepherd [82], Smith
and Gouldin [16] and Namazian et al. [135], while spherical
ﬂames were studied in Refs. [16], [17] and [136].
Figs. 18, 25, 41–46 are plots of some of the burning
velocities that were measured in the studies listed in Table
6. Laser diagnostics provided images of the ¯c ¼ 0:5 contour
and values of the integral scale and turbulence intensities.
Fig. 41 is a plot of global consumption speeds ST,GC
determined by Filatyev et al. [53] and other researchers
[119,126–130]. For all cases shown in Fig. 41 a Bunsen
ﬂame was operated with nearly stoichiometric methane–air
reactants. It is seen that for moderate turbulence intensities
ARTICLE IN PRESS
0
5
10
15
20
4
6
8
10
0              5            10         
15           20 
20
10
0
          
         
       
        
Ka Le = 0.
6.0
0.63
0.07
0
u’/ SL0
ST/SL0
1.5
1.0
Le = 0.8
Curvefit to Bradley
data for constant Le
          
         
       
        
          
         
 
   
        
u’/ SL0
ST/ SL0
Ka Le = 0.258
6.0
0.63
0.07
Bradley data
for constant Ka .Le
2
a
b
Fig. 40. (a) Bradley’s correlation of turbulent burning velocity data [42].
For each curve in (a) the product of Karlovitz number and Lewis number
was held constant. (b) A set of curves that are ﬁt to Bradley’s data and are
given by Eq. (39). Note that (b) is plotted in a different way than (a) for
each curve in (b) Le ¼ constant.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
122


--- Page 33 ---

(u0/SL0) below 1.5, the burning velocity values are similar
despite the fact that the integral scales differed somewhat.
It also is seen that when the turbulence intensity exceeds 1.5
the curves in Fig. 41 are no longer linear but display some
‘‘bending’’ [53]. A similar bending was seen in the
experimental measurements of Bradley [42] which appear
in
Fig.
40,
as
well
as
in
many
other
studies
[17,24,30,34,42,43,122,127] some of which appear in Figs.
28, 29 and 31. There have been several explanations for the
observed bending. Burning velocity is proportional to Smax
dT and it is expected that as u0 is increased the surface
density and the brush thickness cannot grow indeﬁnitely.
Flamelets eventually merge and extinguish due to strain.
Duclos et al. [24] increased (u0/SL0) above 5 and their
computed merging rate ( ¯M in Eq. (10)) was large enough to
cause bending of the curves shown in Fig. 31. Gas
expansion
also
creates
divergent
velocity
ﬁelds
that
prevents the interface from becoming too densely wrinkled.
Geometric factors also can lead to the bending phenom-
enon, as shown by the analysis in Ref. [53]. Bunsen ﬂames,
for example, are limited in their height because of the ﬁnite
burner width and the fact that ﬂames from each side of the
burner merge in the center. Increasing u0 will tend to make
the interface more wrinkled, but it also tends to make the
brush propagate faster, which makes the brush shorter.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
1
2
3
4
0
2
3
4
Filatyev U =3 m/s
Filatyev U =5 m/s
Filatyev U =8 m/s
Filatyev U =12 m/s
Cheng 
Smallwood 
Yoshida
Kobayashi
Karlovitz
Hottel
Turbulence Intensity u’/ SL,0
ST,C.G/ SL,0
U = 3 m/s
Stoichiometric methane-
air Bunsen flames
5 m/s
8 m/s
12 m/s
1
5
Fig. 41. Measured turbulent burning velocity of Filatyev et al. [53]
compared to six other studies of Bunsen ﬂames [119,126–130]. For all
cases: stoichiometric methane–air. For each solid curve the mean velocity
U was held constant, leading to a ‘‘bending’’ of the curves.
0
4
6
8
10
1
2
3
4
5
TURBULENCE INTENSITY u’/SL0
Turbulent bulent 
Consumption
Speed
for u’/ U = 0.2
ST,CG / SL,0
2
Fig. 42. Measured turbulent burning velocity ST,CG of Fig. 41 replotted
for a constant value of u0/U ¼ 0.2, so that u0 and U are not independently
varied. If u0 and U are not independently varied, as has been done in the
past, the plot incorrectly hides the true nonlinear bending behavior.
Table 6
Some experimental studies that provide detailed measurements of
turbulent burning velocities, integral scales, and boundary conditions
that are useful for the assessment of models
Authors
Type
Fuel
Cheng and Shepherd [119]
Bunsen
C2H4
Cheng and Shepherd [120]
Bunsen
CH4, C2H4
Gulder et al. [121]
Bunsen
C3H8
Chen and Bilger [66]
Bunsen
CH4, C3H8
Filatyev et al. [53]
Bunsen
CH4
Lee et al. [122]
Bunsen
CH4, C2H4
Wu et al. [110]
Bunsen
H2
Shepherd and Cheng [13]
Flat low-swirl
CH4
Bedat et al. [131]
Flat low-swirl
CH4
Cheng [132]
Flat low-swirl
CH4, C2H4
Cho et al. [133]
Flat counterﬂow
CH4
Lawn and Schefer [14]
Flat diffuser
CH4
Cheng and Ng [134]
V-ﬂame
C2H4
Smith and Gouldin [16]
V-ﬂame
CH4, C3H8
Bradley et al. [136]
Spherical
CH4, C3H8
Kido et al. [17]
Spherical
H2, CH4
Lawes et al. [16]
Spherical
CH4, C8H18
(Rel)1/2
ST/SL0
0
2
4 
  6
 8
10
6
5
4
3
2
1
Fig. 43. Turbulent burning velocities measured in the V-ﬂame of Smith
and Gouldin [16].
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
123


--- Page 34 ---

The shorter ﬂame brush has less distance over which the
wrinkling process occurs. These two competing effects also
may lead to the bending of the curves in Fig. 41.
Fig. 42 is presented to show that the bending phenom-
enon is observed when the proper precautions are taken to
vary u0 and U independently, but the bending is not
observed if the ratio u0/U is forced to be constant. Data
points in Fig. 41 were replotted for a ﬁxed value of (u0/U)
equal to 0.2. The linear curve in Fig. 42 is misleading; it
represents results that would be obtained if a single grid is
employed and only the mass ﬂow rate was varied, which
often has been done in the past. In such studies both the
turbulence level and the residence time of eddies in the
ﬂame brush incorrectly were varied simultaneously. As u0
increases the eddies become stronger, but if U is also
increased, the eddy–ﬂame residence time is reduced, and
these two competing processes can counteract each other.
This can mask the ‘‘bending’’ process, and may explain
why it has not always been observed.
Filatyev et al. [53] ﬁt their measured turbulent burning
velocities with the relation:
ST;C;G
SL0
¼ 1 þ 0:0021
u0
SL0


 0:16
u0
SL0

2
"
#1=2

U
SL0


l
dL0

1=2 W
dL0

1=2
f ðMaÞ.
ð40Þ
This is a complicated formula because it provides a ﬁt the
nonlinear ‘‘bending’’ when the turbulence intensities are
large. If we only consider smaller values of u0/SL0, it is seen
that the (u0/SL0)2 term can be neglected and Eq. (40)
reduces to
ST;C;G
SL0
¼ 1 þ A2
u0
SL0
l
dL0

1=2
.
(41)
This is similar to Bradley’s relation (Eq. (39)) except that
A2 is not a constant but is
A2 ¼ 0:00077
¯U
SL0

 W
dL0

1=2
f ðMaÞ.
(42)
The function f(Ma) is was not measured in Ref. [53]
because Markstein number was not varied. Analysis was
provided in Ref. [53] that explains the nonlinear ‘bending’
of their burning velocity curves, and the analysis indicates
the reason why the new parameters
¯U
and W are
important. The analysis also shows that Eq. (40) can be
estimated by solving the ﬂame surface density equation,
providing that a number of simplifying assumptions are
made. The reason why Bunsen ﬂames depend on the mean
velocity ( ¯U) and the burner width (W) is because these
quantities affect the wrinkling process. If W or
¯U is
increased, the ﬂame becomes taller. The ﬂame therefore
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 44. Turbulent burning velocity ST,CG of Bunsen ﬂames of Gulder et
al. [121]; propane–air, f ¼ 0.9.
(ST,LC/SL0)/I0
4
3
2
1
q’/SL0
0
2
4
6
8
Fig. 45. Measurements of Chen and Bilger [66] of normalized turbulent
burning velocity (ST,LC/SL0)/I0 using Eq. (16). Proﬁles of surface density
were integrated across the brush of a Bunsen ﬂame. Fuels were methane
and propane, f ¼ 0.65–1.0.
Fig. 46. Measured turbulent burning velocities for the spherical expand-
ing ﬂames of Kido et al. [17]. Circles ¼ methane, squares ¼ propane,
triangles ¼ hydrogen. SL0 ¼ 15 cm/s for all cases. The lowest curve has the
largest Le ¼ 1.59, while the highest curve has the lowest Le ¼ 0.41. ST,LD
equals (rP/rR) dR/dt, where R is the ﬂame radius.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
124


--- Page 35 ---

becomes more wrinkled, since the degree of wrinkling
increases with the distance from the attachment point.
Burning velocities of the V-ﬂame of Smith and Gouldin
[16] appear in Fig. 43 while the Bunsen data of Gulder et al.
[121] appear in Fig. 44. Fig. 45 displays values of ST,LC/I0
measured in a Bunsen burner by Chen and Bilger [66] by
integrating proﬁles of ﬂame surface density across the
brush. Spherical ﬂames were studied by Kido et al. [17] and
typical measurements are shown in Fig. 46; other spherical
ﬂames were studied by Bradley et al. [136]. With spherical
ﬂames analysis indicates that the displacement speed ST,LD
equals (rP/rR) dR/dt where R is the measured radius of the
¯c ¼ 0:5 contour.
There has been considerable debate about the largest
turbulent burning velocities that can be achieved. Bradley
addressed this issue in his 1996 paper [42] that was entitled:
How Fast Can We Burn? Within internal-combustion
engines or afterburners it is possible to achieve very large
values of ST if the laminar burning velocity is increased by
a factor of ten or more by preheating the reactants.
Preheating often is caused by piston that adiabatically
compresses the reactants, or by a recirculation zone that
mixes hot products with the reactants. During a deﬂagra-
tion-to-detonation transition very large values of SL0 are
caused
by
compressive
heating.
However,
a
related
question is what is the largest value of the normalized
consumption speed (ST,LC/SL0) that is associated with the
largest possible degree of ﬂamelet wrinkling? Table 7 lists
some of the largest values of the normalized consumption
speed that were recorded in laboratory-scale burners. The
largest normalized consumption speed of 4.7 was recorded
in the low-swirl burner of Shepherd and Cheng [13], while
Filatyev et al. [53] report a value of 4.0 and Chen and
Bilger [66] measured values up to 3.0.
The ﬂat ﬂame of Shepherd and Cheng was not stabilized
behind a rim or a rod, so it was free to oscillate violently
and this might have created a larger ﬂamelet surface area
than in other burners that impose conﬁning boundary
conditions. It is noted that in most practical devices such as
automobile engines or afterburners the brush normally
would be conﬁned to conform to a spherical or V-shape
and would not be ﬂat.
Table 7 also indicates that the normalized displacement
speed can be as large as 24 and can be much larger than the
normalized consumption speed. This difference is due, in
part, to the divergence of streamlines within the brush and
the deﬁnition of the ﬂame area, which was discussed in
Section 1. Bradley [42] correlated values of ST/SL0 that
were as large as 17, but these values are displacement
speeds; none of the values in Ref. [42] were determined by
integrating the ﬂame surface density across the brush. It
can be concluded that intense wrinkling has been shown to
cause the ﬂamelet area (and consumption speed) to be
approximately as large as ﬁve times the laminar value. It is
expected that there exists an upper limit to the area ratio
AT/AL that is imposed by layer merging, extinction and by
gas expansion effects, but the value of this upper limit is
not known.
5. Some research issues
Sections 1–4 indicate that recent advances in DNS, LES
and laser diagnostics have created many new opportunities
to make progress in our understanding of premixed
turbulent combustion. It is now suggested that some
research issues that need to be addressed are the following.
1. There is a need to separate premixed turbulent ﬂames
into different categories and to develop (for each category)
a modern database that includes the turbulent burning
velocity, ﬂame surface density and brush thickness. The
reader is referred to discussions on this topic in the
proceedings of the Workshop on Premixed Turbulent
Combustion that has been organized by R.K. Cheng and
F.C. Gouldin [137]. The following fundamental geometries
have been identiﬁed:
(a) envelope ﬂames (in a 2-D slot and axisymmetric
Bunsen burners),
(b) oblique ﬂames (rod-stabilized),
(c) unattached ﬂat ﬂames (in low swirl, diffuser or
counterﬂow burners),
(d) spherical ﬂames (in a fan-stirred chamber).
For each category the wrinkling process and boundary
conditions are different, so it is expected that for each
category there will be a different relation for the turbulent
burning velocity. Unfortunately, many of the previous
measurements of burning velocity need to be excluded
from a modern database because they have employed
ambiguous deﬁnitions of burning velocity, integral scales
were not always recorded, and lasers were not available to
image the contours of mean reactedness. More detailed
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 7
Maximum turbulent burning velocities reported
Category
Reference
u0/SL0
Maximum consumption
speed ST,GC/SL0 or ST,LC/SL0
Maximum displacement
speed ST,LD/SL0
Bunsen
Filatyev et al. [53]
8.0
4.0
–
Low swirl
Shepherd and Cheng [13]
7.5
4.7
14.8
Low swirl
Bedat and Cheng [123]
11.5
–
24.5
Spherical
Bradley [42]
20.0
–
18.0
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
125


--- Page 36 ---

measurements of the boundary conditions are needed. If
the same burner is operated in different laboratories, the
experimental results can be compared to better quantify the
uncertainty. This approach has been demonstrated pre-
viously by participants of the turbulent non-premixed
ﬂame (TNF) workshops that are described on the website
of Barlow [138]. Table 8 lists some of the suggested
quantities
that
should
be
included
in
the
premixed
combustion database.
Subgrid surface density is a quantity that appears in LES
subgrid reaction rate models. It can be measured by
applying a spatial ﬁlter of size D to the measured images of
the ﬂamelets. The subgrid scale stretch rate can be
determined by applying a spatial ﬁlter to simultaneous
CH PLIF–PIV data such as that of Ref. [53].
2. Agree on deﬁnitions of the turbulent burning velocity.
The consumption speed and the displacement speed are
both useful quantities that allow for comparisons of
experiments
to other
experiments
or to simulations.
However, some agreed-upon deﬁnitions are needed to
avoid ambiguities. When consumption speed is measured,
it is important to state how 3-D values of surface density
are deduced from the 2-D laser sheet measurements.
Measurements of S also require that the wrinkled interface
be represented by an inﬁnitely thin contour using an
accurate curveﬁtting algorithm. If the contour has a ﬁnite
thickness, the measurement of S may depend on the
interrogation box size which leads to experimental error.
Ambiguities can arise when the displacement speed of the
leading edge of the brush is measured so it would be useful
for researchers to agree on the value of ¯c that deﬁnes the
leading edge. It also would be useful to record how the
turbulent burning velocity varies in space along the brush
of Bunsen and V-ﬂames, and how it varies in time for
spherical ﬂames. This information is needed to make
meaningful comparisons with simulations.
3. Understand the roles of the integral scale ðlÞ, mean
velocity (U) and burner width (W) in the relation for
burning velocity.
Even after many years of research, there is little
experimental evidence available that conclusively shows
how the integral scale affects the turbulent burning
velocity. Adbel-Gayed et al. [43] attempted to correlate
measured values of ST using the parameter ðu0l=nÞ1=2, but
the scatter in the data makes it impossible to draw a
convincing conclusion. Lipatnikov and Chomiak [37]
review some data plots which also indicate that burning
velocity increases as the integral scale is increased.
One problem is that the integral scale normally can not
be varied in an experiment while maintaining constant
values of all other quantities such as turbulence level. For
example, if a turbulence-producing grid is modiﬁed, usually
both the integral scale and u0 will vary. Another issue is
that integral scale varies in space; some studies report their
integral scale values at the burner exit, which may be far
from the actual ﬂame brush. In other studies there was no
attempt to include the integral scale [6] when correlating
burning velocity data.
Several theories and models predict that ST should be
proportional to ðlÞ1=2. For example, it is argued in Refs.
[6,9] that since laminar ﬂame speed is proportional to the
square-root of the molecular diffusivity D, it can be
assumed that in the thick ﬂame regime the molecular
diffusivity can be replaced by the turbulent diffusivity DT
which is proportional to u0l. Using a different approach,
Peters [30] developed a G-equation model for conditions in
the ﬂamelet regime and he varied the integral scale. Fig. 30
shows that his predicted values of ST approximately scale
as ðlÞ1=2. The CFM [26] also predicts that ST depends on
the integral scale because source terms in the surface
density balance (Eqs. (10), (13), (14)) are proportional to
(u0=l) GK and GK also depends on l. The role of the
integral scale has been explained by two entirely different
physical arguments. In the thick ﬂame regime it is assumed
that eddies enter the preheat zone and increase the
diffusion of enthalpy inside the ﬂamelets [6], whereas in
the ﬂamelet regime the integral scale primarily controls the
degree of wrinkling and ﬂamelet surface area [19,30].
Perhaps the best way to understand the role of the integral
scale is to use DNS to systematically vary the integral scale
while keeping all other parameters constant. Two other
parameters that are of interest for the case of Bunsen
ﬂames are the mean velocity U and the burner width W.
Ref. [53] indicates that burning velocity depends on these
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 8
Quantities that are suggested to be included in a database of premixed turbulentcombustion properties
Criteria to assess simulations
Diagnostics now available
Refs.
S
Surface density—large scale
Mie, Rayleigh, CH or OH PLIF
[53,66,80,81]
SSG
Surface density—subgrid scale
Mie, Rayleigh, CH or OH PLIF
–
dT
Brush thickness
Mie, Rayleigh, CH or OH PLIF
[66,13,81]
dCH
Reaction zone thickness of ﬂamelets
CH or CH2O PLIF
[53–56]
dTH
Preheat zone thermal thickness of ﬂamelets
Rayleigh scattering
[1–12]
l
Wrinkle wavelength
CH PLIF or Rayleigh
[58–61]
K
Stretch rate—large scale
CH PLIF+PIV
[53,78]
KSG
Stretch rate—subgrid scale
CH PLIF+PIV
–
G
Stretch efﬁciency factor
CH PLIF+PIV
[53]
Q
Local quenching rate
CH or CH2O PLIF
[53–56]
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
126


--- Page 37 ---

parameters because they control the residence time of the
ﬂame–vortex interactions and the overall height of the
ﬂame, which affects the degree of wrinkling.
4. Understand the role of Markstein number in the
relation for burning velocity.
It sometimes has been assumed that the turbulent
Markstein number (MaT) that appears in Eq. (37) (which
is used to determine the stretch factor I0) is equal to the
laminar Markstein number (MaL) that is deﬁned by Eq.
(35). This assumption is disputed by the DNS results of Im
and Chen [111] and Hawkes and Chen [96]. However, their
results do show that for the special case when MaL is zero
(i.e.,
for a diffusionally neutral fuel–air ratio)
their
computed ﬂamelet Markstein number MaF is approxi-
mately zero, and this suggests that MaT also is zero. There
is a need for future DNS and experimental efforts to
determine values of MaT. To do so, it would be necessary
to perform DNS simulations or experiments for a range of
values of u0 using a Bunsen burner geometry, for example.
Values of I0 can be determined by combining Eq. (29) with
values of S and the known mass ﬂow rate of reactants.
Once I0 is known, Eq. (37) provides the turbulent
Markstein number MaT.
5. Develop high-resolution cinema-PIV and cinema-
PLIF methods to take movies of the turbulent eddy–-
ﬂamelet interactions and compare them to DNS.
Since the ﬂame–eddy interaction is fundamental to the
stretching and wrinkling of turbulent ﬂames, there is a need
to visualize the time–history of the interactions. As
described in Section 2.2, Steinberg et al. [73] recorded
cinema–stereo PIV movies of ﬂame–eddy interactions for
fully turbulent conditions; in some cases the classical
wrinkling process that was predicted by Damkohler [6] was
observed. In other cases eddy–eddy interactions negate any
attempts to wrinkle the ﬂame, while sometimes the
wrinkling process is clearly affected by ﬂame generated
vorticity. While it is possible to use DNS, LES and G-
equation simulations to generate movies of ﬂame–eddy
interactions, there has been little information reported to
date.
Another research need is to achieve improved spatial
resolution of Rayleigh scattering and PLIF diagnostics and
then accurately measure the thickness of ﬂamelets over a
wide range of Karlovitz numbers. The current controversy
concerning the boundary between the laminar ﬂamelet
regime and the thick ﬂame regime is due, in part, to
difﬁculties in achieving the necessary spatial resolution of
50–100 mm. New micro-PIV, micro-Rayleigh scattering and
micro-PLIF diagnostics are needed, but these diagnostics
require extremely thin laser sheets and improved signal-to-
noise. A related challenge is to image eddies that are of the
same size as the ﬂame thickness in order to determine if
they enter the preheat and reaction zones.
6. Assess DNS simulations—boundary conditions, re-
solution requirements
Even though DNS provides solutions to the exact form
of the conservation equations, problems can arise when the
results are compared to measurements. Realistic boundary
conditions must be known on all boundaries. It is not
known if the incoming turbulence ﬁeld of an experiment
can be characterized by just a few measured parameters
such as the proﬁles of mean velocity U, velocity ﬂuctua-
tions (u0) and integral scale (l). It may be acceptable for the
DNS boundary conditions to be based on the assumption
that the incoming turbulence is isotropic and has a
corresponding power spectrum. If these assumptions are
not adequate, then it is necessary to measure all three
integral scales, proﬁles of the ﬂuctuations of all three
velocity components and a measured power spectrum at
the
inlet.
Grid
resolution
continues
to
be
another
important issue. In recent DNS work a grid resolution of
20–79 mm has been achieved [1,3,75,95] but reaction layer
thickness may be as small as 200 mm. Another complication
can arise if local ﬂame extinction occurs; it may not
adequate to use the current complex chemistry mechanisms
that contain typically 20 species and 84 reactions. To
achieve better agreement with measurements, additional
attention may be required to simulate, pressure ﬂuctua-
tions, radiative heat losses and buoyancy forces.
7. Improve methods to measure 3-D ﬂame surface area
from 2-D images.
Several experimental errors can arise when measure-
ments of ﬂame surface density are performed. Wrinkled
ﬂamelets are measured to have a ﬁnite thickness that may
be larger than the true value, due to the pixel size of the
camera or due to the spatial averaging (the binning of
pixels) that is needed to achieve an acceptable signal-to-
noise ratio. To determine S, it is necessary to represent the
interface by an inﬁnitely thin contour, using an appropriate
curve ﬁtting algorithm, so that the measured values of S
can be shown to be independent of the interrogation box
size in the limit as interrogation box size is decreased.
Another issue is that some approximation is necessary to
estimate the 3-D surface area from 2-D images. Three
approximations that have been employed are (i) the 2-D
surface
density
assumption,
(ii)
the
ﬂame
perimeter
assumption and (iii) the fractal dimension assumption.
When the surface density assumption is employed, S is
assumed to equal the average ﬂame perimeter within an
interrogation box located in the plane of the laser sheet,
divided by the interrogation box area. DNS results of the
DNS of Bell et al. [1] that appear in Fig. 15 showed that
this 2-D value should be multiplied by 1.35 to achieve the
correct value of S. The second method to estimate AT/AL is
to assume that it equals (PT/PL)2. PT is the perimeter of the
reaction layers that appear in a 2-D laser sheet image and
PL is the perimeter if there was no wrinkling, which is
determined by superimposing many instantaneous images
of the wrinkled ﬂame surface to obtain the smooth time-
averaged surface and determining its perimeter. To assess
this method, ﬁrst consider the hypothetical case for which
all wrinkles are rectangular in shape. Each wrinkle has a
height H and has a base that is a square having dimensions
L by L. For this example AT can be shown to be related to
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
127


--- Page 38 ---

PT by
ðAT=ALÞ=ðPT=PLÞ2 ¼ ð1 þ 4H=LÞ=ð1 þ 2H=LÞ2.
(43)
This function is plotted as the thick solid line in Fig. 47.
Now consider the wrinkles to be prisms that have
triangular sides, a height H and a base that is a square
having dimensions L by L. The area ratio (AT/AL) in this
case is (1+4H2/L2)1/2. The perimeter ratio is determined by
considering all possible intersections of a laser sheet with
the wrinkled interface. For this geometry the results are
indicated by the dashed line in Fig. 47. It is expected that
for realistic wrinkles the values of (AT/AL)/(PT/PL)2 can be
approximated by the thin solid line that lies between the
other two curves in Fig. 47. Since the ratio of height to
length (H/L) rarely exceeds unity, Fig. 47 shows that the
ﬂame perimeter method to estimate the 3-D surface area
has a typical uncertainty of less than 20%. A third way to
estimate the 3-D surface area is the fractal dimension
assumption. AT/AL is assumed to be equal the ratio of the
outer fractal scale to the inner fractal scale, raised to the
power of D, where D is the 3-D fractal dimension [121,126].
D is assumed to be the measured 2-D fractal dimension
plus 1.0. This method has not been used often because
results that are plotted in Ref. [121] do not appear to be
realistic. Gulder et al. [121] point out that ambiguities still
exist in the way that the fractal dimension is determined.
8. Understand the role of hydrodynamic instabilities.
It has been noted that the wavelengths of the ﬂamelet
wrinkles often are larger than the integral scale of the
turbulence, and they almost never are as small as the
Taylor scale [58–61]. Instead, there is some evidence that
the wrinkle wavelength is proportional to the cell size
associated with hydrodynamic instabilities. However, there
is little experimental information available to determine if
the role of hydrodynamic instabilities is comparable to the
role of turbulent eddies in the wrinkling process. Kobaya-
shi, et al. [15] showed that increasing the gas pressure to
10 atm causes a marked decrease in the wrinkle wavelength
while they maintained a constant value of the integral scale.
This work shows that the wrinkle wavelength does not
scale with the integral scale but scales with the ﬂame
thickness, which is inversely proportional to the gas
pressure. The theory of hydrodynamic instability predicts
that cell sizes are proportional to the laminar ﬂame
thickness [45], so it is possible that the ﬁne-grained
wrinkling observed by Kobayashi at high pressures is
caused, in part, by hydrodynamic instabilities. Paul and
Bray
[101]
modeled
the
ﬂame
wrinkling
caused
by
hydrodynamic instabilities by adding a term to the ﬂame
surface density equation.
9. Determine the limits of the ﬂamelet regime
The previous discussion has focused on measurements
and models that are appropriate for the ﬂamelet regime. In
a very few cases there is evidence that premixed combus-
tion occurs in distributed reaction zones and for these
conditions ﬂamelets do not exist. The boundaries between
the regimes of ﬂamelets, thick ﬂames and distributed
reactions have not been quantiﬁed experimentally. Dis-
tributed reaction zones are created by rapidly raising the
temperature of a large region of the reactants to a value
that is above the ignition temperature. After an ignition
delay the reactions will begin at many locations simulta-
neously. If the reactants are above the ignition tempera-
ture, there is no need for a ﬂame because a ﬂame is a layer
within which heat diffuses upstream in order to preheat the
reactants
to
the
ignition
temperature.
The
criterion
required for distributed reactions to occur is that over a
large region in space the following relation must hold:
tDTotig,
(44)
tDT is the time required to raise the temperature of the
reactants to a temperature above the ignition temperature
and tig is the chemical ignition delay time. Two methods
have been used in order to attempt to create this rapid
temperature rise: (a) rapid adiabatic compression and (b)
rapid turbulent mixing of hot products into the reactants.
While it has been demonstrated that rapid adiabatic
compression can create distributed reactions in homoge-
neous charge compression–ignition (HCCI) engines and in
shock tubes [139–141], there appears to be no conclusive
proof that the second method (rapid turbulent mixing) can
create a documented distributed reaction zone. A docu-
mented distributed reaction zone is deﬁned to be a set of
measured images of the heat release region or images of
radicals such as CH that are spread out over distances that
are many times larger than the thickness of a laminar
ﬂame. The reaction zone is deﬁned to be the primary
reaction zone that is associated with heat release and fuel
decomposition, and the reaction zone does not include
post-ﬂame NOx and OH/water dissociation reactions
which often are distributed in space but are not part of
the ﬂame. It is not argued that distributed reaction zones
created by rapid turbulent mixing are not possible to
ARTICLE IN PRESS
1.20
0
Wrinkle Height/Wavelength  (H/L)
(AT/AL)/(PT/PL)2
TRIANGULAR
1
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
WRINKLES
EXPECTED SHAPE OF 
TURBULENT WRINKLES
RECTANGULAR
WRINKLES
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fig. 47. Ratio of the square of the 2-D ﬂame perimeter ratio to the 3-D
area ratio for different wrinkle heights H and wavelengths L. A value of
unity on the y-axis implies that measured (PT/PL)2 is a good estimate of
the 3-D area ratio. Dashed line: wrinkles are rectangular with height H
and base L by L; solid line: wrinkles are tetrahedral prisms. Conditions for
realistic wrinkles are expected lie between the two curves.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
128


--- Page 39 ---

achieve; to this author’s knowledge they have not yet been
documented.
When rapid compression is used to heat the reactants,
there is experimental proof that distributed reactions occur
in a HCCI device [139,140] or in a shock tube [141]. These
few cases do not represent new regimes of turbulent
combustion,
since
it
is
rapid
compression
and
not
turbulence that causes the distributed reactions. He et al.
[139] employed a rapid-compression facility in which
compressed gases drive a piston into the iso-octane–air
reactants. The adiabatic compression rapidly raised the
reactants to a temperature that exceeds the ignition
temperature. Chemiluminescence that was recorded with
a high-speed camera was observed to be uniformly
distributed in space as the reaction progresses. There was
no visible evidence of ﬂamelets. Aleiferis et al. [140]
obtained images in an HCCI engine showing that under
some conditions there were many islands where reactions
simultaneously occurred. It is noted that spark-ignited
internal combustion engines and gas turbine engines do not
experience the rapid compression–ignition process that
occurs in HCCI engines. Based on the limited images
available, ﬂame structure in spark-ignited and gas turbine
engines appears to consist of thin reaction layers [142–145].
Some attempts to achieve distributed reaction zones due
to rapid turbulent mixing have led to the development of
‘‘well-stirred’’
reactors
[146–148],
strong
recirculation
zones [149–150], the quasi-equilibrium distributed reactor
[151], ‘‘ﬂameless oxidation [152]’’ and moderate and intense
low oxygen dilution (MILD) [153] devices. However, to
date there is no experimental proof (i.e., there are no
images of radicals) that demonstrate that distributed
reactions exist in these devices. On the contrary, when a
strong recirculation zone is used to increase the mixing
rates, the images of Ratner et al. [74], Meier et al. [56] and
Rasmussen et al. [76] indicate that ﬂamelets still exist.
These CH images indicate that very large turbulence
intensities exert strain rates which keep the layers thin, so
that the layers ‘‘extinguish before they broaden’’.
An active area of research has been the determination of
the boundary of the ﬂamelet regime. Since the experimental
evidence described in Section 2 disputes the prediction that
boundary of the ﬂamelet regime occurs when Karlovitz
number exceeds unity (and the Kolmogorov scale equals
the laminar ﬂame thickness), it is reasonable to look for
another criterion. In order to cause broadening, an eddy
should have a rotational velocity large enough to create a
turbulent diffusivity (DT) that exceeds the molecular
diffusivity (D), so that the transport of heat is enhanced
by the turbulence. This suggests that the criterion should be
DTXD.
(45)
The turbulent diffusivity of eddies that have diameters d
equal to dL0 depends on the rotational velocity (uy,F) of
these eddies, so DT can be set equal to uy,F dL0. The
rotational velocity uy,F of the eddy is estimated to equal
u0ðdL0lÞ1=3 (rP/rR). The factor u0ðdL0lÞ1=3 comes from the
energy cascade concept. The density ratio (rP/rR) is
suggested by ﬂame–vortex experiments [77] which show
that as an eddy passes through a ﬂame, its volume after gas
expansion is (rR/rP) times its volume before gas expansion.
The circulation associated with the eddy is conserved, so
the eddy rotational velocity decreases during passage. The
gas expansion elongates the ﬂuid element only in one
direction (normal to the ﬂame); it follows that the
rotational velocity is estimated to be (rP/rR) times its
original rotational velocity. Combining these relations
leads to
D ¼ u0ðdL0=lÞ1=3ðrR=rPÞ1dL0.
(46)
Solving this equation for u0 and inserting it into Eq. (45)
yields a new criterion for ﬂamelet broadening:
Ka4ðrR=rPÞ3=2,
(47)
dF has been eliminated by setting it equal to D/SL0. The
right side of Eq. (47) is typically 17. Therefore, high
intensity turbulence would be required to broaden a
ﬂamelet. However broadening may never occur at all if
the ‘‘ﬂamelets tend to extinguish before they are broa-
dened’’. Evidence that extinction occurs before any broad-
ening is provided by Ratner et al. [74] who achieved very
high intensity turbulence within a strong recirculation
zone. Their images were shown in Fig. 11. The CH layers
are seen to remain thin but become ‘‘shredded’’ due to
frequent local extinction. Their conditions were partially
premixed in the combustion zone and were initially non-
premixed. For the premixed case no imaging studies of
shredded reaction layers have been conducted.
10. Determine the role of large eddies versus small eddies
In the past it has been argued that small eddies control
the dissipation rates and the stretch rates and therefore
play a dominant role in turbulent combustion. The
argument is that small eddies have a larger ratio of
rotational velocity to eddy diameter (uy/d) than do large
eddies because energy cascade concepts [9] predict that uy
scales as u0ðd=lÞ1=3 so (uy/d) should scale as d2/3. In some
studies
it
has
been
assumed
that
stretch
rates
are
proportional to (uy/d) but recent research casts doubt on
this assumption. It is more difﬁcult for a vortex to wrinkle
and stretch a ﬂame surface than to stretch a scalar
isocontour within a non-reacting ﬂow. DNS and ﬂame
vortex experiments show that combustion adds a new
complication; heat release superimposes velocity vectors
that diverge away from the reaction layer. In the product
gases the additional velocity is 5–7 times the laminar
burning velocity. Small eddies typically do not have a
rotational speed large enough to compete against this new
velocity ﬁeld. In addition, the volume of each eddy expands
by a factor of 5–7 as it crosses a reaction layer. Since the
circulation tends to remain constant, this means that the
mean vorticity decreases by a factor of 5–7, as was shown
by the ﬂame–vortex experiments of Mueller et al. [77]. In
addition, the residence time during which a large eddy is in
contact with the ﬂamelet is expected to exceed the residence
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
129


--- Page 40 ---

time of a small eddy. The role of large eddies has important
implications for modeling efforts. Small eddies are assumed
to act in a universal way that can be modeled in RANS
equations by terms that have been averaged in time. Large
eddies often introduce unsteady motions (such as vortex
shedding) that are not universal but depend on the
geometry of shear layers. The occurrence of large-scale
unsteadiness may require the use of LES or DNS.
The stretch efﬁciency factor GK deﬁned by Eq. (13) is a
useful way to quantify the role of eddy size. Meneveau and
Poinsot [19] used DNS to determine that GK is approxi-
mately equal to C1ðl=dL0Þ1:0 where C1 is a constant. They
found that GK did not signiﬁcantly depend on u0/SL0.
Measurements of stretch rates and GK were made in the
turbulent premixed Bunsen ﬂame of Filatyev et al. [53] and
they obtained a somewhat different result:
GK ¼ C2
l
dL0

2:0
.
(48)
The quantity C2 is proportional to ð ¯U=SL0Þ2. It is not
surprising that the turbulent Bunsen ﬂame results differ
from the DNS result obtained for a ﬂat ﬂame interacting
with a toroidal vortex. In the Bunsen ﬂame not all of the
vortices are toroidal, and they do not pass over the ﬂame in
a direction that is normal to the ﬂamefront.
There is additional evidence that suggests that small
eddies are too weak to perturb a ﬂame: it is observed that
wrinkles in the ﬂame surface are almost never as small as
the Taylor scale. Table 9 is a list of the wavelengths of the
smallest wrinkles measured in recent experiments. The
values indicate that for eddies to wrinkle the ﬂame, they
must be at least as large as 20–50% of the integral scale and
must be ten times larger than the Taylor scale. It follows
that eddies at the Kolmogorov scale are far too weak to
create wrinkles. Wrinkles are never observed to be as small
as the Kolmogorov scale. Kolmogorov eddies are so weak
that they are dissipated by viscosity after about one
revolution, so they cannot perturb the ﬂame, which acts a
source that produces velocities in the products on the order
of 240 cm/s.
There also is some evidence that large eddies are more
effective than small eddies in causing local extinction.
Roberts et al. [154] propagated a laminar ﬂame over a
strong vortex and varied the vortex size and rotational
velocity. They found that extinction occurred when the
vortex Karlovitz number exceeded:
ðuy=SL0Þ=ðd=dL0Þ ¼ 2:2 þ 9:2ðd=dL0Þ2.
(49)
Non-dimensional
vortex
diameters
d/dL0
were
varied
from 1 to 5. Eq. (48) indicates that if the eddy size is
made larger it is easier to cause local extinction since a
smaller non-dimensional stretch rate is required. DNS
results of Meneveau and Poinsot [19] displayed a similar
trend. To understand the role of large and small eddies,
it would be useful to apply spatial ﬁlters to DNS results
and identify the degree of ﬂamelet wrinkling, stretching
and extinction associated with eddies of different size
ranges.
A ﬁnal example of how DNS can identify the role of
turbulent eddies is given by Fig. 48. It is a schematic
showing two counter-rotating eddies on the left that exert a
positive stretch rate, while the two eddies on the right are
rotating in the opposite direction. It is clear that the eddies
on the left will increase the surface area of the ﬂame
because they induce the velocity ﬁeld shown by the arrows
that exerts a positive stretch rate. The eddies on the right
would decrease the surface area if the ﬂame remained ﬂat
because the arrows drawn indicate that they exert a
negative
stretch
rate.
However,
they
also
induce
a
rotational velocity ﬁeld that forces the ﬂame to propagate
downward between the eddies. This has the net effect of
increasing the surface area. This process causes the
correlation between stretch rate and ﬂame curvature to
be negative; the eddies on the left exert positive stretch and
negative curvature, while the eddies on the right do the
opposite. The DNS work of Chakraborty and Cant [89]
quantiﬁed this negative correlation. The example shows
that even turbulent eddies that initially exert a negative
stretch rate may end up exerting a positive stretch rate at
later times because the unsteady ﬂame does not remain ﬂat
but becomes distorted. For these reasons the counterﬂow
ﬂame analogy may be valid only for unrealistically small
perturbations and images of the actual eddy–ﬂame inter-
actions are needed.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 9
Wavelengths (lmin) of the smallest wrinkles of premixed turbulent ﬂames, which are 12–25 times the Taylor scale, indicating that eddies smaller than ten
Taylor scales do not cause wrinkles
Reference
Wavelength of smallest
wrinkle lmin (mm)
Integral scale l (mm)
lmin=l
lmin/lTaylor
lmin/dL0
Filatyev et al. [53]
2
5.2
0.4
20
6.7
Cheng et al. [58]
2
10.4
0.2
24
4.0
Lachaux et al. [59]
4
3.0
1.3
25
3.1
Lachaux et al. [59]
2
3.1
0.6
12
3.1
Shepherd et al. [60]
1.5
3.0
0.5
13
5.0
Buschmann et al. [61]
2
12
0.2
22
5.0
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
130


--- Page 41 ---

6. Conclusions
DNS results of Bell et al. [1,2] have demonstrated that it
is now possible to predict reasonable values of the
turbulent burning velocity, using no modeling constants,
of the Bunsen experiment of Filatyev et al. [53] and the V-
ﬂame of Cheng and Shepherd [2] for realistic Reynolds
numbers. The 3-D DNS work employed complex chemistry
and an adaptive mesh reﬁnement. Differences between
predictions and measurements were 4% and 19%, respec-
tively. LES and RANS models also provide realistic curves
of turbulent burning velocity as the turbulence intensity
and integral scale are varied, but a few modeling constants
are required. The universality of these constants needs to
be assessed. We now have available many images of the
reaction layers that are associated with fuel decomposition
and with heat release. These images are made available by
recent advances in CH and CH2O/OH PLIF diagnostics as
well as DNS. Thin ﬂamelets are found to occur even when
the Karlovitz number greatly exceeds unity. The preheat
zone average thickness is no larger than the laminar value
in many studies, while in some cases it is 2–4 times larger.
Better spatial resolution is needed to see if the thickening of
the preheat zone is due to turbulence or is due to strain
rates, the orientation of the reaction layer with the laser
sheet, merging of segments near cusps, or resolution
limitations. Signiﬁcant thermodiffusive (Markstein num-
ber) effects occur even for high intensity turbulence; the
theory of ﬂame stretch now provides a qualitative but not
yet a quantitative explanation. Research has identiﬁed
improved ways to deﬁne and quantify the turbulent
burning velocity and the ﬂame surface density. A modern
database that contains several suggested quantities is
needed for each of several ﬂame categories.
Acknowledgments
The author is grateful for discussions with many
colleagues, including: R.K. Cheng, I.G. Shepherd, N.
Peters, J.B. Bell, J.F. Grcar, M.S. Day, J.H. Chen, H.
Pitsch, C.K. Law, T. Poinsot, S. Candel, M.C. Drake, F.
Gouldin, C.D. Carter, S.A. Filatyev, A.M. Steinberg, J.M.
Donbar, A. Ratner, W.L. Roberts, C.J. Mueller, A.F.
Ibarreta, J.O. Sinibaldi, M.S. Wu and A. Gulati. Support
has been provided by National Science Foundation Grants
CTS-0203140,
CTS-9904198,
CTS-9123834
and
CPE-
8213319.
References
[1] Bell JB, Day MS, Grcar JF, Lijewski MJ, Driscoll JF, Filatyev SA.
Numerical simulation of a laboratory-scale turbulent slot ﬂame.
Proc Combust Inst 2006;31:1299–307.
[2] Bell JB, Day MS, Shepherd IG, Johnson MR, Cheng RK, Grcar JF,
et al. Numerical simulation of a laboratory scale turbulent V-ﬂame.
Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. 2005;102(29):10006–11.
[3] Sankaran R, Hawkes ER, Chen JH. Structure of a spatially-
developing turbulent lean methane–air Bunsen ﬂame. Proc Combust
Inst 2006;31:1291–8.
[4] Pitsch H, Duchamp de Lagenest L. Large-eddy simulation of
premixed turbulent combustion using a level-set approach. Proc
Combust Inst 2002;29:2001–8.
[5] Bray KNC, Cant RS. Some applications of Kolmogorov turbulence
research in the ﬁeld of combustion. Proc R Soc London A
1991;434:217–27.
[6] Damkohler G. Jahrb. deut. Luftfahrtforsch, Z. Electrochem.
1940;46(601):113; also see Lewis B, von Elbe G. Combustion,
ﬂames and explosions of gases. New York: Academic Press; 1961.
[7] Bray KNC, Peters N. In: Libby PA, Williams FA, editors.
Turbulent reacting ﬂows. London: Academic Press; 1994. p. 63–114.
[8] Peters N. Laminar ﬂamelet concepts in turbulent combustion. Proc
Combust Inst 1986;21:1231–50.
[9] Peters N. Turbulent combustion. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press; 2000.
[10] Poinsot T, Veynante D. Theoretical and numerical combustion.
Philadelphia, PA: Edwards Pub; 2005.
[11] Ashurst WT. Darrieus–Landau instability, growing cycloids and
expanding ﬂame acceleration. Combust Theory Model 1997;1(4):
405–28.
[12] Wu AS, Bray KNC. A coherent ﬂame model of premixed turbulent
combustion in a counterﬂow geometry. Combust Flame 1997;109:
43–64.
[13] Shepherd IG, Cheng RK. The burning rate of premixed ﬂames in
moderate
and
intense
turbulence.
Combust
Flame
2001;127:
2066–75.
[14] Lawn CJ, Schefer RW. Scaling of premixed turbulent ﬂames in the
corrugated regime. Combust Flame 2006;146:180–99.
[15] Kobayashi H, Kawahata T, Seyama K, Fujimari T, Kim J-S.
Relationship between the smallest scale of ﬂame wrinkles and
turbulence characteristics
of
high
pressure, high
temperature
turbulent premixed ﬂames. Proc Combust Inst 2002;29:1793–800.
[16] Smith KO, Gouldin FC. Turbulence effects on ﬂame speed and
ﬂame structure. AIAA J 1979;11,5:1243–50.
[17] Kido H, Nakahar M, Nakashima K, Hashimoto J. Inﬂuence of local
ﬂame displacement velocity on turbulent burning velocity. Proc
Combust Inst 2002;29:1855–61.
[18] Veynante D, Duclos JM, Piana J. Experimental analysis of ﬂamelet
models for premixed turbulent combustion. Proc Combust Inst
1994;25:1249–56.
[19] Meneveau C, Poinsot T. Stretching and quenching of ﬂamelets in
premixed turbulent combustion. Combust Flame 1991;86:311–32.
[20] Baritaud TA, Duclos JM, Fusco A. Modeling turbulent combustion
and pollutant formation in stratiﬁed charge SI engines. Proc Comb
Inst 1996;26:2627–35.
[21] Musculus MP, Rutland CJ. Coherent ﬂamelet modeling of diesel
engine combustion. Combust Sci Technol 1995;104:295–337.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Reactants
Products
positive stretch
creates negative
curvature
negative stretch
creates positive
curvature
Fig. 48. Schematic of counter-rotating vortices on the left that exert
positive stretch but create negative curvature. Vortices on the right initially
exert negative stretch but create positive curvature. Even the vortices on
the right eventually create more surface area because the ﬂame does not
remain ﬂat but is free to wrinkle. DNS results of Chakraborty and Cant
[89] have quantiﬁed this negative correlation.
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
131


--- Page 42 ---

[22] Teraji A, Tsuda T, Noda T, Kubo M, Itoh T. Development of a
novel ﬂame propagation model (UCFM: universal coherent ﬂamelet
model) for SI engines and its application to knocking prediction. Soc
Automot Engr 2005; paper 2005-0100199.
[23] Boudier P, Henriot S, Poinsot T, Baritaud T. A model for turbulent
ﬂame ignition and propagation in spark ignition engines. Proc
Combust Inst 1992;24:503–10.
[24] Duclos JM, Veynante D, Poinsot T. A comparison of ﬂamelet
models for premixed turbulent combustion. Combust Flame 1993;
95:1–16.
[25] Veynante D, Piana J, Duclos JM, Martel C. Experimental analysis
of ﬂame surface density models for premixed turbulent combustion.
Proc Combust Inst 1996;26:413–20.
[26] Prasad ROS, Paul RN, Sivathanu YR, Gore JP. An evaluation of
combined ﬂame surface density and mixture fraction models for
nonisenthalpic premixed turbulent ﬂames. Combust Flame 1999;
117:514–28.
[27] Emery P, Maroteaux F, Sorine M. Modeling of combustion in
gasoline direct injection engines. ASME J Fluids Eng 2003;125:
520–32.
[28] Choi C, Huh K. Development of a coherent ﬂamelet model for a
spark ignited turbulent premixed ﬂame in a closed vessel. Combust
Flame 1998;114:336–48.
[29] Brandl A, Pﬁtzner M, Mooney JD, Durst B, Kern W. Comparison
of combustion models and assessment of the applicability to the
simulation of premixed turbulent combustion in IC engines. Flow
Turb Combust 2005;75:335–50.
[30] Peters N. The turbulent burning velocity for large-scale and small-
scale turbulence. J Fluid Mech 1999;384:107–32.
[31] Peters N. A spectral closure for premixed turbulent combustion in
the ﬂamelet regime. J Fluid Mech 1992;242:611–29.
[32] Hawkes ER, Cant RS. Implications of a ﬂame surface density
approach to large eddy simulation of premixed turbulent combus-
tion. Combust Flame 2001;126:1617–29.
[33] Weller HG, Tabor G, Gosman AD, Fureby C. Application of a
ﬂame wrinkling LES combustion model to a turbulent mixing layer.
Proc Combust Inst 1998;27:899–907.
[34] Charlette F, Meneveau C, Veynante D. A power law ﬂame
wrinkling model for LES of premixed turbulent combustion Part
I—non-dynamic formulation and initial tests. Combust Flame
2002;131:159–80.
[35] Pitsch H. A consistent level set formulation for large-eddy simu-
lation of premixed turbulent combustion. Combust Flame 2005;
143:587–98.
[36] Pope SB, Cheng WK. Statistical calculations of spherical turbulent
ﬂames. Proc Combust Inst 1986;21:1473–81.
[37] Lipatnikov AN, Chomiak J. Turbulent ﬂame speed and thickness:
phenomenology, evaluation, and application in multi-dimensional
simulations. Progr Energy Combust Sci 2002;28(1):1–74.
[38] Zimont VL, Battaglia V. Joint RANS/LES approach to premixed
ﬂame modeling in the context of the TFC combustion model. Flow
Turb Combust 2006;77:305–31.
[39] Lindstedt
RP,
Vaos
EM.
Modeling
of
premixed
turbulent
ﬂames with second moment methods. Combust Flame 1999;
116:461.
[40] Mongia HC, Held TJ, Hsiao GC, Pandalai RP. Challenges and
progress in controlling dynamics in gas turbine combustors. J
Propul Power 2003;19:822–9.
[41] Lipatnikov AN, Chomiak J. Molecular transport effects on
turbulent ﬂame propagation and structure. Progr Energy Combust
Sci 2005;31:1–73.
[42] Bradley D. How fast can we burn? Proc Combust Inst 1992;24:
247–53.
[43] Abdel-Gayed RG, Bradley D, Hamid MN, Lawes M. Lewis number
effects on turbulent burning velocity. Proc Combust Inst 1984;20:
505–12.
[44] Gulder OL, Smallwood GJ, Wong R, Snelling DR, Smith R,
Deschamps BM, et al. Flame front surface characteristics in
turbulent
premixed
propane/air
combustion.
Combust
Flame
2000;120:407–19.
[45] Kadowaki S, Hasegawa T. Numerical simulations of dynamics of
premixed ﬂames: ﬂame instability and vortex–ﬂame interaction.
Progr Energy Combust Sci 2005;31:193–241.
[46] Veynante D, Vervisch L. Turbulent combustion modeling. Progr
Energy Combust Sci 2002;28:193–266.
[47] Pitsch H. Large-eddy simulation of turbulent combustion. Annu
Rev Fluid Mech 2006;38:453–82.
[48] Poinsot T, Candel S, Trouve A. Applications of direct numerical
simulation
to
premixed
turbulent
combustion.
Progr
Energy
Combust Sci 1995;21(6):531–76.
[49] Law CK, Sung CJ. Structure, aerodynamics, and geometry of
premixed ﬂamelets. Progr Energy Combust Sci 2000;26:459–505.
[50] Williams FA. Progress in knowledge of ﬂamelet structure and
extinction. Progr Energy Combust Sci 2000;26:657–82.
[51] Poinsot T, Echekki T, Mungal MG. A study of the laminar ﬂame tip
and implications for premixed turbulent combustion. Combust Sci
Technol 1992;81:45–59.
[52] Ghenai C, Gouldin FC, Golkalp I. Mass ﬂux measurements for
burning rate determination of premixed turbulent ﬂames. Proc
Combust Inst 1998;27:979–87.
[53] Filatyev SA, Driscoll JF, Carter CD, Donbar JM. Measured
properties of turbulent premixed ﬂames for model assessment,
including burning velocities, stretch rates and surface densities.
Combust Flame 2005;141:1–21.
[54] Mansour MS, Peters N, Chen Y-C. Investigation of scalar
mixing in the thin reaction zones regime using a simultaneous
CH-LIF/Rayleigh laser technique. Proc Combust Inst 1998;27:
767–73.
[55] Ayoola BO, Balachandran R, Frank JH, Mastorakos E, Kaminski
CF. Spatially resolved heat release rate measurements in turbulent
premixed ﬂames. Combust Flame 2006;144:1–16.
[56] Meier W, Duan XR, Weigand P. Reaction zone structures and
mixing characteristics of partially premixed swirling CH4–air ﬂames
in a gas turbine model combustor. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:
835–42.
[57] Shepherd IG, Cheng RK, Plessing T, Kortschik C, Peters N.
Premixed ﬂame front structure in intense turbulence. Proc Combust
Inst 2002;29:1833–40.
[58] Cheng RK, Shepherd IG, Bedat B, Talbot L. Premixed turbulent
ﬂame structures in moderate and intense isotropic turbulence.
Combust Sci Technol 2002;174:29–59.
[59] Lachaux T, Halter F, Chauveau C, Gokalp I, Shepherd IG. Flame
front analysis of high pressure turbulent lean premixed methane air
ﬂames. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:819–26.
[60] Shepherd IG, Cheng RK, Goix PJ. The spatial scalar structure of
premixed turbulent stagnation point ﬂames. Proc Combust Inst
1990;23:781–7.
[61] Buschmann A, Dinkelacker F, Schafer T, Schafer M, Wolfrum J.
Measurement of the instantaneous detailed ﬂame structure in
turbulent premixed combustion. Proc Combust Inst 1996;26:437–45.
[62] Dinkelacker F, Soika A, Most D, Hofmann D, Leipertz A, Polifke
W, et al. Structure of locally quenched highly turbulent lean
premixed ﬂames. Proc Combust Inst 1998;27:857–65.
[63] Soika A, Dinkelacker F, Leipertz A. Measurement of the resolved
ﬂame structure of turbulent premixed ﬂames with constant Reynolds
number
and
varied
stoichiometry.
Proc
Combust
Inst
1998;27:785–92.
[64] Soika A, Dinkelacker F, Leipertz A. Pressure inﬂuence on the ﬂame
front curvature of turbulent premixed ﬂames: comparison between
experiment and theory. Combust Flame 2003;132:451–62.
[65] Dinkelacker F. Experimental validation of ﬂame regimes for highly
turbulent premixed ﬂames. In: Proceedings of European Combus-
tion Meeting (ECM2003) of The Combustion Institute, 2003.
p. 158–64.
[66] Chen Y-C, Bilger RW. Experimental investigation of three dimen-
sional ﬂame front structure in premixed turbulent combustion-I:
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
132


--- Page 43 ---

hydrocarbon
air
Bunsen
ﬂames.
Combust
Flame
2002;131:
400–35.
[67] Chen
Y-C,
Bilger
RW.
Experimental
investigation
of
three
dimensional ﬂame front structure in premixed turbulent combus-
tion—II: lean hydrogen air Bunsen ﬂames. Combust Flame 2004;
138:155–74.
[68] Chen Y-C, Bilger RW. Detailed measurements of local scalar front
structures in stagnation type turbulent premixed ﬂames. Proc
Combust Inst 2005;30:801–8.
[69] Chen Y-C, Kalt PAM, Bilger RW, Swaminathan N. Effects of mean
ﬂow divergence on turbulent scalar ﬂux and local ﬂame structure in
premixed turbulent combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2002;29:
1863–71.
[70] O’Young F, Bilger RW. Combust Flame 1997;109:682–700.
[71] Chen Y-C, Peters N, Schneemann GA, Wruck N, Renz U, Mansour
MS. The detailed ﬂame structure of highly stretched turbulent
premixed methane air ﬂames. Combust Flame 1996;107:223–44.
[72] de Goey LPH, Plessing T, Hermanns RTE, Peters N. Analysis of the
ﬂame thickness of turbulent ﬂamelets in the thin reaction zones
regime. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:859–66.
[73] Steinberg AM, Driscoll JF, Filatyev S, Carter CD. High resolution
cinema stereo PIV system for the measurement of turbulent ﬂame
dynamics, Paper B-13. In: The 5th US Sections meeting of the
Combustion Institute, San Diego, CA, 2006.
[74] Ratner A, Driscoll JF, Donbar JM, Carter CD, Mullin JA. Reaction
zone structure of nonpremixed turbulent ﬂames in the intensely
wrinkled regime. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:245–51.
[75] Tanahashi M, Nada Y, Ito Y, Miyuchi T. Local ﬂame struc-
ture in the well stirred reactor regime. Proc Combust Inst 2002;29:
2041–9.
[76] Rasmussen CC, PhD thesis University of Michigan, Department of
Aerospace Engineering, Ann Arbor, MI, 2006.
[77] Mueller CJ, Driscoll J F, Reuss D, Drake MC. Vorticity generation
and attenuation as vortices convect through a premixed ﬂame.
Combust Flame 1998;112:342–58.
[78] Upatnieks A, Driscoll JF, Rasmussen CC, Ceccio SL. Liftoff of
turbulent jet ﬂames—assessment of edge ﬂame and other concepts
using cinema PIV diagnostics. Combust Flame 2004;138:259–72.
[79] Donbar JM, Driscoll JF, Carter CD. Strain rates measured along
the wrinkled ﬂame contour within turbulent nonpremixed jet ﬂames.
Combust Flame 2001;125:1239–57.
[80] Deschamps BM, Smallwood GJ, Prieur J, Snelling DR, Gu¨ lder OL.
Surface density measurements of turbulent premixed ﬂames. Proc
Combust Inst 1996;26:427–39.
[81] Lee GG, Huh KY, Kobayashi H. Measurement and analysis of
ﬂame surface density for turbulent premixed combustion on a
nozzle-type burner. Combust Flame 2000;122:43–57.
[82] Shepherd I. Flame surface density and burning rate in premixed
turbulent ﬂames. Proc Combust Inst 1996;26:373–9.
[83] Veynante D, Duclos JM, Piana J. Experimental analysis of ﬂamelet
models for premixed turbulent combustion. Proc Combust Inst
1994;25:1249–56.
[84] Renou B, Mura A, Samson E, et al. Characterization of the local
ﬂame structure and the ﬂame surface density for freely propagating
premixed ﬂames at various Lewis numbers. Combust Sci Technol
2002;174:143–79.
[85] Shy SS, Lee EI, Chang NW, et al. Direct and indirect measurements
of ﬂame surface density, orientation, and curvature for premixed
turbulent combustion modeling in a cruciform burner. Proc
Combust Inst 2000;28:383–90.
[86] Lee SY, Seo S, Broda JC, Pal S, Santoro RJ. An experimental
estimation of mean reaction rate and ﬂame structure during
combustion instability in a lean premixed gas turbine combustor.
Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:775–80.
[87] Domingo P, Vervisch L, Payet S, et al. DNS of a premixed turbulent
V ﬂame and LES of a ducted ﬂame using a FSD-PDF subgrid scale
closure with FPI-tabulated chemistry. Combust Flame 2005;143:
566–86.
[88] Boger M, Veynante D, Boughanem H, Trouve A. Direct numerical
simulation analysis of ﬂame surface density concept. Proc Combust
Inst 1998;27:917–23.
[89] Chakraborty N, Cant RS. Effects of strain rate and curva-
ture on surface density function transport in turbulent pre-
mixed ﬂames in the thin reaction zone regime. Phys Fluids 2005;17:
065108.
[90] Knikker R, Veynante D, Meneveau C. A dynamic ﬂame surface
density model for large eddy simulation of turbulent premixed
combustion. Phys Fluids 2004;16(11):L91.
[91] Tang BHY, Chan CK. Simulation of ﬂame surface density and
burning rate of a premixed turbulent ﬂame using contour advection.
Combust Flame 2006;147:49–66.
[92] Lam JSL, Chan CK, Talbot L, et al. On the high-resolution
modeling of a turbulent premixed open V-ﬂame. Combust Theory
Model 2003;7:1–28.
[93] Hinze JO. Turbulence. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1975.
[94] Goix P, Paranthoen P, Trinite M. A tomographic study of
measurements in a V-shaped H2 air ﬂame and a lagrangian
interpretation of the turbulent ﬂame brush evolution. Combust
Flame 1990;81:229–41.
[95] Bell JB, Day MS, Grcar JF. Numerical simulation of premixed
turbulent
methane
combustion.
Proc
Combust
Inst
2002;29:1987–93.
[96] Hawkes ER, Chen JH. Comparison of direct numerical simulation
of lean premixed methane–air ﬂames with strained laminar ﬂame
calculations. Combust Flame 2006;144:112–25.
[97] Kerstein AR, Ashurst WT, Williams FA. Field equation for
interface propagation in an unsteady homogeneous ﬂow ﬁeld. Phys
Rev A 1988;37(7):2728–31.
[98] Sivashinsky GI. Non-linear analysis of hydrodynamic instability in
laminar ﬂames. 1. derivation of basic equations. Acta Astronaut
1977;4:1177–206.
[99] Ashurst WT. On ﬂame propagation through periodic ﬂow ﬁelds.
Combust Sci Technol 1991;80:159.
[100] Peters N, Wenzel H, Williams FA. Modiﬁcation of the turbulent
burning
velocity
by
gas
expansion.
Proc
Combust
Inst
2000;28:235–43.
[101] Paul RN, Bray KNC. Study of premixed turbulent combustion
including Landau-Darrius instability effects. Proc Combust Inst
1996;26:259–66.
[102] Aung KT, Tzeng L-K, Ismail MA, Faeth GM. Response to
comment by S.C. Taylor and D.B. Smith on laminar burning
velocities and Markstein numbers of hydrocarbon/air ﬂames.
Combust Flame 1995;102:526–30.
[103] Bradley D, Gaskell PH, Gu XJ. Burning velocities, Markstein
lengths, and ﬂame quenching for spherical methane–air ﬂames: a
computational study. Combust Flame 1996;104:176–98.
[104] Echekki T, Mungal MG. Flame speed measurements at the tip of a
slot burner; effects of ﬂame curvature and hydrodynamic stretch.
Proc Combust Inst 1990;23:455.
[105] Durox D, Ducruix S, Candel S. Experiments on collapsing
cylindrical ﬂames. Combust Flame 2001;125:982.
[106] Tzeng L-K, Ismail MA, Faeth GM. Laminar burning velocities and
Markstein numbers of hydrocarbon/air ﬂames. Combust Flame
1993;95:410–26.
[107] Palm-Leis A, Strehlow RA. On the propagation of turbulent ﬂames.
Combust Flame 1969;13:111–29.
[108] Ibarreta
AF,
Driscoll
JF,
Feikema
DA.
Markstein
num-
bers of negatively stretched premixed ﬂames: microgravity mea-
surements
and
computations.
Proc
Combust
Inst
2002;29:
1435–43.
[109] Sun CJ, Sung CJ, He L, Law CK. Dynamics of weakly stretched
ﬂames: quantitative description and extraction of global ﬂame
parameters. Combust Flame 1999;118:108–28.
[110] Wu MS, Kwon S, Driscoll JF, Faeth GM. Turbulent premixed
hydrogen–air ﬂames at high Reynolds numbers. Combust Sci
Technol 1990;73:327–50.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
133


--- Page 44 ---

[111] Im HG, Chen JH. Preferential diffusion effects on the burning rate
of interacting turbulent premixed hydrogen–air ﬂames. Combust
Flame 2002;131:246–58.
[112] Bell JB, Cheng RK, Day MS, Shepherd IG. Numerical simulation of
Lewis number effects on lean premixed turbulent ﬂames. Proc
Combust Inst 2006;31:1309–17.
[113] Hawkes ER, Chen JH. Direct numerical simulation of hydrogen-
enriched lean
premixed methane–air ﬂames. Combust Flame
2004;138:242–58.
[114] Chen JH, Echekki T, Kollmann W. The mechanism of two
dimensional pocket formation in lean premixed methane–air ﬂames
with implications to turbulent combustion. Combust Flame 1999;
116:15–48.
[115] Chen JH, Im HG. Stretch effects on the burning velocity of
turbulent
premixed
hydrogen/air
ﬂames.
Proc
Combust
Inst
2000;28:211–8.
[116] Peters N, Terhoeven P, Chen JH, Echekki T. Statistics of ﬂame
displacement speeds from computations of 2-D unsteady methane
air ﬂames. Proc Combust Inst 1998;27:833–9.
[117] Rutland CJ, Trouve A. Direct numerical simulation of premixed
turbulent ﬂames with nonunity Lewis numbers. Combust Flame
1993;94:41–57.
[118] Sinibaldi JO, Mueller CJ, Driscoll JF. Local ﬂame propagation
speeds along wrinkled unsteady stretched premixed ﬂames. Proc
Combust Inst 1998;27:827–32.
[119] Cheng RK, Shepherd IG. The inﬂuence of burner geometry on
premixed turbulent ﬂame propagation. Combust Flame 1991;85:
7–26.
[120] Cheng RK, Shepherd IG. Intermittency and conditional velocities in
premixed conical turbulent ﬂames. Combust Sci Technol 1987;52:
353–75.
[121] Gulder OL, Smallwood GJ, Wong R, Snelling DR, Smith R,
Deschamps BM, et al. Flame front surface characteristics in
turbulent
premixed
propane/air
combustion.
Combust
Flame
2000;120:407–16.
[122] Kobayashi H, Seyama K, Hagiwara H, Ogami Y. Burning velocity
correlation of methane/air turbulent premixed ﬂames at high
pressure and high temperature. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:827–34.
[123] Bedat B, Cheng RK. Experimental study of premixed ﬂames in
intense isotropic turbulence. Combust Flame 1995;100:485–94.
[124] Cheng RK, Shepherd IG, Talbot L. Reaction rates in premixed
turbulent ﬂames and their relevance to the turbulent burning speed.
Proc Combust Inst 1988;22:771–80.
[125] Bourguignon E, Kostiuk LW, Michou Y, Gokalp I. Experimentally
measured burning rates of premixed turbulent ﬂames. Proc Combust
Inst 1996;26:447–52.
[126] Smallwood GJ, Gulder OL, Snelling DR, Deschamps BM, Gokalp
I. Characterization of ﬂame front surfaces in turbulent premixed
methane/air combustion. Combust Flame 1995;101:461–70.
[127] Yoshida A, Gunther R. Experimental investigation of thermal
structure of turbulent premixed ﬂames. Combust Flame 1980;38:
249–58.
[128] Kobayashi H, Tamura T, Maruta K, Niioka T, Williams F. Burning
velocity of turbulent premixed ﬂames in a high pressure environ-
ment. Proc Combust Inst 1996;26:389–96.
[129] Karlovitz B, Denniston D, Wells F. Investigation of turbulent
ﬂames. J Chem Phys 1951;19(5):541–7.
[130] Hottel HC, Williams GC, Levine RS. The inﬂuence of isotropic
turbulence on ﬂame propagation. Proc Combust Inst 1953;4:636–44.
[131] Driscoll JF, Gulati A. Measurement of various terms in the
turbulent kinetic energy balance within a ﬂame and comparison
with theory. Combust Flame 1988;72:131–52.
[132] Cheng RK. Velocity and scalar characteristics of premixed turbulent
ﬂames stabilized by weak swirl. Combust Flame 1995;101:1–14.
[133] Cho P, Law CK, Hertzberg JR, Cheng RK. Structure and
propagation of turbulent premixed ﬂames stabilized in a stagnation
ﬂow. Proc Combust Inst 1986;21:1493–9.
[134] Cheng RK, Ng TT. On deﬁning the turbulent burning velocity in
premixed V-shaped turbulent ﬂames. Combust Flame 1984;57:
155–67.
[135] Namazian M, Shepherd IG, Talbot L. Combust Flame 1997;108:
349.
[136] Bradley D, Haq MZ, Hicks RA, Kitagawa T, Lawes M, Sheppard
CGW, et al. Turbulent burning velocity, burned gas distribution,
and associated ﬂame surface deﬁnition. Combust Flame 2003;133:
415–30.
[137] Cheng RK. Workshop on premixed turbulent combustion, website:
/http://eetd.lbl.gov/aet/combustion/workshop/Mainz/10thWorkshop.
html and https://cmcs.ca.sandia.gov/cmcs/S.
[138] Barlow RS. Turbulent nonpremixed ﬂame workshop website:
/http://www.ca.sandia.gov/TNF/S.
[139] He X, Zigler BT, Walton SM, Wooldridge MS, Atreya A. A rapid
compression facility to study OH time histories during iso-octane
ignition. Combust Flame 2006;145:552–70.
[140] Aleiferis PG, Charalambides AG, Hardalupas Y, Taylor AMKP,
Urata Y. Autoignition initiation and development of h-heptane
HCCI combustion: an optical investigation. SAE paper 2006-01-
3273, American Society of Automotive Engineers.
[141] Huang J, Hill PG, Bushe WK, Munshi SR. Shock-tube study of
methane ignition under engine-relevant conditions: experiments and
modeling. Combust Flame 2004;136:25–42.
[142] Hult J, Richter M, Nygren J, Alden M, Hultqvist A, Christensen M,
et al. Application of a high-repetition-rate laser diagnostic system
for single-cycle-resolved imaging in internal combustion engines.
Appl Opt 2002;41:24–9.
[143] Trautwein SE, Grudno A, Adomeit G. The inﬂuence of turbu-
lence intensity and laminar ﬂame speed on turbulent ﬂame
propagation under engine like conditions. Proc Combust Inst 1990;
23:723–8.
[144] Bracco FV. Structure of ﬂames in premixed charge IC engines.
Combust Sci Technol 1988;58:209–30.
[145] Dec JE, Coy EB. OH radical imaging in a DI diesel engine and the
structure of the early diffusion ﬂame. Soc Automot Eng 1996: SAE
paper 9608311996.
[146] Vaughn CB, Su WH, Howard JB, Longwell JP. Measurements and
modeling of light hydrocarbons in rich C2H4 combustion in a jet-
stirred reactor. Combust Flame 1991;84:38–46.
[147] Blust JW, Ballal DR, Sturgess GJ. Fuel effects on lean blowout and
emissions
from
a
well-stirred
reactor.
J
Propul
Power
1999;15:216–23.
[148] Rutar T, Malte PC, Kramlich JC. Investigation of NOx and CO
formation in lean premixed, methane air, high intensity, conﬁned
ﬂames at elevated pressures. Proc Combust Inst 2000;28:2435–41.
[149] Weber R, Orsino S, Lalleman N, Verlaan A. Combustion of natural
gas with high-temperature air and large quantities of ﬂue gas. Proc
Combust Inst 2000;28:1315–21.
[150] Plessing T, Peters N, Wunning G. Laser optical investigation of
highly preheated combustion with strong exhaust gas recirculation.
Proc Combust Inst 1998;27:3197–204.
[151] Bilger RW, Yip B, Long MB, Masri A. At atlas of QEDR ﬂame
structures. Combust Sci Technol 1990;72:137–49.
[152] Wunning JA, Wunning JG. Flameless oxidation to reduce thermal
NO formation. Progr Energy Combust Sci 1997;23:81–92.
[153] Cavaliere A, de Joannon M. Mild combustion. Progr Energy
Combust Sci 2004;30:329–66.
[154] Roberts WL, Driscoll JF, Drake MC, Goss LP. Images of the
quenching of a ﬂame by a vortex—to quantify regimes of turbulent
combustion. Combust Flame 1993;94:58–69.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.F. Driscoll / Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 34 (2008) 91–134
134
