
--- Page 1 ---

Bruno Schuermans
Felix Guethe
Wolfgang Mohr
Alstom,
Baden CH-5405,
Switzerland
Optical Transfer Function
Measurements for Technically
Premixed Flames
This paper deals with a novel approach for measuring thermoacoustic transfer functions.
These transfer functions are essential to predict the acoustic behavior of gas turbine
combustion systems. Thermoacoustic prediction has become an essential step in the de-
velopment process of low NOx combustion systems. The proposed method is particularly
useful in harsh environments. It makes use of simultaneous measurement of the chemilu-
minescence of different species in order to obtain the heat release ﬂuctuations via inverse
method. Generally, the heat release ﬂuctuation has two contributions: one due to equiva-
lence ratio ﬂuctuations, and the other due to modulations of mass ﬂow of mixture enter-
ing the reaction zone. Because the chemiluminescence of one single species depends
differently on the two contributions, it is not possible to quantitatively estimate the heat
based on this information. Measurement of the transfer matrix based on a purely acoustic
method provides quantitative results, independent of the nature of the interaction mecha-
nism. However, this method is difﬁcult to apply in industrial full-scale experiments. The
method developed in this work uses the chemiluminescence time traces of several species.
After calibration, an overdetermined inverse method is used to calculate the two heat
release contributions from the time traces. The optical method proposed here has the
advantage that it does not only provide quantitative heat release ﬂuctuations but it also
quantiﬁes the underlying physical mechanisms that cause the heat release ﬂuctuations: It
shows what part of the heat release is caused by equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations and what
part by ﬂame front dynamics. The method was tested on a full scale swirl-stabilized gas
turbine burner. Comparison with a purely acoustic method validated the concept.
DOI: 10.1115/1.3124663
1
Introduction
Modern design of low emission combustors is characterized by
swirling air in the combustor’s dome coupled with distributed fuel
injection to maximize mixing. This design results in efﬁcient com-
bustion with extremely low emissions.
Because of a complex interaction between several physical pro-
cesses, the thermoacoustic dynamics of a swirl-stabilized ﬂame
can be very difﬁcult to model accurately. Experimentally obtained
transfer matrices are crucial to validate acoustic ﬂame models.
Besides validation, the measured transfer functions can give more
physical insight to the interactions occurring in the ﬂame. A mea-
sured transfer function may also be used directly in an acoustic
network, treating the ﬂame element as a “black box.”
The idea of experimentally determining the coefﬁcients of an
acoustic system represented as a black box with two inputs, two
outputs, and two source terms date back to the 1970s 1. Bodén et
al. 2 applied this technique extensively to several cold ﬂow ap-
plications. The idea of using this method to obtain acoustic trans-
fer matrices of combustion processes originates from Paschereit
and Polifke 3,4. The method was further developed and vali-
dated 5–7 and is now a well established tool that proves to be
the key experimental method in thermoacoustic analysis at Als-
tom. The measured transfer matrices were successfully used to
predict stability and pulsation spectra of Alstom gas turbines 8.
The rather harsh conditions in full scale, full pressure test fa-
cilities make highly accurate acoustic measurements difﬁcult. This
motivated the development of an optical technique for measuring
ﬂame transfer functions. Optical ﬂame transfer function measure-
ments are not a novelty at all. This technique was extensively used
by many researchers 9,10. Generally, the chemiluminesence sig-
nal is assumed to be proportional to the heat release. This method
is valid and straightforward for perfectly premixed ﬂames. How-
ever, as pointed out by Schuermans et al.7, Auer et al. 11, and
Haber et al. 12, such an approach yields erroneous results if
applied to ﬂames where ﬂuctuations of equivalence ratio are
present. The reason why the method does not work in these cases
is that the chemiluminesence signal reacts stronger on an equiva-
lence ratio ﬂuctuation than on a mass ﬂux modulation. Thus, if a
certain intensity ﬂuctuation is measured, it is impossible to know
how large the corresponding heat release ﬂuctuation is. Higgins
and co-workers 13,14 did systematic measurements on OH and
CH chemiluminesence intensity of methane ﬂames and found
that the chemiluminesence intensity reacts stronger to fuel con-
centration variation than to mixture mass ﬂux variation. This is a
serious limitation of this technique for application to lean pre-
mixed gas turbine burners because all these burners are techni-
cally premixed and hence equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations can never
be excluded.
Chemiluminesence has typically a power law or exponential
dependence on temperature or equivalence ratio and a propor-
tional dependence on mass ﬂux. The different radicals in the ﬂame
have typically a different exponential factor. This property was
exploited by Higgins et al. 14 and later by Hardalupas and Orain
15 by taking the ratio of two chemiluminesence signals as an
indicator of steady equivalence ratio. A different but conceptu-
ally similar approach is used by Ayoola et.al 16 where informa-
tion of simultaneous laser induced ﬂuorescence LIF images of
different species is combined to visualize heat release.
In this paper, the idea was extended to measure ﬂame transfer
matrices of ﬂames where equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations may be
present. The idea is to measure at least two chemiluminesence
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received April
1, 2008; ﬁnal manuscript received April 11, 2008; published online May 6, 2010.
Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the ASME Turbo Expo
2008: Land, Sea, and Air GT2008, Berlin, Germany, June 9–13, 2008.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
AUGUST 2010, Vol. 132 / 081501-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

intensity signals. In the ﬁrst step, steady state calibration curves
are measured. These calibration curves are linearized and inverted
to convert measured ﬂuctuating intensity signals into signals rep-
resenting mixture mass ﬂux and fuel mass fraction ﬂuctuations.
The heat release ﬂuctuation is then obtained as the sum of these
two ﬂuctuations. In this way not only a quantitative estimate of
the heat release ﬂuctuation is obtained but the method also shows
by what mechanisms the heat released ﬂuctuation are caused.
A proof of concept is delivered by testing this method on a
prototype gas turbine burner and by comparing the results with a
purely acoustic method to measure the heat release ﬂuctuations.
2
Experimental Setup
2.1
Atmospheric Combustion Facility. The tests were per-
formed in an atmospheric pressure, single burner combustion test
facility with a full-scale prototype gas turbine burner. The test rig
is shown in Fig. 1. The test rig consists of a plenum chamber
upstream of a swirl-inducing burner and a combustion chamber
downstream of the burner. The circular combustion chamber con-
sists of an air cooled double walled metal liner. Combustion air is
electrically preheated, fed into a plenum chamber, and ﬂows from
there through the burner and the combustion chamber. The ex-
haust system is an air-cooled tube with the same cross section as
the combustion chamber to avoid acoustic reﬂections at area dis-
continuities. The acoustic boundary conditions of the exhaust sys-
tem can be adjusted from almost anechoic reﬂection coefﬁcient
r0.15 to open end reﬂection by means of suitably dimen-
sioned oriﬁce plates.
The test was performed on an Alstom EV-type test burner. Such
a burner has the unique property of ﬂame stabilization in free
space near the burner outlet utilizing the sudden breakdown of a
swirling ﬂow, called vortex breakdown. The swirler consists of
two halves of a cone, which are shifted to form two air slots of
constant width 17. Gaseous fuels are injected into the combus-
tion air by means of fuel distribution tubes comprising two rows
of small holes perpendicular to the inlet ports of the swirler. Com-
plete mixing of fuel and air is obtained shortly after injection.
2.2
Acoustic Measurement Setup. Pressure ﬂuctuations are
measured using Brüel and Kjær water-cooled microphones. The
water-cooled 1
4 in. condenser microphones are ﬂush mounted on
the walls of the plenum chamber and combustion chamber. The
holder consists of a small oriﬁce d=0.5 mm open to the com-
bustion chamber. The microphone diaphragm is placed in a small
cavity and is protected from heat radiation. The resonance fre-
quency fres of the holder is larger than 20 kHz. Using condenser
microphones rather than piezoelectric pressure transducers has the
advantage of highly accurate phase and amplitude data, which is
necessary for acoustic measurements. The frequency response of
the microphones in probe holders were compared against standard
B&K microphones and showed good agreement. A total of nine
axially distributed microphones were used: four in the plenum
chamber and ﬁve in the combustion chamber. Controlled excita-
tion of the acoustic ﬁeld was accomplished by a circumferential
array of four loudspeakers equally spaced in polar angles. One set
of loudspeakers was placed in the plenum chamber at a distance
x/D=4.2 upstream of the dump plane and the second at x/D
=6.8 downstream of the dump plane, where D is the diameter of
the combustion chamber.
2.3
Optical Setup. The light emitted by the ﬂame is collected
through a water-cooled window by a lens system. The optical
detection was accomplished by a nonimaging system of quartz
lenses focusing the light on seven different ﬁbers. This setup as-
sures that each ﬁber obtains the same light and avoids angle de-
pendency. The lens was optimized in order to minimize the inten-
sity dependence from ﬂame position. This is important in order to
avoid that the ﬂame movement is interpreted as intensity ﬂuctua-
tion. The opening angle of the system was chosen such that the
entire heat release zone was covered. The geometrical extent and
movement of the heat release zone are known from previous ﬂame
visualization studies.
The light is then distributed to a system of ﬁlters and detectors.
This yields ﬁve separate signals for ﬁve different wavelength re-
gions. These chemiluminesence signals are recorded simulta-
neously with the microphone signals on the same data acquisition
system. The optical setup was tested on a Bunsen ﬂame with ﬁve
different band pass ﬁlters of about 10 nm width at central widths
CWs of 307 nm, 431 nm, 450 nm, and 515 nm, and one UV
transparent broad band ﬁlter DUGX11, Schott. The transmission
curves are shown in Fig. 2. Using this optical setup, the different
channels can be attributed to the occurrence of chemilumines-
cence of mainly the species OH,CH,C2
, as indicated in Refs.
15,18. To monitor the broad emission attributed to the CO+O
→CO2
 chemiluminescence, which contributes as background in
the spectrum 19, a ﬁlter with CW of 450 nm is used. All chan-
nels mainly detect emission from different species probing a dif-
ferent part of the ﬂame chemistry. Each of these detection win-
dows scales differently with the operating parameters mass ﬂow
and ﬂame temperature. With the calibration of at least three aver-
aged steady operating points, this ratio of the channels allows the
interpretation as instantaneous measurements of these operating
parameters. This reading can be interpreted as ﬂuctuations of the
governing heat release parameters adiabatic ﬂame temperature
and mixture mass ﬂow, as described in Refs. 13,14. A further
correlation of the signals to individual molecular emissions utiliz-
ing the spectra can be undertaken and would improve the quality
of the interpretation. However, because it is not necessary for the
approach described in this work, this was omitted here.
3
Analysis of Optical Data
The heat release rate does not only depend on equivalence ratio
but is given for a combustion efﬁciency of 100% by the follow-
ing expression:
Q = mfHf = myHf
1
where mf and m are the instantaneous values of the mass ﬂuxes of
fuel and mixture entering the reaction zone, y is the mass fraction
of fuel y=mf/m, and the chemical enthalpy of the fuel is repre-
sented as Hfuel.
The mass ﬂux of the mixture through the ﬂame front fulﬁlls the
following equality: mf+ma=SdA=SflameAflame. The deﬁnition
of the ﬂame surface and ﬂame velocity is somewhat arbitrary.
However, the deﬁnition of both quantities should be such that the
product of ﬂame speed and ﬂame area conserves mass across the
ﬂame front. Please note that in the following, all relevant quanti-
ties are considered as averages of the quantity over the ﬂame
surface hence assuming homogeneity of the time-averaged quan-
tities and linearity of the perturbations.
Fig. 1
Experimental setup: atmospheric pressure combustion
test equipped facility with loudspeakers, microphones, and op-
tical access via a ﬁber bundle
081501-2 / Vol. 132, AUGUST 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

Experimental studies by several authors have shown that the
dependence of OH chemiluminescence on mass ﬂux and equiva-
lence ratio is not the same. For example, Higgins et al. 13 re-
ported the following experimental correlation for the OH chemi-
luminescence:
I = kmp
2
with =5.23 and =−0.86. It should be noted that the experi-
ments were performed in a range of operating conditions that did
not cover the range of our experiments a higher mixture tempera-
ture was used in our experiments. Nevertheless, the correlation
suggests that care should be taken when interpreting chemilumi-
nescence intensity as a measure for the heat release of technically
premixed ﬂames. For example, if an intensity amplitude of 10% of
the mean is measured, then this could be due to a 10% ﬂuctuation
of mass ﬂow or due to 10/5.23% ﬂuctuation of equivalence ratio
which would be associated with a 5.23 times smaller heat release
ﬂuctuation. Thus, if it is not known in advance what the cause of
the intensity ﬂuctuation is, then an error of 500% is introduced.
The present work deals with acoustic phenomena. That is why
only small perturbation of the ﬂow conditions are considered,
which justiﬁes a linearization of Eqs. 1 and 2:
Q
Q¯ = m
m¯ + y
y¯
3
in which a prime denotes a perturbation and an overbar signiﬁes
the mean quantity: xt=x¯+xt.
Similarly, the linearization of Eq. 2 yields
I
I¯ = m
m¯ + y
y¯ + p
p¯
4
Note that
m
m¯ = Sf
S¯ f
+ Af
A¯ f
+ 
¯
5
Thus, the mass ﬂow ﬂuctuations of the mixture entering the reac-
tion zone can also be interpreted as ﬂame area ﬂuctuations and/or
ﬂame velocity ﬂuctuations.
Because m/m¯ is expected to be of order u/u¯, it can be shown
that the inﬂuence of density ﬂuctuations can be neglected for low
Mach number ﬂow.

¯ = p
p¯  ¯cu
p¯ = u
c  u
u¯  m
m¯
6
The use was made of up/¯c, which is justiﬁed because the
spatial maximum amplitude of oscillation of pressure is related to
the maximum amplitude of velocity by uˆmax=pˆmax

/¯c. For the
Mach number range of our experiment, the relative pressure ﬂuc-
tuations are one to two orders of magnitude smaller than the rela-
tive velocity ﬂuctuations. That is why the inﬂuence of pressure or
density ﬂuctuations in Eqs. 4 and 5 will be neglected.
Comparing Eqs. 3 and 4, it can be concluded that in the
absence of equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations y=0, the relative heat
release ﬂuctuations are equal to the relative intensity ﬂuctuations.
Q
Q¯ = I
I¯
7
In absence of mass ﬂux ﬂuctuations m=0, the heat release ﬂuc-
tuations are related to intensity ﬂuctuations as
Q
Q¯ = I
I¯ = I
I
y
8
Thus, if the chemiluminescence intensity is used as a measure for
heat release, one should have prior knowledge of the underlying
physical mechanism causing the heat release ﬂuctuations. Both
contributions of y and m can be expected in technically pre-
mixed burners i.e., when mixing of air and fuel takes place in the
burner. In most cases of practical relevance, it is impossible to
exclude any of the two contributions a priori.
So, for cases where both m/m¯ and y/y¯ could be important,
the chemiluminesence signal is not a measure for heat release
provided  is not equal to 1. Typical values for  range between
5 and 10; thus the error introduced by a wrongly assumed physical
mechanism is of the order of 1000%.
In this work a method is presented that overcomes this problem.
The method uses chemiluminescence of at least two species as
input and calculates the heat release from these signals via an
inverse operation. Thus, measurement of the intensity of two spe-
cies would result in two relations like in Eq. 4. Denoting the two
species by subscripts 1 and 2, these two equations can be written
in matrix form as
Fig. 2
Transmission curve of the ﬁlters used and ﬂame spectrum from a test
ﬂame
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
AUGUST 2010, Vol. 132 / 081501-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---


I1
I¯1
I2
I¯2	
=
1 1
1 2
m
m¯
y
y¯ 	
9
If 12, then the system can be inverted in order to calculate
m/m¯ and y/y¯ from measured I1/I¯1 and I2/I¯2.
This concept can be extended to the more general case with K
species and a model structure different from Eq. 2 by lineariza-
tion of the intensity functions.

I1
I¯1
]
IK
I¯K	
=
m¯
I1
I1
m
y¯
I1
I1
y
]
]
m¯
IK
IK
m
y¯
IK
IK
y	
m
m¯
y
y¯ 	
= J
m
m¯
y
y¯ 	
10
The matrix J is thus a normalized Jacobian matrix of the intensity
functions. In the case of K2, the system is overdetermined and
hence the system has to be inverted in least-squares sense:

m
m¯
y
y¯ 	
= J†
I1
I¯1
]
IK
I¯K	
11
in which the following notation was introduced: X†XX−1X,
where the asterisk denotes the transposed complex conjugate of
the matrix.
This equation can either be applied to the time traces of the
signals It or to the Fourier coefﬁcient of the transformed signal
Iˆ	. In order to apply this method, the derivatives of the intensi-
ties with respect to the mass ﬂow and fuel fraction need to be
known. These can be obtained from a set of calibration measure-
ments where the chemiluminescence intensities of all the species
are measured while changing the time-averaged mass ﬂow and
fuel fraction. The derivatives can be obtained by approximating
them by ﬁnite differences of the data. However, in this work a
curve ﬁt with equations similar to Eq. 1 is performed, and the
derivatives of these curves are obtained analytically.
With heat release ﬂuctuations measured in this way, a ﬂame
transfer function can be obtained if the acoustic velocity ﬂuctua-
tion in front of the ﬂame is measured. In the case of a negligible
effect of the inﬂuence of pressure on the heat release ﬂuctuation,
the transfer function is obtained as
F	 = Qˆ
uˆ1
u¯1
Q¯
12
Note that generally uˆ1/u¯1mˆ /m¯ , this is because m is deﬁned as
the instantaneous mass ﬂux of mixture taking part in reaction,
which is equal to the integral of the product of ﬂame area, ﬂame
speed, and density over the ﬂame area. In the steady state, both
quantities will be equal up to order of M2, but for higher fre-
quencies, the ﬂame front dynamics i.e., the kinematic response of
the instantaneous ﬂame front location and area to a velocity per-
turbation will cause a frequency dependent difference between
the two.
The optical method proposed here has the advantage since it
does not only provide quantitative heat release ﬂuctuations but it
also quantiﬁes the underlying physical mechanisms that cause the
heat release ﬂuctuations: It shows what part of the heat release is
caused by equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations and what part by ﬂame
front dynamics. To exploit this even more, the dependence of the
ﬂuctuations of mass ﬂux and mass fraction on the acoustic pres-
sure and velocity is investigated. These quantities are related by a
transfer matrix C:

mˆ
m¯
yˆ
y¯	
=
C11 C12
C21 C22
pˆ 1
u¯1
uˆ1
u¯1	
13
Note that the matrix is a function of frequency and that the Fourier
coefﬁcients of the pressure are normalized by c, thus pˆ	 has
units of m/s. In order to obtain the four matrix elements from the
experimental data, at least two linearly independent test states are
required. These test states are generated by consecutively applying
forcing with the upstream and downstream loudspeakers. Denot-
ing the upstream forcing test results with superscript A and the
downstream excitation case with superscript B, the matrix C is
obtained as

C11 C12
C21 C22 =
mˆ A
m¯
mˆ B
m¯
yˆA
y¯
yˆB
y¯ 	
pˆ 1
A pˆ 1
B
uˆ1
A uˆ1
B
−1 1
u¯1
14
The pressure and velocity ﬂuctuations uˆ1 and pˆ 1 can be obtained
from acoustical measurements. This is done using the micro-
phones placed before and after the burner together with the mul-
timicrophone method as will be explained in Sec. 4.
The Rankine–Hugoniot relations give the following relations
between the acoustic velocities on both sides of a low Mach num-
ber interface with heat release:
uˆ2 = uˆ1 +
T2
T1
−1u¯1
Qˆ
Q¯
15
From the deﬁnition of the ﬂame transfer matrix and Eqs. 13 and
15, it follows that the transfer matrix elements are given by
F21 =
T2
T1
−1C11 + C21
16
F22 = 1 +
T2
T1
−1C12 + C22
17
4
Transfer Matrix Measurement
The acoustic transfer matrix T of an acoustic system gives the
dynamic relation between the acoustic ﬁelds on both sides of the
system. It is deﬁned here as

pˆ d
uˆd =
T11 T12
T21 T22
pˆ u
uˆu
18
The subscripts d and u refer to locations upstream and down-
stream of the element. The symbols pˆ and uˆ represent acoustic
pressure and velocity. These quantities correspond to the unsteady
irrotational part of the pressure and velocity ﬁeld.
The four frequency dependent elements of the transfer matrix T
are obtained by forcing the system with loudspeakers and measur-
ing the response with microphones. A detailed description of this
technique is given in Ref. 7. The most important aspects will be
repeated here. Because Eq. 18 provides two equations in four
unknowns, at least two independent test states are required to
extract the four elements of T. Thus, using the same notation as in
Eq. 14, the transfer matrix is obtained as
081501-4 / Vol. 132, AUGUST 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---


T11 T12
T21 T22 =
pˆ d
A pˆ d
B
uˆd
A uˆd
B
pˆ u
A pˆ u
B
uˆu
A uˆu
B
−1
19
The multimicrophone method is used in order to obtain the acous-
tic velocity and pressure at the reference position from data of
acoustic pressure at multiple microphone locations. It makes use
of the solution of the one dimensional wave equation in presence
of mean ﬂow pˆ	,x= fˆ	e−i	/cx/1+M+gˆ	ei	/cx/1−M, in
which the Riemann invariants fˆ	 and gˆ	 are integration con-
stants whose values depend on the initial conditions and boundary
conditions. The acoustic pressure measured by N microphones in
a straight duct at positions xn can thus be expressed as

pˆ 1
]
pˆ N	
=
z1
1/1+M z1
−1/1−M
]
]
zN
1/1+M zN
−1/1−M	
fˆ
gˆ = Z
fˆ
gˆ
20
in which the following notation zne−i	xn/c is used. The Rie-
mann invariants can be calculated from the measured microphone
signals by solving Eq. 20, provided that at least two micro-
phones were used. The solution in the least-squares sense is given
by

fˆ
gˆ = Z†
pˆ 1
]
pˆ N	
21
The acoustic velocity at the reference position is then given by
uˆx=0= fˆ−gˆ. Using the matrix notation, this can conveniently be
expressed as

pˆ A pˆ B
uˆA uˆB =
1
1
1 −1Z†
pˆ 1
A
pˆ 1
B
]
]
pˆ N
A
pˆ N
B	
22
Applying the operation of Eq. 22 to both the microphones up-
stream and downstream of the element yields the matrix with
acoustic pressures and velocities required to solve Eq. 19 for T.
4.1
Flame Transfer Matrix. In order to measure a transfer
matrix, arrays of microphones have to be placed at both sides of
the element. Since a ﬂame is always stabilized by some kind of
ﬂame holder the “burner”, it is not possible to measure a ﬂame
transfer matrix directly. However, the transfer matrix of the com-
bined burner and ﬂame element T can be measured, along with
the transfer matrix of the burner B only in the absence of com-
bustion but with ﬂow. The desired ﬂame transfer function F can
then easily be obtained from
F = TB−1
23
The underlying assumption is that the transfer matrix B does not
change due to the combustion process.
5
Results
Prior to the transfer function measurement experiments, a cali-
bration experiment was performed by operating the test facility at
three adiabatic ﬂame temperatures and four mixture mass ﬂow
settings. The time traces of the chemiluminesence data were re-
corded. In order to get an estimate of the mean intensities of the
signals, the median value of the time traces was evaluated. These
values are plotted in Fig. 3 for the signal of CW307. The values of
k and  in Eq. 2 were solved for in least-squares sense by linear
regression of the measured data. Linear regression could be used
because lnI/m=lnk+ lnT is linear in the parameters lnk
and . The results of this curve ﬁt are shown in Fig. 4 as well.
Note that during the temperature variation experiment, the veloc-
ity was not held exactly constant. This explains why the ﬁtted
trend line does not coincide with the ﬁtted data points. A similar
ﬁt was performed for the other chemiluminesence signals. Re-
markably, the curves were very similar with only about 10% dif-
ference in the value of the exponent . The values of  for all ﬁve
signals are shown in Table 1 together with the ﬁtting statistics.
The relative error E represents an average value of the normalized
residuals of the ﬁt E=1/NnIn−I˜n/In. The value of R2 is a mea-
sure for the explained variation of the data. It is deﬁned as one
minus the variance of the residuals divided by the variance of the
data. It was tabulated together with the values obtained for  in
Table 1. Considering that only two parameters were ﬁtted to six
data points, the ﬁt is remarkably good. A transfer function experi-
ment was carried out by applying a sequence of pure tone excita-
tions to the loudspeakers. Excitation was applied upstream and
downstream consecutively. The response of the nine microphones
and the ﬁve chemiluminescence signals was recorded, and the
Fourier coefﬁcients at the forcing frequency were evaluated. The
multimicrophone method Eq. 22 was used to obtain the acous-
tic velocities and pressures at the burner exit plane. First, a test
without combustion was done in order to obtain the burner trans-
fer matrix B using Eq. 19. A similar test with combustion was
carried out. From the measured acoustic signals, the heat release
Fig. 3
Normalized mean chemiluminescence intensity as a
function of adiabatic ﬂame temperature and mixture mass ﬂow.
Crosses: measured data; circles: data ﬁt using Eq. „2…; solid
line: trend line of Eq. „2…
Fig. 4
Comparison of heat release obtained from acoustic
data „dashed… with heat release obtained from optical data ac-
cording to Eqs. „11… and „3… „solid… and the relative OH inten-
sity ﬂuctuations „dash-dotted…
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
AUGUST 2010, Vol. 132 / 081501-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

ﬂuctuations were calculated by making use of the Rankine–
Hugeniot relation Eq. 15 and the previously measured burner
transfer matrix
Qˆ
Q¯ = uˆ2 −B12pˆ 0 −B22uˆ0

T2
T1
−1u¯1
24
The relative heat release ﬂuctuations i.e., the Fourier coefﬁcients
of the heat release signal divided by the mean heat release were
also calculated from the optical signals by making use of Eqs. 3
and 11. A comparison between the results of the purely optical
method and the purely acoustical method for obtaining the heat
release is shown in Fig. 4. The comparison shows a very good
agreement of the phase while the agreement of the absolute value
is reasonable for lower frequencies, but shows stronger deviations
for higher frequencies. In some literature references, the relative
intensity ﬂuctuations are interpreted as relative heat release ﬂuc-
tuations. For comparison, this quantity was also plotted in Fig. 4.
Although the phase matches reasonably, the absolute values do
not even capture the trends. As will be shown later, the main
component of the heat release ﬂuctuations in this case is due to
mass ﬂux ﬂuctuations. Note that if the interaction would take
place via equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations, then the relative intensity
ﬂuctuations would be an order of magnitude larger than the values
recorded here. Clearly, the method proposed in this paper is not
biased by prior assumptions on the nature of the interaction
mechanism.
From the acoustic data available, the ﬂame transfer matrix F is
calculated using Eqs. 19 and 23. The result is plotted in Fig. 5
for the F12 and F22 elements. In the same ﬁgure, the ﬂame transfer
matrix elements obtained from the optical data are plotted using
Eq. 16. Although the match is not perfect, the comparison is
reasonable both quantitatively and qualitatively. Note that the F12
element is considerably smaller than the F22 element, which
means that the inﬂuence of velocity ﬂuctuations on the transfer
function is more important than the inﬂuence of pressure ﬂuctua-
tions. However, the inﬂuence of pressure ﬂuctuations on this
burner is signiﬁcant and should not be neglected. In order to in-
vestigate the nature of this transfer matrix, the transfer matrix C is
analyzed. It was obtained from Eqs. 11 and 14 and shows how
the mass ﬂux ﬂuctuations through the ﬂame i.e., ﬂame surface or
ﬂame velocity ﬂuctuations and fuel mass fraction ﬂuctuations
depend on the acoustic pressure and velocity. The matrix elements
are plotted in Fig. 6. This ﬁgure shows that the C12 element
which relates mass ﬂux to velocity is most dominant. The C22
element has a considerable magnitude as well, which means that
fuel mass fraction ﬂuctuations are caused by velocity ﬂuctuations.
This is a well known mechanism: If the injected mass ﬂow of fuel
is fairly constant, then a modulation of the velocity in the burner
will cause equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations at the injection location.
This mechanism is explained in more detail in Refs. 6,7. These
concentration waves are convected with mean ﬂow from the in-
jector to the ﬂame. Fuel mass fraction ﬂuctuations caused by pres-
sure ﬂuctuations C21 are signiﬁcantly smaller but not negligible.
The physical explanation is that the fuel system is not entirely
stiff, which means that pressure ﬂuctuations cause a modulation of
the fuel supplied by the injection holes. The C11 element describes
the inﬂuence of the pressure ﬂuctuations on the ﬂame speed or
area. For natural gas ﬂames, the ﬂame area and speed can be
considered independent of the pressure. So, this term is indeed
expected to be small. However, ﬂame speed depends on the
equivalence ratio and, as mentioned before, equivalence ratio ﬂuc-
tuations can be caused by pressure ﬂuctuations.
As a check of consistency of the method, it is interesting to
analyze the values of the C12 and C22 elements for frequencies
approaching zero. For quasisteady changes of the velocity i.e.,
approaching zero Hz, the relative mass ﬂux through the ﬂame
front should be equal to the relative velocity in front of the ﬂame.
Hence, the C21 element should approach a value of +1 for zero
frequency. Similarly, a quasisteady increase in velocity in the
burner at constant mass ﬂow of fuel results in a proportional de-
Table 1
Results of curve ﬁtting the data with Eq. „2…; values of , the relative error E in %, and
the goodness of ﬁt R2 in %
Filter
No ﬁlter
F1
F2
F3
F4
/r
1
1.13
1.05
0.93
0.91
E
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.1
1.5
R2
99.6
99.6
99.6
99.6
99.4
Fig. 5
Comparison of transfer matrix elements F12 and F22 ob-
tained from acoustic data „dotted… using equation Eqs. „19… and
„23… and obtained from optical data „solid… using Eqs. „11…, „14…,
and „16…
Fig. 6
Absolute values „solid… and phase „dashed… of the ma-
trix elements of C
081501-6 / Vol. 132, AUGUST 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

crease in the mass fraction of fuel. Hence C22 should be −1 at 0
Hz. Note that the lowest frequency measured was a Helmholtz
number of He=0.1; however, one can reasonably estimate from
Fig. 6 that toward zero frequency, both elements have an absolute
value of about 1, while the phase of C12 assumes a value of close
to zero and the phase of C22 a value of about 
, which demon-
strates that at least the very basic physical conservation laws are
correctly represented by this matrix.
6
Discussion
Both the newly developed optical method for measuring trans-
fer matrices and the acoustic approach yield similar results. As
mentioned before, the two methods have a signiﬁcant difference
in the absolute values for the high frequencies. This difference can
be due to uncertainties in both the optical and the acoustic
method. The main possible sources of uncertainty of the optical
method are as follows: 1 The optical arrangement does not have
a spatially uniform efﬁciency i.e., light of equal intensity emitted
from different regions of the combustion chamber is measured
with a different intensity. Because of this, an intensity ﬂuctuation
due to periodic ﬂame motion could be recorded, although this
does not represent ﬂuctuating heat release. 2 The inversion op-
eration in Eq. 11 may cause strong sensitivity to measurement
uncertainty if J is badly conditioned i.e., if the rows of matrix J
are linearly dependent. Indeed, the values of  Table 1 do not
differ strongly. However, an error analysis shows that the discrep-
ancy cannot be explained by this. 3 It was assumed that the
ﬂame is spatially homogeneous. If this is not the case i.e., there
are hot spots in the ﬂame, then Eq. 2 will no longer be valid for
the integrated light intensity. However, because measured levels
of NOx emissions were low during the experiment, it is likely that
the temperature distribution was homogeneous. 4 It is assumed
that the intensity signals are proportional to the ﬂuctuating heat
release components. In case a quasisteady component contributes
to the signal e.g., black body radiation of the liner, this would
bias the calibration process. It is, however, not expected that to be
the case here because the liner temperature was cold enough to
avoid components in the UV bands. 5 It is assumed that the time
scale of the chemical reaction is much smaller than acoustic or
convective time scales. If this is not true, then the matrix J would
not be constant but frequency dependent. For the range of fre-
quencies considered here, we may consider this assumption to be
valid. 6 Linearization is applied, which implies that the ﬂuctua-
tion amplitudes are assumed small enough.
The main sources of uncertainty in the acoustically measured
transfer function are as follows: 1 Speed of sound downstream of
the combustion zone. Although the adiabatic ﬂame temperature
can be obtained with reasonable accuracy from the measured
mass ﬂow, temperature, and composition of the mixture, the heat
ﬂux through the cooled combustion chamber liners is more difﬁ-
cult to estimate. A resulting error in the speed of sound may cause
problems when using the multimicrophone method. The intro-
duced error can be very large in the case of resonant behavior. The
relative error is of order 1
2Z He times the normalized error in the
temperature, where Z is the speciﬁc impedance of the test rig.
Since the test rig is nearly anechoic Z1 and He1, then even
an error in the temperature as large as 100 K will not cause an
error larger than 3% in worst case conditions. 2 The inversion of
the burner transfer matrix in Eq. 23 introduces an uncertainty,
which is more difﬁcult to quantify. It was assumed that the burner
transfer matrix measured in the reactive case is the same as in the
nonreactive case, which is difﬁcult to verify.
The determination of the matrix C allows for an assessment of
the underlying physical mechanisms of the thermoacoustic inter-
action processes. It directly relates the contribution of the fuel
system interaction, equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations, and ﬂame front
dynamics on the heat release. For the test burner under investiga-
tion, the most important coupling mechanism was found to be the
ﬂame front dynamics mass ﬂux ﬂuctuations. However, as vari-
ous investigations have shown, this is not always the case: De-
pending on the type of burner, either fuel system interactions or
equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations may become dominant.
7
Conclusions
A novel method for the experimental determination of ﬂame
transfer matrices was presented. The proposed method makes use
of multiple chemiluminesence signals. The method has the advan-
tage since it directly reveals the nature of the interaction mecha-
nism because it allows for the identiﬁcation of the contribution of
equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations and ﬂame front dynamics in an in-
termediate step. A proof of concept is given by comparing this
method with a purely acoustic method for measuring ﬂame trans-
fer functions. The quantitative agreement between the two meth-
ods is reasonable. Possible causes for the difference are discussed.
The method was applied to a full-scale prototype gas turbine
burner and quantiﬁed the underlying interaction mechanisms: fuel
system interaction, equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations, and ﬂame front
dynamics. Due to the stiff fuel system and distributed fuel injec-
tion, the ﬁrst two interaction mechanisms were found to be less
pronounced, which made the ﬂame front dynamics the dominant
interaction mechanism.
Acknowledgment
This work was conducted in the framework of AG Turbo/
COOREFF-T. The authors would like to acknowledge Brian Cox
for his assistance in the experiments, Daniel Guyot TU Berlin
for his interesting discussions on the feasibility of the proposed
method, and Peter Flohr for his support of this work.
Nomenclature
Af  ﬂame area
Hf  chemical enthalpy
He  Helmholtz number, He=	L/2
c
I  chemiluminesence intensity
Q  heat release rate
Sf  ﬂame speed
T  temperature
c  speed of sound
m  mass ﬂux through ﬂame surface
p  pressure
u  velocity
y  fuel mass fraction
  ratio of speciﬁc heats
  density
	  angular frequency
x¯  steady component of x
xt  unsteady component of x, xtxt−x¯
xˆ	  Fourier coefﬁcient of xt
References
1 Cremer, L., 1971, “The Treatment of Fans as Black Boxes,” J. Sound Vib.,
161, pp. 1–15.
2 Bodén, H., and Åbom, M., 1986, “Inﬂuence of Errors on the Two-Microphone
Method for Measuring Acoustic Properties in Ducts,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
792, pp. 541–549.
3 Paschereit, C. O., Schuermans, B., Polifke, W., and Mattson, O., 2002, “Mea-
surement of Transfer Matrices and Source Terms of Premixed Flames,” ASME
J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 1242, pp. 239–247.
4 Paschereit, C., Schuermans, B., Polifke, W., and Mattson, O., 1999,“Measure-
ment of Transfer Matrices and Source Terms of Premixed Flames,” ASME
Paper No. 99-GT-0133.
5 Schuermans, B., 2003, “Modeling and Control of Thermoacoustic Instabili-
ties,” Ph.D. thesis, EPFL Lausanne, Switzerland, http://library.epﬂ.ch/theses/
?nr2800.
6 Schuermans, B., Polifke, W., and Paschereit, C., 1999, “Modeling Transfer
Matrices of Premixed Flames and Comparison With Experimental Results,”
ASME Paper No. 1999-GT-0132.
7 Schuermans, B., Bellucci, B., Guethe, F., and Meili, F., 2003 “A Detailed
Analysis of Thermoacoustic Interaction Mechanisms in a Turbulent Premixed
Flame,” ASME Paper No. GT-2004-53831.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
AUGUST 2010, Vol. 132 / 081501-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

8 Bellucci, V., Schuermans, B., Nowak, D., Flohr, P., and Paschereit, O., 2003,
“Thermoacoustic Modeling of a Gas Turbine Combustor Equipped With
Acoustic Dampers,” ASME Paper No. GT-2004-53977.
9 Langhorne, P., 1988, “Reheat Buzz: An Acoustically Coupled Combustion
Instability. Part 1. Experiment,” J. Fluid Mech., 193, pp. 417–443.
10 Poinsot, T. J., Trouve, A. C., Veynante, D. P., Claudel, S. M., and Esposito, E.
J., 1987, “Vortex-Driven Acoustically Coupled Combustion Instabilities,” J.
Fluid Mech., 177, pp. 265–292.
11 Auer, M. P., Hirsch, T., and Sattelmayer, T., 2006, “Inﬂuence of Air and Fuel
Mass Flow Fluctuations in a Premix Swirl Burner on Flame Dynamics,”
ASME Paper No. GT-2006-90127.
12 Haber, L., Vandsburger, U., Saunders, W. R., and Khanna, V., 2006, “An
Examination of the Relationship between Chemiluminescent Light Emissions
and Heat Release Rate under Non-Adiabatic Conditions,” ASME Paper No.
GT-2000-GT-0121.
13 Higgins, B., McQuay, M., Lacas, F., Rolon, J., Darabiha, N., and Candel, S.,
2001, “Systematic Measurements of OH Chemiluminescence for Fuel-lean
Highpressure, Premixed, Laminar Flames,” Fuel, 80, pp. 67–74.
14 Higgins, B., McQuay, M., Lacas, F., and Candel, S., 2001, “An Experimental
Study of Pressure and Strain Rate on CH Chemiluminescence on Premixed
Fuellean Methane/Air Flames,” Fuel, 80, pp. 1583–1591.
15 Hardalupas, Y., and Orain, M., 2004 “Local Measurements of the Time-
Dependent Heat Release Rate and Equivalence Ratio Using Chemiluminescent
Emission From a Flame,” Combust. Flame, 139, pp. 188–207.
16 Ayoola, B. O., Balachandran, R., Frank, J. H., Mastorakos, E., and Kaminski,
C. F., 2006, “Spatially Resolved Heat Release Rate Measurements in Turbulent
Premixed Flames,” Combust. Flame, 144, pp. 1–16.
17 Zajadatz, M., Bernero, S., Lachner, R., and Motz, C., 2007, “Development and
Design of Alstom’s Staged Fuel Gas Injection EV Burner For NOx Reduction,”
ASME Paper No. GT 2007–27730.
18 Kojima, J., Ikeda, Y., and Nakajima, T., 2000, “Detailed Distributions of OH,
CH and C2
 Chemiluminescence in the Reaction Zone of Laminar Methane/
Air Premixed Flames,” 36th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Con-
ference and Exhibit, Paper No. AIAA-3394.
19 Nori, V., and Seitzman, J., 2007, “Detailed distributions of OH, CH and C2

Chemiluminescence in the Reaction Zone of Laminar Methane/Air Premixed
Flames,” 45th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, Jan. 8–11, Paper No.
AIAA-2007-0466.
081501-8 / Vol. 132, AUGUST 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
