
--- Page 1 ---

AIAA JOURNAL
Vol. 44, No. 4, April 2006
Large-Eddy Simulations as a Design Tool
for Gas Turbine Combustion Systems
S. James,∗J. Zhu,† and M. S. Anand‡
Rolls–Royce, Indianapolis, Indiana 46206
In recent years, large-eddy simulation (LES) has emerged as a promising next-generation computational tool for
design applications. Compared to Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes simulation, the advantages that LES offers,
in terms of improved turbulent mixing and ability to predict unsteady phenomena, makes it attractive for gas
turbine combustor applications. An overview of recent activities related to LES being pursued at Rolls–Royce is
provided. The LES methodology is reviewed both from numerical and modeling perspectives. The state of the art in
subgrid-scale (SGS) modeling and spray modeling is discussed. Recently developed SGS reaction-rate closures such
as the transport ﬁltered density function method are reviewed and discussed. Validation experiments performed
on several benchmark ﬂows (nonreacting and reacting) and practical gas turbine combustor conﬁgurations are
presented. Finally, ongoing developments for improving the LES methodology are highlighted.
Nomenclature
⟨A⟩
=
expected value of A
⟨A|B⟩
=
expected value of A conditioned on B
Bm
=
mass transfer number
BT
=
heat transfer number
C
=
standard Smagorinsky constant
CD
=
coefﬁcient of drag of a spray particle
Ck
=
turbulent-viscosity constant in the one-equation
kinetic-energy model
Cε
=
dissipation term constant in the one-equation
kinetic-energy model
Cφ
=
model constant in the Interaction by exchange with
the mean model
cpg
=
gas-phase speciﬁc heat coefﬁcient
at constant pressure
cpp
=
speciﬁc heat capacity of a droplet
D
=
molecular diffusivity
DT
=
turbulent diffusivity
dk
=
diameter of the kth spray particle
FL
=
ﬁltered mass density function
G
=
ﬁlter kernel
J α
i
=
diffusional ﬂux of species α in the ith-coordinate
direction
k
=
turbulent kinetic energy
kg
=
gas-phase thermal conductivity
ksgs
=
subgrid scale kinetic energy
Mα
i
=
subgrid scale mass ﬂux of scalar α
˙m p
=
rate of change of mass of a spray particle
p
=
pressure
Rek
=
Reynolds number of the kth spray particle
Sct
=
turbulent Schmidt number
Si j
=
strain-rate tensor
Sm
=
spray source term in the continuity equation
Smi
=
spray source term in the momentum equation
Smα
=
spray source term in the scalar transport equation
Sα
=
chemical source term of species α
Received 4 January 2005; revision received 24 October 2005; accepted
for publication 26 October 2005. Copyright c⃝2005 by Rolls–Royce Corpo-
ration. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Inc., with permission. Copies of this paper may be made for personal or inter-
nal use, on condition that the copier pay the $10.00 per-copy fee to the Copy-
right Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923;
include the code 0001-1452/06 $10.00 in correspondence with the CCC.
∗Specialist, P.O. Box 420, Speed Code T-14, Combustion Systems. Mem-
ber AIAA.
†Senior Specialist, P.O. Box 420, Speed Code T-14, Combustion Systems.
‡Group Leader/Consultant, P.O. Box 420, Speed Code T-14, Combustion
Systems. Member AIAA.
˜Sα
=
ﬁltered reaction rate of scalar α
Ti j
=
subgrid stress tensor
ui
=
instantaneous velocity in the ith-coordinate
direction
˜ui
=
Favre ﬁlter of ui
V k
i
=
velocity of the kth spray-particle in the
ith-coordinate direction
xi
=
Cartesian coordinate in the i direction

=
ﬁlter width
δ
=
Dirac delta function
δi j
=
Kronecker delta
ε
=
turbulent dissipation
μ (or μg)
=
gas-phase molecular viscosity
μT
=
turbulent viscosity
νT
=
turbulent kinematic viscosity
ξ
=
instantaneous mixture fraction
ρ (or ρg)
=
gas-phase density
ρp
=
density of a spray particle
¯ρ
=
ﬁltered (or mean) density
τd
=
spray particle relaxation time
τi j
=
ﬁltered viscous stress tensor
φα
=
mass fraction of species α in physical space
¯φ
=
ﬁltered value of a scalar φ
ψα
=
mass fraction of species α in composition space
ω
=
mixing frequency
Introduction
T
HERE are three main avenues to computing turbulent re-
acting ﬂows: Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes simulations
(RANS), large-eddy simulations (LES), and direct numerical sim-
ulations (DNS). In the gas turbine industry, RANS is the primary
means of analyzing combusting ﬂows, mainly due to its relatively
fast turnaround time and success in providing design guidance for
meeting exit temperature proﬁle requirements. RANS has also been
used to predict emissions, but such predictions have met with mixed
success. Predictions are also known to be sensitive to the turbulence
model used. For example, when both the liner and annuli of a gas
turbine combustor are included in the computational ﬂow model,
the standard k–ε model predicts incorrect turbulence levels at the
primary and dilution ports of the liner. At the other extreme, DNS
is computationally affordable only for simple conﬁgurations at low
Reynolds numbers and is mainly a tool to validate turbulence and
combustion submodels for RANS and LES. At high Reynolds num-
bers, the enormous grid resolution requirement makes DNS unaf-
fordable for practical applications. LES is also computationally in-
tensive, however, to a lesser degree than DNS. Unlike in DNS, where
all length scales and timescales are resolved, only large-scale struc-
tures are directly resolved in LES. The small scales are modeled.
674


--- Page 2 ---

JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
675
With the availability of powerful computers and distributed
computing platforms, increasing applications of LES to complex ge-
ometries are being reported in literature.1−4 LES is now considered
to be the next-generation practical design tool for gas turbine com-
bustors. With low emissions being an important aspect of combustor
design, it is becoming increasingly important to overcome new tech-
nological barriers to combustor design such as combustion instabil-
ities. RANS-based tools cannot provide insight into these phenom-
ena. LES, due to its time-accurate nature, may be used to understand
and predict these instabilities. Additionally, combustion mainly oc-
curs away from walls in gas turbine combustors; therefore, sophisti-
cated wall treatments are not required, a favorable feature for LES.
For LES to be a reliable combustion design tool, extensive vali-
dations of various submodels used in the methodology are required.
Numerics play an important role in LES, and close attention has
to be paid to the numerical scheme used. In this paper, the LES
methodology for application to complex conﬁgurations is reviewed.
Both numerical and modeling aspects of the methodology are exam-
ined. The state of the art in subgrid-scale modeling and liquid-fuel
spray modeling for LES is presented and discussed. A hierarchy
of validation cases performed on several nonreacting and reacting
benchmark ﬂows are presented. These cases, ranging from simple
lid-driven cavity ﬂow to complex gas turbine combustor ﬂow, high-
light the predictive capabilities of LES.
Theoretical and Numerical Aspect of LES
In LES, the most energetic ﬂow structures are directly resolved,
whereas the small-scale ﬂow structures are modeled. The instan-
taneous numerical solution from LES represents an instantaneous
realization of the turbulent ﬂow with frequencies above a certain cut-
off value ﬁltered out. This is in contrast to RANS, which produces
a time average of the turbulent ﬂow. LES also affords advantages
over RANS in modeling aspects. Small-scale structures are not sig-
niﬁcantly affected by inhomogeneities; therefore, it is believed that
modeling these structures is less daunting than the modeling that
accounts for all scales as in RANS.
Filtering Operation
The large-scale or ﬁltered ﬁeld can be mathematically expressed
as5
¯φ(x, t) = 1

 +∞
−∞
φ(x′, t) G

|x −x′|


dx′
(1)
where φ(x′, t) is the instantaneous ﬁeld and G is a localized ﬁlter
kernel with ﬁlter width  having the following properties:
 +∞
−∞
G(ψ) dψ = 1
(2a)
G(−ψ) = G(ψ)
(2b)
 +∞
−∞
xmG(ψ) dψ
exist for m ≥0
(2c)
Examples of ﬁlters include a box ﬁlter, a Gaussian ﬁlter, and a
Fourier cutoff ﬁlter (see Ref. 6). An interpretation of Eq. (1) is that
the mean (or ﬁltered) ﬁeld is constructed from an instantaneous ﬁeld
by ﬁltering eddies of size smaller than .
Governing Equations
Applying the ﬁltering operation to the instantaneous transport
equations, we obtain the following:
∂¯ρ
∂t + ∂¯ρ ˜ui
∂xi
= Sm
∂¯ρ ˜u j
∂t
+ ∂¯ρ ˜ui ˜u j
∂xi
= −∂¯p
∂x j
+ ∂τi j
∂xi
−∂Ti j
∂xi
+ Smj
∂¯ρ ˜φα
∂t
+ ∂¯ρ ˜ui ˜φα
∂xi
= −∂
∂xi

¯ρ ˜D ∂˜φα
∂xi

−∂Mα
i
∂xi
+ ¯ρ ˜Sα + Smα
(3)
where ρ is the density, τi j is the viscous stress tensor, and φα
is the scalar array, Ti j = ρuiu j −ρ ˜ui ˜u j and Mα
i = ρuiφα −ρ ˜ui ˜φα
denote the subgrid-scale (SGS) stress and SGS scalar mass ﬂux,
respectively. ˜Sα are the ﬁltered reaction source terms. Sm, Smi, and
Smα are the liquid fuel source terms in the continuity, momentum,
and scalar equations, respectively. Note that in the preceding equa-
tions, quantities with the tilde represent Favre-average ﬁlters.
In most LES, the ﬁltering operation is not explicitly performed
in simulations. Instead, it is argued that the discretization scheme
for derivatives and the ﬁnite spectral support of the computational
grid (where only wave numbers smaller than π/x can be repre-
sented on a grid with spacing x) mimic the ﬁltering operation.
This is commonly referred to as implicit ﬁltering. The ﬁlter width
in the implicit ﬁltering approach is typically assumed to be the local
grid spacing. An assumption implied in the derivation of Eq. (3)
is that the ﬁltering operation commutes with spatial differentiation,
that is, ∂φ/∂x = ∂¯φ/∂x. However, this is not true in the case when
nonuniform grids are used. Nevertheless, the error incurred due to
loss of commutative property is second order in the ﬁlter width.7
Hence, in most LES applications employing second-order schemes,
this error is typically neglected. A consequence of linking the ﬁlter
width to the grid spacing is that, as the grid is reﬁned, the ﬁlter width
also becomes smaller. Consequently, more scales are resolved in the
ﬂowﬁeld and the contribution of the SGS model becomes smaller.
Eventually, the LES simulation converges to a DNS as the grid size
is made smaller and smaller.
Numerical Method
Equation (3) can be solved by a density-based or a pressure-
based method. In the RANS context, the pressure-based method
has been widely used for simulating gas turbine combustor ﬂows.8
The density-based method can also be applied to such ﬂows; how-
ever, appropriate preconditioners have to be used to avoid time-step
restrictions imposed by the low-speed ﬂow.
Robustness and low numerical dissipation of the numerical
scheme are issues of utmost importance in LES of gas turbine com-
bustors. For RANS applications in complex geometries, upwind-
type methods are typically used and have been known to produce
reasonable results. However, studies9 have shown that these meth-
ods when applied to LES simulations show undue damping of
small-scale structures. Central differencing schemes are typically
preferred9 because these schemes do not exhibit numerical dissi-
pation. A drawback of these schemes is that computations are sen-
sitive to nonuniformities in the grid. Grids, therefore, have to be
constructed with care. However, even with the utmost care, grid
spacing can vary quite rapidly in regions near the fuel nozzle of gas
turbine combustors, triggering numerical instabilities in LES.
A means to enhance the robustness of LES simulations on such
grids is to ensure discrete kinetic energy conservation.10−14 In the
inviscid limit (or high-Reynolds-number ﬂows) and in the absence
of time-discretization errors, kinetic energy, deﬁned as uiui/2, is
considered to be discretly conserved if the numerical approxima-
tion of all of the terms in its transport equation can be expressed
in divergence form. This implies that, in a computational domain
with periodic boundaries, the numerical scheme will force the to-
tal kinetic energy of the system to be constant at all times (as ex-
pected). Numerical methods that employ central difference schemes
but do not satisfy energy conservation are often unstable at high
Reynolds numbers. Discrete kinetic energy conservation in stag-
gered and collocated numerical schemes has been investigated in
detail by Morinishi et al.10 Because of their simplicity, collocated
schemesareusuallypreferredoverstaggeredschemesforsimulating
ﬂows in complex geometries. In collocated schemes, the cell-face
ﬂuxes are typically computed using a procedure outlined by Rhie
and Chow.15 This procedure, although preventing checkerboarding
of the pressure ﬁeld, results in violation of discrete kinetic-energy
conservation. The impact of this violation has not been extensively
studied, but limited studies performed by Benhamadouche et al.13
suggest that it may not be serious. Kinetic-energy conservation
is also lost when cell-face quantities are computed by weighted
interpolations.11 This is not an issue when uniform grids are used.


--- Page 3 ---

676
JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
However, the problem can be easily overcome by using a symmetric
interpolation scheme.11,12,14
Assessing the convergence of LES solutions is an issue that has
not been given importance by LES practitioners. A grid-independent
instantaneous ﬁeld cannot be achieved in LES, because the ﬁl-
ter width is linked to the local grid spacing. However, in most
LES studies, one is interested in time-averaged quantities, which
can be shown to be grid independent by reﬁning the grid. Hence,
when assessing different submodels, the model that provides opti-
mal accuracy at a minimum computational cost could be consid-
ered as superior. More details on appraising LES are discussed by
Pope.16
The LES method used for simulations presented in this paper
is implemented in the Rolls–Royce corporate combustion design
analysis system, PRECISE. The LES solver is based on a col-
located, ﬁnite volume, structured-grid, incompressible, pressure-
based method.8 Spatial derivatives for velocities are discretized by a
second-order central scheme. For the scalar ﬁelds, the hybrid or the
hybrid-linear parabolic approximation scheme17 is typically used
to ensure boundedness of scalars. Time derivatives are discretized
by a second-order backward difference scheme. A SIMPLE-type18
method is used to converge the discretized equations at each time
step. For reacting ﬂows, roughly 10 iterations sufﬁce for conver-
gence at each time step.
Modeling
In Eq. (3), the unclosed terms are SGS stress, SGS scalar ﬂux,
and ﬁltered reaction rates. For liquid fuels, additional modeling of
spray source terms is required. In the following sections, we will
review models for these terms and present some sample results.
SGS Stress and Scalar Flux
ThemajorityofSGSstressmodelsarebasedontheeddy-viscosity
approach. Since the early pioneering work by Smagorinsky,19 there
have been several variants20−24 of the eddy viscosity model that have
shown improved predictive capabilities.
The Smagorinsky model is given by the expression
Ti j −(δi j/3)Tkk = −2νT ˜Si j = −2(C)2| ˜S| ˜Si j
(4)
where ˜Si j = 1
2(∂˜ui/∂x j + ∂˜u j/∂xi) is the strain rate tensor, νT is the
turbulent viscosity, and | ˜S| is the magnitude of the strain rate tensor.
The ﬁlter width  is typically considered to be the local grid spacing.
In the standard Smagorinsky model, the constant C is assumed to
have a ﬁxed value. A review of literature shows signiﬁcant variation
in the value used for C; values ranging from 0.065 to 0.17 have been
used.
The dynamic model proposed by Germano et al.20 overcomes the
limitation of tuning the constant C. In this model, C is computed
dynamically via an identity that relates stresses at different scales.
There are several variants of the dynamic model that provide im-
proved predictions, for example, the localized dynamic model,21 the
dynamic localization model,22 the Lagrangian dynamic model (see
Ref. 23), and scale-dependent dynamic model.24
Another class of SGS stress models is based on the one-equation
model, in which the transport equation for the SGS turbulent kinetic
energy equation is solved.25 It has been argued that by solving this
equation, the equilibrium assumption, that is, production equals dis-
sipation of SGS kinetic energy, inherent in algebraic eddy-viscosity
models, is no longer required. Therefore, a relatively coarser
grid could be used. The SGS kinetic energy equation is deﬁned
as
ksgs = 1
2(
ukuk −˜uk ˜uk)
(5)
and its transport equation can be derived to be
∂¯ρksgs
∂t
+
∂
∂x j
( ¯ρ ˜uiksgs) = Psgs −Dsgs + ∂
∂xi

ρνt
Prt
∂ksgs
∂xi

(6)
The terms on the right-hand side represent production, dissipation,
and transport of the subgrid kinetic energy, respectively. Here, the
production term is
Psgs = −Ti j

∂˜ui
∂x j

(7)
The SGS stress is modeled as
Ti j = −2 ¯ρCkk
1
2sgs
 ˜Si j −1
3 ˜Skkδi j

+ 2
3 ¯ρksgsδi j
(8)
where the turbulent viscosity is deﬁned as νt = Ckk1/2
sgs . The dissi-
pation term is modeled as
Dsgs = Cε ¯ρk
3
2 

(9)
The two parameters Ck and Cε are assumed to be either a constant
or computed dynamically.
To illustrate the predictive capability of the eddy-viscosity model,
an assessment of RANS with the k–ε model and LES with standard
Smagorinsky model, localized dynamic model, and one-equation
kinetic-energy equation model is performed for the ﬂow in a lid-
driven, three-dimensional cavity. The value of the constant C in the
standard Smagorinsky model is set to 0.17. In the kinetic-energy
equation model, a dynamic procedure is used to compute Ck, but a
constant value of 0.916 is used for Cε. The ﬂow conﬁguration con-
sists of a three-dimensional cavity bounded by walls with the upper
wall (or lid) moving at a velocity UB. Fluid motions are generated by
shear stresses at the moving wall. Past studies have shown that at a
Reynolds number Re lower than 5 × 103 the ﬂow is essentially lam-
inar with inherent unsteadiness. At Re > 6 × 103, the ﬂow becomes
unstable near the downstream eddy and at Re > 1 × 104, the ﬂow
near the downstream eddy becomes fully turbulent. The experimen-
tal data used for comparisons with the present LES calculations were
collected by Prasad and Koseff.26 Data were collected for three dif-
ferent Reynolds numbers at different spanwise aspect ratios (SAR),
deﬁned as L/B, where L is the cavity span and B is the breadth of the
cavity. Simulations are conducted for Re = 1 × 104 and SAR = 0.5
with a mesh resolution of 64 × 64 × 32. Figure 1 presents the mean
streamwise, u, and transverse, v, velocities from the three simu-
lations at the spanwise midplane of the cavity. It can be seen that
the predictions using the dynamic and one-equation models show
very good agreement with data. RANS shows poor agreement with
data. The standard Smagorinsky model shows an improvement over
RANS; however, predictions are not as good as those from the other
LES models. This is even more apparent in Fig. 2, which shows the
rms of u and v velocities at the same plane. The dynamic and one-
equation models show reasonable agreement with data, whereas the
Fig. 1
Comparison of mean u and v velocities with experimental data
for lid-driven cavity ﬂow using various models: ——, localized dy-
namic; - - - -, kinetic-energy equation; —·—, standard Smagorinsky;
— —, RANS; , experimental data for u velocity; and , experimental
data for v velocity.


--- Page 4 ---

JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
677
Fig. 2
Comparison of turbulence intensities with experimental data
for lid-driven cavity ﬂow various models: ——, localized dynamic; - - - -,
kinetic-energy equation; —·—, standard Smagorinsky; , experimental
data for u velocity; and , experimental data for v velocity.
Fig. 3
Comparison of mean u velocity using dynamic and kinetic-
energymodelswithDNSandexperimentaldataforplaneturbulentCou-
ette ﬂow: ——, localized dynamic; - - - -, kinetic-energy equation; — —,
DNS data of Bech et al.27; —·—, RANS (note wall functions not used at
moving wall); and , experimental data of Aydin and Leutheusser.28
standard Smagorinsky model shows signiﬁcant deviation from the
data. It may be possible to improve the predictions of the standard
Smagorinsky model by tuning the constant C.
Results from LES of a plane turbulent Couette ﬂow are shown
in Figs. 3 and 4. This ﬂow is essentially driven by shear generated
by the relative motion of two parallel plates. Physical experiments
on this ﬂow conﬁguration were performed by Bech et al.27 and
Aydin and Leutheusser.28 Bech et al.27 also performed DNS of this
ﬂow. In the present simulations, the upper wall has a ﬁxed velocity
Uw, whereas the lower wall is ﬁxed. Periodic boundary conditions
are imposed in the axial and spanwise directions. The transitional
Reynolds number for plane Couette ﬂows is approximately 300 and
fully developed turbulence is achieved at Reynolds numbers above
500. For the present study, the Reynolds number is Re = 2.6× 103;
the ﬂow is, therefore, fully turbulent. The computational domain has
dimensions 4πh × 2h × 2πh in the streamwise, normal, and span-
wise directions, where h is the channel half-height. A grid resolu-
tion of 32 × 32 × 32 grid is used in the simulations. As in the cavity
case, simulations of the Couette ﬂow are performed with the lo-
calized dynamic and one-equation models. Figure 3 presents the
mean streamwise velocities in the spanwise midplane. The predic-
tions are in good agreement with both experimental data and DNS
simulation. Note that RANS shows a very different prediction. In
the RANS simulation, no wall functions are used at the moving wall
and, therefore, may be a cause for the poor prediction. In the LES
simulations, no wall functions are imposed. Figure 4 shows rms of
Fig. 4
Comparison of rms of u velocity using dynamic and kinetic-
energymodelswithDNSandexperimentaldataforplaneturbulentCou-
ette ﬂow: ——, localized dynamic model; - - - -, kinetic-energy model;
— —, DNS data of Bech et al.27; , experimental data of Bech et al.27;
and , experimental data of Aydin and Leutheusser.28
Fig. 5
Schematic
of
Sommerfeld
and
Qiu29
experimental
conﬁguration.
the streamwise velocity normalized by the wall-shear velocity. It can
be seen that the LES predictions are in reasonable agreement with
data and DNS. The turbulent kinetic energy in RANS (not shown)
does not show the same behavior.
The third test case presented is the experiment of Sommerfeld
and Qiu.29 The ﬂow conﬁguration, shown in Fig. 5, is more complex
than the preceding two cases. Heated air is blown from an annular
injection tube into a test section that has an inner diameter of 200 mm
and a length of 1500 mm. The inner and outer diameters of the
annulus are 40 and 64 mm, respectively. The air mass ﬂow rate is
29 g/s, and the air temperature is 373 K. A hollow cone pressure
atomizer is mounted in the cylindrical centerbody of the inlet tube.
A set of measurements obtained without the atomizer in operation
is used to validate LES of this ﬂow conﬁguration. The localized
dynamic model is used in the simulations.
The computational domain is constructed entirely by H-elements
and consists of 9 blocks. A total of 1.2 million grid points are used to
represent the ﬂow domain. To take advantage of parallel processing
capabilities, the domain is decomposed into ﬁve subdomains. Each
subdomain is acted on by an independent processor. A laminar pro-
ﬁle is used at the inlet and full-developed conditions are assumed
at the exit boundary. No perturbations are imposed on the inlet pro-
ﬁle. Instantaneous contours of u velocity are shown in Fig. 6. As
reported in the experiments, a small recirculation region is seen in
front of the atomizer, and the recirculation region at the edge of
the pipe expansion extends throughout the ﬂow domain. Figure 7
shows a comparison of the prediction of mean u velocity against
data at several axial locations. It can be seen that the predictions
are in reasonable agreement with data. Figure 8 presents the rms of
u velocity at the same axial stations. Again, the rms predictions are
also in reasonable agreement with the data.
The preceding three cases show that the localized dynamic and
one-equation kinetic-energy models are able to predict the ﬂow-
ﬁeld reasonably without having to tune boundary conditions. A
third class of subgrid stress models proposed in literature is scale-
similarity models. In this model, the unﬁltered velocity in the SGS
stress terms is approximated by the ﬁltered velocity.30 However,


--- Page 5 ---

678
JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
Fig. 6
Instantaneous u-velocity contours in Sommerfeld and Qiu29 experiment study.
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 7
Comparison of mean u velocity at several axial locations in
Sommerfeld and Qiu29 experiment: a) x = 0.05 m, b) x = 0.1 m, and
c) x = 0.3 m: ——, computations and , experimental data.
simulations based on this model suffer from lack of sufﬁcient dissi-
pation and the model has to be supplemented by an eddy-viscosity
model to stabilize the calculations.31 A fourth category of subgrid
stress models is based on the idea of reconstructing the unresolved
primitive variables and directly computing the stresses from their
deﬁning equations. The approximate deconvolution model32 and the
SGS estimation model33 fall in this category. These models are yet
to be tested in complex reacting ﬂow conﬁgurations. For a detailed
exposition on SGS stress models, the reader may refer to recent
review articles.34,35
The most widely used model for closure of the SGS scalar ﬂux
term is the gradient diffusion model36−42 given by the expression
Mi
α = −¯ρDt
∂˜φα
∂xi
(10)
where Dt = νt/Sct. The turbulent Schmidt number can be either
assumedtobeaconstantorcomputeddynamically.42 TheSGSstress
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 8
Comparison of rms of u velocity at several axial locations in
Sommerfeld and Qiu29 experiment: a) x = 0.05 m, b) x = 0.1 m, and
c) x = 0.3 m: ——, computations and , experimental data.
and scalar ﬂux terms can be computed exactly when the transport
equation of the joint ﬁltered density function (FDF) of velocity and
scalars is solved.43 However, there are other unclosed terms in the
joint FDF transport equation for which appropriate models have to
be devised.
Spray Modeling
The spray methodology that is typically used in LES is for
the most part adopted from RANS applications.8 The Lagrangian
method with two-way coupling is the most common approach used
to simulate droplet dynamics. The dispersed phase is represented by
computational particles with no particle–particle interactions. Each
computational particle is a representation of a group of actual spray
particles having the same size, velocity, and temperature. To rep-
resent the spray physics, spray tracking and evaporation processes
need to be modeled accurately. In RANS, because time accuracy is
usually not important, each computational particle is tracked until it


--- Page 6 ---

JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
679
completely evaporates or leaves the computational domain, before
another particle is injected. In LES, due to the constraint of time ac-
curacy, several particles are injected from the fuel nozzle and tracked
for the duration of the time step. Subsequently, more particles are
injected from the fuel nozzle and the process repeated. Hence, at a
given instant of time, there may be a large number of particles in
the ﬂow domain.
The governing equation of motion for the kth particle in the i di-
rection is given by44
dV k
i
dt
=

ui −V k
i

τd
(11)
where
τd =
4dkρp
3CDρg|u −Vk|
(12)
In Eqs. (11) and (12), u is the instantaneous gas-phase velocity
at the particle location and Vk is velocity of the kth particle. CD
is the drag coefﬁcient, and ρp and ρg are densities of the particle
phaseandgasphase,respectively.CD iscomputedthroughnonlinear
relationships45 that are dependent on the particle Reynolds number,
deﬁned as
Rek = ρp|u −Vk|dk
μg
(13)
Note that instantaneous gas-phase velocities are needed in
Eqs. (11–13). The standard approach in RANS is to use the turbu-
lent kinetic energy to reconstruct the ﬂuctuating velocities. A similar
approach was used by Pannala and Menon,46 where they used the
SGS kinetic energy to reconstruct the unknown velocities. Studies
by Miller and Bellan47 showed that neglecting the subgrid veloc-
ity ﬂuctuations results in erroneous predictions of the droplet drag
force. Apte et al.48 performed LES of swirling particle-laden ﬂow in
a coaxial-jet combustor without accounting for these ﬂuctuations.
Their predictions were in good agreement with data.
The commonly used evaporation model, to mimic heat and mass
transfer from spray droplets, is based on a quasi-steady analysis of
an isolated droplet in a quiescent environment.49 The rate of change
of mass of a particle is deﬁned as
˙m p = 2πdk(k/cp)g ln(1 + Bm)
(14)
where k and cp are the thermal conductivity and the speciﬁc heat
capacity, respectively, of the gas phase. Bm is the mass transfer
number.49 The rate of change of drop surface temperature is given
by
dTs
dt = ˙m pL
cppm
	
BT
Bm
−1

(15)
where L is the latent heat of fuel vaporization and BT is the heat
transfer number.49 The effects of convection on heat and mass trans-
fer rates can be accommodated by a correction factor, which is a
function of Reynolds number and Schmidt (or Prandtl) number (see
Ref. 49).
Fig. 9
Spray particles from LES simulation of Sommerfeld and Qiu29 experiment superimposed on instantaneous u-velocity ﬁeld.
Modeling the inlet conditions for the spray injection process is
another issue that is equally important. The common procedure is to
inject spray size groups from a Rossin–Rammler distribution (e.g.,
see Ref. 50). More recent approaches are based on modeling the
primary breakup of the liquid ﬁlm issuing from the fuel nozzle,
followed by a secondary breakup process (e.g., Refs. 51 and 52).
As an illustrative example, LES of an evaporating ﬂuid in a tur-
bulent airstream is performed for the ﬂow conﬁguration studied by
Sommerfeld and Qiu.29 The ﬂow conﬁguration is the same as that
shown in Fig. 5. The hollow cone pressure atomizer issues iso-
propyl alcohol into the cylindrical tube. Detailed measurements of
droplet particle velocities and diameters are available at several ax-
ial locations.29 In the LES, spray droplets are injected around a ring
with radius 3 mm. The cone angle of the spray is set to 60 deg
(Ref. 29). Mean axial velocity is set to 18 m/s and Sauter mean di-
ameter is set to 40. The fuel ﬂow rate is 0.44 g/s, and the airﬂow rate
is 28.3 g/s. At each time step, 10 spray droplet size groups are sam-
pled from a modiﬁed Rossin–Rammler distribution (see Ref. 50).
At the next time step another 10 spray droplet size groups (not the
same as those in the previous time step) are sampled and so on.
This procedure ensures that over a large number of time steps the
droplet distribution is accurately mimicked. The key to performing
accurate spray simulations is an accurate spray-tracking algorithm.
The spray-tracking algorithm implemented in the LES code is the
same as that implemented for tracking computational particles in the
transport probability density function (PDF) method.53 This algo-
rithm, which is based on identifying cell-face crossings of particles,
is quite robust even in complicated geometries. The spray-tracking
algorithm has also been parallelized to take advantage of distributed
computing. Figure 9 shows the spray particles in the computational
domain at one instant of time. Large droplets are present in the near
ﬁeld of the spray nozzle and typically found at large radii. Farther
downstream droplets evaporate and only smaller droplets are found.
Figure 10 presents the mean particle velocities at several axial lo-
cations. Note that the predictions are in reasonable agreement with
data. Figure 11 presents the mean particle diameters at several ax-
ial locations. Again, the predictions and the data match very well.
Figure 11 also shows that large droplets are found at the edge of
the spray, whereas small droplets are found in the core region. Far
downstream of the inlet, particle diameters decrease and become
more uniform due to evaporation. Ham et al.52 also report similar
predictions using an unstructured LES code.
Turbulent-Combustion Model
For applications of LES to turbulent reacting ﬂows, appropriate
turbulence–chemistryinteractionmodelisrequiredtoclosethereac-
tion source terms [see Eq. (3)]. In the past decade, signiﬁcant strides
have been made in combustion modeling for LES. The majority of
the models have been extensions of RANS models.
The eddy breakup model has been successfully used in reacting
RANS simulations of gas turbine combustors.8 The model has been
extended for LES applications by Fureby and Lofstrom,54 where
they applied it to bluff-body stabilized ﬂames. In this model, the
mean reaction rate is assumed to be the minimum of the kinetically
controlled reaction rate and the mixing controlled reaction rate. The


--- Page 7 ---

680
JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 10
Particle velocity predictions at several axial locations in
Sommerfeld and Qiu29 experiment: a) x = 0.05 m, b) x = 0.1 m, and
c) x = 0.3 m: , experimental data and ——, LES predictions.
mixing controlled rate is assumed to be proportional to the mix-
ing frequency, computed based on the ﬁlter width and SGS kinetic
energy.
More recently, ﬂamelet models37,55−57 based on single-variable
and two-variable formulations have become popular. The advan-
tage of ﬂamelet-based approaches is that detailed chemical kinetics
could be used to describe the ﬂame. In the single-variable formula-
tion, chemical species are functions of mixture fraction ξ only. The
PDF of ξ is modeled as an assumed beta function, parameterized
by the mean and variance of ξ. The mean value is computed from
a transport equation, and the variance is computed from an alge-
braic relation, derived by assuming production equals dissipation in
the variance transport equation.57 In the two-variable formulation,56
chemical species are functions of ξ and a reaction progress variable
η. The PDF of η is typically assumed to be a Dirac-delta function.
More recently,58 other forms such as a beta PDF, parameterized by
the mean and variance of η, have been assumed. Other SGS reac-
tion models based on conditional moment closure59 and closures for
SGS stress terms60,61 have also been proposed in literature.
A promising new development in subgrid reaction closures that
avoids a priori speciﬁcation of the PDF of scalars is the FDF trans-
port method.41,43,62−65 This method is analogous to the PDF trans-
port method used in RANS simulations. In the scalar FDF transport
method, a transport equation for the ﬁltered mass density function
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 11
Particle mean diameters at several axial locations in Sommer-
feld and Qiu29 experiment: a) x = 0.05 m, b) x = 0.1 m, and c) x = 0.3 m:
, experimental data and ——, LES predictions.
(FMDF) is solved for. The FMDF is deﬁned as
FL(ψ, x; t) =
 +∞
−∞
ρ(x′, t)δ[ψ −φ(x, t)]G(x′ −x) dx′
(16)
where δ is the delta function, ψ is the scalar variable in composition
space, and G is the ﬁlter function. The transport equation for FLcan
be derived to be of the form
∂
∂t (FL) + ∂
∂xi
(⟨ui⟩i FL) =
∂
∂ψα

1
ρ
∂
∂xi
J α
i
ψ

FL

−∂
∂xi
[(⟨ui|ψ⟩−⟨ui⟩)FL] −
∂
∂ψα
(Sα FL)
(17)
There are two terms in this equation that require modeling: the
molecular mixing term (ﬁrst term on the right-hand side) and the tur-
bulent convection term (second term on the right-hand side). One of
the mixing models used for the molecular mixing term is the inter-
action by exchange with the mean (IEM) model, given by
∂
∂ψα

1
ρ
∂J α
i
∂xi
ψ

FL

=
∂
∂ψα
[Cφω(ψα −⟨φα⟩)FL]
(18)
A value of 2.0 is typically used for the model constant Cφ. The
mixing frequency ω is expressed in terms of the SGS viscosity and


--- Page 8 ---

JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
681
the ﬁlter size. The turbulent convection term is typically modeled
by the gradient diffusion model given by
(⟨ui|ψ⟩−⟨ui⟩)FL = −⟨ρ⟩DT
∂
∂xi

FL
⟨ρ⟩

(19)
In Eq. (17), it can be seen that the last term on the right-hand side is
due to chemical reactions and is in a closed form. Thus, reactions of
arbitrary complexity could be used to describe chemical reactions.
Given this advantage of the FDF method and also the fact that the
PDF is not speciﬁed a priori as in ﬂamelet models, it is expected that
the LES/FDF method will yield better predictions of not only overall
turbulent ﬂame structures, but also local extinction and reignition
scenarios in these ﬂames.
The large dimensionality of Eq. (17) precludes the use of ﬁnite
difference or ﬁnite volume schemes for the solution of this equa-
tion. The standard method to solve Eq. (17) is via Monte Carlo
methods. In these methods, the FMDF in each computational cell is
represented by an ensemble of notional particles, each with a set of
scalars and position vector. The transport of these particles in phys-
ical and compositional space mimics the solution of Eq. (17). The
mean velocities at the particle locations are computed by interpolat-
ing the velocities computed by an Eulerian ﬂow solver. The ﬁltered
scalar values in each cell are constructed by ensemble averaging the
particle scalar values in that cell.
In the FDF transport method, the main link between the ﬂow
solver and the particle solver is the density ﬁeld. This ﬁeld, typi-
cally computed from the particle solver, has been the cause of severe
numerical difﬁculties in pressure-based methods because the den-
sity ﬁeld computed from a ﬁnite ensemble size of particles is quite
noisy. There are several methods available to address this problem.
One method is to use density underrelaxation to smooth out the
density ﬁeld. A similar approach was successfully used by Forkel
and Janicka37 in their LES of a turbulent hydrogen diffusion ﬂame
with an assumed PDF model. A second method41 to overcome the
problem is to solve the scalar transport equations in addition to the
velocity and pressure equations. The ﬁltered reaction rates required
in the scalar equations are computed from the particle ﬁeld. In this
approach, the reaction rates are the main link between the ﬂow and
particle solvers. The disadvantage of this approach is that a large
number of transport equations have to be solved when the number
of scalars is large. A third method to overcome numerical difﬁ-
culties is as suggested by Muradoglu et al.,66 in a RANS context,
in which the transport equation of total sensible internal energy is
solved for. The source term in this equation is computed from the
particle solver. Filtered density is then computed from an expres-
sion that involves mean pressure, total sensible internal energy, and
velocities. A fourth method to overcome numerical instabilities is
via the solution of the transport equation for
 = R0  T φα
Mα
The source terms in this equation are computed from the particle
solver. Given ˜, mean density could be easily computed from the
relation ¯ρ = ¯p/ ˜.
A few examples of LES of turbulent reacting ﬂows are presented
next. The ﬁrst case presented is the LES of a model gas turbine com-
bustor for which experimental data are presented by Pitsch et al.67
A schematic of the combustor is shown in Fig. 12. The combustor
consists of concentric tubes, with the central tube feeding methane
and an outer tube feeding air into a test section. Both the air and
fuel are coswirled to provide liftoff of the ﬂame in the test section.
The test section terminates into a narrow pipe. LES of the ﬂow are
performed using the mixture fraction-based assumed PDF model in
Fig. 12
Schematic of swirl-stabilized model gas turbine combustor.
conjunction with an equilibrium chemistry description of the ﬂame.
Simulations are also performed with the FDF model in conjunc-
tion with the Westbrook and Dryer two-step chemistry model. In
the FDF solver, combustion chemistry is integrated using a table
lookup algorithm. Density is underrelaxed with a factor of 0.001 to
stabilize the FDF calculations. This is akin to performing a running
time average of the density ﬁeld over 1000 time steps. In the FDF
calculations, 10 particles/cell are used. Inlet boundary conditions
for both calculations are taken from a previous simulation of the
same combustor.68 The computational grid for the present calcu-
lation consists of 1.1 million grid points and is constructed using
O- and H-grid elements. Calculations are performed on six pro-
cessors. The FDF calculation with the two-step chemistry model is
henceforth denoted as FDF/2-step.
The swirling ﬂow establishes a recirulating region, which acts as
a stabilization mechanism for the ﬂame. Figure 13 shows the mean
velocities at several axial locations in the test section. Note that, at
x = 0.043 m, which is very close to the inlet of the test section, peak
velocities are better predicted by the assumed PDF model. Near
the centerline, the FDF/2-step model shows better predictions. At
x = 0.115 m and 0.151 m, the FDF/2-step model shows superior
predictions. The rms of the axial velocity is shown in Fig. 14 at
several axial locations. At x = 0.043 m, both of the models show
poor predictions near the centerline. The comparison improves away
from the centerline. At x = 0.115 and 0.151 m, both models show
excellent prediction of ﬂuctuations.
Figure 15 shows the instantaneous temperature ﬁelds from the
assumed PDF model and the FDF/2-step model. The FDF/2-step
model shows a highly lifted ﬂame compared to that shown by the
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 13
Mean axial velocities at several axial locations: a) x = 0.043 m,
b) x = 0.115 m, and c) x = 0.151 m: ——, assumed PDF model; - - - -, FDF
model; and , experimental data.


--- Page 9 ---

682
JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
assumed PDF model. Note that with the assumed PDF model, tem-
peratures are higher and the ﬂame shows two tails at the ﬂame sta-
bilization location. The fast burning seen with this model is due to
the single variable used to parameterize methane combustion chem-
istry. A two-variable assumed PDF formulation does not show this
behavior.67
Detailed comparisons of the mean temperatures at several ax-
ial locations are shown in Fig. 16. In Fig. 16, an additional curve
is shown for predictions from the FDF method using a detailed
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 14
Axial velocity rms at several axial locations: a) x = 0.043 m,
b) x = 0.115 m, and c) x = 0.151 m: ——, assumed PDF model; - - - -, FDF
model; and , experimental data.
a)
b)
Fig. 15
Instantaneous temperatures in model gas turbine combustor: a) mixture fraction variable-based assumed PDF model in conjunction with
equilibrium chemistry used for turbulent combustion and b) FDF turbulent combustion model in conjunction with Westbrook and Dryer two-step
methane reaction model.
15-step, 21-species chemical kinetics mechanism.69 Integration of
the detailed chemical kinetics scheme is achieved using the in situ
adaptive tabulation70 scheme. Also, in addition to the three LES
calculations, results from RANS with a transport PDF model and
2-step chemistry are also shown in Fig. 16.
At x = 0.043 m, the FDF/2-step and RANS/PDF models un-
derpredict the temperatures near the centerline signiﬁcantly. The
assumed PDF model shows a temperature spike at r ∼0.03 m,
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 16
Mean temperatures at several axial locations: a) x = 0.043 m,
b) x = 0.151 m, and c) x = 0.26 m: ——, FDF model with detailed chem-
ical kinetics; — —, assumed PDF model; - - - -, FDF model; —·—,
RANS/PDF transport model; , experimental data.


--- Page 10 ---

JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
683
Fig. 17
Computational grid of sector model of developmental gas
turbine combustor.
which is an artifact of the single-variable PDF as explained be-
fore. The FDF model with detailed chemical kinetics shows rea-
sonable agreement with data. At x = 0.151 m, the assumed PDF
model consistently overpredicts temperatures. The RANS/PDF and
FDF/detailed-chemistry models show higher temperatures near the
centerline. Away from the centerline, the FDF/detailed-chemistry
model shows good agreement with data. At x = 0.26 m, all of the
models show overprediction of temperature values. Because radia-
tion is not accounted for in the simulations, this overprediction is
expected. These results suggest that the ﬂame is highly lifted in the
FDF/2-step and RANS/PDF calculations. Flame liftoff is reason-
ably predicted using detailed chemical kinetics. At the base of lifted
ﬂames, ﬁnite-rate chemistry effects are signiﬁcant. Hence, ﬂame
liftoff height is sensitive to the accuracy of the chemical kinetic
mechanism and mixing model in FDF (or RANS/PDF) transport cal-
culations. In the present simulations, the two-step mechanism may
not be accurate enough to predict the correct ﬂame liftoff height.
Deﬁciences with the IEM mixing model are well known. More ac-
curate mixing models such as the Euclidean minimum spanning
tree71 model may yield better results. Nevertheless, the present cal-
culations demonstrate that LES/FDF calculations of complex ﬂow
conﬁgurations are feasible.
LES results from a single-sector model of a developmental gas
turbine combustor are presented next. The grid for the combus-
tor, presented in Fig. 17, consists of roughly 1 million cells. The
combustor model has all of the elements of a practical gas turbine
combustor, swirlers, fuel nozzles, primary and dilution holes, cool-
ing ﬂows, etc. Note that the annuli of the combustor and the liner
are also included in the computational ﬂow model. The jet-A fuel is
simulated using a surrogate two-step Westbrook and Dryer mecha-
nism with propane rate parameters. The localized dynamic and the
eddy breakup models are used in the calculations. Figure 18 shows
contours of the instantaneous velocity magnitude and temperature
ﬁelds in the azimuthal centerplane of the combustor. A recirculating
zone is seen in the primary zone, which helps to stabilize combus-
tion. High temperatures are seen in the primary zone and also in
regions downstream of the dilution holes.
Figure 19 shows the mean exit temperature proﬁles from calcu-
lations and full-annular rig measurements. Also shown in Fig. 19
are proﬁles from LES calculations of the liner alone (without the
annuli), RANS calculations, and rig measurements. Note that LES
of the liner plus annuli model and the RANS of the liner-only model
show similar proﬁles. However, LES of the liner-only model show
a very different proﬁle. In the liner-only model, no turbulent ﬂuctu-
ations were superimposed on the velocity proﬁles prescribed at the
primary and dilution ports. This may have resulted in overpenetra-
tion of the jets from these ports, thus, signiﬁcantly affecting the exit
a)
b)
Fig. 18
Developmental gas turbine combustor: a) instantaneous
velocity magnitude and b) temperature.
Fig. 19
Mean exit mixture fraction (averaged in circumferential direc-
tion) along combustor span: ——, LES of liner plus annuli; - - - -, LES
of liner only; —·—, RANS of liner only; and , rig measurements.
temperature proﬁle. Note that all of the three calculations predict
peak mixture fraction to be at a higher span than that seen in the
data. (Subsequent RANS calculations with improved boundary con-
ditions showed excellent agreement with data. It is expected that,
with these boundary conditions, the LES calculations will also show
improvement.)
The LES solver is also applied to a production combustor shown
in Fig. 20. The eddy breakup model and the localized dynamic
model are used in the simulation of the ﬂow in this combustor.
Figure 21 shows contours of the instantaneous velocity magnitude
and temperature in the ﬂowﬁeld. These results again demonstrate
that LES of complex gas turbine combustors is feasible.
Future Developments
As LES is applied to increasingly complex problems, there is a
needtofurtherenhancethetheoreticalbasisoftheLESmethodology
to improve accuracy. One area that is gaining attention is the explicit
ﬁltering approach for LES. An advantage of explicit ﬁltering is
that grid-independent LES solutions can be obtained by allowing
ﬁlters to be chosen independent of the computational mesh. Another
advantageisthatnumericalerrorsinthehigh-frequencyrangecanbe
reduced or eliminated. In the explicit ﬁltering method, an alternative


--- Page 11 ---

684
JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
Fig. 20
Model of production combustor for LES; 1-million-element
grid.
a)
b)
Fig. 21
Production combustor: a) instantaneous velocity magnitude
and b) temperature ﬁelds.
form of the LES equations is solved.72 The momentum equations
are written as
∂u j
∂t + ∂¯ui ¯u j
∂xi
= −∂p
∂x j
+ ∂τi j
∂xi
−∂Ti j
∂xi
(20)
and the SGS stress is written as Ti j = ¯ui ¯u j −uiu j. Note that there
is an extra ﬁltering step in the convective terms. The advantage of
this is that frequencies higher than the cutoff are not generated by
the nonlinear terms. Filters are chosen such that they commute with
differentiation. In support of this requirement, a new class of com-
mutative ﬁlters has been developed for structured and unstructured
grids.72,73 Further research is required to assess the suitability of
explicit ﬁltering methods for large complex problems.
The SGS stress and turbulent-chemistry interactions are the two
most important terms to be modeled in LES. New methods such
as one-dimensional turbulence,74 velocity FDF,64 and SGS esti-
mation methods33 appear promising for modeling SGS stress. For
turbulence–chemistry interactions, the linear-eddy model75 and the
G-equation model67 are promising avenues that are being explored.
The scalar FDF transport method is just beginning to be applied for
practical problems. FDF with detailed chemical kinetics could be
used to address emissions, extinction, reignition, and lean blowout,
issues of importance to the gas turbine community. Further work is
needed to exploit the capabilities of the FDF method. In addition to
the scalar FDF method, the joint velocity–scalar FDF method has
been developed recently.43 The feasibility of using this method for
complex ﬂows needs to be explored. For combustion instabilities, a
low-dissipative compressible version of the pressure-based method
has to be developed. Some advances are being made to this effect.76
The unsteady nature of LES makes it more suited (than RANS)
for tackling transient problems such as lean blowout, relight, and
combustion instabilities. In recent years, applications of RANS to
a variety of steady-state high fuel–air ratio gas turbine combustor
ﬂows have highlighted deﬁciencies with conventional RANS mod-
els.ThereisanincreasingdesiretouseLESforsuchﬂows.However,
the overall turnaround time of LES is an important issue. Presently,
the wall clock time for a typical gas turbine combustor simulation
such as those shown in Figs. 17–21 is about four days on an eight-
processor LINUX machine. To improve accuracy, grids involving
several million cells will have to be used. Correspondingly, CPU
requirements are expected to increase signiﬁcantly. With the de-
velopment of more efﬁcient solvers and large computing resources
becoming more affordable, it is foreseeable that LES may soon be-
come the preferred tool for gas turbine applications.
Conclusions
Although LES is computationally expensive compared to RANS,
increasing computing power in conjunction with more accurate re-
sults obtained with LES for a variety of benchmark ﬂows is making
LES attractive for gas turbine combustor applications. In this paper,
an overview of recent activities related to LES being pursued by the
authors at Rolls–Royce is presented. The state of the art of LES for
gas turbine combustion systems is reviewed. Numerical and model-
ing issues are presented, and some promising models are discussed.
A hierarchy of validation cases performed on several nonreacting
and reacting benchmark ﬂows are presented. These cases ranging
from simple lid-driven cavity ﬂow to complex gas turbine combustor
ﬂow highlight the predictive capabilities of LES. As LES is applied
to more complex problems, more validation and veriﬁcation efforts
are needed to assess the limitations and accuracy of the submod-
els. Further improvement to the underlying theoretical foundation
of LES is mandated to improve accuracy. A key issue for LES to be
accepted as a practical design tool in industry is the turnaround time.
Efﬁcient solvers with parallel processing capabilities in conjunction
with large computational resources will help overcome this barrier.
Acknowledgments
ThisworkwasfundedinpartbyagrantfromtheIndianaState21st
Century Research and Technology Fund. The authors acknowledge
the contributions of Nagendra Dittakavi of Purdue University to
the simulations of the lid-driven cavity and plane turbulent Couette
cases presented in Figs. 1–4.
References
1Mahesh, K., Constantinescu, G., and Moin, P., “LES of Gas Turbine
Combustors,” Annual Research Briefs, Center for Turbulence Research,
Stanford Univ. and NASA Ames Research Center, 2000, pp. 219–228.
2Kim, W. W-., Menon, S., and Mongia, H. C., “Large-Eddy Simulation
of a Gas Turbine Combustor Flow,” Combustion Science and Technology,
Vol. 143, No. 1–6, 1999, pp. 25–62.
3Selle, L., Lartigue, G., Poinsot, T., Kaufmann, P., Krebs, W., and
Veynante, D., “Large-Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Combustion for Gas
Turbines with Reduced Chemistry,” Proceedings of the Summer Program,
Center for Turbulence Research, Stanford Univ. and NASA Ames Research
Center, 2002, pp. 333–344.
4Cannon, S. M., Smith, C. E., and Anand, M. S., “LES Predictions of
Combustor Emissions in an Aero Gas Turbine Engine,” AIAA Paper 2003-
4521, July 2003.
5Leonard, A., “Energy Cascade in Large Eddy Simulations of Turbulent
Fluid Flows,” Advances in Geophysics A, Vol. 18, 1974, p. 237.
6Aldama, A. A., “Filtering Techniques for Turbulent Flow Simulation,”
Lecture Notes in Engineering, Vol. 49, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990.
7Ghosal, S., and Moin, P., “The Basic Equations for the Large Eddy Simu-
lation of Turbulent Flows in Complex Geometry,” Journal of Computational
Physics, Vol. 118, No. 1, 1995, pp. 24–37.
8Anand, M. S., Zhu, J., Connor, C., and Razdan, M. K., “Combustor Flow
Analysis Using an Advanced Finite-Volume Design System,” American So-
ciety of Mechanical Engineers, ASME Paper 99-GT-273, June 1999.


--- Page 12 ---

JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
685
9Mittal, R., and Moin, P., “Suitability of Upwind-Biased Finite Difference
Schemes for Large-Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flows,” AIAA Journal,
Vol. 35, No. 8, 1997, pp. 1415–1417.
10Morinishi, Y., Lund, T. S., Vasilyev, O. V., and Moin, P., “Fully Conser-
vative Higher Order Finite Difference Schemes for Incompressible Flows,”
Journal of Computational Physics, Vol. 143, June 1998, pp. 90–124.
11Vasilyev, O. V., “High Order Finite Difference Schemes on Non-
Uniform Meshes with Good Conservation Properties,” Journal of Compu-
tational Physics, Vol. 157, Jan. 2000, pp. 746–761.
12Mahesh, K., Constantinescu, G., and Moin, P., “A Numerical Method for
Large-Eddy Simulation in Complex Geometries,” Journal of Computational
Physics, Vol. 197, June 2004, pp. 215–240.
13Benhamadouche, S., Mahesh, K., and Constantinescu, G., “Collo-
cated Finite-Volume Schemes for Large-Eddy Simulation on Unstruc-
tured Meshes,” Proceedings of the Summer Program, Center for Turbu-
lence Research, Stanford Univ. and NASA Ames Research Center, 2002,
pp. 143–154.
14Pierce, C. D., and Moin, P., “Progress-Variable Approach for Large
Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Reacting Flows,” Dept. of Mechanical Engi-
neering, Rept. TF-80, Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, June 2001.
15Rhie, C. M., and Chow, W. L., “A Numerical Study of the Turbulent
Flow past an Isolated Airfoil with Trailing Edge Separation,” AIAA Journal,
Vol. 21, 1983, pp. 1525–1532.
16Pope, S. B., “Ten Questions Concerning the Large-Eddy Simulation of
Turbulent Flows,” New Journal of Physics, Vol. 6, March 2004, p. 35.
17Zhu, J., “On the Higher-Order Bounded Discretization Schemes for
Finite-Volume Computations of Incompressible Flows,” Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, Vol. 98, No. 3, 1992, pp. 345–360.
18Patankar, S. V., Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow, McGraw–
Hill, New York, 1980.
19Smagorinsky, J., “General Circulation Experiments with the Primitive
Equations, Part I: The Basic Experiment,” Monthly Weather Review, Vol. 91,
No. 3, 1963, pp. 99–164.
20Germano, M., Piomelli, U., Moin, P., and Cabot, W. H., “A Dynamic
Subgrid-Scale Eddy Viscosity Model,” Physics of Fluids A, Vol. 3, No. 7,
1991, pp. 1760–1765.
21Piomelli, U., and Liu, J., “Large-Eddy Simulation of Rotating Channel
Flows Using a Localized Dynamic Model,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 7, No. 4,
1995, pp. 839–848.
22Ghosal, S., Lund, T. S., Moin, P., and Akselvoll, K., “A Dynamic Lo-
calization Model for Large-Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flows,” Journal
of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 286, 1995, pp. 229–255.
23Meneveau, C., Lund, T., and Cabot, W., “A Lagrangian Dynamic
Subgrid-Scale Model of Turbulence,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 319,
1996, pp. 353–385.
24Porte-Agel, F., Meneveau, C., and Parlange, M. B., “A Scale-Dependent
Dynamic Model for Large-Eddy Simulation: Application to a Neutral At-
mospheric Boundary Layer,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 415, 2000,
pp. 261–284.
25Kim, W. W., and Menon, S., “An Unsteady Incompressible Navier–
Stokes Solver for Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flows,” Interna-
tional Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, Vol. 31, No. 6, 1999,
pp. 983–1017.
26Prasad, A. K., and Koseff, J. R., “Reynolds Number and End-Wall
Effects on a Lid-Driven Cavity Flow,” Physics of Fluids A, Vol. 1, Feb.
1989, pp. 208–218.
27Bech, K. H., Tillmark, N., Alfredsson, P. J., and Andersson, H. I., “An
Investigation of Turbulent Plane Couette Flow at Low Reynolds Numbers,”
Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 286, 1995, pp. 291–325.
28Aydin, E. M., and Leutheusser, H. J., “Experimental Investigation of
Turbulent Plane Couette Flow,” ASME Forum on Turbulent Flows, FED
Vol. 51, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Cincinnati, OH, 1987,
p. 51.
29Sommerfeld, M., and Qiu, H. H., “Experimental Studies of Spray Evap-
oration in Turbulent Flow,” International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow,
Vol. 19, 1998, pp. 10–22.
30Bardina, J., “Improved Turbulent Models Based on Large Eddy Sim-
ulation of Homogeneous, Incompressible, Turbulent Flows,” Ph.D. Disser-
tation, Mechanical Engineering Rept. TF-19, Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA,
1983.
31Liu, S. W., Meneveau, C., and Katz, J., “On the Properties of Similarity
Subgrid Scale Models as Deduced from Measurements in Turbulent Jets,”
Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 275, 1994, p. 83.
32Adams, N. A., and Stolz, S., “Deconvolution Methods for Subgrid-Scale
Approximation in Large-Eddy Simulation,” Modern Simulation Strategies
for Turbulent Flow, edited by B. Geurts, Edwards, Ann Arbor, MI, 2001,
pp. 21–41.
33Domaradski, J. A., and Adams, N. A., “Direct Modeling of Subgrid
Scales of Turbulence in Large Eddy Simulation,” Journal of Turbulence,
Vol. 3, No. 24, 2002, pp. 1–19.
34Sagaut, P., Large Eddy Simulations for Incompressible Flows, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 2001.
35Meneveau, C., and Katz, J., “Scale-Invariance and Turbulence Models
for Large Eddy Simulation,” Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 32,
2000, pp. 1–32.
36Cook, A. W., and Riley, J. J., “A Subgrid Model for Equilibrium
Chemistry in Turbulent Flows,” Physics of Fluids A, Vol. 6, No. 8, 1994,
pp. 2868–2870.
37Forkel, H., and Janicka, J., “Large Eddy Simulation of a Turbulent
Hydrogen Diffusion Flame,” Flow, Turb. and Comb, Vol. 65, No. 2, 2000,
pp. 163–175.
38Steiner, H., and Pitsch, H., “Large-Eddy Simulation of a Turbulent
Piloted Methane/Air Diffusion Flame (Sandia Flame D),” Physics of Fluids,
Vol. 12, No. 10, 2000, pp. 2541–2554.
39Pierce, C. D., and Moin, P., “Large Eddy Simulation of a Conﬁned
Coaxial Jet with Swirl and Heat Release,” AIAA Paper 98-2892, June
1998.
40Jones, W. P., and Branley, N., “Large Eddy Simulation of a Turbulent
Non-Premixed Flame,” Proceedings of the 11th Symposium on Turbulent
Shear Flows, Grenoble, France, 1997.
41James, S., and Jaberi, F. A., “Large Scale Simulations of Two-
Dimensional Non-Premixed Methane Jet Flames,” Combustion and Flame,
Vol. 123, No. 4, 2000, pp. 465–487.
42Moin, P., Squires, K., Cabot, W., and Lee, S., “A Dynamic Subgrid-
Scale Model for Compressible Turbulence and Scalar Transport,” Physics of
Fluids A, Vol. 3, Nov. 1991, pp. 2746–2757.
43Sheikhi, R. M. H., Drozda, T. G., Givi, P., and Pope, S. B., “Velocity-
Scalar Filtered Density Function for Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent
Flows,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 15, No. 8, 2003, pp. 2321–2337.
44Gosman, A. D., and Ioannides, E., “Aspects of Computer Simulation of
Liquid Fueled Combustors,” AIAA Paper 81-0323, Jan. 1981.
45Crowe, C., Sommerfeld, M., and Tsuji, Y., Multiphase Flows with
Droplets and Particles, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1997.
46Pannala, S., and Menon, S., “Large Eddy Simulations of Two-Phase
Turbulent Flows,” AIAA Paper 98-0163, Jan. 1999.
47Miller, R. S., and Bellan, J., “Direct Numerical Simulation and Subgrid
Analysis of a Transitional Droplet Laden Mixing Layer,” Physics of Fluids,
Vol. 12, No. 3, 2000, pp. 650–671.
48Apte, S. V., Mahesh, K., Moin, P., and Oefelein, J. C., “Large-Eddy
Simulation of Swirling Particle-Laden Flows in a Coaxial-Jet Combustor,”
International Journal of Multiphase Flow, Vol. 29, 2003, pp. 1311–1331.
49Chin, J. S., and Lefebvre, A. H., “The Role of the Heat-Up Period in
Fuel Drop Evaporation,” International Journal of Turbo Jet Engines, Vol. 2,
1985, pp. 315–325.
50Custer, J. R., and Rizk, N. K., “Effect of Fuel Nozzle Concept on Spray
Quality and Droplet Size Distribution,” AIAA Paper 85-1186, July 1985.
51Cha, C., Zhu, J., and Anand, M. S., “A Comprehensive Liquid Fuel
Spray Injection Model for CFD Simulations of Gas Turbine Combustors,”
AIAA Paper 2005-0349, Jan. 2005.
52Ham,
F.,
Apte,
S.,
Iaccarino,
G.,
Wu,
X.,
Herrmann,
M.,
Constantinescu, G., Mahesh, K., and Moin, P., “Unstructured LES of Re-
acting Multiphase Flows in Realistic Gas Turbine Combustors,” Annual Re-
search Briefs, Center for Turbulence Research, Stanford Univ. and NASA
Ames Research Center, 2003, pp. 139–160.
53James, S., Anand, M. S., and Pope, S. B., “The Lagrangian PDF Method
for Gas Turbine Combustor Flows,” AIAA Paper 2002-4017, July 2002.
54Fureby, C., and Lofstrom, C., “Large-Eddy Simulations of Bluff-Body
StabilizedFlames,”Twenty-FifthSymposium(International)onCombustion,
Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, PA, 1994, pp. 1257–1264.
55Branley, N., and Jones, W. P., “Large Eddy Simulation of a Turbulent
Non-Premixed Flame,” Combustion and Flame, Vol. 127, No. 1–2, 2001,
pp. 1914–1934.
56Pierce, C. D., and Moin, P., “Progress-Variable Approach for Large-
Eddy Simulation of Nonpremixed Turbulent Combustion,” Journal of Fluid
Mechanics, Vol. 504, 2004, pp. 73–97.
57Pierce, C. D., and Moin, P., “A Dynamic Model for Subgrid-Scale Vari-
ance and Dissipation Rate of a Conserved Scalar,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 10,
No. 12, 1998, pp. 3041–3044.
58Ihme, M., Cha, C., and Pitsch, H., “Prediction of Local Extinction
and Reignition Effects in Non-Premixed Turbulent Combustion Using a
Flamelet/Progress Variable Approach,” Thirtieth Symposium (International)
on Combustion, Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, PA, 2004, pp. 793–800.
59Bushe, W. K., and Steiner, H., “Conditional Moment Closure for Large
Eddy Simulation of Nonpremixed Turbulent Reacting Flows,” Physics of
Fluids, Vol. 11, No. 7, 1999, pp. 1896–1906.
60James, S., and Jaberi, F. A., “A Dynamic Similarity Model for Large
Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Combustion,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 10,
No. 7, 1998, pp. 1775–1777.


--- Page 13 ---

686
JAMES, ZHU, AND ANAND
61DesJardin, P. E., and Frankel, S. H., “Large Eddy Simulation of a
Turbulent Non-Premixed Reacting Jet: Application and Assessment of
Subgrid-Scale Combustion Models,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 10, No. 9, 1998,
pp. 2298–2314.
62Colucci, P. J., Jaberi, F. A., Givi, P., and Pope, S. B., “Filtered Density
Function for Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Reacting Flows,” Physics
of Fluids, Vol. 10, No. 2, 1998, pp. 499–515.
63Jaberi, F. A., Colucci, P. J., James, S., Givi, P., and Pope, S. B., “Filtered
Mass Density Function for Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Reacting
Flows,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 401, 1999, pp. 85–121.
64Gicquel, L. Y. M., Givi, P., Jaberi, F. A., and Pope, S. B., “Velocity
Filtered Density Function for Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flows,”
Physics of Fluids, Vol. 14, No. 3, 2002, pp. 1196–1213.
65Givi, P., “Subgrid Scale Modeling in Turbulent Combustion: A Review,”
AIAA Paper 2003-5081, July 2003.
66Muradoglu,M.,Jenny,P.,Pope,S.B.,andCaughey,D.A.,“AConsistent
Hybrid Finite-Volume/Particle Method for the PDF Equations of Turbulent
Reactive Flows,” Journal of Computational Physics, Vol. 154, No. 2, 1999,
pp. 342–371.
67Pitsch, H., Trouillet, P., Pierce, C. D., Tribbett, E., Sipperley, C. M.,
Edwards, C. F., and Bowman, C. T., “A Joint Experimental/Large-Eddy Sim-
ulation Study of a Model Gas Turbine Combustor,” Western States Section
of the Combustion Inst., Paper WSS-02S31, March 2002.
68Dittakavi, N., Khosla, S., Eriksen, M., Chandy, A., Gore, J. P., and
Frankel, S. H., “Numerical Modeling of Nonreacting and Reacting Swirl
Combustors: Key Issues and Validation Studies,” Proceedings of the Third
Joint Meeting of the U.S. Sections of the Combustion Institute, Combustion
Inst., Pittsburgh, PA, 2003.
69Sung, C. J., Law, C. K., and Chen, J. Y., “An Augmented Reduced
Mechanism for Methane Oxidation with Comprehensive Global Paramet-
ric Validation,” Twenty-Seventh Symposium (International) on Combustion,
Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, PA, 1998, pp. 295–304.
70Pope, S. B., “Computationally Efﬁcient Implementation of Combustion
Chemistry Using an In Situ Adaptive Tabulation,” Combustion Theory and
Modelling, Vol. 1, Jan. 1997, pp. 41–63.
71Subramanium, S., and Pope, S. B., “A Mixing Model for Turbulent
Reactive Flows Based on Euclidean Minimum Spanning Tree,” Combustion
and Flame, Vol. 115, No. 4, 1998, pp. 487–514.
72Vasilyev, O., Lund, T., and Moin, P., “A General Class of Commutative
Filters for LES in Complex Geometries,” Journal of Computational Physics,
Vol. 146, No. 1, 1998, pp. 105–123.
73Marsden, A., Vasilyev, O., and Moin, P., “Construction of Commutative
Filters for LES on Unstructured Meshes,” Annual Research Briefs, Center
for Turbulence Research, Stanford Univ. and NASA Ames Research Center,
2000, pp. 179–192.
74Kerstein, A. R., “One-Dimensional Turbulence: Model Formula-
tion and Application to Homogeneous Turbulence, Shear Flows, and
Buoyant Stratiﬁed Flows,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 392, 1999,
p. 277.
75Menon, S., McMurtry, P. A., and Kerstein, A. R., “A Linear-Eddy Sub-
grid Model for Turbulent Combustion,” Large Eddy Simulation of Complex
Engineering and Geophysical Flows, edited by B. Galperin and S. A. Orszag,
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993, Chap. 14, pp. 287–314.
76Wall, C., Pierce, C. D., and Moin, P., “A Semi-Implicit Method for
Resolution of Acoustic Waves in Low Mach Number Flows,” Journal of
Computational Physics, Vol. 181, No. 2, 2002, pp. 545–563.
J. C. Oefelein
Guest Editor
