
--- Page 1 ---

(more) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Facts on NOx Reduction 
 
What is NOx? 
NOx is the generic name for a group of 
highly reactive gases that contain varying 
amounts of NO and NO2.  NOx tends to 
be colorless and odorless.  
Where does NOx come from? 
Common sources of NOx are motor 
vehicles (49%), electric utilities (27%), 
and other industrial, commercial and 
residential sources (19%) that burn fuels.  
How does a diesel engine create NOx? 
When high temperatures and pressures 
occur in-cylinder during combustion, the 
air molecules O2 and N2 combine to form 
NO (nitric oxide).  As exhaust gases 
leave the engine, the temperature 
decreases, and a small amount of NO 
combines with O2 to form NO2 (nitrogen 
dioxide).  The majority of NOx is NO. 
Do all engines emit NOx? 
Yes.  Aircraft engines, natural gas 
engines, diesel engines and gasoline 
engines are all examples of internal 
combustion engines that emit NOx.  
What are the health and 
environmental impacts of NOx? 
Human health concerns center on the 
respiratory system.  NOx reacts with 
ammonia, moisture and other 
compounds to form nitric acid and related 
particles.  These particles damage lung 
tissue.  Small particles penetrate deeply 
into sensitive parts of the lungs, and can 
cause or worsen potentially fatal 
respiratory diseases such as emphysema 
and bronchitis.  
Ground-level ozone (smog) is formed 
when NOx and volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs) react with heat and sunlight.  
Children, asthmatics and people who work 
or exercise outside are susceptible to 
adverse effects such as lung tissue 
damage and decreased lung function.  
Ozone also damages vegetation and 
reduces crop yields.  
Acid rain forms when NOx and sulfur 
dioxide react with other substances in the 
air to form acids, which fall to earth with 
rain, fog, snow or dry particles.  Acid rain 
damages or deteriorates cars, buildings 
and monuments, as well as causes lakes 
and streams to become unsuitable for fish.  
The accumulation of greenhouse gases in 
the atmosphere is thought to be a factor in 
global warming.  One NOx element is a 
greenhouse gas.   
What is the EPA doing to reduce NOx? 
Since 1970, the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) has required 
motor vehicle manufacturers to reduce 
NOx emissions.  Significant reductions 
have been achieved through auto 
emissions controls.  As a result, while 
miles traveled have increased, NOx 
emissions from highway vehicles have 
decreased by five percent in the last 10 
years.   
In October 1997, the EPA adopted new 
emission standards for heavy-duty diesel 
truck and bus engines for model year 2004 


--- Page 2 ---

 
2 
(more) 
and later.  The goal was to reduce NOx 
emissions from highway heavy-duty 
engines to levels of approximately 2.0 
g/bhp-hr, beginning in 2004.  The date 
for implementation was moved up to 
October 2002 for Consent Decree 
manufacturers. 
On Dec. 21, 2000, the EPA signed 
emission standards for model year    
2007 and later heavy-duty highway 
engines.  The rule includes two 
components: (1) emission standards   
and (2) diesel fuel regulations.   
The first component of the regulation 
introduces new, very stringent emission 
standards.   
2010 standards are as follows: 
• PM – 0.01 g/bhp-hr  
• NOx – 0.20 g/bhp-hr  
• NMHC – 0.14 g/bhp-hr  
The NOx and NMHC standards will be 
phased in for diesel engines between 
2007 and 2010.   
In 2007, the EPA is providing the option 
for manufacturers to sell 100 percent of 
their engines at a 1.1 g/bhp-hr NOx level, 
rather than 50 percent at 2.0 g/bhp-hr 
and 50 percent at 0.2 g/bhp-hr. 
What solutions are being developed to 
reduce NOx? 
There are several solutions being 
developed to reduce NOx.  However, no 
solution has been unilaterally accepted 
by the U.S. transportation industry at this 
time.  
In Europe, Selective Catalytic Reduction 
(SCR) is the prevailing solution for NOx.  
In conjunction with engine management 
controls, SCR systems meter a precise 
amount of a reagent urea into the 
engine’s exhaust stream.  Urea will 
decompose to ammonia and react with 
NOx across a catalyst located down-
stream of the injection point.  This 
reaction reduces NOx to elemental 
nitrogen and water vapor.  Reductions of 
up to 90 percent are possible. 
In North America several solutions are 
under consideration to control NOx:  
Engine management adjusts engine 
operating conditions so that either soot 
or NOx is decreased, but not both 
simultaneously. If the engine is 
adjusted so that NOx is decreased, the 
engine is running less efficiently and, 
therefore, fuel economy is lower.  
Engine management alone will not 
reduce levels of NOx and soot to meet 
2007 emissions standards. 
NOx traps are composed of materials 
(often barium salts) that store NOx 
under lean conditions, and then 
periodically release and catalytically 
reduce the stored NOx to CO2 and N2 
under rich conditions. 
SCR, as described above. 
What is the best solution to reduce 
NOx? 
There is no optimal solution for NOx at this 
time.  Each solution has advantages and 
disadvantages.   
SCR has perceived environmental and 
societal concerns related to it, such as the 
need for a urea distribution network and 
the creation of ammonia within the 
reaction.  However, it is a far more 
advanced solution than NOx traps.   
NOx traps do not carry the same societal 
issues, but they are not as advanced 
technically and in the field.  
The EPA is trying to balance the societal 
and technical issues to make sure the best 
solution is available for heavy-duty trucks 
for 2007 and 2010.  The size of engine, 
duty cycle and application will all be factors 
in the ultimate solution. 
 


--- Page 3 ---

 
3 
 
What solution does ArvinMeritor 
provide to reduce NOx? 
ArvinMeritor has developed an optimized 
SCR system to address the needs of the 
European market.  This solution is 
transferable to the U.S. market, as 
needed.  We have positioned our 
development efforts to provide the 
solution that our customers desire, based 
on all of the external factors that must be 
taken into consideration. 
ArvinMeritor believes that NOx traps are 
going to be a long-term viable solution to 
address NOx reduction.  Therefore, one 
of our technology initiatives is to develop 
solutions that will help enable NOx traps 
to work.  One such technology under 
development is a process designed to 
regenerate NOx traps, using hydrogen-
rich gas.  Hydrogen regeneration offers a 
wider range of operating conditions than 
diesel dosing provides.   
 
 
How does ArvinMeritor’s hydrogen 
regeneration technology work? 
ArvinMeritor has advanced development 
and testing under way for a hydrogen 
generator that creates a hydrogen-rich gas 
from diesel fuel.  The hydrogen helps drive 
the chemical reaction that cleanses NOx 
traps and catalysts of contaminants.  
Hydrogen is a very strong reductant – 
approximately five times as effective as 
diesel fuel. 
Do I have to use Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel 
(ULSD) fuel with NOx traps to achieve a 
NOx reduction? 
Most NOx trap technologies are very 
sensitive to sulfur poisoning.  High-sulfur 
fuels tend to rapidly decrease the 
effectiveness of NOx traps, requiring more 
frequent regenerations.  The introduction 
of ULSD fuel in 2006 to the United States 
should help, but not eliminate, this issue 
for traps with conventional technology.  
ArvinMeritor’s Hydrogen-Enabled NOx 
Trap has demonstrated an ability to 
successfully remove sulfur from the filter 
during regeneration.
 
 
 
 
 
Sources: 
EPA Web site: www.epa.gov.   
 
Air Quality Where You Live 
 
Glossary of Terms 
 
Air Toxics from Motor Vehicles 
Diesel Technology Forum Web site: www.dieselforum.org. 
 
Diesel Issues Forum 
Diesel Net Web site: www.dieselnet.com 
Health and Environmental Effects 
 
 
GP04-40 
060904 
