
--- Page 1 ---

2435
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Volume 28, 2000/pp. 2435–2441
INVESTIGATION OF NOx AND CO FORMATION IN LEAN-PREMIXED,
METHANE/AIR, HIGH-INTENSITY, CONFINED FLAMES
AT ELEVATED PRESSURES
TEODORA RUTAR,* PHILIP C. MALTE and JOHN C. KRAMLICH
University of Washington
Mechanical Engineering Department
Box 352600
Seattle, WA 98195-2600, USA
The coupling between NOx formation chemistry and the mixing/transport environment is of critical
importance to the design of lean-premixed gas turbine combustors but is incompletely understood. In the
present research, this problem was addressed via the study of NOx formation in a high-pressure jet-stirred
reactor operating on lean-premixed methane/air. These experiments focused on the effects of residence
time (0.5–4.0 ms), pressure (3.0, 4.7, and 6.5 atm), and inlet temperature (344–573 K). The combustion
temperature varied from 1815  5 K at the lowest residence times to 1910  30 K at the largest residence
times. The NOx was lowest at intermediate residence times, reaching higher values at the extremes. In-
creasing pressure and inlet temperature tend to reduce NOx concentrations. Concentration proﬁling in
the reactor suggests two general environments: (1) a highly non-equilibrium reaction zone deﬁned by high
CO concentrations, and (2) a postﬂame environment. The NOx formation was concentrated in the region
of strongly non-equilibrium combustion chemistry. The Damko¨hler number was 0.06  Da  1, and the
ratio of turbulent intensity to laminar burning velocity was 28  u/SL  356, indicating the combustion
occurs in the high-intensity, chemical rate-limiting regime. The results were interpreted using a two-
environment, detailed chemistry model in which the size and structure of the ﬂame environment were
established by matching the measured data, and which were independently veriﬁed using turbulent ﬂame
velocity/thickness correlations. The modeling suggests NOx formation is controlled by both the speciﬁc
conditions in the non-equilibrium zone and by the size of the zone. Since both these features are inﬂuenced
by the experimental parameters, a highly nonlinear scenario emerges with implications for minimizing
NOx via combustor design. The modeling also suggests the unique case of well-stirred combustion for NOx
at elevated pressure is obtained at low residence time conditions.
Introduction
Lean-premixed gas turbine combustors provide an
economical means of achieving very low NOx emis-
sions. The design of these combustors is a challeng-
ing problem, involving the use of complex conﬁgu-
rations and ﬂow ﬁelds to achieve a compromise
between low NOx performance and acceptable
ﬂame stability. Tests conducted on a number of pro-
totype and commercial designs show that the varia-
tion of NOx with common combustion parameters is
far from consistent [1]. In some designs, high pres-
sure leads to markedly higher NOx, while in others
the NOx decreases with pressure. Measurements
suggest some of the complexity occurs because the
external parameters change the size of the zones
where NOx forms, in addition to changing the rate
of formation within the zones. The present work ex-
plored how this behavior occurs in lean-premixed,
*Present address: Teodora Rutar Shuman, Seattle Uni-
versity, 900 Broadway, Seattle, WA 98122, USA.
high-intensity combustion, so that insight can be
gained for the combustor design problem.
The high-pressure jet-stirred reactor (HP-JSR)
has been used before as an experimental idealization
of lean-premixed gas turbine combustion. Steele [1]
employed a HP-JSR geometrically similar to the
present reactor to determine the response of NOx to
combustion temperature for lean-premixed meth-
ane combustion. The activation temperature for the
NOx (adjusted to 15% O2 dry) was found to be 23650
K. Additionally, the NOx was observed to decrease
with increasing pressure (1–7.1 atm), and to be in-
sensitive to inlet temperature (to 600 K) and resi-
dence time (2–4 ms). Bengtsson et al. [2] examined
the effect of pressure (1–20 atm) at a ﬁxed methane/
air stoichiometry (  0.55), with the residence
time varied from 1 to 2 ms in a multinozzle JSR. The
measurements showed a decrease in NOx with pres-
sure, with the effect becoming negligible above 6
atm.
In the present work, the focus was on the inﬂu-
ence of residence time, which was varied from 0.5


--- Page 2 ---

2436
NOx AND SOx FORMATION AND CONTROL
Fig. 1. High-pressure jet-stirred reactor (HP-JSR) rig
(top) with the JSR cavity (bottom). Reactor inlet nozzle
diameter is 1.4 mm.
to 4.0 ms. Also, the effects of pressure and inlet tem-
perature on NOx were examined over this range.
Previous work [1] recognized the HP-JSR is not spa-
tially uniform at high pressure, so the present work
focused on resolving the structure of the reacting
gas, on interpreting the results via modeling of the
structure, and on seeking conditions for which the
HP-JSR operates well stirred for NOx formation.
Experimental Setup and Conditions
The high-pressure experimental rig, with the HP-
JSR, is shown in Fig. 1. Details are given in Ref. [1].
Prior to entering the HP-JSR, the combustion air
passed through the air preheater (electric) and pre-
mixer, all located inside the pressure vessel. A sec-
ond air stream that bypassed the HP-JSR was used
to regulate the pressure within the vessel. The vol-
ume of the HP-JSR, that is, the axisymmetric jet-
stirred cavity, was 1.5 cm3, with dimensions as shown
in the Fig. 1. The reactor material was cast alumina.
Because of the long residence time in the premixer
(100 ms) and the mixing within the premixer and
inlet jet, the HP-JSR was assumed to operate fully
premixed.
The HP-JSR was run over the 0.5 to 4.0 ms resi-
dence time (s) range. Because of the almost eight-
fold range in ﬂow rate, the jet velocity and pressure
drop across the nozzle varied signiﬁcantly. For
operation at 0.5 ms residence time, the pressure
drop was 45% and the jet inlet velocity was close to
sonic, whereas, for operation at 4.0 ms residence
time, the pressure drop was about 3% and the jet
inlet velocity (without preheat) was 75 m/s.
Species and temperature proﬁles were obtained
along the path (at two-thirds reactor height) indi-
cated in Fig. 1. Gas sampling was done with a small
ceramic probe. Analyzers measured NO, NOx, CO,
CO2, and O2. Because the majority of NOx found in
the sample line was NO2, and NO2 is soluble in wa-
ter, the sample line was maintained above the con-
densation temperature upstream of the ice bath con-
denser, located just upstream of the analyzers.
Limited testing with an NOx-to-NO converter
placed in the sampling line was used to conﬁrm neg-
ligible loss of NO2 in the condenser.
The gas temperature measurements were ob-
tained with R-type thermocouples, coated with Cer-
amabond 569 (a high-temperature paste containing
99% alumina). The thermocouple was placed in
the middle of the recirculation zone, on the side of
the reactor opposite to that containing the sampling
probe. The recirculation zone represented the bulk
of the reactor and was nearly uniform in tempera-
ture and species concentrations. The thermocouple
temperature was maintained at 1803  5 K by tun-
ing the fuel/air equivalence ratio () and was cor-
rected to obtain the true gas temperature (termed
the combustion temperature) using two methods as
described in Ref. [3]. In the ﬁrst method, the con-
vective gain and radiative loss of the thermocouple
were analyzed. In the second method, the heat loss
of the HP-JSR was calculated. The two methods
gave similar values, which were averaged to obtain
the combustion temperature. For residence times
below about 1.0 ms, the convective loading onto the
thermocouple was large, and thus the thermocouple
temperature required little correction. Further-
more, the HP-JSR was nearly adiabatic. For larger
residence times, the convective loading onto the
thermocouple weakened, hence the combustion
temperature was greater than the thermocouple


--- Page 3 ---

NOx IN LEAN-PREMIXED COMBUSTION
2437
Fig. 2. NOx versus residence time at 3.0, 4.7, and 6.5
atm for unheated inlet. Mean fuel/air equivalence ratio is
0.71.
Fig. 3. NOx versus residence time at 3.0 and 6.5 atm for
preheated inlet (573 K). Mean fuel/air equivalence ratio is
0.62.
temperature. Additionally, the reactor was no longer
adiabatic. The result was a combustion temperature
of 1815  5 K at the lowest residence times. For
the experiments at 4.7 and 6.5 atm, the combustion
temperature increased to about 1880 K at the largest
residence times, whereas for 3.0 atm, it reached
about 1940 K at the largest residence times. Mean
 was 0.71 for the experiments without inlet pre-
heat, and 0.62 with preheat. The range was 0.58 
  0.80. Details on the variation of  with reactor
conditions are given in Ref. [3].
Experimental Results and Discussion
The effect of residence time on measured NOx is
shown in Fig. 2, for pressures of 6.5, 4.7, and 3.0
atm, without preheating of the reactants. The mea-
surements are obtained 3 mm from the reactor axis,
in the middle of the recirculation zone.
Starting at the lowest residence times, the NOx
was seen to decrease with increasing residence time,
reached a minimum, and then increased. The in-
crease was caused by the increase in the combustion
temperature for the largest residence times.
The NOx data for the 4.7 and 6.5 atm experiments
can be compared for the effect of pressure. For
identical residence times, the experiments have
nearly identical combustion temperature. Thus, the
increase in NOx with decreasing pressure noted in
Fig. 2 is not masked by changing temperature. For
the 3.0 atm experiments, the combustion tempera-
ture at residence times larger than 1.5 ms is greater
than the temperature for the 4.7 and 6.5 atm exper-
iments. Thus, the signiﬁcant increase in NOx for the
3.0 atm data at the intermediate and large residence
times is caused at least in part by the temperature
increase.
Figure 3 shows the NOx results for the reactor
inlet gas preheated to 573 K. Because of the preheat,
the reactor operates leaner than the unheated inlet
experiments. As above (in Fig. 2), the NOx increases
as the pressure decreases from 6.5 to 4.7 atm. Also
as above, the increase in NOx, affected by decreasing
the pressure to 3.0 atm is inﬂuenced by the greater
combustion temperature of the 3.0 atm measure-
ments. Comparison of Fig. 3 with Fig. 2 indicates
less NOx formation with the preheated inlet. The
effect is most pronounced at the low residence
times, where the combustion gas temperature is
about 1815 K for all cases. For 1.0 ms, using the best
curve ﬁt results, the reductions in NOx affected by
preheating the inlet jet are about 20% at 3.0 atm and
about 30% at 6.5 atm.
Adjustment of the NOx data to the reference con-
dition of 15% O2 dry, followed by an additional ad-
justment to the average temperature (1815 K) of the
low residence time experiments, using the activation
temperature of 23,650 K of Steele [1], showed a de-
crease in NOx as the residence time increased from
0.5 ms up to 3.0 ms. For residence times greater
than 3.0 ms, the adjusted data increased slightly. For
the unheated inlet experiments, the adjusted NOx
(based on best curve ﬁts) decreased from 4.5  0.2
ppmv at 1.0 ms to 3.2  0.3 ppmv at 3.0 ms, whereas
for the heated inlet, the adjusted NOx changed from
4.2  0.2 ppmv at 1.0 ms to 3.4  0.2 ppmv at 3.0
ms. The upper limits in the NOx uncertainties per-
tain to 3.0 atm pressure, the lower limits to 6.5 atm.
The adjusted results indicate there is a minimum
value of NOx of about 3.0 ppmv (15% O2 dry) for
combustion at 1815 K. Additionally, the adjustment
essentially eliminates the reduction of NOx with inlet
preheat noted above.
Examples of spatial proﬁles of CO and NOx at 6.5
atm are shown in Figs. 4 and 5. The CO is low on
the centerline, since this represents fresh, largelyun-
reacted gas, and reaches a peak in the shear region
at the edge of the jet, indicating this to be the lo-
cation of intense reaction. As noted in Fig. 1, the jet


--- Page 4 ---

2438
NOx AND SOx FORMATION AND CONTROL
Fig. 4. Spatial proﬁles of CO across the HP-JSR at two-
thirds reactor height for 6.5 atm and 0.5, 0.9, and 2.5 ms
residence times with unheated reactants, and for 0.9 ms
residence time with reactants preheated to 573 K.
Fig. 5. Spatial proﬁles of NOx across the HP-JSR at two-
thirds reactor height for 6.5 atm and 0.5, 0.9, and 2.5 ms
residence times with unheated reactants, and for 0.9 ms
residence time with reactants preheated to 573 K.
impinges on the top wall of the reactor and recir-
culates down the inside wall of the reactor. For large
residence times, CO has ample opportunity to com-
plete reaction, and the recirculation zone shows a
ﬂat proﬁle of relatively low CO concentration. At the
low residence times, the time is insufﬁcient for CO
to complete burnout, as evidenced by elevated CO
in the recirculated gas. For 0.5 ms, except for the
center of the recirculation zone, the CO is approach-
ing a level of about 1%. For the cases involving pre-
heat (only 0.9 ms shown), the CO is lower due to
leaner stoichiometry. The NOx in Fig. 5 exhibits
nearly uniform concentration in the recirculation
zone. That is, the recirculation zone appears well
stirred for NOx. This can happen if NOx enters the
recirculation zone and is well dispersed. It can also
happen if NOx forms in the recirculation zone at a
rate slow compared with the mixing rate. Because of
the NOx uniformity, and because the exhaust is
drawn from the recirculation zone, the recirculation
zone NOx concentration can be regarded as the ex-
haust NOx concentration of the reactor.
Modeling and Discussion
The physical picture that emerges of the situation
just described is of a turbulent premixed ﬂame an-
chored over and around the inlet jet, followed by a
postﬂame environment. Because the postﬂame en-
vironment is stirred, the CO and free radical species
do not relax to equilibrium as quickly as for a plug
ﬂow reactor. The size of the turbulent ﬂame (i.e., the
fraction of the reactor volume occupied by the highly
non-equilibrium gas) increases for low residence
times. At the lowest times, it may ﬁll the entire re-
actor. This situation lends itself to a two-environ-
ment chemical kinetic model in which the ﬁrst zone
represents the non-equilibrium turbulent ﬂame and
the second the postﬂame gas. The partitioning into
the two environments depends on the turbulent pre-
mixed ﬂame regime present in the reactor.
The Damko¨hler number, Da  mixing time/
chemical time, and the turbulence Reynolds num-
ber, ReT  ud0/m, were estimated for the ﬂames in
the present work. The mixing time was calculated as
d0/u, where d0 was the jet nozzle diameter, which
was assumed to be the turbulence integral scale (l0),
and u was the turbulent intensity, which was as-
sumed to be 10% of inlet jet (cold) velocity (u0).
Chemical time (sL) was calculated as /SL
2, where
 was the thermal diffusivity and SL was the laminar
burning velocity, calculated by equations given by
Ref. [4]. The kinematic viscosity (m) and  were de-
termined for the inlet temperature and reactor pres-
sure.
The Da-ReT range for the present experiments
was Da  0.06/ReT  104, corresponding to the low-
est residence times, to Da  1.0/ReT  103, corre-
sponding to the largest residence times with the re-
actor operating at the highest temperature levels.
The Da-ReT range indicated that the operation of
the HP-JSR fell in the ﬂamelets-in-eddies regime
[5]. This regime is characterized by torn ﬂamelets
that can be non-contiguous, that is, a thick turbulent
reaction zone containing “islands” of reactants and
products in which the reactant pockets are strained
by the ﬂow while the reaction front moves into their
periphery.
The turbulent ﬂame thickness is used to evaluate
the fraction of the reactor occupied by the non-equi-
librium ﬂame zone. This turbulent ﬂame thickness,
dT, is determined by analogy to the laminar ﬂame


--- Page 5 ---

NOx IN LEAN-PREMIXED COMBUSTION
2439
Fig. 6. CO and NOx exiting PSR2 in the two-PSR model,
based on GRI-Mech. 3.0. Residence times are 0.5 and 4.0
ms, pressure is 6.5 atm, and there is no preheat. The circles
indicate experimentally measured values of CO and NOx.
thickness as the ratio of the turbulent diffusivity (DT
 ul0, [6]) to the turbulent burning velocity, ST, that
is, dT  u d0/ST. Velocity ST is calculated based on
the equation suggested by Ref. [7]: ST  SL  u
(1  Da2)1/4. For small Da and ud0/dL k SL,
which is the case in the present work, the ST equa-
tion reduces to ST  uDa0.5  (ud0/sL)0.5, which
is the turbulent analogy to the laminar burning ve-
locity. Consequently, the ﬂame thickness formula re-
duces to dT  d0/Da0.5. The resulting values for dT
vary between 1.6 mm (for large residence time) and
5.4 mm (for small residence time). Thus, in some
cases the ﬂame may ﬁll the reactor volume since the
reactor radius (at its widest point) is 5.75 mm.
The low Damko¨hler number and high turbulence
intensity suggest the ﬂame zone may be modeled to
ﬁrst approximation as a perfectly stirred reactor
(PSR). The two-environment model thus becomes
two PSRs in series with the second representing the
stirred postﬂame environment. Earlier applications
of modeling with two PSRs are found in Refs. [1]
and [2]. The only parameter requiring selection is
the fraction of the reactor volume associated with
the ﬁrst PSR (PSR1). One approach is to select this
based on dT. An independent approach is to deter-
mine the volume of PSR1 by matching the measured
NOx and CO to values calculated by the two-PSR
modeling. The result derived can then be compared
against the ﬂame volume inferred from dT.
Matching of the model to the measured NOx and
CO was performed by varying the volume of PSR1
from the blowout volume, determined based on the
prescribed fuel/air equivalence ratio and reactor
mass ﬂow rate, to the full reactor volume (1.5 cm3).
The chemical kinetic mechanism used in the two-
PSR calculations was GRI-Mech. 3.0 [8].
Figure 6 shows how the calculated NOx and CO
concentrations vary with the fraction of the total re-
actor volume assigned to PSR1. The residence times
are 0.5 and 4.0 ms, the pressure is 6.5 atm, and the
inlet jet is not preheated. Focusing on the 0.5 ms
case, the CO is relatively constant for all PSR1 vol-
umes until the size of PSR2 (which acts as the re-
laxation zone) becomes quite small. The NOx re-
mains constant unless the size of PSR1 approaches
blowout. For this case, the data are CO: 4110 ppmv,
NOx: 12 ppmv. The NOx can thus be matched by a
large range in PSR1 volumes, but the CO can be
matched only when PSR1 approaches 100% of the
reactor volume. For this condition, the two-PSR
model can match the data only by assuming the non-
equilibrium ﬂame zone essentially ﬁlls the reactor,
which is consistent with the experiments at low res-
idence times. For the 4.0 ms case, the data are CO
 190 ppmv and NOx  10.3 ppmv. This CO level
is matched by most PSR1 volumes, indicating CO is
near equilibrium. Only a very small PSR1 can match
the NOx data. This implies a situation where the
ﬂame zone is small and the bulk of the reactor can
be treated as a postﬂame relaxation zone, again con-
sistent with the experiments.
The NOx formation rate was signiﬁcantly higher
in PSR1 for all cases, due to the higher O-atom and
CH concentrations promoted by the fuel oxidation.
For the 0.5 ms case in Fig. 6, the O-atom concen-
tration increases quickly as the volume of PSR1 in-
creases from the blowout condition. This accounts
for the rapid increase in NOx formation as the con-
ditions step away from blowout. At longer times, the
O atom decreases with increasing PSR1 volume, but
the increased time available for NOx formation es-
sentially counterbalances the effect, leaving NOx
nearly constant with residence time. Another con-
tributing factor is NOx formation by CH  N2. The
CH concentration mirrors the trends of the O atom
but is more extreme in its falloff with increasing res-
idence time, decreasing by over a factor of 10 as the
PSR1 volume increases over its full range. Thus, the
NOx formation chemistry is inﬂuenced by both the
size of the non-equilibrium zone and by the condi-
tions within the zone.
The volume partition resulting from the two PSR
modeling (via matching CO and NOx) is shown in
Fig. 7 for 6.5 and 3.0 atm without preheat. For low
residence times, data are matched for volume ratios
of about 100% (i.e., the ﬂame ﬁlls the reactor),
whereas at large residence times the matching oc-
curs closer to a few percent of reactor volume (i.e.,
a small turbulent ﬂame).
Also shown in Fig. 7 is the percentage of the re-
actor occupied by the turbulent ﬂame, calculated
from the turbulent ﬂame modeling. With the half-
angle of the unreacted jet cone taken as h  d0/2h
 ST/10 u, where h is the cone height and the inlet


--- Page 6 ---

2440
NOx AND SOx FORMATION AND CONTROL
Fig. 7. Ratio of PSR1 volume to the total reactor volume
(Vpsr1/Vt) corresponding to the best match between the
measured and modeled data, and the ratio of ﬂame volume
to the total volume (Vﬂame/Vt) estimated by turbulent pre-
mixed ﬂame correlations, plotted versus reactor residence
time. The pressures are 3.0 and 6.5 atm and there is no
preheat.
velocity is u0  10u, one obtains h  5dT. The cor-
responding ﬂame volume is
. This is
3
V
 5pd
flame
T
used to calculate the Vﬂame/Vt values plotted in Fig.
7; Vt is the reactor volume. When h becomes ap-
proximately equal to the height of the reactor cavity
(L  20 mm), dT  3.6 mm and Vﬂame  0.75 cm3.
This is one-half the reactor volume. Comparison to
the two-PSR modeling shows this condition closely
corresponds to the sharp transition from Vpsr1/Vt 
100% to Vpsr1/Vt  10%. The Damko¨hler number
at transition is Da  0.15.
As noted in Fig. 7, the 3.0 atm case undergoes
transition at a smaller residence time than the 6.5
atm case. For low residence times, the 3.0 atm ﬂame
has a greater Da than the 6.5 atm ﬂame, and hence,
a smaller thickness. In order for the 3.0 atm ﬂame
to ﬁll the reactor, the reactor must operate at a lower
residence time than for the 6.5 atm case. Also, the
3.0 atm case shows closer agreement between the
ﬂame thickness modeling and the two-PSR model-
ing, probably because its temperature, and hence,
Da, change signiﬁcantly between low residence time
(1815 K) and large residence time (1940 K).
Chemical Kinetic Discussion
Results from the chemical kinetic modeling of the
unheated inlet experiments (all pressures) and the
heated inlet experiment at 6.5 atm indicate the fol-
lowing when the reactor is operating in single PSR
mode (residence time 0.5  s  1.5 ms):
• [O], [H], and [NNH] decrease two- to threefold
over the threefold increase in s, [N2O] is nearly
constant, and [CH] decreases by eightfold. Tem-
perature is nearly constant. The nitrous oxide
(N2O  O, H) and prompt (CH  N2) reactions
are predominant for NO formation. By the nitrous
oxide mechanism, the NO yield is relatively insen-
sitive to s, because the increase in s is offset by the
decrease in [O] and [H], and by the prompt mech-
anism, the NO decreases because of the sharp de-
crease in [CH]. The falloff in measured NOx with
increasing s (Fig. 2) for the low residence times is
consistent with the decrease in [CH].
• [O] is relatively insensitive to preheat, while [H]
and [NNH] decrease slightly and [N2O] increases
slightly. [CH] decreases ﬁvefold. Thus, the de-
crease in NOx obtained by preheating the experi-
ment and the ﬂatness of the NOx data in Fig. 3 for
6.5 atm (s  1.5 ms) are consistent with the di-
minished inﬂuence of [CH].
• [O], [H], and [NNH] increase with decreasing
pressure, while [N2O] decreases almost twofold,
and [CH] is insensitive. Overall, the NO yield
(both modeled and measured) increases with de-
creasing pressure.
For the two-PSR regime (s  1.5 ms), 74  10%
of the modeled NOx forms in PSR1 when s  2 ms,
whereas for 4 ms, the value is 54  7%. For PSR1,
the prompt mechanism is predominant, followed in
importance by the nitrous oxide and NNH mecha-
nisms. In PSR2, the Zeldovich mechanism is most
important, followed closely by the nitrous oxide
mechanism.
Conclusions
The present research provides new experimental
data on the formation of NOx in the HP-JSR,
through the operation of the reactor over an 8-fold
change in residence time and a 17-fold change in
the Damko¨hler number (Da). Data are provided on
NOx as a function of residence time, pressure, and
inlet temperature. Two-PSR modeling is applied to
the NOx and CO behavior in the reactor. With Da
 0.1, the NOx and CO are well modeled by treating
the reactor as a single PSR. With Da  0.2, a small
ﬁrst PSR followed by a large second PSR is required
to jointly model the NOx and CO. The ﬁrst PSR
represents the non-equilibrium ﬂame zone, while
the second PSR represents the stirred postﬂame
zone. Turbulent ﬂame length modeling provides an
independent methodology for determining the ﬂame
zone volume required in the two-PSR modeling. For
Da  0.06 (corresponding to lowest residence time),
the turbulent ﬂame thickness is about 5.5 mm, a
value similar to the reactor radius. The ﬂame ﬁlls the
reactor. For Da  1 (corresponding to largest resi-
dence time), the turbulent ﬂame thickness is about


--- Page 7 ---

NOx IN LEAN-PREMIXED COMBUSTION
2441
1.5 mm, implying a ﬂame volume of few percent of
the reactor volume. The signiﬁcant decrease in the
ﬂame volume with increasing Da is consistent with
the PSR modeling of the measured NOx and CO
concentrations.
REFERENCES
1. Steele, R. C., “NOx and N2O Formation in Lean-Pre-
mixed Jet-Stirred Reactors Operated from 1 to 7 atm,”
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle,
1995.
2. Bengtsson, K. U. M., Benz, P., Schaeren, R., and Frou-
zakis, C. E., Proc. Combust. Inst. 27:1393–1401, (1998).
3. Shuman,
T.
R.,
“NOx
and
CO
Formation
for
Lean-Premixed Methane-Air Combustion in a Jet-
Stirred Reactor Operated at Elevated Pressure,” Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle, 2000.
4. Go¨ttgens, J., Mauss, F., and Peters, N., Proc. Combust.
Inst. 24:129–135, (1992).
5. Turns, S. R., An Introduction to Combustion, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1996, pp. 460, 468, 469.
6. Chomiak, J., Combustion: A Study in Theory, Fact and
Application, Gordon and Breach Science Publishers,
New York, 1990, p. 73.
7. Schmid, H-P. Habisreuther, P., and Leuckel, W., Com-
bust. Flame 113:79–91, (1998).
8. Smith, G. P., Golden, D. M., Frenklach, M., Moriarty,
N. W., Eiteneer, B., Goldenberg, M., Bowman, C. T.,
Hanson, R., Song, S., Gardiner Jr., W. C., Lissianski, V.,
and Qin, Z., GRI-Mech. 3.0, Gas Research Institute,
Chicago, IL, http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri_mech/
(1999).
COMMENTS
Vladimir Zamansky, GE Energy and Environmental Re-
search, USA. How did you separate the NOx formation
channels in your modeling? They all are radical in nature
and are supposed to interfere with each other. Secondly,
how can you explain the modeling results that show very
different NO formation from N2O depending on residence
time? In PSR1, your modeling shows a decrease in [NO]
versus residence time. In PSR2, it is the opposite; [NO] is
higher at longer residence times.
Author’s Reply. The methodology used for determining
the contributions to NO from each of the four mechanisms
(Zeldovich, nitrous oxide, prompt, and NNH) is described
in [1].
For example, consider NO formed by the nitrous oxide
mechanism. The reactions are:
N O  O →NO  NO
2
N O  H →NO  NH
2
Under lean-premixed combustion, NH converts to NO.
Thus, [NO] formed from nitrous oxide in a PSR is ex-
pressed as:
[NO]  2
t†(k [N O][O]  k [N O][H])
t
2
2
2
where t† is the residence time and k1 and k2 are the forward
rate constants of the two reactions shown. Calculation of
[N2O], [O], and [H] is done by the full GR1 3.0 mecha-
nism. The contributions to NO from the other mechanisms
are similarly evaluated.
For long residence times ( 1.5 ms), the HP-JSR is
modeled as two PSRs in series. Good agreement to mea-
surements is obtained by assigning PSR1 a residence time
of about 0.1 ms and by decreasing this residence time as
the total residence time of the HP-JSR increases. The
[N2O] is limited by the short residence time of PSR1, and
thus NO formed from the nitrous oxide mechanism in
PSR1 decreases as the total residence time of the HP-JSR
increases. The bulk of the HP-JSR is PSR2. As the resi-
dence time of PSR2 (and that of the whole HP-JSR) in-
creases, NO formed in PSR2 by the nitrous oxide mecha-
nism increases. However, this is outpaced by the formation
of Zeldovich NO in PSR2. Thus, the relative contribution
of the nitrous oxide mechanism to NO becomes less as the
total residence time of the HP-JSR increases.
REFERENCE
1. Polifke, W., Do¨bbeling, K., Sattelmayer, T., Nicol, D.
G., and Malte, P.C., ASME J. 118:765–772 (1996).
