
--- Page 1 ---

Antoine Durocher
Gas Turbine Laboratory,
National Research Council Canada,
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada;
Alternative Fuels Laboratory,
McGill University,
Montreal, QC H3A OC3, Canada
Luming Fan
Gas Turbine Laboratory,
National Research Council Canada,
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada
Benjamin Francolini
Alternative Fuels Laboratory,
McGill University,
Montreal, QC H3A OC3, Canada
Marc F€uri
New Technologies Department,
Siemens Energy Canada Limited,
Dorval, QC H9P 1A5, Canada
Gilles Bourque
Combustion Department,
Siemens Energy Canada Limited,
Dorval, QC H9P 1A5, Canada
Julien Sirois
Design for Additive Manufacturing Department,
Siemens Energy Canada Limited,
Dorval, QC H9P 1A5, Canada
David May
New Technologies Department,
Siemens Energy Canada Limited,
Dorval, QC H9P 1A5, Canada
Jeffrey M. Bergthorson
Alternative Fuels Laboratory,
McGill University,
Montreal, QC H3A OC3, Canada
Sean Yun
Gas Turbine Laboratory,
National Research Council Canada,
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada
Patrizio Vena1
Gas Turbine Laboratory,
National Research Council Canada,
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada
Characterization of a Novel
Additive Manufacturing Micromix
Nozzle Burning Methane to
Hydrogen
As the energy landscape transitions to low/zero-carbon fuels, gas turbine manufacturers are
targeting fuel ﬂexible operation with natural gas, syngas, and hydrogen-enriched mixtures.
Having a single geometry that can support the different fuel blends requested by clients can
accelerate the transition to cleaner energy generation and mitigate the environmental
impact of gas turbines. Toward this goal, micromix combustion technology has received
signiﬁcant interest, and when coupled with additive manufacturing, novel injector
geometries with unique conﬁgurations may be capable of stabilizing premixed, partially-
premixed, and diffusion ﬂames using fuel mixtures ranging from pure methane to pure
hydrogen. In this work, a preliminary investigation of this micromix concept is performed in
the Atmospheric Combustion Rig at the National Research Council (NRC) Canada. Flame
stability maps are obtained for fuel lean mixtures of H2/CH4 ranging from 0/100, 70/30, 90/
10, to 100/0%, by volume. Multiple ﬂame shapes are observed depending on the fuel mixture
and combustion mode selected. Particle image velocimetry (PIV), OH, and acetone planar
laser-induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF), and acoustic measurements provide additional insights
into the combustion process of these novel burners to better understand the stability
mechanisms. The quality of the fuel–air mixing from the premixed and micromix injectors is
assessed using acetone as a tracer for the fuel, while simultaneous OH-PLIF measurements
provide an indication of the postﬂame regions in the ﬂow. Acoustic measurements complete
the current dataset and provide combustion dynamics maps measuring the normalized
pressure amplitudes and identifying the dominant frequencies. The preliminary character-
ization of this additive manufacturing (AM) micromix nozzle shows promising fuel ﬂexibility
with wide stability margins and low combustion dynamics for this single nozzle burner.
[DOI: 10.1115/1.4063690]
Keywords: micromix, fuel ﬂexibility, hydrogen, multi-species PLIF, simultaneous laser
diagnostics
Turbomachinery Technical Conference & Exposition, Hynes Convention Center,
June 26–30, 2023. Turbo Expo 2023.
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received August 10, 2023; ﬁnal manuscript received September 19,
2023; published online December 11, 2023. Editor: Jerzy T. Sawicki.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2024, Vol. 146 / 051009-1
Copyright V
C 2024 by ASME, National Research Council Canada, and Siemens Energy Canada Limited
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 2 ---

1
Introduction
In an effort to reduce the environmental footprint of energy
production, gas turbine manufacturers have looked for low- and
zero-carbon alternatives to traditional hydrocarbon fuels. Hydrogen
has been identiﬁed as one of the most promising carbon-free options
for its potential of delivering high energy density with no carbon and
minimal NOx emissions. Unfortunately, the established premixed
dry-low-NOx technology cannot be applied directly for hydrogen-
fueled gas turbines in part due to ﬂashback and transient maneuvers
[1]. In addition, the lean, and ultralean, hydrogen–air mixtures are
inherently unstable, which can generate signiﬁcant thermoacoustic
instabilities within a combustion system, and potentially damage the
hardware [2,3].
The micromix concept has been developed to answer the
shortcomings of the premixed technology for fuels with a high-
hydrogen content [1]. Instead of having the fuel and air mixed
sufﬁciently upstream of the ﬂame to, ideally, achieve a perfectly
premixed, uniform mixture out of the injector, the micromix concept
relies on a nonpremixed, or partially-premixed, conﬁguration. In
this approach, the hydrogen-enriched fuel is typically injected as a
jet in crossﬂow through several smaller, distributed oriﬁces and is
rapidly mixed with the air [4–6]. This conﬁguration provides two
critical advantages compared to the traditional premixed conﬁgu-
ration: (1) a signiﬁcantly reduced risk of ﬂashback and (2) low NOx
emissions due to the smaller miniaturized ﬂames resulting in shorter
residence times in hot regions of the ﬂow, hence less thermal-NO.
The micromix technology has been demonstrated for various
applications and implemented in prototype combustors deployed
in power plants [1,5,7]. These activities showed the possibility of
safely stabilizing ﬂames with 100% H2 with acceptable levels of
pollutant emissions.
The rapid development of AM supported the progress of
combustion technology by enabling the manufacturing of novel
geometries and, especially, complex internal fuel channels not
accessible to traditional manufacturing processes [8–11]. This has
effectively expanded the design space and provided new possibil-
ities on the location of deposition of energy and momentum from the
fuel throughout the reactant ﬂow. Such freedom in designing novel
burner geometries is critical for compact micromix systems, where
the fuel might be injected in nontraditional locations. The impact of
some of these design parameters, for example, the size, location, or
number of fuel injection holes, has seldom been studied leading to
new ﬁelds of research toward the development of micromix systems.
While the hydrogen economy is achievable in theory, its
widespread implementation is still decades away [12]. This should
not deter the interest in the development of micromix technology for
100% H2 fuel mixtures, but should instead indicate the importance
of developing fuel-ﬂexible designs that can accommodate
hydrocarbon–hydrogen fuel blends [6]. The development of fuel-
ﬂexible micromix technology and its deployment would ensure that
within a single combustion system, operators would have the
possibility to sustainably run fuels with increasing hydrogen
contents. Ideally, such a technology would support current fuel
mixtures relying almost entirely on hydrocarbons, such as natural
gas, and allow for pure hydrogen and any blends in between.
Toward this goal, a preliminary micromix concept is investigated
in this work. The novel AM designed injector utilizes two-staged
fuel injection where the primary and secondary stages operate in
premixed and micromixed modes, respectively. This architecture
then allows for premixed, partially-premixed, and micromixed
combustion modes within a single injector geometry depending on
the fuel ﬂow split between the two stages.
The current work is the ﬁrst attempt to characterize this novel
prototype in the Atmospheric Combustion Rig at the NRC Canada.
Stability and acoustic maps are obtained for lean H2/CH4–air
mixtures of 0/100, 70/30, 90/10, to 100/0%, by volume, demonstrat-
ing the capacity of this concept to burn pure methane to pure
hydrogen fuels. Simultaneous two-dimensional particle image
velocimetry (2D-PIV), OH and acetone planar laser-induced
ﬂuorescence (PLIF), and acoustic measurements are acquired.
These datasets provide insight into the combustion process of these
novel burners to better understand the stability mechanisms of the
three different operating modes.
2
Methodology
2.1
Micromix Combustor. The Atmospheric Combustion Rig
at the NRC [8,13] is equipped with the micromix injector to perform
conﬁned single injector experiments as shown in Fig. 1(a). A two-
staged fuel injection strategy allows for operation in premixed
(primary only), partially-premixed (primary and secondary), and
micromixed (secondary only) modes. The injector is designed to
achieve high swirling ﬂows, as is traditionally expected in typical
dry-low-NOx technology, and the geometry includes a central
extrusion, shown in Fig. 1(b), that acts as a bluff body.
Reactant air enters the base of the burner and ﬂows through
expanding and honeycomb sections, before passing through the air
plenum and AM nozzle/injector. Both fuel stages are fed through the
air plenum directly to the injector with 8 mm nylon tubing, to allow
for acetone seeding, via bored through Swagelok ﬁttings shown in
Fig. 1(a). Primary fuel lines connect to the internal primary fuel
plenum, which injects the primary fuel at the inlet of the injector,
Fig. 1
(a) Atmospheric combustion rig for the micromix injector
with instrumentation. Dimensions are in millimeters. (b) Top view
of the injector showing the bluff body in the center of the
geometry.
051009-2 / Vol. 146, MAY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 3 ---

upstream of the swirler, resulting in a premixed fuel-air mixture
passing through the injector body. The secondary fuel line enters the
base of the burner and connects to the internal secondary fuel
plenum that injects the fuel at the exit of the injector, near the dump
plane, as jets in crossﬂow through multiple smaller oriﬁces.
Reactant CH4, H2, and air ﬂows are controlled using Brooks
thermal mass ﬂow controllers (SLAS58000 Series), calibrated by
the supplier. Two sets of mass ﬂow controllers are used in the current
experiments to operate in optimal ranges for the lower ﬂow rates
observed close to ﬂashback conditions and in 100% CH4 mixtures,
and the larger ﬂow rates necessary to achieve blowoff and in high-
hydrogen content fuel blends. The ﬂow parameters, fuel split, and
amount of seeding are calculated, controlled, and monitored
throughout the experiment using an integrated LabVIEW program.
The fuel split, labeled pilot-fuel ratio (PFR), which is inherited from
previous pilot technology (for example, [14]), prescribes the fuel
ratio between the primary (Py) and secondary (Sy) injections, or the
premixed and micromixed modes, respectively. It is deﬁned using
the standard volumetric ﬂow rates delivered through each channel
by
PFR ¼
_VSy
_VPy þ _VSy
(1)
where a PFR of 0 corresponds to a fully premixed mode, and a PFR
of 100 to a pure micromixed mode. Primary and secondary fuel
mixtures are controlled independently to adjust the fuel split. In
these experiments, the same fuel mixture is delivered to both the
primary and secondary plenums to simulate practical on-site
activities where a single fuel source would be available to the
operator.
The air and fuel plenums and the combustion chamber are
instrumented with pressure ports connected to differential pressure
transducers (Yokogawa EJX110A and Rosemount C1151DP). They
are used to perform effective area calculations for the complex
injector geometry with cold ﬂows and monitor the fuel and air
momentum throughout the experiments using LabVIEW. Effective
areas are measured every day to ensure that the injector or fuel
tubing have not been damaged, especially after evaluating ﬂashback
conditions, and that the fuel passages are not clogged by the seeded
particles used for diagnostics.
Five acoustic pressure transducers (PT, PCB Piezotronics
pressure sensor, ICP model 112A22) are installed on the rig and
connected to semi-inﬁnite coils (l ¼ 5 m, outer diameter 1/8 “X
0.030” wall). Four of them, PT1–PT4, are installed on the
combustion chamber as shown in Fig. 1, and the ﬁfth is mounted
on the side of the air plenum. The pressure traces and the frequencies
obtained from fast Fourier transform (FFT) are monitored through-
out the experiments and acquired at a sampling rate of 10.24 kHz to
ensure the acoustic modes, expected to appear in the 600 Hz
frequencies, are adequately captured. The acoustic data acquisition
system also records the laser and scientiﬁc camera triggers such that
the diagnostics can be registered with the acoustic measurements.
The Atmospheric Combustion Rig is mounted on a three-axis
traverse to select the imaged ﬁeld of view (FOV) of the ﬂame for
laser diagnostics. The z-traverse position is therefore adjusted for
each condition and recorded to calculate the true height above the
burner reported in this work.
2.2
Diagnostic Techniques. The diagnostic setup is shown in
Fig. 2 for simultaneous acetone PLIF, OH PLIF, and 2D-particle
image velocimetry (PIV). Details about the experimental setup and
the laser path forming optics, summarized in this work, can in found
in An et al. [8]. The second harmonic of the Spectra-Physics Nd:
YAG laser (Quanta Ray PIV400) pumps a wavelength-tunable dye
laser (Sirah, Precision Scan) using a solution of rhodamine 6G to
obtain an ultraviolet (282.94 nm) beam with an average output
energy of 4 mJ/pulse. The beam is formed into a thin laser sheet,
approximately 38 mm tall,centered above the burnercenterline axis.
The same UV laser sheet is used to simultaneously excite acetone
and OH.
Acetone and OH PLIF images are acquired using a pair of
intensiﬁed CCD cameras (PI-MAX 2 Gen II, UV). The acetone
ﬂuorescence is collected by the camera with a gate time of 500 ns. It
is equipped with a colored glass longpass ﬁlter (Schott GG395), to
reject the ﬂuorescence signal from OH and mounted at a 45 deg
angle to avoid reﬂections in the opposite camera. The camera/lens
combination results in collection wavelengths of 400–600 nm.
Acetone is selected as the fuel tracer for its lower molecular weight
and well-known photophysical properties [15,16]. While there are
known limitations regarding the accuracy of acetone tracking in
high hydrogen–content fuel mixtures with signiﬁcantly different
diffusivity, Rayleigh scattering is not a feasible option for these
conﬁned experiments performed with simultaneous particle seed-
ing. To the best knowledge ofthe authors, despiteits shortcomings to
track hydrogen, acetone remains one of the better options to
visualize fuel distribution in similar combustion systems [16]. The
OH ﬂuorescence is captured by the camera with a 450 ns gate time. It
is equipped with a bandpass ﬁlter (320620 nm) and colored glass
(Schott UG11) mounted at a 45 deg angle to avoid reﬂections in the
opposite camera.
Individual acetone and OH images are spatially registered using a
perforated plate target. The raw images are corrected for pulse-to-
pulse laser energy variations, mean dark background intensity, and
mean laser proﬁle. Spatial calibration is performed with a
millimetric grid, resulting in a FOV for the LIF measurements that
covers a 37.5 mm  37.5 mm (width  height) area. A 5  5 median
ﬁlter is applied to both images to reduce photon shot noise, while
retaining spatial fuel–air inhomogeneity that might be present,
especially when acetone is seeded through the secondary fuel
passage.
Two-dimensional, two-component PIV is used to measure ﬂow
velocities instead of stereo-PIV previously used in this rig [8,13]
sincethecombustion chamberispartiallyblocking theFOVobtained
in the forward scatter conﬁguration. Alumina particles (1 lm) are
seeded in the ﬂow and illuminated by dual-pulse, Nd:YAG laser
Fig. 2
Experimental conﬁguration used in these experiments. Only the combustion chamber and the upper air plenum
are shown for simplicity.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2024, Vol. 146 / 051009-3
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 4 ---

sheet pulse pairs at 532 nm that are coincident with the 283 nm laser
sheet. The pulse delay between the 532 nm pairs is adjusted for each
condition to match the bulk inlet velocity. The sCMOS camera
captures the Mie scattering signal with a projected spatial resolution
of 34.4 lm/pixel and vector ﬁelds are calculated with Davis 8.4 using
a 32  32 interrogation window with 50% overlap leading to a vector
spacing of 0.542 mm. The PLIF and PIV setup are triggered
synchronously using a LaVision timing unit and image sets are
acquired at a frequency of 2 Hz. Datasets include 520 images per
operating condition.
2.3
Operating Conditions. Experiments are performed for
increasing hydrogen content, with mixtures presented in this work
focusing on high hydrogen fractions. The blends presented in this
work are composed of H2/CH4 in proportions of 0/100, 70/30, 90/10,
100/0% by volume. Fuel–air ratios are adjusted for each
composition to achieve globally lean mixtures with similar adiabatic
ﬂame temperatures of interest for gas turbine applications. The lean
equivalence ratios are calculated with a mole-weighted average for
the binary mixtures. The combustion modes are investigated in
increments of 10 PFR from the fully premixed to the fully
micromixed.
Bulk inlet velocities are gradually decreased/increased for each
fuel mixture and PFR combinations to evaluate ﬂashback/blowoff.
For ﬂashback, the inlet velocity is reduced until the ﬂames start
burning inside the nozzle, or the hardware starts glowing red. In pure
micromix mode, the ﬂame does not propagate in the injector as per
the traditional deﬁnition of ﬂashback since the fuel is directly
injected close to the dump plane, as highlighted by the secondary
fuel injection zone in Fig. 1(a). Instead, the ﬂame sits closer to the
injector, increasing the heat transferred to the hardware, which
might cause damage as indicated by the glowing injector. A wide
variety of ﬂame shapes are observed during the stability mapping,
and only a few experimental conditions are actually selected to
perform advanced diagnostics.
3
Results
3.1
Flame Stability Maps. The complete stability maps are
compared in Fig. 3 for the four fuel mixtures (H2/CH4: 0/100, 70/30,
90/10, 100/0). The velocity axis is truncated at Uin ¼ 80 to highlight
the differences in ﬂashback limits for the different conﬁgurations.
Blowoff is achieved at velocities larger than Uin ¼ 80 for the 90 H2/
10 CH4 mixture. For pure hydrogen, however, blowoff could not be
achieved for most of the conditions, even with inlet velocities
approaching 200 m/s. A selection of direct ﬂame images captured
during the stability mapping is presented in Fig. 4 for PFR 0, 30, 70,
and 100, only, for brevity. The images are corrected for white
balancing to ensure that the colors shown are representative of the
ones observed during the experiments. These few pictures highlight
the diversity in observed ﬂame shapes and colors. While this is
difﬁcult to capture with a single picture, high PFR conditions have
highly tridimensional, nonaxisymmetric ﬂame structures resulting
from the discrete injection of fuel from the micromix holes.
For pure methane (0 H2/100 CH4), ﬂames could only be stabilized
in the fully premixed (PFR 0) mode. Attempts were made to
gradually increase the fuel split to slowly transition toward partially-
premixed conditions without success. As expected, it provides the
most restrictive stability map, but the geometry still produces stable
ﬂames for a surrogate of current hydrocarbon fuels. In a single
injector conﬁguration, i.e., without neighboring ﬂames, the
V-shaped ﬂame is predominant, with sporadic re-attachment on
the rim of the injector in an M-shape conﬁguration. While the ﬂame
shapes appear to be either V- or M-shaped for the premixed mode,
the inﬂuence of the bluff body at the injector centerline axis
generates a ﬂow ﬁeld that is neither representative of high swirling
ﬂow nor the wake behind a bluff body, but a combination of both.
The ﬂame color is mostly blue, as expected for these lean, premixed,
hydrocarbon ﬂames.
Focusing on fully premixed mixtures ﬁrst (PFR 0), the ﬂashback
velocity increases rapidly from 70% to 100% hydrogen content in
the fuel. The higher reactivity of the fuel results in an increased
propensity for the ﬂame to propagate upstream into the injector. This
is expected from the literature and clearly exhibits one of the reasons
why micromix injectors have received interest as a potential
alternative to traditional lean, premixed technology to safely burn
high-hydrogen content fuels [8,17,18].
As the proportion of fuel injected toward the micromix mode
increases at larger PFR, similar ﬂahsback limits as pure methane are
recovered between Uin ¼ 3  6 m/s for PFR 100. While the
ﬂashback velocity is still larger for the pure hydrogen case, this
increase is more easily manageable for operations of such an injector
in retro-ﬁtted combustion systems.
The partially-premixed and micromixed mode combined with
high-hydrogen content fuels generally widens the stability margins.
Narrower limits are interestingly observed for this injector at lower
PFR (PFR 20–40). This is evident in Fig. 3 for the 70 H2/30 CH4 and
90 H2/10 CH4 as the blow off velocities rapidly decrease to reach a
minimum around PFR 30–40, while the ﬂashback velocity is almost
the same as for the premixed mode. This signiﬁcant reduction in
velocity, by 75%, creates a thinner waist in the stability maps
clearly visible in Fig. 3 for the hydrogen-methane blends. This
behavior is not observed for the pure hydrogen case, as blow off
could not be achieved for most of the PFR conditions. As the PFR is
increased from the premixed mode, the core premixed ﬂow becomes
gradually leaner while the momentum of the micromix fuel injection
jets remains small. The combination of these two phenomena is
expected to play an important role in anchoring the ﬂame in the
partially-premixed, swirling ﬂow. It is still unclear why this region of
low-to-moderate PFR causes such a reduction in stability margins in
the single injector conﬁguration, but it is deﬁnitely an area of interest
to better understand partially-premixed, micromixed ﬂames.
The impact of micromix fuel injection, and the resulting partially
and nonpremixed combustion modes, is clearly visible from the
variation in ﬂame coloring from the sample ﬂame pictures provided
in Fig. 4. The four pictures for 90 H2/10 CH4 at Uin ¼ 30 m/s show
the blue from CH* typically found in premixed ﬂames gradually
showing more green from C*
2, typically found in rich mixture. For
different PFR, methane content in the fuels, and secondary mixing
quality, the ﬂames achieve various combinations of blue, green, and
turquoise coloring. As hydrocarbons are removed, the hydrogen
ﬂame becomes almost invisible in the lighted environment of the
laboratory. In low light, however, the UV chemiluminescence from
the ﬂame appears as a faint white on the camera with some red and
near-infrared radiations from water captured in the postﬂame region
[19].
Fig. 3
Stability maps for hydrogen/methane mixtures with 0% H2
( ), 70% H2 ( ), 90% H2 ( ), and 100% H2 ( ). Flashback (–) and
blowoff (- -) limits are interpolated between measured velocities
(symbols). Note that 100% H2 does not blow off for the velocity
shown. (Color version online.)
051009-4 / Vol. 146, MAY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 5 ---

These pictures highlight the wide range of stabilization
mechanisms found with this injector. Compact and elongated
M-shaped ﬂames are observed for varying hydrogen content in the
lower PFR range, while highly three-dimensional structures with
distinct ﬂames close to the secondary fuel injection holes are found
in the higher PFR range. These localized ﬂames can be discerned in
some of the high PFR pictures, where each jet opens up, similarly to
ﬂower petals. Different conditions provide attached, partially lifted,
or fully lifted ﬂames, resulting from the wide range of parameters
studied in this work and the unique swirling and bluff body injector
used. Noisy cases are also present for the single injector
conﬁguration as seen from the blurry ﬂame presented for 100 H2/0
CH4 at PFR 30. While this behavior is interesting to better
understand the partially-premixed mode, such combinations of
fuel and PFR do not bode well for multi-injector burners that would
be used in real gas turbine combustion systems. While the behavior
might be different at elevated pressures and temperatures in a real
combustor, understanding the cause of these instabilities and
improving existing models with atmospheric pressure measure-
ments should help prediction tools used at engine-relevant
conditions for this novel geometry.
3.2
Flame Characterization—Laser Diagnostics. A selec-
tion of ﬂames with a constant bulk velocity of Uin ¼ 30 m/s are
shown in Fig. 5 to demonstrate the laser diagnostics used in this work
and showcase some of the different ﬂame structures observed in
Fig. 4. Figures 5(a)–5(c) present the dataset for a 90 H2/10 CH4 fuel
mixture with PFR of 0, 30, and 70 and Fig. 5(d) shows a 70 H2/30
CH4 fuel mixture with PFR 70 highlighting the difference in ﬂame
structure for the same fuel split and inlet velocity. The diagnostics
presented for each case are labeled with subscripts 1–4 correspond-
ing to direct imaging, OH PLIF, acetone PLIF, and 2D-PIV,
respectively. The FOV for the laser diagnostics is shown in Fig. 5(a)
for comparison with the direct imaging. It covers approximately
37.5 mm  37.5 mm (width  height) and images the same height
above the burner for the four cases. The injector location and
geometry provided at the bottom of Fig. 5 are consistent with the
axes included in the PIV frames.
The selected dataset already visually shows marked differences in
ﬂame structures with M-shaped ﬂames presented in Figs. 5(a) and
5(b) and ﬂower-shaped ﬂames in Figs. 5(c) and 5(d) for compact and
elongated cases. The advanced diagnostics complement the visual
observations by providing instantaneous slices across the burner.
Since some of these ﬂames are nonaxisymmetric such that the laser
sheet may intersect different regions of the highly three-dimensional
general structure of the ﬂame, it is possible to image only parts of a
single ﬂame branch, or petal, for some high PFR conditions, as
shown in Fig. 5(c2).
OH PLIF shows the expected instantaneous M-shaped ﬂames in
Figs. 5(a2) and 5(b2) for the swirling conﬁguration. These ﬂames are
stabilized in the inner shear layer of the ﬂow with the ﬂame edges
propagating upstream in the outer shear layer. The center of the
ﬂame is attached to the bluff body for the premixed condition. As the
PFR is increased, the ﬂame becomes more elongated and nonreacted
jets are observed in instantaneous frames. As the ﬂames stabilize
closer to the localized secondary fuel injection, the acetone seeded in
the premixed mode is burned in the ﬂame branches that are outside
the laser sheet. As the micromix mode becomes dominant in
Fig. 5(c2), the ﬂame edges are completely lifted.For these conditions
producing highly nonaxisymmetric ﬂames, a single branch is
captured in the instantaneous OH LIF, whereas other branches
would be captured with different laser/burner orientations. It is
curling back upstream, but is not propagating as far into the outer
shear layer as in lower PFR conditions. The right side of the ﬂame is
imaged between secondary fuel injection holes resulting in a lower
Fig. 4
Selection of ﬂames observed for four hydrogen-methane fuel mixtures. Filled symbols denote stability limits, i.e.,
ﬂashback for lower velocity and blowoff for higher velocity. Open symbols correspond to the conditions where ﬂame pictures are
presented.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2024, Vol. 146 / 051009-5
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 6 ---

amount of fuel available locally. In Fig. 5(d2), the less reactive fuel
mixture results in a more elongated ﬂame, where the ﬂame petals do
not propagate upstream as much as for higher hydrogen content. The
OH PLIF shows the ﬂame jet and occasionally captures the ﬂame
edge propagating upstream at the top of the FOV. While the PIV
ﬁelds appear quite similar at ﬁrst glance for the 90 H2/10 CH4
mixture, a low velocity core ﬂow is measured for the 70 H2/30 CH4
case (Fig. 5(d4)) around x=D  0. Further investigation will be
required to identify transition points and fully explain such
behaviors.
Acetone is seeded in the primary fuel plenum (premixed mode)
for the four cases presented, even for the higher PFR conditions. The
acetone PLIF images presented in Figs. 5(a3)–5(d3) complement the
OH PLIF images by estimating the fuel distribution in the ﬂow.
Overlapped frames conﬁrm that the spatial registration for the two
cameras is performed adequately. The dataset shows that, although
the mixture is not perfectly premixed, the fuel–air mixture is fairly
uniform out of the premixed mode. Difﬁculties with achieving
constant acetone seeding through the data collection prevent
quantitative comparison among experimental conditions. Nonethe-
less, the measurements provide qualitative information on mixed-
ness within a given condition. For a PFR 0 (Fig. 5(a3)), acetone is
seeded only in the primary fuel channel and the acetone PLIF is
enclosed by the OH PLIF. That does not remain the case as the PFR
is increased and the ﬂame edges are pushed downstream. For
conditions at PFR 70, ﬂame structures are still observed at the edge
of the FOV where the fuel can still be oxidized. Imaging
simultaneously the fuel structures from the primary and secondary
Fig. 5
Instantaneous diagnostics for a selection of ﬂames (a)–(d) studied in the Atmospheric Combustion Rig at Uin530 m/s.
(1) Direct photography performed with Nikon D750 (f/5.6, 1/40 s., ISO-3200). The ﬁeld of view used for laserdiagnostics is identiﬁed
by the dashed lines. (2) OH PLIF. (3) Acetone PLIF, seeding in the primary fuel stage (premixed). (4) 2D-PIV, coloring corresponds to
velocity magnitude. The nozzle exit geometry is shown at the bottom and its location is consistent with the y-axis of the PIV ﬁgure.
051009-6 / Vol. 146, MAY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 7 ---

plenums would require another tracer whose ﬂuorescence is not
overlapping with current diagnostics.
Normalized mean OH- and acetone-PLIF ﬁelds are presented in
Fig. 6 for the same four cases, with acetone seeded in the primary
fuel channel. The average ﬁelds support the discussion performed
with instantaneous PLIF measurements, while highlighting system-
atic behaviors in the ﬂame shapes that instantaneous measurements
cannot provide. The premixed case (Fig. 6(a)) shows a relatively
uniform OH ﬁeld in the radial direction. The premixed mixture
produces an axisymmetric ﬂame structure that is burning in a typical
M-shape. In this case, the primary fuel mixture is evenly distributed
throughout the main core of the injector. Similar primary fuel
distribution/penetration is observed for the PFR 30 case in Fig. 6(b)
with the premixed mixture burning slightly more downstream of the
dump plane. The OH ﬁeld, however, presents a relatively weak
burning zone along the injector centerline axis. A localized ﬂame
structure starts to appear as the left side of the mean OH ﬁeld is
strongly burning in the outer shear layer while there is a wider ﬂame
brush on the right side, without strong evidence of the ﬂame edge
propagating upstream.
The nonaxisymmetric ﬂame structures become more present in
the mean PLIF ﬁelds as the PFR is increased to 70 in Figs. 6(c) and
6(d). In both cases, the laser sheet is cutting through a ﬂame branch
on the left side, while only partially capturing a ﬂame structure on
the right. For the higher hydrogen content (Fig. 6(c)), a compact
ﬂame is observed with the left branch curling back toward the nozzle
exit, without the ﬂame edge consistently reaching sufﬁciently
upstream to attach to the nozzle rim. At lower hydrogen content for
the same PFR and inlet velocity conditions (Fig. 6(d)), the PLIF
FOV only mostly captures a strongly burning jet on the left side of
the injector. The mixture is not reactive enough to propagate
upstream in the low velocity regions to form open ﬂame petals as can
be seen in Figs. 5(c1) and 5(d1). The primary fuel penetration is also
skewed toward the weak burning side of the injector as the premixed
mixture would be consumed by the localized ﬂame branch outside
the laser plane. For these complex, nonaxisymmetric ﬂame
structures, multiple laser slices performed at different heights above
the burner and radial positions might be required to fully capture the
stability mechanisms involved in partially-premixed, stratiﬁed,
swirling ﬂames.
3.3
Mixing Characteristics. Evaluating mixedness from the
primaryandsecondaryfuelinjectionispossiblewhenacetoneisseeded
sequentially in the two fuel channels to track where the fuel, hence
energy, is being deposited. Additionally, acetone PLIF performed by
seeding the secondary fuel channel provides a better understanding of
how well the fuel is being dispersed out of the micromix holes through
the jet in crossﬂow injection. Such a comparison is presented in Fig. 7
with acetone seeded in the a) primary and b) secondary fuel passages
for the 70 H2/30 CH4, PFR 70 case presented in Fig. 5(d). The same
color scale is consistently applied to both ﬁgures to allow fair
comparison between the LIF images.
The spatial fuel distributions are signiﬁcantly different depending
on the injection mode. When the tracer is seeded into the primary
passage (Fig. 7(a), premixed), a thicker, more uniform fuel
distribution is observed in the LIF image. The fuel is present in
the entire volume available between the shear layers. In contrast,
thinner, stratiﬁed jetsof fuel are observed when the acetone isseeded
in the secondary plenum (Fig. 7(b), micromixed). The micromixed
Fig. 6
Normalized meanOH- and acetone-PLIF ﬁelds for a selectionof ﬂames (a)–(d) studied in the atmospheric combustion rig at
Uin530 m/s
Fig. 7
Acetone seeding in (a) the primary fuel channels
(premixed) and (b) the secondary channels (micromix) for the
70 H2/30 CH4, PFR 70 case. The same colorscale is applied to both
ﬁgures.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2024, Vol. 146 / 051009-7
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 8 ---

fuel is occupying less than 50% of a radial slice of the primary fuel
distributed at a given height above the burner. The localized fuel
injections do not have enough momentum to completely penetrate
the incoming premixed core ﬂow, but micromixing can still be
observed in the acetone PLIF images as the initially richer fuel
pockets are gradually mixed with the incoming premixed mixture.
The LIF intensity provides a qualitative measurement of local
equivalence ratio. When acetone is seeded in the premixed channels, a
fairly homogeneous signal is obtained in Fig. 7(a). As acetone is
seeded into the micromixed mode, a higher ﬂuorescence signal can be
captured in the stratiﬁed ﬂow. The micromixed jets in crossﬂow may
have locally higher fuel concentrations exiting the nozzle, as
highlighted by the brighter fuel segments in Fig. 7(b), indicating
local volume with higher equivalence ratios than the targeted global
lean condition. The intensity gradually decreases as the fuel jets are
mixing with additional air along the shear layer, but stratiﬁed layers
are still observed a few nozzle diameters downstream of the nozzle
exit. These richer pockets should ideally be mixed before passing
through the ﬂame to avoid creating hot spots, and potentially
contributing to NOx emissions. Investigations at different ﬂow
conditionsandhigherfuel-to-airmomentumﬂuxratioswithemissions
measurements should shed more insight into whether this behavior is
found at higher hydrogen content, PFR, and inlet velocities where the
micromix concept is more attractive for engine operations.
3.4
Acoustics. The acoustics module can be run independently
of the laser diagnostics in preliminary investigations, before honing
onto speciﬁc conditions to perform phase-averaged PLIF measure-
ments. It provides quantitative real-time information for the
operators along with the visual input of the ﬂame to track undesired
ﬂame dynamics that might lead to hardware failure. In this
conﬁguration, ﬁve pressure traces are acquired and processed with
fast Fourier transforms to provide information on the frequency
domain.
Combustion dynamics maps are acquired for the four fuel
mixtures and presented for the hydrogen-containing fuels only in
Fig. 8. These maps are obtained for bulk inlet velocities from the
ﬂashback velocity up to either the blowoff velocity or 80 m/s.
Figures 8(a)–8(c) present the normalized pressure amplitudes
(P0
1=P), measured using the PT1 located at midheight of the
combustion chamber, and Figs. 8(d)–8(f) provide spectral insight by
identifying the dominant frequency of the single-sided amplitude
spectrum obtained using FFT.
The strongest normalized pressure amplitudes are found (1) close
to the blowoff limits and (2) in 90 H2/10 CH4 and 100 H2/0 CH4 for
combinations of lower PFR (PFR 0–50) and higher inlet velocities
(Uin ¼ 40  80 m/s). In the ﬁrst case, as the bulk inlet velocity
approaches the blowoff condition for these high-hydrogen fuel
mixtures, the ﬂames typically start lifting and reattaching to the
burner generating large ﬂame motions in the combustor. In the
second case, the ﬂames remain close to the nozzle exit while
experiencing large ﬂame motions. This behavior is expected from
the mostly premixed, lean, high-hydrogen content fuel mixtures that
are known to be inherently more unstable than lean methane–air
mixtures. The high probability of developing thermoacoustic
instabilities that might lead to engine failure is one of the main
reasons behind the current micromix effort for high-hydrogen
combustion technology [1]. In these regions with high pressure
ﬂuctuations, the entire ﬂame is typically oscillating in the combustor
near the nozzle exit and can even be burning in and out of the injector
depending on the PFR and Uin combination. One such unstable
condition is shown in Fig. 4 for pure hydrogen at a PFR 30 and a bulk
inlet velocity of 60 m/s, which is located approximately in the
middle of the high ﬂuctuating region in Fig. 8(c). Interestingly, for
pure hydrogen, the micromix injection signiﬁcantly reduces the
pressure ﬂuctuations by approximately one order of magnitude
across the bulk inlet velocities studied. The localized, nonuniform,
fuel–air mixture appears to be reducing the thermoacoustic coupling
at higher premixing ratios. This behavior is not observed for the 70
H2/30 CH4 and 90 H2/10 CH4 cases, in Figs. 8(a) and 8(b),
respectively. In both cases, increasing the micromix contribution to
the combustionprocess introduces larger pressure amplitudes forthe
velocities shown here.
The single-sided amplitudes obtained with FFT (Figs. 8(d)–8(f))
show that most of the conditions studied have a dominant frequency
in the range of 550–650 Hz. Most of the frequency spectra exhibit a
single strong peak in that range with a few conditions showing more
complex spectra for particularly noisy, or partially lifted, ﬂames. A
three-dimensional Helmholtz solver (COMSOL Multiphysics[text
Fig. 8
Acoustics maps for 70%, 90%, and 100% H2-methane mixtures. (a)–(c) present normalized pressure amplitudes (P1=P)
measured using PT1 located at midheight in the combustor. Note the log-scale for the color bar. (d)–(f) present the dominant
frequency obtained in the frequency spectrum.
051009-8 / Vol. 146, MAY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 9 ---

registered] v5.6) was used to obtain resonances of the rig, without
sources or ﬂow, for a homogenous temperature in the combustor and
room temperature upstream of the injector. The model includes the
entire Atmospheric Combustion Rig, from the base of the air
plenum, an acoustically closed boundary condition (u0 ¼ 0), to the
combustor outlet where a radiative boundary condition has been set
(unﬂanged outlet). An acoustic monopole with a conical shape, and
centered on the combustor axis, is used as a forcing source. The
monopole frequency is swept from 5 to 4000 Hz and the resulting
pressure ﬂuctuation amplitudes, measured at the same location as
the PT1 sensor, are recorded as a function of frequency. The results
show a single dominant frequency at 600 Hz, which corresponds to
a full wave through the Atmospheric Combustion Rig, from the air
inlets to the combustor outlet (one wavelength). Given that this
wavelength is much larger than the axial length of the combustor and
that the combustor temperature is kept constant, it is expected that
most cases presented in Fig. 8 exhibit a similar mode shape with
frequencies close to 600 Hz.
A sample of the normalized pressure traces and frequency spectra
is shown in Fig. 9 for the four cases discussed with the laser
diagnostics. None of the cases selected are particularly noisy and
they all exhibit normalized pressure ﬂuctuations between 0.01 and
0.03, and a dominant frequency close to 600 Hz. A single peak is
observed in the frequency spectra of Figs. 9(b)–9(d), but other
frequencies below 500 Hz are appearing for the premixed case
shown in Fig. 9(a), leading to a bimodal spectrum. For the 90 H2/10
CH4 mixture, there is a rapid transition in the ﬂame response and
acoustics properties at velocities slightly larger than 30 m/s. The
ﬂame becomes unstable and can burn in-and-out of the injector.
Simultaneously, the normalized pressure ﬂuctuations rapidly
increase as the dominant frequency shifts to 450 Hz. For the
acoustics measurements presented in Fig. 9(a), the condition at
30 m/s appears to still be stable, but on the verge of switching toward
the lower frequency mode found to be correlated with the unstable
case in the fully premixed mode. Further investigation with phased-
matched diagnostics with the acoustic modules should help better
understand the relationship between ﬂame stability mechanisms and
the thermoacoustics of this novel injector, especially for cases with
large pressure amplitudes.
4
Conclusion
This work presents the newly instrumented Atmospheric
Combustion Rig at the National Research Council Canada. Previous
experimental capabilities are extended to perform simultaneous 2D-
PIV, acetone PLIF, and OH PLIF while acquiring acoustic signals
from multiple pressure ports positioned around the combustion
chamber.
The diagnostics are used to perform a preliminary characteriza-
tion of a fuel-ﬂexible, dual-stage, micromix injector produced with
additive manufacturing. The development of a burner with premix/
micromix operation capabilities targets the current and future
energy demands within a single design that can safely burn fuel
blends ranging from pure methane to pure hydrogen. Stability maps
are ﬁrst obtained for fuel blends of 0/100, 70/30, 90/10, 100/0% (H2/
CH4), by volume. The addition of hydrogen in the fuel greatly
increases the blowoff limits while signiﬁcantly increasing ﬂashback
limits for premixed ﬂames. The introduction of fuel through the
micromix stage allows to recover similar ﬂashback limits as for pure
methane with the same nozzle geometry. With the wide range of
parameters investigated, a variety of ﬂame shapes are observed,
ranging from traditional M- andV-shaped ﬂames found in premixed,
swirling ﬂows, to distributed ﬂames while operating under the
micromix mode.
A selection of results is shown for a constant bulk velocity with
different hydrogen content and fuel splits between the premixed/
micromixed modes. OH PLIF, acetone PLIF, and 2D-PIV show
signiﬁcantly different ﬂame and ﬂow structures indicating that
operators might not be able to simply change a single parameter and
expect the same behavior when the injector is placed in an array.
Further investigations tailored toward the transition points between
ﬂame shapes are required to better understand the stabilization
mechanisms involved for partially-premixed and micromixed
ﬂames. The stability mapping performed in this work will help
target conditions for advanced diagnostics.
Combustion dynamics maps are obtained for all the fuel mixtures
highlighting regions prone tolarge pressure ﬂuctuations. In addition,
the dominant frequency obtained with fast Fourier transform shows
that most of the conditions in the single nozzle array correspond to a
full wave through the Atmospheric Combustion Rig with a
frequency of 600 Hz. Interestingly, the introduction of micromix
in the pure hydrogen fuel–air mixture mitigates the normalized
pressure amplitudes by approximately one order of magnitude,
conﬁrming the potential of this technology for high-hydrogen
content fuels. The combination of the acoustics and stability maps
should infer future experimental campaigns to not only describe the
stability mechanisms but also improve the understanding of
thermoacoustics for this novel geometry.
The amount of information obtained for a single injector through
the entire suite of diagnostics can be used toiterate prototype designs
and also compare performance between various promising injectors
at an early design stage. This should help manufacturers streamline
Fig. 9
Acoustic traces and frequency spectra for the four cases presented with laser diagnostics
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2024, Vol. 146 / 051009-9
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 10 ---

the design process by having experimental measurements to validate
predictions from simulations early on, and mitigate the risks and
costs of a new development program.
5
Permission for Use
The content of this paper is copyrighted by the National Research
Council Canada and Siemens Energy Canada Limited and is
licensed to ASME for publication and distribution only. Any
inquiries regarding permission to use the content of this paper, in
whole or in part, for any purpose must be addressed to National
Research Council Canada and Siemens Energy Canada Limited
directly.
Funding Data
 National Research Council Canada (Award ID: Low-Emission
Aviation Program; Funder ID: 10.13039/501100000046).
 Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(Award ID: Environment and Climate Change Canada; Funder
ID: 10.13039/501100000038).
 Siemens (Award ID: Siemens Energy Canada Limited; Funder
ID: 10.13039/501100004830).
Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated and supporting the ﬁndings of this article are
obtainable from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Nomenclature
Roman Letters
AM ¼ additive manufacturing
DP ¼ differential pressure
F ¼ frequency (Hz)
FFT ¼ fast-Fourier transform
FOV ¼ ﬁeld of view
P ¼ pressure (kPa)
Py ¼ primary fuel channel
PFR ¼ pilot-fuel ratio
PT ¼ pressure transducer
Sy ¼ secondary fuel channel
U ¼ normalized velocity
_V ¼ volumetric ﬂow rate (SLPM)
Greek Symbol
/ ¼ equivalence ratio
References
[1] Funke, H. H.-W., Beckmann, N., Keinz, J., and Horikawa, A., 2021, “30
Years of Dry-Low-NOx Micromix Combustor Research for Hydrogen-Rich
Fuels-An Overview of Past and Present Activities,” ASME J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power, 143(7), p. 071002.
[2] Candel, S., 2002, “Combustion Dynamics and Control: Progress and Challenges,”
Proc. Combust. Inst., 29(1), pp. 1–28.
[3] Beita, J., Talibi, M., Sadasivuni, S., and Balachandran, R., 2021, “Thermoacoustic
Instability Considerations for High Hydrogen Combustion in Lean Premixed Gas
Turbine Combustors: A Review,” Hydrogen, 2(1), pp. 33–57.
[4] Funke, H. H.-W., Beckmann, N., and Abanteriba, S., 2019, “An Overview on Dry
Low NOx Micromix Combustor Development for Hydrogen-Rich Gas Turbine
Applications,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 44(13), pp. 6978–6990.
[5] Kroniger, D., Horikawa, A., Funke, H. H.-W., Pfaefﬂe, F., Kishimoto, T., and
Okada, K., 2021, “Experimental and Numerical Investigation on the Effect of
Pressure on Micromix Hydrogen Combustion,” ASME Paper No. GT2021-58926.
[6] Kroniger, D., Horikawa, A., Okada, K., and Ashida, Y., 2022, “Novel Fuel Injector
Geometry for Enhancing the Fuel Flexibility of a Dry Low NOx MicroMix
Flame,” ASME Paper No. GT2022-83025.
[7] Cho, E.-S., Jeong, H., Hwang, J., and Kim, M., 2022, “A Novel 100% Hydrogen Gas
TurbineCombustorDevelopmentforIndustrialUse,” ASMEPaperNo.GT2022-80619.
[8] An, Q., Kheirkhah, S., Bergthorson, J., Yun, S., Hwang, J., Lee, W. J., Kim, M. K.,
Cho, J. H., Kim, H. S., and Vena, P., 2021, “Flame Stabilization Mechanisms and
Shape Transitions in a 3D Printed, Hydrogen Enriched, Methane/Air Low-Swirl
Burner,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 46(27), pp. 14764–14779.
[9] Giuliani, F., Paulitsch, N., Cozzi, D., G€ortler, M., and Andracher, L., 2018, “An
Assessment on the Beneﬁts of Additive Manufacturing Regarding New Swirler
Geometries for Gas Turbine Burners,” ASME Paper No. GT2018-75165.
[10] Moosbrugger, V., Giuliani, F., Paulitsch, N., and Andracher, L., 2019, “Progress in
Burner Design Using Additive Manufacturing With a Monolithic Approach and
Added Features,” ASME Paper No. GT2019-90720.
[11] Rajasegar,R., Mitsingas, C.M., Mayhew, E. K., Liu, Q., Lee, T., and Yoo, J., 2018,
“Development and Characterization of Additive-Manufactured Mesoscale
Combustor Array,” J. Energy Eng., 144(3), p. 04018013.
[12] Bridgeland, R., Chapman, A., McLellan, B., Sofronis, P., and Fujii, Y., 2022,
“Challenges Toward Achieving a Successful Hydrogen Economy in the US:
Potential End-Use and Infrastructure Analysis to the Year 2100,” Cleaner Prod.
Lett., 3, p. 100012.
[13] Fan, L., Savard, B., Carlyle, S., Nozari, M., Naaman, R., Fond, B., and Vena, P.,
2023, “Simultaneous stereo-PIV and OHCH2O PLIF Measurements in
Turbulent Ultra Lean CH4/H2 Swirling Wall-Impinging Flames,” Proc. Combust.
Inst., 39(2), pp. 2179–2188.
[14] Lam, K.-K., Geipel, P., and Larfeldt, J., 2015, “Hydrogen Enriched Combustion
Testing of Siemens Industrial SGT-400 at Atmospheric Conditions,” ASME J.
Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 137(2), p. 021502.
[15] Schulz, C., and Sick, V., 2005, “Tracer-LIF Diagnostics: Quantitative Measure-
ment of Fuel Concentration, Temperature and Fuel/Air Ratio in Practical
Combustion Systems,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 31(1), pp. 75–121.
[16] Salazar, V. M., Kaiser, S. A., and Halter, F., 2009, “Optimizing Precision and
Accuracy of Quantitative PLIF of Acetone as a Tracer for Hydrogen Fuel,” SAE
Int. J. Fuels Lubr., 2(1), pp. 737–761.
[17] Tuncer, O., Acharya, S., and Uhm, J., 2009, “Dynamics, NOx and Flashback
Characteristics of Conﬁned Premixed Hydrogen-Enriched Methane Flames,” Int.
J. Hydrogen Energy, 34(1), pp. 496–506.
[18] Syred, N., Abdulsada, M., Grifﬁths, A., O’Doherty, T., and Bowen, P., 2012, “The
Effect of Hydrogen Containing Fuel Blends Upon Flashback in Swirl Burners,”
Appl. Energy, 89(1), pp. 106–110.
[19] Schefer, R. W., Kulatilaka, W. D., Patterson, B. D., and Settersten, T. B., 2009,
“Visible Emission of Hydrogen Flames,” Combust. Flame, 156(6), pp. 1234–1241.
051009-10 / Vol. 146, MAY 2024
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/146/5/051009/7219956/gtp_146_05_051009.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025
