
--- Page 1 ---

 
-PUBLIC- 
 
GE Research 
Technical publication 
 
 
Impact of Secondary Air Flow on 
Combustor Emissions 
 
PUBLIC
November 2021 
                                                                                                                
Bassam Sabry Mohammad Abdelnabi (abdelnab@ge.com) 
Keith McManus (mcmanus@ge.com) 
Thermosciences 
 
 
Abstract 
It is a common practice to characterize DLE combustion systems based on the mixer flame temperature 
which is estimated by metering the air and the fuel flowing through the mixer. In many combustion 
systems, the exit temperature (or nozzle inlet temperature) is low enough that it is not considered in 
characterizing the combustion emissions. The difference between the combustion flame temperature and 
exit temperature is mainly due to the secondary air. There is no detailed published data that quantifies 
this effect. The target of this study is to quantify the impact of secondary air percentage on emissions 
both globally and locally. Experiments are conducted under high pressure at H class gas turbine operating 
conditions on a DLE combustion system. Secondary air refers to the air used for cooling, dilution and 
leaking air. In the context of DLE combustion system it is the cooling and leakage air. Since the introduction 
of DLE systems the percentage of air running through the mixer has been increasing steadily to reduce 
the flame temperature and improve the combustion NOx emissions. With the NOx requirements moving 
toward the single digit NOx, it becomes essential to accurately quantify the impact of reducing the 
secondary air percentage on performance. In addition to the need to carefully study the impact of local 
interaction of the secondary air with the flame. The combustion system is configured with two 
independently controlled mixers along with a variable secondary air circuit that can change the secondary 
air percent from 0 to 6.25%. Multiple emissions rakes are used at the combustor exit to delineate the 
interaction and relate it to the flame region. The system is configured to enable sampling from individual 
rakes to study local emissions and to gang the rakes to get the overall combustion emissions. This research 
provides a quantification of the improvement of the NOx margin with a decrease in the secondary air 
percentage. The study shows that the increase in margin is not a simple reestimate of the combustor 
emissions using the NOx design curve because of the flame quenching effects. Also, the results show that 
the secondary air can be used to improve the NOx emissions via controlling the interaction with the primary 
flame. 
 
Keywords 
NOx Emissions, NOx Design Curve, Secondary Air, Combustor Air Redistribution, DLE, DLN,  
 
 
This publication is intended for external publication: 
TurboExpo 2020 
 
2019093022278 


--- Page 2 ---

 
2 
 
 
 
 
CLASSES OF GENERAL ELECTRIC 
TECHNICAL REPORTS 
CLASS 1 — PUBLIC (CLASS 1) - GENERAL INFORMATION 
Available to anyone on request. GEGR management, and relevant Company component 
reviews are required before publication. 
CLASS 2 — GE INTERNAL (CLASS 2) - GENERAL COMPANY INFORMATION 
Available on request to any GE employee or employee of a GE subsidiary company that has 
executed a non-disclosure agreement with GE. 
CLASS 3 — GE CONFIDENTIAL (CLASS 3) - LIMITED AVAILABILITY INFORMATION 
Original distribution limited to those individuals with specific need for the information. 
Subsequent Company availability requires originating component approval. 
CLASS 4 — GE RESTRICTED (CLASS 4) - HIGHLY RESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION 
Original distribution to those individuals personally responsible for the Company’s interests 
in the subject. Copies are serially numbered and assigned, and the recipients’ names are 
recorded. Knowledge of existence and material content is restricted to the copy holder. 
 
Class 2, 3, and 4 reports may be subject to Export Control, depending on 
subject matter. 
 
In addition to the limitations above, distribution of Class 2, 3 and 4 information may be 
controlled by Export Control laws or Regulations.  Consult your Export Control representative 
or the GEGR Export Control Manager whenever you have a question in 
this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 3 ---

 
 
 
3 
 
 
IMPACT OF SECONDARY AIR FLOW ON COMBUSTOR EMISSIONS 
 
 
Bassam S. Mohammad, Brian Volk and Keith McManus  
General Electric Global Research Center 
Niskayuna, NY 12309, USA 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
It is a common practice to relate emissions performance 
of Dry Low Emissions (DLE) combustion systems to the flame 
temperature that is estimated from the mass flows of air and fuel 
flowing through the premixer. In many combustion systems, the 
exit temperature (or turbine nozzle inlet temperature) is quite low 
and is not a good parameter for estimating combustion 
emissions. The difference between the combustion flame 
temperature and exit temperature is mainly due to secondary air 
dilution. To our knowledge there are no detailed published data 
that quantify the impact of this temperature difference on 
combustion emissions. The target of this study is to quantify the 
impact of secondary air variation on emissions, both globally and 
locally. High pressure experiments are conducted at H class gas 
turbine operating conditions using a DLE combustion system. In 
the context this DLE system, secondary air refers to cooling and 
leakage flows because direct air dilution of the combustion 
gasses is not necessary. This is because the flame stabilized 
downstream of the premixer is well mixed and fuel-lean. With 
NOx requirements moving toward single digit (ppm) levels, it 
becomes essential to accurately quantify the impact of reducing 
the secondary air percentage on emissions performance. In 
addition to the need to carefully study the impact of local 
interaction of the secondary air with the flame. The combustion 
system is configured with two independently controlled mixers 
along with a variable secondary air circuit that can change the 
secondary air fraction from 14 to 8%. Multiple emissions rakes 
are used at the combustor exit to delineate the interaction and 
relate it to the flame structure. The system is configured to enable 
sampling from individual rakes to study local emissions and the 
rakes can be ganged together to measure the bulk-averaged 
combustion emissions. This research provides a quantification of 
the improvement of the NOx margin with a decrease in the 
secondary air percentage. The study shows that the increase in 
margin is not a simple re-estimate of the combustor emissions 
using the NOx design curve due to flame quenching effects. The 
results also show that the secondary air can be used to improve 
the NOx emissions via controlling the interaction with the 
primary flame. The impact is quantified in terms of emissions, 
acoustics and metal temperatures. 
 
1    INTRODUCTION 
Emissions reduction has been the main driver for gas 
turbine combustion system development for decades. The Dry 
Low Emissions (DLE) or Dry Low NOx systems (DLN) have 
been introduced for about 30 years now. They successfully drove 
the NOx emissions reduction from hundreds of ppm to less than 
25 ppm (operation on gas). Today several Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEM) offer products that achieve better than 15 
ppm NOx levels. However, the increase in efficiency 
requirements calls for an increase in the firing temperature and 
pressure which tend to drive NOx higher. The combustion 
community has reached maturity in understanding NOx 
generation and control using advanced fuel injection and mixing 
devices. The philosophy is simple and relies on designing fuel-
air mixing devices that provide perfect homogeneous mixtures. 
On the other hand, combustion emissions are also sensitive to 
operating conditions and the overall combustor configuration. 
More research is required to provide better understanding of the 
influence of these factors on combustor operability and emission 
performance.   
Several 
parameters 
influence 
the 
combustion 
emissions. NOx and CO are sensitive to flame temperature, 
operating pressure, residence time, fuel composition and mixing 
quality (controlled by premixer performance). There are 
interactions between all of these parameters so quantifying the 
impact of each separately is not straight forward. Most of this 
paper will be focused on NOx emissions as it is the dominant 
component formed at high pressure and temperature.  
Flame temperature is the major driver for NOx 
emissions. The NOx design curve is the typical tool used to 
quantify the impact of flame temperature on NOx emissions. The 
curve is simply the amount of NOx generated as a function of 
flame temperature. The combustion designer develops a specific 
mixer and then evaluates the performance and collects data to 
generate this curve. However, this curve is dependent on many 
parameters. Essentially a different curve exists at different 
operating conditions (combustor pressure, P3, and exit 
temperature T4), flame distribution, residence time, fuel type, 
oxidizer type and diffusion portion of the flame (if it exists). 
 In an attempt to define the lowest possible emissions at 
a given flame temperature or the best NOx design curve, the 
concept of entitlement was introduced in the 1990’s by the 
pioneering work of Leonard and Correa [1]. They ran a simple 
jet flame-based system under perfectly premixed conditions and 
quantified the corresponding emissions. This concept was 
revived by Elkady et. al  [2] and they extended the data collected 
to other operating condition. In addition, they validated several 
kinetics models against it to specify the best models for NOx 
simulation using reactor network modelling. The same 
combustor architecture (with different variations) was used for 
several emissions related studies. Mohammad et. al used it to 
show that flame oscillations can drive higher NOx emissions 
even for the entitlement data [3].  It was also used by Elkady et. 


--- Page 4 ---

 
 
 
4 
 
 
al to quantify the reduction in NOx emissions corresponding to 
40% exhaust gas recirculation (EGR)[4]. The rig data was also 
used for successful CO modeling close to lean blow out (LBO) 
[5, 6]. 
Several authors documented the impact of pressure on 
combustion emissions [1, 7-9]. It is a complex effect that 
depends on the flame temperature and degree of mixedness. This 
does not mean that the pressure effect only depends on these two 
parameters. It just means this is what is available in published 
literature. The higher the flame temperature the higher the NOx 
emissions penalty at elevated pressure. CO decreases with 
pressure. Residence time effect on NOx emissions is 
documented in few publications, but was not thoroughly studied 
in a way that provides combustor designers to make the best 
selection based on target cycle conditions [2, 10, 11]. However, 
these publications still provide useful quantification for the 
impact of residence time on emissions. As the residence time 
increases the NOx increase, but growth rate is dependent on 
flame temperature. It also depends on the diffusion portion of the 
flame. The authors are not aware of any existing thorough 
published research that documents the effect of residence time 
on CO.  The literature is lacking guidance or quantification of 
the impact of cooling flow on combustion emissions. 
Combustion system cooling is essential to protect the 
combustor parts from failure. This cooling air interacts with the 
flame and may have an emissions impact. The percentage of air 
used for cooling the combustor is a function of the cycle 
conditions and flame temperature. It is also dependent on the 
advent in heat transfer technologies, developments of advanced 
coatings and thermally capable materials. There is no published 
data that quantifies the impact of the change in cooling air 
percentage on combustion emissions. Marosky et. al provided a 
rare study on the interaction of the cooling air with the main air 
[12]. They showed that the air strongly interacts with the flame 
and caused dilution and fluctuations to the equivalence ratio 
which may lead to combustion instabilities. However, they did 
isothermal experiments using water flow and hence did not study 
the impact on emissions.  
 This paper describes a study of the impact of cooling 
air (referred to below as secondary air) on combustion emissions 
for a DLE combustion system operating at H class gas turbine 
conditions. The primary air term in this paper refers to the air 
flowing through the premixer only. The combustor used in this 
study features two premixers that are mounted side-by-side. The 
system is configured to enable variation of the secondary air 
from 14% to 8%. The data is collected at variable flame 
temperatures as well as with a side-to-side temperature bias to 
more 
thoroughly 
quantify 
the 
effect 
on 
emissions.  
Instrumentation at the combustor inlet and exit are used not only 
to quantify the effect of secondary air on emissions, but to 
delineate 
the 
extent 
of 
flame 
interaction. Also, 
the 
instrumentation are used to provide a possible strategy to tailor 
the secondary air distribution to reduce NOx levels.  
 
2    NOMENCLATURE 
P3 
= Combustor feed pressure 
T3 
= Combustor inlet air and fuel temperature 
TC 
= Thermocouple 
P/P 
= Operating pressure drop across nozzle 
NOx 
= Nitric Oxides 
CO 
= Carbon Monoxide 
O2 
= Oxygen 
CO2 
= Carbon Dioxide 
H2 
= Hydrogen 
ppmvd 
= Particle per million volume dry 
Tflame  
= Flame temperature-based mixer only air 
TExit  
= Combustor exit temperature 
ms 
= combustor residence time in millisecond 
p’ 
= Thermo-acoustic instabilities pressure fluctuation 
in psi 
pk-pk 
= Pressure fluctuations peak to peak 
TKHS 
= Thermocouple placed on the heat shield 
DLE 
= Dry Low Emissions combustion systems 
EPA 
= Environmental protection agency 
Secondary Air = All air flowing inside the combustor less the 
mixers air 
Variable Secondary Air = The portion of the secondary air that 
is controlled and varied 
GER 
= General Electric Research 
 
 
3     EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND TEST CONDITIONS: 
3.1 Test facility capability 
The General Electric Research (GER) combustion facility is 
highly capable for developing and evaluating advanced 
combustor component technologies. The facility is composed of 
multiple test cells where each provides a unique capability 
corresponding to a specific problem of interest. Multiple fuel and 
air delivery systems are available that supply combustor inlet 
flows consistent with those found in actual turbine engines, 
including heavy duty, aeroderivative and aircraft engines, 
operating at full power. 
3.2 Test cell capability 
This study was conducted in a combustion test cell with 
extensive capability (see Figure 1). The test cell can supply 
multiple gas fuel circuits, multiple liquid fuel circuits, multiple 
air circuits, and different types of gaseous fuels and gas fuel 
blends. It is equipped with a fuel heater to control the gaseous 
fuel temperature to the desired value. There are two different 
ways of supplying fuel blends of interest: a specific fuel blend 
prepared in a blowdown reservoir; or via online blending in the 
test cell. This blending capability is often required to assess the 
flex fuel capability of different combustion technologies. This is 
in addition to the ability of using water injection for emissions 
control via a liquid fuel water emulsion or direct water injection 
through dedicated water injection circuit. The cell is configured 
to enable sampling from individual emissions rakes as well as 
ganging the emissions to provide an area weighted average of the 
emissions at the combustor exit.   


--- Page 5 ---

 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
3.3 Problem definition and combustor design 
The target of this research is to study the impact of 
secondary air on emissions, both locally and globally. In the 
context of this study, primary air is only the portion of the air 
running through the DLE mixers. The secondary air refers to all 
other air streams flowing into the combustor. Typically, the 
secondary air streams include heat shield cooling, dome cooling, 
leakage flows, and liner cooling flows. The secondary air in this 
specific problem is composed of mainly two parts. The first part 
is the dome and leakages air which forms around 8 % of the 
combustor flow. This portion is fixed and not varied through the 
experiment. The second part is variable and is varied in this study 
roughly from 0 to 6% (zero corresponds to 8 % secondary flow 
and 6% corresponds to 14% secondary flow).   
Based on the problem under investigation, two DLE mixers 
are required to help study the local effects as will be discussed 
shortly. Also, two air streams are needed. The main air stream 
will be feeding the combustor directly and the second will be 
used as a source for the variable secondary air. Both air streams 
are metered and controlled. The combustor layout is given in 
Figure 2. The variable secondary air injection is located toward 
the outer mixer at roughly 25% of the combustor length (relative 
to the front end) as shown in Figure 2.  
The variable secondary air injector is inserted to the 
combustor through a ferrule that is designed to enable flexible 
mounting as well as to provide a leeway for thermal expansion 
without interference with the combustor walls as the systems 
operates at high-pressure and -temperature. This is of extreme 
importance because the thermal expansion can drive geometrical 
variations resulting in interference between parts and eventually 
hardware failure. A hydrogen torch is inserted through the 
opposite wall to provide an ignition source for the combustor. It 
is also inserted through a ferrule assembly to allow for thermal 
expansion.  
 
Figure 1.  Test cell 4 layout and capabilities 
 
 
Figure 2. Combustion system components and 
design 
 
 
The flow path of the combustor assembly is given in Figure 
3. There are two pressure measurements ports for monitoring the 
static and dynamic pressure. They are in the same plane of the 
igniter and secondary air injection point. A flow sleeve surrounds 
the liner for cooling air to cool the walls from the backside. 
Emissions rakes are located at the exit for emissions sampling as 
will be discussed in detail below. There are two emissions rakes 
aligned with each mixer to help identify and clearly define the 
interaction between the cooling air and different flame 
structures. Also, they will help explore the impact of the flame 
temperature bias. These are key characteristics that will be 
evaluated in this study.  
 
3.4 Combustor instrumentation 
Combustor development and validation is a complex 
process that requires high-accuracy. Test quality is ensured via 
closures of metered air, fuel, emissions, temperatures and 
pressures. The combustor under investigation is instrumented 
both internally and externally to ensure integrity and safe test 
execution. There are four static pressure measurements ports as 
illustrated in Figure 4. They are used to determine the pressure 
drop and hence facilitate the estimation of air flowing through 
the mixers. Two of the four ports are used also for dynamics 
pressure monitoring which is a critical measurement for DLE 
combustion systems.  Also, there are 3 pressure measurement 
points at the inlet of the combustor that are used to monitor the 
operating pressure (P3). This test is conducted at an operating 
pressure of 22.1 atm. 


--- Page 6 ---

 
 
 
6 
 
 
It was mentioned earlier that it is important to be able to 
study the extent of interaction between the secondary air and 
combustion air. Therefore, the relative location of the inlet flows 
and instrumentation is important. Figure 4 shows the inlet 
location of the secondary air and Figure 2 shows that it is located 
downstream from the dome (at 25% of the combustor axial 
length). The dome is the structure shown in Figure 4 and it is 
essentially the structure that forms the front end of the combustor 
and through which the mixers are installed. The dome structure 
is cooled using a portion of the incoming air to maintain 
acceptable metal temperature values. Typically, this air is split 
from the compressor air feeding the combustor which is at T3, 
the air preheat temperature (784 K).  
Thermocouple instrumentation (TC’s) that measure heat 
shield temperatures are a very important part of this study. They 
will be used along with the local emissions data to provide 
insight on the extent of interaction of the secondary air and the 
main flames. There are four thermocouples that are strategically 
located as shown in Figure 4. TKHSA1 is located at the same 
side of the combustor corresponding to the secondary air 
injection. However, it is located on the dome which is not in the 
same axial plane of the injection point. The response of this TC 
can indicate if the secondary air recirculates back to the dome 
through the combustor flow reversal zones. TKHSA2 is located 
at the center of the outer mixer. TKHSB1 is located at the 
midpoint of the combustor and TKHSB2 is located all the way 
at the opposite corner. These TC’s are brazed in position to 
ensure perfect representation of the metal temperature being 
measured as well as to prolong the TC life which is typically 
influenced by combustion dynamics and vibration.  
 
 
Figure 3. Flow path and pressure measurement point 
 
 
Figure 4. Instrumentation diagram (location of Thermocouples 
and pressure ports) 
 
3.5 Emissions sampling system 
The emissions sampling system is an integral part of this 
study. The system is illustrated in Figure 5. The four emissions 
rakes are strategically located such that each two are facing one 
mixer. Rake 1 is the closest to the secondary air injection and 4 
is the furthest.  This arrangement enables local study of the extent 
of penetration and interaction between the secondary air and the 
mixer flames. The rakes are water cooled to ensure survivability 
in the hot combustion products. Each rake can be used 
independently by sampling through a scanning valve. Only four 
channels are used in this case and each corresponds to a single 
emissions rake. Also, the four sampling lines are can be ganged 
together to provide an area weighted average of the combustion 
emissions at the combustor exit. Overall there are 20 sampling 
ports distributed over the combustor exit as there are 5 sampling 
holes per emissions rake. Two shutoff solenoids make it possible 
to sample in ganged mode or in a single channel mode as 
illustrated in Figure 5. 
The collected emissions sample is then transferred to a 
heated filter and eventually to the emissions stand. The sample 
flows through an electrically heated hose that help maintain the 
sample temperature at 422K. This temperature ensures no 
condensation of the water in the sample gas will occur before 
feeding the sample to the analyzer. This is important as NO2 is 
water soluble. If water condensation occurs, then NO2 may be 
lost and hence the total NOx measured will be in error. This is a 
very serious and frequent problem in emissions sampling 
systems.  Most standard NOx analyzers are chemiluminescence 
based analyzers which do not measure NO2 directly. They use 
an internal converter that converts NO2 to NO and then measure 
the total NO. This converter deteriorates with time and needs to 
be continuously monitored for the decline of the conversion 
efficiency. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) method 
7E is of extreme importance to be referred to by researchers and 
industrial entities performing emissions sampling [13] 
The emissions stand is composed of a series of analyzers 
that are used to measure all major components of the sampled 
gas stream. Mainly we are interested in oxygen (O2), nitric 
oxides (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO), unburned hydro carbons 


--- Page 7 ---

 
 
 
7 
 
 
(UHC), methane (CH4) and carbo dioxide (CO2). NOx 15 refers 
to the standard correction of the NOx emissions to 15% oxygen. 
The same terminology applies for CO. 
  
3.6 Operating conditions, data storage and reporting 
Data collection and combustion operation for this study is 
conducted at representative H class gas turbine operating 
conditions. The combustor pressure (P3) is ~22.1 atm, pressure 
drop through the mixers is maintained at 3.5% relative to P3, air 
preheat temperature (T3) is 785K. Residence time is ~ 13.5 ms 
which represents an average size combustion system. The 
variable secondary air is provided at an unheated temperature of 
~310K and enables the study of the interaction between the 
secondary air injection and the main flames. The fixed secondary 
air portions (dome, heatshield and leakages) is also provided at 
T3. Therefore, the finger print of the secondary air and its 
interaction with the dome (though it is injected downstream) can 
be tracked since it is supplied at much colder temperature as will 
be discussed shortly. However, the test was repeated with a 
heated secondary air stream (at 588.7K) to confirm that the 
reported impact is minimally influenced by the temperature 
difference. 
All data is recorded at a rate of 1 data point per second. The 
data presented here is collected at steady state. Each point is an 
average of 60 instantaneous data points. This minimizes standard 
deviation and significantly improves the accuracy of the reported 
average.  
4     RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
4.1 Effect of secondary air flowrate on emissions 
performance 
Figure 6 shows the NOx emissions of this combustion 
systems at the baseline case with 14 % secondary air as well as 
cases with 11% and 8%, respectively. The emissions are 
presented as a function of TFlame. Figure 7 shows a plot of the 
same data set vs the combustor exit temperature (TExit). The 
curves may be seen to provide contradictory conclusions. Figure 
6 shows emissions increase with the decrease of the secondary 
air while Figure 7 shows the opposite. Figure 8 can help explain 
why they appear contradictory. At a fixed combustor exit 
temperature the reduction of secondary air calls for reduction in 
the flame temperature since less fuel is needed to maintain the 
same exit temperature. Let us explain this in detail. 
The combustor can be thought of as a black box. The overall 
air and fuel always have to be the same for a fixed engine 
operating condition. Combustors are designed to receive a 
certain amount of air from the turbomachinery and burn a certain 
amount of fuel to provide power. The combustor is a hot gas 
generator that delivers a prescribed TExit (which is the inlet 
temperature to the first stage turbine nozzle). This is the view 
point that will be focused on in this study. Therefore, Figure 7 is 
the proper way to characterize this problem.  
Running a lab test is different from an engine test. In an 
engine, the air will always redistribute (as we discussed 
previously), but in a lab test the system components are 
independent and really nothing can force the system to use the 
same air, burn the same fuel or maintain the same exit 
temperature. In an engine, the compressor, combustor and 
turbine are all one system. On the other hand, the compressor, air 
heater and the combustor in the lab are all independent systems 
(there is no turbine). In lab test, the test is designed to mimic a 
specific problem. The reader will notice that we ran the 
combustor under multiple firing temperatures and while 
changing the exit and flame temperature as well. This is not 
possible in an engine test. Therefore, the data presented should 
be clear about what was varied and what was help constant.  
The problem presented here represents an existing 
combustion system that will be redesigned by reducing the 
secondary air used for cooling and feeding it to the mixer. This 
type of study is typically driven by the advent in coatings, 
materials and cooling mechanisms such that the secondary 
cooling air percent can be efficiently cut down without impact 
on durability. In this study we are presenting three cases. The 
baseline case corresponds to the starting point where the 
combustion system is running at 14% secondary air. The second 
and third case correspond to a reduction of 3% and 6% in the 
cooling air respectively.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. sampling system 
 


--- Page 8 ---

 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. NOx emissions vs TFlame with variable secondary 
air 
 
 
 
Figure 7. NOx emissions vs TExit with variable secondary air 
 
Figure 8. TFlame vs. TExit 
Using the data from Figure 7, the NOx reduction 
associated with the reduction in secondary air at various flame 
temperatures can be estimated. Figure 9 shows a plot 
corresponding to a 6% reduction in cooling air. Assuming that 
this reduction is linear then emissions reduction corresponding 
to 3.16% cooling flow reduction can be predicted. Now both the 
linear prediction and the measured data at 3.16% reduction can 
be compared as shown in Figure 9. It appears that the linear 
approximation is an excellent approximation at TExit higher than 
1800K. The deviation from linear behavior increases in the low 
temperature range. Nevertheless, the low temperature range is 
characterized with low NOx emissions since they vary 
exponentially with temperature. Also, at the low temperature 
side, the linear prediction underestimates the saving in 
emissions. This is a safe practice from an engineering 
perspective since it provides a quantification of the merit with 
margin.   
Figure 10 shows the NOx15 emissions reduction while 
varying secondary air (linear approximation) vs the reduction 
estimated using the NOx design curve. Typically, the problem 
under investigation is initiated when an existing combustion 
system needs to be improved. The existing system is 
characterized by what is called the NOx design curve. This curve 
is the black curve shown in Figure 6 and corresponds to 14% 
secondary air. This curve can be used to estimate the NOx 
reduction as a function of secondary air reduction since this air 
will represent an increase in the mixer air and hence a decrease 
in the flame temperature. For the problem under investigation, 
we have already measured the actual reduction in NOx 
emissions.  Both curves are plotted in Figure 10 and shows a 
comparison between the NOx reduction estimated from the NOx 
design curve and the actual reduction from measured data.  At 
the higher temperature range (more than 1800K where the linear 
approximation is accurate) the estimate using the NOx design 
curve over estimates the benefit of reducing the secondary air by 
~50%. This sheds light on the importance of evaluating the 
system performance experimentally before introduction to the 
engine to quantify the actual benefit in NOx emissions with 
reduction in cooling air.  Our data suggests a 50 % correction 
factor should be applied to the prediction from the NOx design 
curve. The problem appears to be straight forward and may not 
call for extensive testing and validation since the hardware is 
essentially the same and will be fired at a lower flame 
temperature. However, it is evident that the interaction between 
both flows is strong and will have a significant impact on the 
emissions. 
Figure 11 shows the impact of reducing the secondary 
air on CO emissions. It appears there is minimal impact at high 
flame temperatures. CO in this region of the curve is mainly due 
to CO2 dissociation. However, at lower temperatures, the CO 
emissions is reduced with a reduction in secondary air. This 
agrees well with the understanding that CO in this portion of the 
curve is mainly generated due to a quenching mechanism. This 
highlights the fact that manipulating secondary air can lead to 
improvements in both NOx and CO emissions. Typically, when 
one of these species increases the other is decreased. The reason 


--- Page 9 ---

 
 
 
9 
 
 
the CO improves at the low secondary air flows is due to the 
reduction of flame quenching. In other words, the reduction of 
secondary cooling air results in a reduction of the flame 
temperature needed to achieve the same combustor exit 
temperature. Also, the quenching air (the cooling air) was 
reduced. There are two competing effects and quantifying this is 
not straight forward. The quenching effect is dependent on flame 
flow interaction. To the authors knowledge, very limited success 
has been attained in capturing this through modelling techniques. 
The only possible accurate quantification method available today 
is to run the test and measure the impact. NOx is much better 
from a modeling perspective than CO.  
 
 
 
Figure 9. Percentage NOx reduction vs Tflame corresponding 
to secondary air percentage reduction 
 
 
Figure 10. NOx reduction vs Tflame corresponding to 1 
percent reduction in secondary air.  
 
 
Figure 11. Impact of secondary air reduction on CO emissions 
4.2 Extent of interaction between secondary air and 
the main flame and impact on acoustics 
The interaction between the secondary air and the mixer 
air is driving the behavior reported in this study. The 
thermocouples placed on the dome as well as the emissions rakes 
at the exit can help identify the extent of interaction. This section 
is only focused on understanding the extent of interaction 
between the main and the variable portion of the secondary air. 
Therefore, the data presented here is given at the same TFlame 
and not the same TExit (the exit combustor temperature is not 
fixed, but the flame temperature is fixed and the only variable is 
the secondary air). This is important because the flame is the 
main source of heat to the heat shield and we will be using the 
thermocouples response to identify the extent of upstream 
interaction.  
 Figure 12 shows a plot of the variation of the dome heat 
shield temperature as the secondary air is being increased while 
holding the flame temperature constant. The four TC’s shown 
here are located as described previously in Figure 4. The data 
shows that the secondary air major influence happens in the first 
quadrant and fades away as the middle plane of the combustor is 
reached. The interesting observation is the air is injected 25% 
downstream the dome structure, but it is circulated back to the 
dome by the main flow and the temperature drops as more air is 
being introduced. This behavior is because of the flow 
recirculation in the combustor. It appears that the interaction 
between the secondary air and the mixer flows influences the 
temperature distribution along the whole length of the combustor 
and not only downstream from the injection point. 
Figure 13 shows the combustor exit profile at a fixed 
flame temperature and while the secondary air is increased 6% 
(from 8% to 14%). Again, we are only focusing on the extent of 
interaction. It is evident that the secondary flow continues to 
interact along the combustor length and the interaction grows as 
the flow proceeds toward the exit. The growth occurs slightly 


--- Page 10 ---

 
 
 
10 
 
 
beyond the mid plane of the combustor as indicated by the 
change in the emissions profile.   
With this level of interaction of the secondary air with 
the main flame, it is important to study the impact on thermo 
acoustic instabilities. Marosky et. al discussed that the 
interaction between the panel air (similar to dome air in this 
study) and the main flow causes equivalence ratio fluctuations 
which may induce thermo-acoustic instabilities [12]. However, 
they did not run the test to confirm. Also, the flow field and 
physics of the combustion system is highly nonlinear such that 
no universal response dominates. If the question is will 
secondary cooling air cause thermo-acoustic instabilities? The 
right answer is it depends on what the secondary air is causing. 
Let us discuss what happened in this combustion system under 
investigation. 
Figures 14 and 15 show the impact of secondary air 
variation on the low-frequency (up to 1000Hz) and high-
frequency dynamics (1000-6000 Hz), respectively. The curves 
are plotted vs the same combustor exit temperature since the 
target of the curve is to show the impact of the redesign on 
dynamics levels. The high-frequency dynamics did not change. 
The low-frequency dynamics changed slightly for high levels of 
secondary flow. The change did not impact overall operability 
because the oscillations levels are small and not detrimental to 
performance. However, the change in low-frequency dynamics 
content is notable. At 1750K there is no change in the acoustics 
signature with varying secondary air. At higher temperatures the 
amplitude increased and at lower flame temperatures the 
amplitude decreased. It appears that the increase in flame 
temperature that is associated with the increase in secondary air 
drives more oscillations at the high side and more stable flame at 
the low side. The neutral point for this system is at 1750K.  
 
 
 
Figure 12. Impact of secondary air percentage increase on 
dome and heat shield temperature 
 
 
Figure 13. Impact of secondary air percentage increase on 
combustor exit NOx profile 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Impact of secondary air percentage variation on low 
frequency dynamics.  
 
Figure 15. Impact of secondary air percentage variation on 
high frequency dynamics.  


--- Page 11 ---

 
 
 
11 
 
 
4.3 Utilizing the secondary air to achieve emissions 
reduction rather than imposing a penalty 
In the previous sections it was shown that the reduction of 
the secondary air results in reduced NOx emissions. Also, for 
increased secondary flow (due to an increase in cooling 
requirements, for example) then there is a NOx penalty. In this 
section we will show that by appropriate handling of the cooling 
air distribution, one can reduce NOx emissions under some 
operating conditions. 
Most 
combustion 
systems 
use 
flame 
temperature 
nonuniformity to suppress thermo-acoustic instabilities. Hence, 
some flames run hotter than others and we refer to this as mixer 
flame temperature bias. As we discussed previously, the overall 
air and fuel in the engine will not change at a specific load, but 
the bias can be large (up to hundreds of degrees).  
This bias is illustrated in Figure 16. The figure shows the 
simple combustion system under investigation running in two 
modes based on mixer fuel flow bias. The first mode is 
essentially a mode where the burners are sent the same amount 
of fuel and hence, they have the same target flame temperature. 
In this case the target flame temperature is 1930K and the exit 
temperature is 1777K. The front portion of the combustor is 
referred to as the head-end. The combined air and fuel flowing 
through the mixer is summed together to provide a head-end 
temperature. Therefore, the first mode corresponds to a head-end 
temperature that is the same as each mixer flame temperature. 
Mode 2 corresponds to a bias in the mixer flame temperature. If 
we set one burner at 1875K then the second one must be 1986K 
to maintain the same head end temperature and consequently the 
same combustor exit temperature. This is a bias of 111K between 
both burners. Another way to look at this, is that there is a certain 
budget for the fuel and it can be divided any way among the 
mixers as long as operation is possible and emissions are 
acceptable. 
Figure 17 shows the emissions variation for the two modes 
of operation. This is repeated two more times at 3 % (11 %) and 
zero variable secondary air (8%). The curve is only to be used to 
compare the two points at the same secondary air fraction. Close 
to zero secondary flow, it is apparent that the emissions with 
flame bias is higher than the emissions with the uniform flames. 
This can be explained by NOx production being an exponential 
function of temperature. Hence, the increase in temperature on 
one side due to the bias will result in a NOx penalty.  
On the other hand, the 6% case shown in Figure 17 shows 
that NOx reduction can be achieved by releasing the secondary 
air at the hot portion of the flame. This is illustrated in Figure 16 
for the non-uniform flame mode. The implication of this to the 
combustor designer is that the release of the secondary or cooling 
air close to the hot flames will improve the system emissions and 
can be used to reduce NOx emissions. Therefore, the system can 
be designed intelligently with the knowledge of the expected 
flame bias and the proper handling of the secondary air.  The 
specific example shown here shows how the same combustion 
system emissions can be reduced from 9.25 ppm to 8.25 ppm just 
by handling the secondary air intelligently and without a penalty 
on acoustics. This is a transition of the same exact system from 
a low NOx to ultralow NOx system (ultra-low NOx stands for 
combustion systems running at < 9 ppm). The release of the 
cooing air close to the front end and deeper into the flame will 
always help NOx emissions. 
Figure 18 can be used to better explain why this reduction is 
achieved. The figure shows the NOx emissions profile at the 
combustor exit with a 111K temperature bias with and without 
6% secondary cooling air. The blue upper curve shows that most 
NOx generation is occurring at the right-hand side burner which 
is running 111K hotter than the left-hand side burner (this is aft 
looking forward as shown in Figure 4. One burner is on the left-
hand side and the other is on the right-hand side).  Discharging 
6% of the secondary air at this specific spot will bring the NOx 
emissions down because this is the hot spot where the NOx is 
generated. This curve is not at the same combustor exit 
temperature. It is at the same flame temperature. It is just being 
used here for illustrations and magnification of the phenomenon 
under discussion. Figure 17 shows the two points compared at 
the same exit temperature (the two points all the way to the right) 
with and without the temperature bias.  
 
Figure 16. Illustration of the bias in individual mixers flame 
temperature while maintaining the same combustor exit 
temperature at 6% secondary air injection.  
 
 
Figure 17. Impact of the secondary air on emissions in the 
presence of burner flame temperature bias  
     


--- Page 12 ---

 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
Figure 18. Impact of the secondary air on emissions in the 
presence of burner flame temperature bias  
5     CONCLUSIONS 
Cooling air and secondary flow interacts with the main mixer 
flows and this interaction was shown to impact both NOx and 
CO. Decreasing secondary air was shown to yield a NOx and CO 
benefit. The point of admission or release of the secondary air 
and the method will dictate the amount of saving. In this 
combustion system under investigation, the reduction of NOx 
measured per percent reduction in secondary air is about 7%. The 
variation is a function of the temperature, but this value provides 
an approximate level. Estimating the NOx benefit using the NOx 
design curve yields an estimate that is 2x higher than what is 
achievable in this case. If there was no interaction between the 
secondary air and the main air then the NOx reduction will 
follow the estimate from the NOx design curve. In other words, 
in this study, the secondary air was already quenching the flame 
and reducing NOx. The decrease in NOx associated with the 
decrease in secondary air appears to be linear at least within the 
boundaries of this study (14-8 % roughly in this study). The 
linear approximation is valid in the high temperature range 
which is typically the area of concern regarding NOx. There was 
limited impact on operability manifested in little to no impact on 
acoustics signature. The data shows that the interaction was not 
only from the injection point to the downstream portion, but the 
flow was carried to the dome structure through main flow 
recirculation. If the combustor is operating with a temperature 
bias, then the NOx can be improved by discharging the 
secondary air close to the hot flame.   It was demonstrated that 
the combustion system emissions can be reduced by directing the 
interaction between the secondary flow toward the hot portion of 
the flame. The results of this study are system dependent and it 
would be expected that some of the interactions between 
secondary air and the main combustion flows would vary among 
different combustor geometries. Nevertheless, the trends 
observed are expected to be similar for other configurations. 
6     REFRENCES 
 
[1] Leonard, G., and Correa, S., "NOx Formation in Premixed 
High-Pressure Lean Methane Flames," Proc. Fossil Fuel 
Combustion 
Symposium: 
13th 
Annual 
Energy-Sources 
Technology Conference and Exhibition, pp. 69-74. 
[2] Elkady, A. M., Herbon, J., Kalitan, D. M., Leonard, G., 
Akula, R., Karim, H., and Hadley, M., 2012, "Gas Turbine 
Emission Characteristics in Perfectly Premixed Combustion," 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 134(6). 
[3] Mohammad, B. S., Balasubramanyam, P., McManus, K., 
Ruszczyk, J., Elkady, A. M., and Mueller, M. A., "Combustion 
Dynamics Diagnostics and Mitigation on a Prototype Gas 
Turbine Combustor," Proc. ASME Turbo Expo 2012: Turbine 
Technical Conference and Exposition, pp. 383-389. 
[4] Elkady, A. M., Brand, A. R., Vandervort, C. L., and Evulet, 
A. T., "Exhaust Gas Recirculation Performance in Dry Low 
Emissions Combustors," Proc. ASME 2011 Turbo Expo: Turbine 
Technical Conference and Exposition, American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, pp. 1183-1192. 
[5] Graham, G., Zhuyin, R., Hendrik, F., Liuyan, L., Venkat, T., 
and Hasan, K., "Modeling CO With Flamelet-Generated 
Manifolds: Part 2 — Application," Proc. ASME Turbo Expo 
2012: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition, American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, pp. 1177-1184. 
[6] Karim, G. G., Zhuyin, R., Hendrik, F., Liuyan, L., Venkat, T., 
and Hasan, "Modeling CO With Flamelet-Generated Manifolds: 
Part 1—Flamelet Configuration," Proc. ASME Turbo Expo 
2012: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition, American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, pp. 1141-1151. 
[7] Bhargava, A., Kendrick, D. W., Colket, M. B., Sowa, W. A., 
Casleton, K. H., and Maloney, D. J., "Pressure Effect on NOx 
and CO Emissions in Industrial Gas Turbines," Proc. ASME 
Turbo Expo 2000: Power for Land, Sea, and AirV002T02A017. 
[8] Rutar, T., and Malte, P. C., 2002, "NOx Formation in High-
Pressure Jet-Stirred Reactors With Significance to Lean-
Premixed Combustion Turbines," Journal of Engineering for Gas 
Turbines and Power, 124(4), p. 776. 
[9] Biagioli, F., and Guthe, F., 2007, "Effect of pressure and fuel–
air unmixedness on NOx emissions from industrial gas turbine 
burners," Combustion and Flame, 151(1-2), pp. 274-288. 
[10] Rutar, T., Horning, D. C., Lee, J. C. Y., and Malte, P. C., 
"NOx Dependency on Residence Time and Inlet Temperature for 
Lean-Premixed Combustion in Jet-Stirred Reactors," Proc. 
ASME 1998 International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine 
Congress and ExhibitionV003T06A036. 
[11] Therkelsen, P., Werts, T., McDonell, V., and Samuelsen, S., 
2009, "Analysis of NOx Formation in a Hydrogen-Fueled Gas 
Turbine Engine," Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and 
Power, 131(3). 
[12] Marosky, A., Seidel, V., Bless, S., Sattelmayer, T., and 
Magni, F., 2012, "Impact of Cooling Air Injection on the Primary 
Combustion Zone of a Swirl Burner," Journal of Engineering for 
Gas Turbines and Power, 134(12). 
[13] 
Agency, 
E. 
P., 
"Method 
7e," 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-
08/documents/method_7e.pdf. 
 
