
--- Page 1 ---

J. F. Garrotte 
P. A. Denman 
A. P. Wray 
Department of Transport Technology, 
Loughborough University, 
Loughborough, Leics, United Kingdom 
P. Fry 
Combustion Department, Rolls Royce pic, 
Derby, United Kingdom 
Detailed Performance 
Comparison 
of a Dump and Short Faired 
Combustor Diffuser System 
A rectangular model simulating four sectors of a combustion chamber was used to 
compare the performance of a standard dump diffuser, of overall length 180 mm, 
with that of a faired design 25.5 mm shorter. The performance of each system was 
assessed in terms of total pressure loss and static pressure recovery between pre-
diffuser inlet and the annuli surrounding the flame tube. Since the program objective 
was to test design concepts only, no allowance was made for the presence of burner 
feed arms or flame tube support pins. In addition, tests were performed with relatively 
low levels of inlet turbulence and no wake mixing effects from upstream compressor 
blades. Relative to the dump design, the mass weighted total pressure loss to the 
outer and inner annuli was reduced by 30 and 40 percent, respectively, for the faired 
diffuser. Measurements around the flame tube head were used to identify regions 
of high loss within each system and account for the differences in performance. 
Within a dump diffuser the flow separates at prediffuser exit resulting in a free 
surface diffusion around the flame tube head and a recirculating flow in the dump 
cavity. This source of loss is eliminated in the faired system where the flow remains 
attached to the casings. Furthermore, the faired system exhibited similar velocity 
magnitudes and gradients around the combustor head despite its shorter length. 
Introduction 
One of the main objectives in aircraft engine design is to 
minimize weight. In the context of the combustor, this has led 
to the requirement for minimum length consistent with an 
acceptable total pressure loss and outlet temperature distri-
bution. Since reducing the combustor burning length is pro-
hibited by the need to meet pollution regulations, attention 
has therefore been focused on the diffuser system. 
The primary function of a gas turbine combustor diffuser 
system is to distribute air issuing from the compressor around 
the flame tube. In current advanced core engines this objective 
is usually met with dump diffuser systems, which incorporate 
a prediffuser upstream of a recirculating dump region. Al-
though such systems have relatively high losses, they are fa-
vored because of their inherent flow stability and insensitivity 
to manufacturing tolerances and thermal expansions. Such 
systems were initially investigated by Fishenden and Stevens 
[1] who monitored overall system performance while varying 
the prediffuser area ratio, dump gap, and mass-flow split to 
the inner and outer annuli. All tests were conducted with a 
flame tube that had a radial depth, expressed in terms of 
prediffuser inlet height {W/h0), of 3.5. It was concluded that 
the principal determinants of total pressure loss in such systems 
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute and presented at the 
38th International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exposition, Cin-
cinnati, Ohio, May 24-27, 1993. Manuscript received at ASME Headquarters 
March 17, 1993. Paper No. 93-GT-331. Associate Technical Editor: H. Lukas. 
are the amount of diffusion being attempted and the radius 
of curvature undertaken by the flow as it passes around the 
flame tube. This latter effect is a function of the size and shape 
of the flame tube and the dump gap. The more recent work 
of Young et al. [2], Stevens et al. [3], and Srinivasan et al. [4] 
illustrates the trend for flame tubes of increasing depth with 
values {W/h0) in excess of 4.0. This implies a significant in-
crease in the amount of turning and curvature that must be 
undertaken by the flow in the vicinity of the combustor head. 
Hence, although these modern systems have been optimized 
to produce an acceptable pressure loss in the shortest length 
possible, further reductions in length or increases in flame tube 
depth will result in relatively large increases in pressure loss. 
One possible method of maintaining system performance while 
achieving significant length reductions is therefore to define 
an alternative diffuser geometry. 
A facility has been built at Loughborough (Fig. 1) that allows 
diffusers of different geometries to be tested. All models are 
four burner sectors wide and of rectangular cross section. Thus, 
it should be noted that diffusion of the flow in the circum-
ferential direction present within annular systems is not sim-
ulated here. However, it is thought the relative performance 
of different diffusers can be accurately assessed while the rec-
tangular geometry allows a large number of designs to be tested 
relatively easily. This paper outlines results relating to a stand-
ard dump diffuser (Fig. 2a), which is typical of current engine 
design practice. Its performance is compared with a faired 
design, which is 25.5 mm shorter (Fig. 2b), this representing 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
JULY 1994, Vol. 116/517 
Copyright © 1994 by ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 2 ---

Air drawn from atmosphere 
Top plenum chamber 
(19.6m3) 
\ / 
Transition section 
Inlet section 
Test section 
Air expelled to atmosphere 
V 
Exhaust pipes 
CHZEI 
; / / 
Bottom plenum chamber 
y 
(2.2m3) 
V 
Centrifugal fan 
Exhaust system throttle 
Fig, 1 Test facility—airflow paths 
a 14 percent reduction of overall system length. The perform-
ance of these systems is assessed in terms of the total pressure 
loss and static pressure recovery between prediffuser inlet and 
the annuli surrounding the flame tube head. Detailed meas-
urements around the combustor head are also presented and 
used to identify the important processes and loss-generating 
mechanisms within both systems and thereby offer some ex-
planation for any observed differences in performance. 
Experimental Facility 
Although of rectangular cross section, for ease of under-
standing the facility is described using terminology associated 
with the annular system it is trying to simulate. Hence, rec-
tangular flow passages are described as annuli while at a given 
Fig. 2(a) 
Dump diffuser geometry 
All dimensions in mm 
Fig. 2(b) Faired diffuser geometry 
axial plane, locations are described in terms of radial and 
circumferential components. Furthermore, since the overall 
program objective was to investigate diffuser design concepts, 
all tests were performed without simulation of the burner feed 
arms, flame tube supports pins, and other detailed features 
that would be present within an operational system. 
The test facility was manufactured predominantly out of 
Perspex, its modular design incorporating an inlet section, test 
section, and three exhaust pipes. Air was drawn from atmos-
N o m e n c l a t u r e • 
B = 
CP = 
E = 
E0 = 
h0 = 
A, = 
K = 
L = 
M = 
hot-wire calibration coefficient 
n = 
static pressure recovery coeffi- 
p = 
cient 
pps = 
mean hot-wire voltage 
hot-wire voltage with no flow 
P = 
prediffuser inlet height 
q = 
prediffuser exit height 
R„ = 
button hook calibration factor 
r = 
diffuser overall length 
Mach number 
t = 
hot-wire calibration coefficient 
local mean static pressure 
local "pseudo" static pressure 
(Fig. 3) 
local mean total pressure 
dynamic head 
nondimensional annulus height 
radius relative to the center of 
curvature 
static temperature 
Ui = instantaneous velocity 
u = local mean velocity 
u' 
= fluctuating (rms) velocity com-
ponent 
a = kinetic energy flux coefficient 
X = total pressure loss coefficient 
p = density 
Superscripts 
= mass-weighted mean value 
= momentum mix mean value 
518/Vol. 116, JULY 1994 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 3 ---

phere into a plenum box (Fig. 1), located above the vertically 
mounted rig, prior to entering the inlet section and passing 
through the test rig. This air was then exhausted into a plenum 
box, below the facility, prior to being expelled to atmosphere. 
A centrifugal fan, driven by an 11 kW variable speed motor, 
was located in the exhaust system and provided the pressure 
rise required to draw air through the facility. 
The scale of the working section was such that diffuser 
dimensions were typical of those likely to be found within a 
large turbofan engine. For the standard dump geometry a 2.5 
deg outwardly canted prediffuser was incorporated of length 
58 mm, inlet height 29.16 mm, and an area ratio of 1.45 (Fig. 
2a). This was designed according to the current rules for dif-
fusers [6] and projected into the dump cavity. The gap between 
prediffuser exit and the combustor (i.e., dump gap D/h{) was 
approximately 1.0, with the flame tube head being canted 
outward by 9 deg. Head porosity was provided by holes of 
diameter 50 mm, the flow then passing through the cowl back 
plate prior to entering the combustor primary zone. The total 
width of the rig was 360 mm and consisted of four burner 
sectors, each sector containing a cowl hole. However, meas-
urements were limited to the central sector, 90 mm wide, where 
the effects due to the presence of the sidewalls were at a min-
imum. The faired system (Fig. 2b) was 25.5 mm shorter, which 
was achieved by moving the flame tube closer to prediffuser 
inlet. Hence, the amount of overall diffusion between the inlet 
plane and the annuli surrounding the flame tube was the same 
for both designs. In addition, liners were attached to alter the 
profile of the inner and outer casings while also modifying the 
prediffuser geometry. It should also be noted that the diffuser 
systems incorporated slight variations in flame tube head ge-
ometry. In the dump system, sharp edged "lips" or shoulders 
on the combustor at entry to the outer and inner annuli re-
flected current engine hardware, their presence being due to 
flame tube manufacturing techniques. These were found to 
have virtually no effect on the performance of the dump system 
[5], and were not present for the tests on the faired system. 
All measurements were obtained with low levels (Tu < 1 per-
cent) of inlet turbulence and in the absence of compressor 
blade wakes. The distribution of mass flow to the flame tube, 
inner and outer annuli was controlled by throttles located in 
the downstream exhaust pipes. In addition to these three in-
dividually controllable flow paths, a further throttle in the 
exhaust system was used to control the total mass flow passing 
through the test rig. The facility was operated at a constant 
prediffuser inlet Mach number of 0.14, which corresponded 
to a Reynolds number based on the prediffuser inlet hydraulic 
diameter of 1.8 x 105. The mass flow split around the flame 
tube head was nominally set to 
Upstream facing measurement 
Downstream facing measurement 
(probe rotated through 180°) 
Inner annulus 
Flame tube 
Outer annulus 
43.1 percent 
14.9 percent 
42.0 percent 
This mass flow split was maintained within ±0.3 percent 
of these values, thereby ensuring that the amount of flow 
diffusion to the outer and inner annuli was the same in all 
tests. 
Instrumentation and Data Acquisition 
The quantitative performance was mainly assessed using 
"button hook" pitot probes (Fig. 3), which could be inserted 
into the facility through holes of the same approximate di-
ameter as that of the probe stem. Radial movement of each 
probe was controlled by a stepper motor, whereas a probe was 
circumferentially located either through discrete holes or small 
slots within which the probe and an associated blanking plate 
could slide. At any point in the flow the "button hook" pitot 
probes were used to obtain static as well as total pressures and 
this information was complemented by numerous wall static 
_^ 
0Tip = 0.8mm 
P.P 
I 
P.P 
0Stem = 2.7mm 
\ 
Calibration factor K 
<P-P« 
(P-p). 
Fig. 3 Button hook probe operation 
tappings located around the flame tube head and within the 
outer and inner annuli. In addition, constant temperature ane-
mometry using a single hot-wire probe (Dantec type 55P11) 
was also used to give information on the turbulence levels 
within each diffuser system. 
The overall performance of each system was assessed from 
measurements made at prediffuser inlet (XI) and the traverse 
planes farthest downstream within the outer and inner annuli 
(X6, X8). The axial location of these latter planes coincided 
with that of the primary port admission holes that would be 
present in engine hardware. At these planes some 20 data points 
were recorded for each radial traverse, this being repeated at 
21 circumferential locations spaced over the 90 mm between 
burners. Measurements were also made at traverse planes X4 
to X4c in order to indicate the nature of the flow passing 
around the flame tube head. However, in this case measure-
ments were restricted to a single circumferential position lo-
cated midway between burners, with approximately 20 data 
points being collected at each traverse plane. 
All pressures were measured using transducers, which pro-
duced an analogue output signal proportional to the pressure 
measured. These voltage signals were digitized using an ana-
logue to digital convertor (ADC), with the 5 second averaging 
of each signal being based on 250 samples at intervals of 20 
milliseconds. Hot-wire voltage signals from a Dantec CTA 
56C17 bridge circuit were similarly recorded, although these 
values were based on a 10 second averaging of the data. 
Data Reduction 
The curvature of flow around the flame tube head means 
that conditions in this region could not be defined using a pitot 
probe and wall static tapping. Instead, the technique outlined 
by Fry [7] was adopted in which the "button hook" probe, 
as well as being used as a conventional pitot probe, was also 
used to obtain local static pressure within the flow field. By 
recording the upstream (total) pressure and the value obtained 
when the "button hook" probe was rotated through 180 deg, 
into the downstream direction, the static pressure could be 
deduced with the aid of a suitable calibration. The calibration 
factor was assumed constant for a given probe and was defined 
as: 
where P is the total pressure of the flow measured by the probe 
when facing upstream, pps is the "pseudo" static pressure 
recorded by the probe when pointing downstream, and p is 
the flow true static pressure (Fig. 3). Since the probe was 
calibrated prior to its use on the test rig, at a given point in 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
JULY 1994, Vol. 116/519 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 4 ---

the flow the true static pressure could be calculated from the 
measured values of P and pps. Calibration of each probe was 
performed in a low-turbulence calibration facility for which 
the conditions at the working section could be accurately de-
fined. Over the speed range of 10 m/s to 40 m/s the values of 
K were within ± 1 percent of the mean value. 
Calibration of each single hot-wire was based on the law: 
E2-El 
= Bu" 
(2) 
where E is the measured voltage and E0 the "wind off" voltage 
of a hot wire with calibration coefficients B and n. Turbulence 
intensity was calculated using the formula: 
m 
u 
t 
Tu = — = —r 
u 
E2 
2E 
(3) 
where -Erms is the root mean square of the fluctuating voltage 
component. The fluctuating (rms) velocity («') was calculated 
from the turbulence intensity and the mean velocity at that 
point in the flow field. 
At any measurement plane the mass flow rate and mean 
velocity were defined as: 
m = 
\pudA=puA 
(4) 
while spatially averaged values of total and static pressure at 
each plane were derived using both mass-weighted and mo-
mentum mix techniques [8]. 
Mass Weighting 
P = — 
PG?W = — 
\PpudA 
m J 
pu J 
Energy Flux: 
\ 44 
^ 
udA = mCpt( 1 + X ^ i M2j 
(9) 
The three unknowns (p, M, t) can be obtained using these 
three equations, which allows the momentum mix total pres-
sure to be calculated from compressible flow relationships. It 
should be noted that in this paper, these pressures are mainly 
used to assess the-loss in the outer and inner annuli that is 
associated with the mixing out of the highly distorted profile 
in these regions. 
Changes in the spatially averaged pressures between plane 
"b" and an upstream plane " a " within each diffuser system 
are expressed in terms of the total pressure loss (X) and static 
pressure recovery (Cp) coefficients: 
P.-Pb 
K-b~~ 
r 
Pb-Pa 
^Pa-b~~ p 
1 
fl 
(10) 
Pa-Pa 
" " - " 
t'a-Pa 
Note that these coefficients can be based on either mass-
weighted or momentum mix spatially averaged pressures. 
Information concerning the radial distribution of flow prop-
erties at a measurement plane is given in terms of pitch-av-
eraged profiles, which are derived by averaging the relevant 
flow parameter in the circumferential direction. At a specific 
annulus height, a pitch-averaged velocity therefore represents 
the area-weighted mean value of the velocities measured at 
that height and is nondimensionalized by the overall mean 
velocity for that traverse plane. Around the flame tube head, 
the total pressure distributions are nondimensionalized with 
respect to the mass-weighted total pressure at that plane and 
the mass-weighted total and static pressures for the short faired 
design at plane X8. 
\pdm=^i 
\ppudA 
(5) 
In addition, a kinetic energy flux coefficient (a) is defined 
that compares the kinetic energy flux of the measured velocity 
profile with that of a uniform profile with similar mass flow: 
1 u pudA 
u2puA 
(6) 
so that 
P-p 
+ a-pu 
=p + l 
It should be noted that it is the pressures derived from this 
technique that are used to define the performance of each 
diffuser system. 
Momentum Mix. 
The spatially averaged total and static 
pressures obtained from this method are the values that would 
be recorded if a nonuniform flow mixed out to uniformity in 
a duct of constant area and in the absence of heat transfer 
and wall friction. Hence, the momentum mix total pressure is 
always lower than the mass-weighted value since it includes 
the pressure loss associated with the mixing out of the non-
uniform profile. As outlined by Livesey and Hugh [8], the 
calculation of the equivalent uniform stream is based on con-
tinuity of mass, momentum, and energy flux. 
Momentum: 
Mass: 
\p(l+yM2)dA 
=pA(l+yM2) 
^-udA^pMA 
IX. 
Rt 
F 
-\}Rt 
(7) 
(8) 
Estimate of Experimental Errors 
Mass-weighted pressures at the traverse plane XI, X6, and 
X8 were repeatable to better than ±1 mm H 20, a variation 
of less than ± 1 percent of the inlet dynamic head. This results 
in the derived total pressure loss and static pressure rise coef-
ficients relating to overall diffuser performance being repeat-
able to better than ±0.007 of a given value. 
Because of flow curvature, turbulence levels, and the shape 
of the velocity profiles, it is extremely difficult to obtain an 
accurate definition of the flow parameters around the flame 
tube head. For example, the maximum velocities derived from 
the "button hook" probes at planes X4 to X4c were consist-
ently greater, by up to 8 percent, than the values indicated by 
the hot-wire data. The relatively poor resolution of these data 
should therefore be considered when viewing the results. Based 
on these differences in velocity it has been estimated that the 
spatially averaged pressures in this region are only repeatable 
to within ±4 mm H 20, resulting in loss coefficients being 
accurate to within ±0.03 of a given value. However, as will 
be subsequently shown using the measured pressure values 
obtained within each diffuser, it is thought the accuracy of 
these data is better than this estimate. 
One problem associated with facilities that only simulate 
sectors of a fully annular flow field is that of the growth of 
boundary layers on each sidewall. Due to the diffusing nature 
of the flow field this is of particular significance in the present 
investigation and leads to the migration of fluid toward the 
center of the rig. Detailed measurements of these sidewall 
boundary layers indicated that at planes X8 and X6 up to 10 
percent more flow was passing through the central burner 
sector, where diffuser performance was assessed, due to this 
effect. This reduces the amount of diffusion undertaken by 
the flow in the central measurement region, which will lead to 
errors in the absolute values of the performance parameters. 
However, measurements indicated the sidewall boundary layer 
effect was the same for each diffuser geometry tested therefore 
520/Vol. 116, JULY 1994 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 5 ---

_u_ 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
-
- f 
-
i 
I 
i 
r 
I
I 
i 
I 
Inlet conditions : P = 1255.2 N/m2 
p = 
-66.0 N/m2 
u = 
45.8 m/s 
a = 
1.04 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
1 
-
Y 
\ 
-
-
1 
0.0 
0.2 
Inner Casing 
0.4 
0.6 
Rn 
0.8 
1.0 
Outer casing 
u 
1.4 
1.2 
1 0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
-
1 
I 
-
-
i 
i 
i 
i 
^ - 9 - ^ . 
/T^^ 
• 
Dump diffuser 
V 
Short faired 
i 
i 
i 
i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
*=®a*—a 
ci n 
ir~l 
1"—«-~#__£—^ 
i 
i 
i 
i 
I 
-
^ ^ 
\ 
-
-
i 
0.0 
0.2 
Flame tube 
Fig. 4 
Pitch-averaged velocity profile—diffuser inlet (X1) 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
Inner Casing 
Rn 
Fig. 5 
Pitch-averaged velocity profiles—inner annulus (X8) 
Table 1 Overall diffuser performance data (mass weighted) 
Outer annulus: 
Inner annulus: 
Flux coefficients: 
Dump diffuser 
^ _ 6 
= 0.318 
C p l . 6 = 0.469 
M_8 = 0-302 
Cpi. 8= 0.454 
aj 
= 1.04 
a 6 
= 1.09 
a 8 
= 1.02 
Faired diffuser 
^!_6 = 0.221 (-30%) 
C p l. 6 = 0.519 
M_8 = 0.181(-40%) 
C p l. 8= 0.535 
a [ 
= 1.04 
a 6 
= 1.26 
a 8 
= 1.04 
allowing the relative performance of each system to be eval-
uated. 
Results and Discussion 
Inlet Conditions. Tests were performed with a clean up-
stream geometry resulting in relatively thin boundary layers 
(Fig. 4) at prediffuser inlet with no simulated compressor blade 
wakes. Turbulence intensity was less than 1 percent in the 
midpassage region. Stevens et al. [9] have already indicated 
the favorable mixing effects on diffuser boundary layers that 
can be produced when blade wakes are present. Within ex-
perimental error these inlet conditions were the same for the 
two geometries tested. 
Overall System Performances. For the standard dump de-
sign, the mass-weighted total pressure loss (X) to the outer (X6) 
and inner (X8) annuli was 0.318 and 0.302, respectively (Table 
1). Allowing for differences in the geometry tested, these values 
are thought to be in reasonable agreement with previous results. 
For example, with no head porosity and a smaller flame tube 
depth (W/h0 = 3.5) Fishenden and Stevens [1] recorded loss 
values to each annulus of 0.24. In contrast, on a deeper flame 
tube (W/h0 = 5.5) but at a larger dump gap (D/h \ = 1.1) Stevens 
et al. [31] recorded losses of 0.336 (outer) and 0.313 (inner). 
In these latter tests, however, the losses are thought to be 
relatively low, since performance was not evaluated from area 
traverses, but at a single circumferential location midway be-
tween burners. 
Results from the faired diffuser show a significant reduction 
in total pressure loss and an associated improvement in static 
pressure recovery relative to the dump system (Table 1). For 
the flow passing to the outer annulus the mass-weighted pres-
sure loss was reduced by 30 percent while a 40 percent loss 
reduction was observed for the inner annulus flow. This im-
provement in performance is, of course, in addition to the 
length reduction of 25.5 mm offered by the short faired design. 
For a dump diffuser this length reduction would have been 
obtained by an effective change in the dump gap (D/h\) from 
1.03 to 0.43. On tests with a flame tube of relatively small 
depth {W/h0 = 3.5), Fishenden and Stevens [1] observed a 15 
percent loss increase for a dump gap reduction of this mag-
nitude. However, Srinivasan et al. [4] using a flame tube of 
more comparable geometry (W/h0 = AA) indicated loss in-
creases of between 30 and 60 percent depending on mass flow 
split. 
The radial distribution of fluid within the outer and inner 
annuli of each diffuser system is shown by the pitch-averaged 
velocity profiles at the measurement planes (X6, X8). For both 
diffusers, the flow within the inner annulus appears to be 
relatively well mixed out (Fig. 5) with virtually no difference 
between the two systems. However, this is not the case within 
the outer annulus, where the profiles show a noticeable bias 
toward the flame tube (Fig. 6). Furthermore, the lower loss 
associated with the faired system has resulted in a more dis-
torted profile in this region, and this is also confirmed by the 
kinetic energy flux coefficients (Table 1). It could be argued 
that this profile reflects an inherent loss that has yet to be 
realized, so that a relatively high pressure loss will occur within 
the outer annulus, downstream of plane X6, as the more dis-
torted profile mixes out. However, estimates based on the 
momentum mix values indicate this could only result in the 
loss reduction for the faired diffuser falling from 30 to 27 
percent. 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
JULY 1994, Vol. 116/521 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 6 ---

u 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
00 
/*X ' 
' 
' 
D 
Dump diffuser 
V 
Short faired 
i 
i 
i 
i 
1 
I
I 
1 
T 
• 
-
x\ 
\ 
N>/ 
\ 
-
-
-
i 
< 
i 
i 
i 
0.0 
Flame tube 
0.2 
0.4 
Rn 
0.8 
1.0 
Outer casing 
Fig. 6 Pitch-averaged velocity profiles—outer annulus (X6) 
Table 2 
Mass weighted : 
Momentum mix : 
Flame tube head pressure loss data 
Dump diffuser 
A, 2 =0.03 (10%) 
^,_4 =0.09 (30%) 
^i-4a = 0-15 (50%) 
X,_4b = 0.21 (70%) 
Xj_4 =0.26 (87%) 
X]_8 =0.30 (100%) 
h-4 
=0.15 (48%) 
A,_4a = 0.22 (71%) 
A,_4b = 0.26 (84%) 
A,_4C = 0.30 (97%) 
Ai-8 =0.31 (100%) 
Faired diffuser 
Xj_4 =0.01 (5.%) 
Xj 4a = 0.06 (30%) 
V 4 b = 0.10 (50%) 
>^i-4c = 0.17 (85%) 
V s = 0-20 doo%) 
^!_4 =0.05 (25%) 
A!_4a = 0.12 (60%) 
X!_4b = 0.16 (80%) 
A,_4c = 0.19 (95%) 
X]_8 =0.20 (100%) 
Detailed Diffuser Performances. 
Using a hot wire and but-
ton hook probe, attempts have been made to define the flow 
field around the flame tube head of each diffuser system and 
thereby account for differences in their overall performance. 
Measurements were restricted to the rig centerline, midway 
between cowl holes, and concentrated on the inner annulus 
flow, which exhibited the greatest differences in loss. Up to 
six planes were traversed within each system, although for 
reasons of brevity only a limited number of the measured 
distributions are presented here. It should also be noted that 
in the dump diffuser, no attempt was made to define the 
recirculating flow field within the dump cavity. Hence, for this 
system spatially averaged pressure values at each plane (Table 
2) were only evaluated for the flow passing directly into the 
downstream annulus. The streamline dividing the mainstream 
and recirculating flow was defined as that which gave the 
required mass flow upon integration of the velocity profile 
between this location and the flame tube surface. 
In the past, very few measurements have been made on the 
flow field around a flame tube head due to the difficulty of 
making accurate measurements in such regions. Concern has 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 - 5 
0.0 
D 
mi 
V 
• 
' 
Dump 
Dump 
Faired 
Faired 
Mass weighted 
Momentum mi* 
Mass weighted 
loss 
loss 
loss 
Momentum mix loss 
<L 
E 
3 
X X 
m 
<u <u 
Q-< 
' D - 
D J 
| ' L 
B 
• / 
X 
I 
20mm 
Distance along streamline 
Fig. 7 Pressure loss (X) through each diffuser system 
also been expressed as to the quality of data obtained from 
this investigation, since differences in velocity of up to 8 percent 
were recorded between the hot wire and button hook probes. 
However, the mass-weighted and momentum mix pressure data 
for each plane (Table 2) appear to correlate reasonably well 
and agree with the measurements of relatively high accuracy 
at plane X8. This has been expressed graphically in terms of 
the position of each plane within the dump and faired systems 
(Fig. 7), their location being defined as the intersection point 
along a streamline passing down the center of the prediffuser 
and through the maximum velocity points around the flame 
tube head. It can be seen that both the mass-weighted and 
momentum mix pressure loss data lie on reasonably smooth 
curves with no significant discontinuities. This correlation of 
the data between planes therefore gives some degree of con-
fidence in the pressure measurements and of the loss values 
quoted for each station. 
Dump Diffuser. 
For the dump system approximately 10 
percent of the mass-weighted total pressure loss (A1_2 = 0.03) 
occurs within the prediffuser and is confined to the fluid within 
the boundary layers adjacent to each casing. At prediffuser 
exit the flow then separates and rolls up to form a recirculation 
zone in the dump cavity. The size of this region is indicated 
by the velocity profile at plane X4 (Fig. 8a), with reattachment 
of the flow to the inner casing occurring in the region of plane 
X4c (Fig. 8b). This vortex in the dump cavity bounds the 
mainstream flow, which is discharged into the dump region 
and impinges on the flame tube head. 
At plane X4 (Fig. 8«), the high-velocity region close to the 
flame tube surface indicates acceleration of the flow away from 
the stagnation point, with velocities in excess of 40 m/s being 
recorded. This acceleration continues around the flame tube 
head with the maximum velocity occurring in the vicinity of 
plane X4b. However, at greater distances from the surface, 
the velocity decreases rapidly, producing a highly sheared pro-
file with kinetic energy flux coefficients in excess of 1.7. The 
distorted profile is mainly associated with the curvature of the 
flow that is required in order for it to pass around the flame 
tube head. Since flow curvature is still present at plane X4c 
the profile is still highly sheared (Fig. 8b), but downstream of 
this location the turning is complete with the flow entering the 
inner annulus. Comparison of the velocity distributions at 
planes X4c and X8 indicate a rapid mixing out of the profile 
in this region. 
The measured fluctuating velocities were recorded with a 
522/Vol. 116, JULY 1994 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 7 ---

"l~ 
r—-i——r— 1 
p-—p™™^ 
r — r - r 
Recircularion region (Dump) y 
u (m/s) 
a 
Dump diffuser 
K 
Short faired 
Recirculation region (Dump) 4 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Distance from flame tube (mm) 
60 
U (m/s) 
Fig. 8(a) 
Velocity profiles-—plane X4 
—i 
1 
1 
1 
i 
1 
1 
1 
r 
u (m/s) 
• 
Dump diffuser 
x 
Short faired 
_l 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
1 
1_ 
10 
20 
30 
40 
*- Distance from flame tube (mm) 
50 
Fig. 8(b) Velocity profiles—plane X4c 
hot wire, which was sensitive to the components both parallel 
and perpendicular to the flame tube head but not to the com-
ponent in the circumferential direction. These velocities are 
therefore thought to be a good indication of the turbulent 
kinetic energy levels and at plane X4 (Fig. 8a) it can be seen 
that, as expected, this corresponds to the region of highly 
sheared flow. This continues to be the case around the flame 
10 
u' (m/s) 
5 
0 
4<f 
30 
U (m/s) 
20 
10 
D 
Dump diffuser 
x 
Short faired 
0 I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
L-
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
*" Distance from flame tube (mm) 
Fig. 8(c) 
Velocity profiles—plane X8 
tube head, with the turbulent energy levels increasing steadily 
to reach a maximum value at plane X4c (Fig. 8b). In addition, 
the growth of the boundary layer on the flame tube head also 
produces turbulent flow, which can be observed at this plane. 
These high turbulence levels then assist in the rapid mixing out 
of the velocity profile between plane X4c and X8. 
Since the turbulent energy is extracted from the mean flow 
there is a good correlation between regions of high turbulence 
and pressure loss. For example, approximately 30 percent of 
the system loss has occurred by plane X4, but the measured 
pressure levels close to the flame tube (1 mm-8 mm) are vir-
tually the same as the maximum pressures recorded at predif-
fuser inlet (Fig. 9a). Hence, at this plane the loss is not associated 
with this high-velocity fluid but with the shear layer farther 
away from the surface. The fluid in this shear layer continues 
to exhibit large pressure losses farther around the head, with 
over 50 percent of the total system loss being generated within 
the relatively small region between plane X4 and X4c (Table 
2). This region of sheared flow and relatively high pressure 
loss is thought to be associated with two important loss gen-
erating mechanisms: 
(/) 
Dump loss: Energy has to be extracted from the main-
stream flow passing through the diffuser in order to drive the 
recirculating flow in the dump cavity. This energy is extracted 
from the flow adjacent to the recirculation region, thereby 
increasing local velocity gradients and accounting for some of 
.the observed turbulence and pressure loss. 
(Ji) Turning loss: As already observed, a heavily distorted 
velocity profile is observed as the flow is deflected around the 
flame tube head. This sheared flow must lead to the production 
of turbulent kinetic energy. However, as outlined by Fishenden 
and Stevens [1] this generation process will be significantly 
enhanced by the effects of streamline curvature. This is due 
to the unstable nature of a turbulent flow when the product 
of the local velocity and radius of curvature (ur) decreases with 
increasing radius of curvature (r). It can be seen that, apart 
from the boundary layer close to the flame tube head, the bulk 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
JULY 1994, Vol. 116/523 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 8 ---

1.4 
P-P 
-0.2 
-1.8 
D 
Dump diffuser - Engine rep. flame tube head 
x 
Short faired - Outer casing trip.standard head 
P = 996.7 N/m 
p = 678.8 
N/m2 
Recirculation region (Dump) I 
_i 
i 
i 
i _ 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
—s-Distance from flame tube (mm) 
Fig. 9(a) Total pressure profiles—plane X4 
1.4 
P - P 
P - P 
-1.8 
P = 996.7 N/m 
p = 678.8 N/m2 
Dump diffuser - Engine rep. flame tube head 
Short faired - Outer casing trip.standard head 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
-Distance from flame tube (mm) 
Fig. 9(b) Total pressure profiles—plane X4c 
1.4 
1.0 
0.6 
P - P 
P - p 
-0.2 
-1.0 
-1.4 
60 
P = 996.7 
N/m 
p = 678.8 
N/m 2 
D 
Dump diffuser - Engine rep. flame tube head 
x 
Short faired - Outer casing trip.standard head 
-1.8 I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
•Distance from flame tube (mm) 
Fig. 9(c) Total pressure profiles—plane X8 
of the profile is unstable and will result in a significant en-
hancement of turbulent energy production. 
Downstream of plane X4c a further loss in total pressure of 
approximately 10 to 15 percent occurs, with the large amounts 
of mixing in this region also producing a more uniform pressure 
distribution at X8. However, it can also be seen that between 
these planes virtually no change is observed in the levels of 
momentum mix total pressure (Table 2). Hence, the mass-
weighted total pressure loss in this region is associated with 
the mixing out of the distorted profile that was observed at 
plane X4c and which was generated by the upstream turning 
of the flow. 
Faired System. 
The faired system has no data available at 
plane X2 (prediffuser exit), but the total pressure loss up to 
plane X4 (X!_4 = 0.01) is significantly less than that observed 
for the dump system (Xi_4 = 0.09). However, it should be re-
membered that within each diffuser system the geometry and 
flow conditions upstream of plane X4 are extremely different. 
The faired system incorporates a higher area ratio prediffuser, 
which may lower the dynamic head at prediffuser exit and 
thereby reduce losses around the combustor head. But also to 
be expected with this change in prediffuser area ratio is an 
increase in loss associated with this component. However, com-
parison of the dump prediffuser loss (Xi_2 = 0.03) with the 
faired system measurement at plane X4 (X!_4 = 0.01) indicates 
the reverse effect. This is thought to be due to the flame tube 
influence on the upstream flow, which, as outlined by Stevens 
et al. [3], increases the static pressure at the center of a pre-
diffuser passage while reducing the adverse pressure gradient 
along each casing. In this way prediffuser performance can be 
improved due to the lower maximum velocities in the passage 
center and the thinner boundary layers. For the faired system 
524 /Vol. 116, JULY 1994 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 9 ---

the closer proximity of the flame tube, due to its 25.5 mm 
movement toward the inlet plane, is therefore thought re-
sponsible for the reduction in prediffuser total pressure loss. 
At exit from the prediffuser the close proximity of the flame 
tube along with the contoured casing profile avoids flow sep-
aration within the faired system. In fact, midway between cowl 
holes the flow initially undergoes a modest acceleration, which 
will further minimize pressure loss, prior to undergoing a con-
trolled diffusion around the combustor head. This preturning 
of the flow may reduce local rates of curvature in this region, 
while the velocity profiles at plane X4 (Fig. 8a) show the elim-
ination of the large dump recirculation within the faired sys-
tem. A significant reduction in pressure loss will therefore 
occur since no energy is being extracted to drive the recircu-
lating flow within the dump cavity. Comparison of the total 
pressure distributions at this plane (Fig. 9a) shows the reduction 
in mass-weighted pressure loss at plane X4 is associated with 
the flow between 9 mm and 15 mm from the flame tube surface. 
However, this difference in pressure loss is not reflected by 
the measured overall levels of fluctuating velocity and hence 
turbulent energy at this location (Fig. 8a). It is therefore thought 
that a significant proportion of the turbulent energy generated 
within the dump diffuser is transported into the recirculation 
region, which is not defined in the results presented here. 
Approximately 80 percent of the total loss within the faired 
system occurs between planes X4 and X4c (Table 2), and it is 
in this region where flow turning and streamline curvature 
effects are dominant. However, the absolute loss value in this 
region (AX = 0.16) is virtually the same as that recorded for 
the dump diffuser (AX = 0.17). It has already been noted that 
reducing the dump diffuser length by 25.5 mm would signif-
icantly increase the system loss and this would be associated 
with higher velocities and steeper velocity gradients around the 
flame tube head. However, despite the shorter length of the 
faired system, at plane X4 the velocity profiles are remarkably 
similar to that of the longer dump diffuser (Fig. 8a). This 
continues to be the case farther downstream at plane X4c (Fig. 
8b), where the fluctuating velocities are also reduced and the 
difference in pressure loss between the two systems is more 
apparent (Fig. 9b). The similarity of the velocity profiles around 
the flame tube head is also confirmed by the previous diagram 
(Fig. 7), which showed the mass-weighted and momentum mix 
pressures at each plane. The difference between these curves 
reflects the total pressure loss due to the distorted velocity 
profiles mixing out and is seen to be remarkably similar for 
each design. Thus, in addition to eliminating the energy loss 
required to maintain the recirculation within the dump cavity, 
it appears that preturning the flow at prediffuser exit and 
keeping it attached to the inner casing helps reduce the velocity 
magnitudes and gradients around the flame tube head. In this 
way, relative to the dump design, a length reduction of 25.5 
mm has been achieved for the faired system without increasing 
the loss between planes X4 and X4c. 
A further mass-weighted pressure loss (AX = 0.03) occurs 
between planes X4c and X8 (Table 2). However, as was also 
the case for the dump system, the momentum mix total pres-
sures are virtually constant in this region, and so this loss is 
mainly associated with the mixing out of the distorted profile 
that was generated around the flame tube head. The fact that 
this profile appears not to be as well mixed out in the faired 
system is thought to be due to the lower upstream turbulence 
levels. 
Stability of the Faired System. Although the dump diffuser 
system has always exhibited relatively high losses, its use has 
been widespread due to its inherent flow stability and insen-
sitivity to manufacturing tolerances and thermal expansions. 
In contrast the faired system can be unstable, and this was 
illustrated in the present investigation by reducing the amount 
of air passing down the outer and inner annuli by increasing 
the flame tube mass flow. This off-design-point operation in-
creased the amount of flow diffusion being attempted by the 
flow passing to each annulus and resulted in a flow separation 
that had no clearly defined location. This led to an instability 
with the flow switching between the inner and outer annuli 
and would have been an unacceptable occurrence under op-
erational conditions [5]. In contrast the dump system has a 
clearly defined separation point at prediffuser exit and allows 
stable operation over a wide range of conditions. However, 
with the trend for flame tubes of greater depth and diffusers 
of shorter length so the difference in total pressure loss and 
static pressure recovery between the two systems will to con-
tinue to grow. It is thought the present results merely reflect 
this trend and so a point may be reached where the potential 
gains are sufficient to merit the use of a faired system so long 
as the instability problems can be addressed. Alternatively a 
hybrid design may be possible that offers some of the per-
formance improvements of a faired system but that maintains 
the stability characteristics of a dump diffuser. 
Conclusions 
The performance of a standard dump diffuser system has 
been investigated and compared with a faired design that was 
25.5 mm shorter. The following conclusions have been drawn: 
0 The mass-weighted total pressure loss coefficients (X) 
between prediffuser inlet and the inner and outer annuli were 
reduced by 40 percent (inner) and 30 percent (outer) for the 
faired system. This improvement in overall performance is in 
addition to the 25.5 mm length reduction offered by this sys-
tem. 
9 In the dump diffuser the flow separated at prediffuser 
exit and reattached to the inner casing at entry to the inner 
annulus. However, this recirculation loss was eliminated in the 
faired system with the flow remaining attached to the casing. 
9 Highly sheared velocity profiles were observed around 
the flame tube head in both systems due to the deflection and 
flow curvature in this region. These profiles were virtually the 
same within each system, despite the shorter length of the faired 
diffuser. 
9 The mass-weighted pressure loss within the inner annulus 
is associated with the mixing out of the profile generated around 
the flame tube head. 
9 Relative to the dump diffuser, the faired system is more 
prone to aerodynamic instabilities. Any reduction in pressure 
loss by using a faired geometry can therefore only be achieved 
after a full investigation of system stability. 
This work is the subject of a continuing investigation in-
volving both experimental measurements and computational 
predictions. The aim is to optimize diffuser geometries for a 
given length, combustor depth, head shape, etc. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by Rolls Royce, Derby, Contract 
Nos. PVF1-250DM. The authors would also like to express 
their appreciation to Messrs. R. Marson, D. Glover, and L. 
Monk for their assistance in the numerous modifications in-
corporated into the test rig. 
References 
1 Fishenden, C. R., and Stevens, S. J., "Performance of Annular Combustor 
Dump Diffusers," Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 14, No. 1, Jan. 1977. 
2 Young, K. F., Wray, A. P., and Stevens, S. J., "An Integrated Approach 
to the Design of Compressor OGVs and Combustor Pre-diffusers," Dept. of 
Transport Technology, Report No. TT89R03, Loughborough University, 1989. 
3 Stevens, S. J., Wray, A. P., and Price, P. D., "The Aerodynamic Per-
formance of a Modern Vaporising Combustor Dump Diffuser," Paper No. 
AIAA-88-3273, 1988. 
4 Srinivasan, R., Freeman, G., and Grahmann, J., and Coleman, E., "Par-
ametric Evaluation of the Aerodynamic Performance of an Annular Combustor-
Diffuser System," Paper No. AIAA-90-2163, July 1990. 
5 Carrotte, J., Denman, P., and Wray, A. P., "Performance Comparison 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 
JULY 1994, Vol. 116/525 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 10 ---

of a Dump and Short Faired Diffuser System," Dept. of Transport Technology, 
Report No. TTR92R02, Loughborough University, 1992. 
6 Carrotte, J., andWray, A. P., "Research Into Short Combustor Diffusers," 
Dept. of Transport Technology, Report No. TTR91R03, Loughborough Uni-
versity, 1991. 
7 Fry, P., Private Communication, Rolls Royce, Derby, United Kingdom. 
8 Livesey, J. L., and Hugh, T., "Suitable Mean Values in One-Dimensional 
Gas Dynamics," Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science, Vol. 8, No. 4, 
1966. 
9 Stevens, S. J., and Wray, A. P., "The Influence of Blade Wakes on the 
Performance of Outwardly Curved Combustor Pre-diffusers," Paper No. AIAA-
85-1291, 1985. 
526/Vol. 116, JULY 1994 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/116/3/517/5704067/517_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026
