
--- Page 1 ---

D. Fanaca
P. R. Alemela
C. Hirsch
e-mail: hirsch@td.mw.tum.de
T. Sattelmayer
Lehrstuhl für Thermodynamik,
TU München,
85748 Garching, Germany
Comparison of the Flow Field of a
Swirl Stabilized Premixed Burner
in an Annular and a Single Burner
Combustion Chamber
An experimental investigation of the ﬂow ﬁeld of a 12 burner annular combustor and a
single burner combustor with the same burner was performed. It has revealed the aero-
dynamic effect, which causes the discrepancies in the ﬂame transfer function behavior
measured at the same operating conditions in the single and the annular combustion
chambers. The results have shown signiﬁcant differences in the ﬂow ﬁeld. In particular, it
is seen that for the investigated system in the annular combustor a free swirling jet ﬂow
forms, while in the single burner conﬁguration, a swirling wall jet ﬂow regime exists. In
this paper, we discuss the physical mechanism and show how to generalize an earlier
ﬁnding, which identiﬁed a critical conﬁnement value for a given swirler. We propose a
new correlation for coswirling burners, which explains the changes found for the inves-
tigated system. It compares also well with the experimental data from other burner
geometries. The correlation should allow to design single burner tests as to match the
annular combustor ﬂow regime. DOI: 10.1115/1.4000120
1
Introduction
The stability of lean premixed combustion systems with regard
to self-sustained combustion instabilities can be evaluated with a
stability analysis using the acoustic network modeling approach
1–4. It requires the knowledge of the dynamic behavior of the
ﬂame in terms of the acoustical transfer matrices or transfer func-
tions. Because of their complexity, often these functions are mea-
sured 5 or derived from more complex models, which are based
on experimental investigations.
The fundamental method to obtain the ﬂame transfer matrix
was proposed in Refs. 6,7. Due to cost effectiveness and experi-
mental feasibility, the experimental determination of the dynamic
ﬂame characteristics is often performed in single burner conﬁgu-
rations SCCs 8–10 and the data are then used to perform the
stability analysis on multiburner combustor systems, e.g., annular
combustors ACCs. In doing so, close similarity of the ﬂame in
both systems is assumed. While some success has been achieved
with this procedure, the underlying assumption has never been
qualiﬁed. Therefore, a comprehensive experimental and theoreti-
cal study was conducted at the Lehrstuhl für Thermodynamik of
TU München with the Alstom EV5 model burner on both a 12
burner annular and its corresponding single burner combustor. In
previous papers 11,12, the detailed results of the study on ﬂame
dynamics in both systems, as well as the method of analysis, have
been reported. It was found that the ﬂame transfer functions mea-
sured for the EV5 burner in the single and the annular combustor
at the same operating conditions are different. There it was shown
that the ﬂames could be well described by the following param-
etrized ﬂame transfer function, Eq. 1, proposed by Schuermans
et al. 13:
FTF  Q˙ /Q˙¯
u/u¯ = n exp−i · exp−1
222
1
As an example for the difference between annular and single com-
bustor characteristics, the parameters for an externally premixed
ﬂame are given in Table 1. The presented data have been normal-
ized with the nominal burner diameter d0 and the nominal velocity
u0 in the following way:
 = u0 · 
d0
,
 = u0 · 
d0
2
Comparing the individual parameters, it can be seen that the
relative differences of the interaction index n with 4% and the
convective time delay  with 12% are small. But the delay time
spread  is by almost 100% larger in the annular combustor
when compared with the single combustor value. In the fourth
column of the table, the axial coordinates of the maximum
OH-chemiluminescence intensity, XOH max, of the ﬂames are
given. This parameter was determined from the time averaged
intensity distribution in both combustion chambers, as seen in Fig.
1. In the picture, the OH-chemiluminescense intensity is color
coded ranging from white for zero intensity to black for maximum
intensity. The burner exit is located on the bottom of the frame
giving a side view with the ﬂow from bottom to top. In the ACC
left picture, the location of the highest reactivity XOH max is
found about 20% farther away from the burner than in the SCC
right picture. This difference is signiﬁcantly larger than the com-
parison of time delays that would result from the same burner
velocity, as they should obey the proportionality given in
  XOH max
u0
3
Also the basic ﬂame structures appear very different. The SCC
picture on the right features a broad band of intensity with char-
acteristic lobes at the sides, while in the ACC picture on the left,
the intensity is centered in two spots on either side of the midaxis.
Both ﬁndings, i.e., the missing scaling and the ﬂame structure
differences, indicate that the ﬂow ﬁeld could be very different in
the annular combustor compared with the single burner case.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received April
8, 2009; ﬁnal manuscript received July 28, 2009; published online April 7, 2010.
Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071502-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

With this in mind, a ﬂow ﬁeld measurement campaign and the-
oretical analysis was performed. The purpose was to clarify the
aerodynamic effects, which govern the different ﬂame form and
position and the thermo-acoustical behavior observed in the two
combustor conﬁgurations for the same operating conditions 11.
To obtain quantitative velocity data, high speed particle image
velocimetry HS-PIV system was used to measure the velocity
ﬁeld in both the single and the annular combustion chambers un-
der various conditions. In the following, we present the single and
the annular test rig conﬁgurations emphasizing the experimental
setup for the PIV measurements. In Sec. 3, we show the time
averaged velocity maps of the EV5 burner in the single and the
annular combustion chambers for the isothermal ﬂow and for the
case with combustion. Given these results, we provide a new
theory based on previously reported ﬁndings that allows to antici-
pate the observed differences.
2
Experimental Setup
Figure 2 shows a view of the annular combustor test rig. Pre-
heated air with a mass ﬂow rate of up to 1 kg/s and a temperature
up to 773 K is supplied from below, feeding into 12 fuel premix-
ers with high pressure drop. They are used to provide externally
premixed reactants to the annular plenum chamber. The annular
plenum has a width of h=136 mm and a mean diameter of D
=437 mm at a length of l=223 mm. The large area ratio between
the premixers and the plenum combined with the large pressure
drop provides for an acoustically hard boundary condition and
thus constant equivalence ratio of the externally premixed ﬂow.
Above the plenum, the annular combustion chamber is seen. It has
the
dimensions
h/D/l=77 mm/437 mm/279 mm.
It
is
equipped with two windows to allow the observation of the ﬂame,
as well as optical access for the PIV measurement explained be-
low. Between the plenum and the combustor, the 12 EV5 burners
are mounted. At the end of the annular combustor, 12 water
cooled exit nozzles provide an area contraction similar to that
found in gas turbines. On six of the nozzles, phase controlled
sirens are mounted, which can provide external acoustical forcing.
For technical premixing, where the fuel injection is done in the
burners like in the gas turbine, thus allowing equivalence ratio
ﬂuctuations, the fuel distribution can be switched from the exter-
nal premixers to the burners. All ﬂow paths were carefully equili-
brated to achieve a most even distribution of fuel and air ﬂows. In
technical premixing, the rig can be operated with power ranging
from 500 kW to 1600 kW and equivalence ratios of 0.5–0.67 for
573 K air preheating temperature. For external premixing at this
preheating temperature, the equivalence ratio range would be
0.45–0.6. At full power and with exit nozzles, the air cooled an-
nular combustor operates at 1 bar above ambient pressure. The
PIV measurement setup is shown schematically in Fig. 3. An
adaptor is mounted in place of the right window of the annular
combustion chamber such that the light sheet can be introduced
with little diffraction losses. The measurement plane cuts through
the center of the EV5 burner at 90 deg to the slot plane. Like this,
the velocity data will correspond to the meridional section of the
single burner measurements.
The SCC rig consists of an air preheater, a premixing injector
for external premixing, a phase controlled siren with bypass for
amplitude control, a plenum pipe, and the 9090 mm2 combus-
tion chamber with a length of 700 mm. At the end, a perforated
plate with carefully chosen area ratio provides a low reﬂection
boundary condition. A close up view of the combustor can be seen
in Fig. 4. Here the window adaptor used to introduce the light
sheet from the top and the beam dump cavity on the bottom are
shown. Figure 5 shows the schematic setup for the PIV measure-
ment. As can be seen, the light sheet cuts through the meridional
plane of the EV burner at 90 deg to the slots.
In both rigs, the high speed camera was positioned at 90 deg to
the light sheet in front of the observation window. The PIV setup
was completed with a seeding generator using TiO2 seeding par-
Table 1
Externally premixed ﬂame parameters in the SCC and
the ACC
n


XOH max
d0
ACC
3
1.06
0.57
0.95
SCC
3.11
0.93
0.29
0.76
Fig. 1
OH-chemiluminescence distribution in the annular
„left… and single „right… combustion chamber with the EV burner
Annular
combustion
chamber
Annular
plenum
Fuel
premixing
system
Exit
nozzles
Glass
windows
Flow direction
Burner
exit
Fig. 2
ACC test rig
Laser light
sheet optics
12 EV burner
Annular
combustion
chamber
HS PIV
camera
Fig. 3
Schematic of the PIV experimental setup in the ACC
071502-2 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

ticles with a diameter of 5–10 m as ﬂow tracer. The high speed
PIV system consists of a Nd-YAG twin laser unit with a wave-
length of 532 nm. The laser is synchronized with a high speed
camera equipped with a 85 mm lens and an interference ﬁlter of
wavelength 532 nm20 nm. The sampling frequency of the PIV
system was 2000 Hz with a time delay between the laser pulses of
around 20 s. This was ﬁne tuned according to the mean bulk
velocities in the burner. A big advantage of the high sampling
frequency of the PIV system was that it allowed the recording of
sufﬁcient data within a short time period before the windows got
clogged with seeding particles. This aspect was of particular im-
portance in the annular combustor where the cleaning of the win-
dows is difﬁcult. The postprocessing procedure of the PIV data
provides two-dimensional ﬁelds of the two instantaneous planar
velocity components in the combustion chamber downstream of
the burner exit. From this time, averages were obtained, which are
presented below. Mass balances were calculated from the isother-
mal ﬂow data integrating the axial velocity proﬁles in the single
burner test rig. The local integrals were found to be within 15%
of the metered ﬂow rate.
3
Results
In the following, we present time averaged velocity ﬁelds mea-
sured in the ACC and SCC setups. In the measurements, always
the same pressure drop over the EV5 burner was applied. The data
for the annular combustor are shown for isothermal conditions in
Figs. 6 and 8 with ﬂame. The isothermal data for the single burner
conﬁguration are shown in Fig. 7. In all of the ﬁgures, the planar
velocity vectors were plotted on the color coded ﬁeld of axial
velocity using the same color bar based on a ﬁxed but undisclosed
maximum velocity umax. Thus the same color corresponds to the
same axial velocity in all plots. Also the magnitude scale of the
velocity vectors is the same in these ﬁgures, i.e., the same mag-
nitude results in the same vector length. As already suspected
from the ﬂame pictures and the comparison of the delay times
with the XOH max mentioned in the Introduction, a large difference
in the ﬂow ﬁeld can be observed between the two conﬁgurations.
In the annular combustor data shown in Fig. 6, a typical swirl-
ing jet ﬂow with about 30 deg jet half angle is seen with an inner
recirculation zone IRZ of 0.5d0 width and 1.5d0 length. The
inner recirculation axial velocity is about half the peak jet veloc-
ity, which together with the IRZ width results in about 15% recir-
culation rate that is common for this kind of ﬂow. Inspecting the
outer jet boundary, the velocity vectors show a pattern very simi-
lar to free jet ﬂow. A slight asymmetry is seen in that the recircu-
lation bubble and the jet lobes are tilted to the right. Considering
the swirl direction of the burners see Fig. 3 and the induced
azimuthal secondary ﬂows in the annulus, which are clockwise at
the inner diameter and counterclockwise at the outer diameter of
the annulus, this seems to indicate that the burner midplane does
not coincide with the zero velocity surface separating the inner
and outer azimuthal secondary ﬂows.
The ﬂow ﬁeld of the single combustor plotted in Fig. 7 is rather
different. For the same swirl number eff=1, the jet half angle is
increased to 50 deg and the IRZ width has grown to almost 0.8d0.
The axial velocity in the IRZ has increased such that almost twice
the recirculation rate of the annular combustor case results. The
forward axial velocity has only 70% of the magnitude of the an-
Laser light
sheet optics
Flow
Slits
Combustion
chamber
Flow
Slits
Fig. 4
SCC test rig
Laser light
sheet optics
HS PIV
camera
Single burner
combustion
chamber
EV burner
Slits
Fig. 5
Schematic of the PIV experimental setup in the SCC
Radial coordinate [y/d0]
Axial coordinate [x/d0]
−0.8
−0.4
0
0.4
0.8
2
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
Axial velocity
[u/umax]
−0.49(min)
0
1(max)
Fig. 6
PIV in the ACC without ﬂame
Radial coordinate [y/d0]
Axial coordinate [x/d0]
−0.8
−0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.8
1.2
0.6
Axial velocity
[u/umax]
−0.5(min)
0
0.6(max)
Fig. 7
PIV in the SCC without ﬂame
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071502-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

nular combustor, which explains why the delay times given in
Table 1 are quite similar in spite of the large difference in XOH max
and the ﬂame shape. Due to limitation of the window size in the
single burner combustor, the outer jet boundary could not be fully
resolved.
Summarizing the comparison of the isothermal velocity ﬁelds
between annular and single burner combustors, it can be stated
that two very different ﬂow ﬁelds are found, which in this case
form a rather questionable basis for using the dynamic ﬂame data
of the single burner ﬂame for the analysis of the annular combus-
tor.
Figure 8 presents the ﬂow ﬁeld for the case with ﬂame in the
annular combustor. The air mass ﬂow was kept the same as in the
isothermal case Fig. 6. The effect of volume expansion due to
the heat input in the reaction zone can be recognized especially in
the longer jet, stretching up to 1.3d0, whereas in the cold case, it
reaches only 0.9d0. However, the basic structure remains the same
as in the isothermal case.
3.1
Critical Conﬁnement Scaling. The change in the ﬂow
ﬁeld between the single burner rig and the annular combustor was
investigated further based on the ﬁndings recently presented by Fu
et al. 14. Fu et al. 14 demonstrated two ﬂow regimes of a
swirling jet entering into a square combustion chamber. The wall
jet regime where the swirling jet spreads quickly and high axial
velocities are seen close to the combustor walls and the free jet
regime where the ﬂow ﬁeld resembles that of a swirling jet issuing
into quiescent ambient. The occurrence of either regime depended
on the degree of conﬁnement seen by the swirling jet, i.e., the area
ratio between the swirler exit and combustor. For a given swirler
having an effective swirl number eff=0.45 as calculated from Eq.
10 below, Fu et al. 14 found that the transition between the
regimes took place at an area ratio of Acc/Abu=5.88.
As seen in Fig. 7, the ﬂow ﬁeld in the single combustor with the
EV5 burner shows the wall jet regime, whereas the ﬂow structure
in the annular combustor, Fig. 6, has the free jet type. Since the
area ratio between combustor and burner is almost the same1 for
both cases, a fundamental difference must be occurring. The ob-
vious differences between the two systems are the missing side
walls in the case of the annular rig, which are giving rise to mass
ﬂow along the circumference and also to a change in the radial
pressure ﬁeld for the burner jet ﬂow. The overall entrainment mass
balance of the individual jet in either system should be similar due
to the periodic symmetry. But the missing side walls in the annu-
lar combustor change the angular momentum balance for the jet
considered. In the ACC, the entrainment mass ﬂow will carry
much less angular momentum because it stems also from the
neighboring burners. As discussed in the Appendix, these have
opposite swirl with respect to the axis of the jet considered, which
reduces the entrained angular momentum ﬂux and in turn reduces
the centrifugal force acting on the jet. In contrast to this, the mass
ﬂow recirculating in the outer recirculation zone of the single
burner combustor returns the angular momentum, such that the
decrease in swirl velocity due to entrainment will be considerably
smaller than in the free jet. Therefore, the centrifugal force driving
the jet ﬂow outward will be preserved longer, extending the jet
core region. If the combustor diameter is large enough, such that
the negative axial velocities associated with the outer recirculation
are small, the axial pressure gradient needed to drive them is also
small. In this case, the swirling jet ﬂow development, e.g., its
expansion angle, is dominated by the balance of inertia 15. If the
combustor cross section area is decreased, the recirculation ve-
locities and the associated axial pressure gradient rise until at the
critical conﬁnement the jet angle suddenly increases signiﬁcantly.
Now the jet touches the combustor wall and effectively blocks
recirculation from downstream. The inertia associated with the
increased jet angle balances the axial pressure gradient caused by
entrainment ﬂow and the new force balance creates the wall jet
regime. While the details of this process may be even more in-
volved, we argue below that the critical area ratio will scale with
the entrainment mass ﬂow rate of the swirling jet, since the ratio
of both provides for the recirculation velocity and thus for the
axial pressure gradient.
To obtain a functional description of the angular momentum
transferred with the outer recirculation of the jet, we consider the
following crude balance of angular momentum. The ansatz used
for this is analogous to a stirred vessel balance of, e.g., enthalpy
ﬂuxes and uses concepts, as proposed in the book by Panton 16.
Control volumes are deﬁned to which ﬂuxes of angular momen-
tum can be formulated. These mix within the volumes, thus cre-
ating new “concentrations” of angular momentum si, which are
then carried out across the boundaries. We deﬁne the mass speciﬁc
mean angular momentum si m2/s as
si 
m˙ iwi · ri · dm˙ i
m˙ i
4
In Eq. 4, the numerator on the right hand side is the ﬂux of
angular momentum with mass ﬂow rate m˙ i. In Fig. 9, the upper
half shows a schematic view of the front panel of the annular
combustor from downstream. Half of the cut through the middle
jet is drawn below. There are three neighboring swirlers with a
clockwise swirl orientation. The swirling ﬂow induces the forma-
tion of circumferential mass ﬂow rates m˙ s, which ﬂow to the right
on the top half and to the left on the bottom half of the annulus.
The jet ﬂow enters into the combustor with the mass ﬂow rate of
m˙ 0. Due to jet entrainment, the recirculation mass ﬂow rate m˙ r
forms.
11/12 of the ACC area is about 8% larger than the SCC area.
Radial coordinate [y/d0]
Axial coordinate [x/d0]
−0.8
−0.4
0
0.4
0.8
2
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
Axial velocity
[u/umax]
−0.57(min)
0
1(max)
Fig. 8
PIV in the annular combustor with ﬂame
1
2
r
r
m s

s
s
m s

(
)
s
s
m
s
 

1
2
r
x
m s

A
A
s
s
m s

r
x
m s

r
r
m s

0 0
m s

0
x
m s

Side view A:A
Fig. 9
Schematic of jet swirl balance
071502-4 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

Considering the side view ﬁrst, we can set up a balance of
angular momentum ﬂux by assuming the mixing of jet and recir-
culation ﬂux.
m˙ 0s0 + m˙ rsr −m˙ 0 + m˙ rsx = 0
5
Here s0 is the speciﬁc angular momentum the swirler provides, sr
is the value that is entrained from the recirculation zone, and sx is
the speciﬁc angular momentum that the jet provides to the outer
recirculation zone and further downstream. Considering just the
top half now, the ﬂux of angular momentum from the jet to the
outer recirculation, 1/2m˙ rsx, is mixed with the ﬂux from the side
−m˙ sss. Here the minus sign signiﬁes that the burner to the left has
the opposite speciﬁc swirl, as shown in the Appendix. The mixture
has the speciﬁc angular momentum ss and leaves in part m˙ sss over
the right side to the next burner, as well as upstream to be en-
trained by the jet 1/2m˙ rsr. Clearly the magnitude of ss will change
along the distance from the burner nozzle. At the end of the jet,
we expect ss=sx, while at the root, it would be ss=sr. Assuming a
linear proﬁle, we can write ss=0.5sr+sx. With this, the balance
equation for the outer recirculation volume becomes
−m˙ s · 1
2sr + sx + 1
2m˙ rsx −m˙ s · 1
2sr + sx −1
2m˙ rsr = 0
6
Combining Eqs. 5 and 6, we can eliminate sx and solve for the
speciﬁc angular momentum entrained by the jet.
sr =
s01 −2m˙ s
m˙ r
1 + 2m˙ s
m˙ r
+ 4m˙ s
m˙ 0
7
From Eq. 7, the effect of the side ﬂow can be seen. For vanish-
ing side ﬂow m˙ s=0, the recirculating ﬂow has the same speciﬁc
angular momentum as the nozzle ﬂow. With increasing side ﬂow,
the returning angular momentum will become smaller.
To draw more quantitative conclusions, the mass ﬂow rates of
side and entrainment ﬂow need to be known. To obtain an esti-
mate for the side mass ﬂow rate, we can approximate the induced
velocities on the side planes from point vortex theory and inte-
grate them. As shown in the Appendix, this gives the following
relation, where the constant was ﬁxed using the data from an
earlier publication 18:
m˙ s 	 0.28 ·
Acc
Abu
0.5
· eff · m˙ 0
8
An estimate for the entrainment mass ﬂow rate m˙ r of a swirling
jet is obtained from the work of Meier 19 who investigated
isothermal free swirling jets. He derived the following entrain-
ment correlation from his experiments:
m˙ x
m˙ 0
=0.32 x
d0
+ 4.4eff
9
Here m˙ x is the total mass ﬂow rate at some position x/d0 down-
stream of the swirler and m˙ 0 is the swirler mass ﬂow rate. The
nondimensional effective swirl number of the jet eff in Eq. 9 is
deﬁned by
eff =
m˙ w · r · dm˙
m˙ u · dm˙ · Reff
Reff = 1
m˙ ·
m˙ 
r · dm˙
10
Equation 9 reﬂects the experimental ﬁnding that the additional
entrainment due to swirl is restricted to the burner near ﬁeld,
while downstream the jet ﬂow continues like a free nonswirling
jet. From Meier’s data 19, also the length of this core region of
the jet in dependence of the swirl number can be obtained. Here it
was correlated in the following way that also provides the well
known 10d0 core distance of the nonswirling turbulent round jet
for eff=0.0.
xm
d0
= 10 · exp−0.3 · eff
11
Comparing the speciﬁc axial momentum ﬂuxes of forward jet u0
2
and outer recirculation ﬂow ur
2, we propose that for a given critical
ratio the transition between free and wall jet regime occurs.

u0
2
ur
2
crit
=
m˙ 0
m˙ r
· Acc
Abu
2

Acc
Abu
crit
= Ccrit · m˙ r
m˙ 0
12
With m˙ r=m˙ xm−m˙ 0 to obtain the recirculation mass ﬂow rate from
Meier’s correlation by inserting eff=0.45 into Eqs. 9 and 11
and setting Acc/Abu=5.88 as determined by Fu et al. 14, we can
ﬁx the constant Ccrit=1.56. So ﬁnally the model reads

Acc
Abu
crit
= 1.56 ·0.32xm
d0
+ 4.4eff −1
13
In Fig. 10, this model is shown as a solid line together with data
points from our experimental testing. The solid symbols refer to
cases in the wall jet regime, while the hollow symbols indicate
free jet behavior. In the graph, the ordinate is the effective area
ratio from the combustor sector to the burner and on the abscissa
the effective swirl number of the recirculation r is given. Using
Eqs. 7 and 8, it is calculated from sr as
r =
m˙ 0 · sr
m˙ u · dm˙ · Reff
= eff
sr
s0
14
In order to estimate the recirculation mass ﬂow rate, Eq. 13 can
be rearranged.
m˙ r
m˙ 0
= 0.64 ·
Acc
Abu
eff
15
As shown above in Eq. 7, the swirl number for the SCCs is that
of the burner, whereas in the ACC it is reduced. The EV5 burner
SCC data point can be seen well within the wall jet regime, which
is conﬁrmed from Fig. 7. For the ACC case, the estimated swirl
number r moves the EV5 ACC data point just into the free jet
regime, which is in accordance to our experimental ﬁnding Fig.
6.
EV5 SCC
TD1-
321608
SCC
EV5 ACC
Fu et al.
SCC
Thring-
Newby
TD1-
401616
SCC
TD1-
401616
ACC
TD1-
321608
ACC
0
5
10
15
0
0.5
1
r
Acc/Abu
"Wall jet regime"
"Free jet regime"
Fig. 10
Comparison of conﬁnement theory Eq. „13… with ex-
perimental data from various burners in the SCC and ACC, as
well as from previous axial jet theory †17‡
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071502-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

Further data obtained for the generic “TD1-xxyyzz”2 burner
shown in Fig. 11 support this theory for different geometry pa-
rameters. For the TD1-401616 burner, the theory predicts that
transition between the ﬂow regimes occurs, which was also ob-
served experimentally. The TD1-321608 burner should, according
to theory, be in the free jet regime both in the SCC and the ACC.
Thus similar ﬂame geometries are expected. This is conﬁrmed in
Fig. 12 where almost identical ﬂame structures are observed in the
single and the annular combustor.
Finally, the result from the classical theory by Thring and
Newby 17 for axial nonswirling jets is also given in Fig. 10. It
coincides very well with the eff=0 value of this independent
scaling law, which gives further conﬁdence in our analysis.
4
Summary and Conclusions
An experimental investigation of the ﬂow ﬁeld of an annular
combustor and a single burner combustor with the same burner
was performed. It has revealed the aerodynamic effect, which
causes the discrepancies in the ﬂame transfer function behavior
measured at the same operating conditions in the single and the
annular combustion chambers. The results have shown signiﬁcant
differences in the ﬂow ﬁeld. In particular, it was seen that for the
investigated system in the annular combustor a free swirling jet
ﬂow forms, while in the single burner conﬁguration a swirling
wall jet ﬂow regime exists.
For a ﬁxed single swirler conﬁguration, such behavior had been
reported earlier 14. There it was observed that the area ratio
between combustor and burner in the single burner combustion
chamber had a critical value where for a given swirler the ﬂow
regimes switched. In this paper, we discuss the physical mecha-
nism and show how to generalize the earlier ﬁnding. We propose
a new correlation, which serves to estimate this critical value for
other swirl combustor geometries. It explains the observed change
in the ﬂow ﬁeld between single burner and annular combustor for
the EV5 burner. The new theory also works well with the experi-
mental data from other burner geometries and holds in compari-
son with previous independent literature for conﬁned nonswirling
jet ﬂow.
Given the area ratio between combustor sector cross section
and burner area and the operation temperatures, the theory allows
to estimate the swirling jet ﬂow regime for coswirling burners in
an annular combustion chamber. With this information, single
burner experiments, to obtain the ﬂame transfer function, can be
designed with respect to choosing the area ratio in the SCC test rig
in order to best reproduce the ACC ﬂow regime.
In conclusion, we state that the measurement of dynamic ﬂame
parameters in a single burner test rig to be used in the stability
analysis of an annular combustor requires a careful choice of the
single burner combustor dimensions to obtain similar ﬂames. The
theory and concepts developed here should help to achieve this
goal.
Acknowledgment
This project was funded by Alstom, Bayerische Forschungsstif-
tung, Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Wirtschaft, Forschung
und Kunst, and Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Wirtschaft, In-
frastruktur und Technologie in the framework of KW21. Their
support is gratefully acknowledged.
Nomenclature
A 	 cross-sectional area m2
d,D 	 diameter m
D˙ 	 ﬂux of angular momentum N m
h 	 ACC width, SCC side length m
I˙ 	 ﬂux of axial momentum N
m˙ 	 mass ﬂow rate kg/s
n 	 interaction index
r,R 	 radius m
 	 swirl number
si 	 speciﬁc angular momentum of ﬂux i m2/s
u,v,w 	 axial, radial, and tangential velocities m/s
x 	 axial coordinate m
XOH max 	 axial coordinate of OH maximum m
y,r 	 radial coordinate m
 	 normalized convective time delay
 	 normalized time delay variance
bu 	 burner
cc 	 combustion chamber
eff 	 effective
m 	 core region coordinate
r 	 recirc. mass ﬂow, entr. spec. ang. mom.
s 	 circumferential side mass ﬂow
x 	 downstream ejected spec. ang. mom.
0 	 nominal burner quantity
Appendix
We consider the dependence of the side mass ﬂow m˙ s in the
annular combustor on the mass ﬂow rate and the swirl strength of
the burners for the coswirling arrangement.
In Figs. 13a and 13b, the kinematics of the ﬂow ﬁeld at the
interface between two burners are shown. We assume that the
burners can be described as two corotating ideal vortices with
2xx encodes the nozzle diameter D, yy encodes the center body diameter d, and zz
encodes the swirler slot length leff, all in mm,
Fig. 12
OH-chemiluminescence distribution in the annular
„left… and single „right… combustion chamber with the TD1-
321608 burner
Fig. 11
Schematic of the TD1 burner
071502-6 / Vol. 132, JULY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

circulation w0r0 located at the points L and M. M represents the
burner considered in the swirl balance equations 5 and 6. At a
point P on the interface, the velocities wL and wM are induced.
Projecting wL into the M,
M coordinate system, as shown in Fig.
13b, we get the swirl velocity component wL,
M, which is obvi-
ously negative compared with wM. The speciﬁc angular momen-
tum of the L-velocity with respect to the M-burner at point P is
calculated as
sL,MP = wL  rMP
= −w0r0
rLP · sin
M −
L −
2 · rMP · ex
= −w0r0 sin2
M −3
2  · ex
A1
Here ex is the unit vector in the axial direction of the burner/
combustor. The induced velocity us at point P normal to the in-
terface is obtained from Fig. 13b as
usP = wL · cos

2 −
L + wM · cos
M −
2
= 4 · w0r0
rML · cos2
M −
2
A2
With this relation, we can estimate the side mass ﬂow rate m˙ s per
unit axial length of the combustor.
m˙ s
 · l =

1

us · rMP · cos −
Md
 = const · w0r0
A3
Here 
1=−arctanh/rML, where h is the ACC width. Using
the speciﬁc angular momentum deﬁnition Eq. 4 and the deﬁ-
nition of swirl number Eq. 10, we get
w0r0 = D˙ 0
m˙ 0
= I˙0 · Reff · eff
m˙ 0
= const · m˙ 0
2 · Reff
Abu · m˙ 0
· eff
A4
Inserting this into Eq. A3, solving for m˙ s, and simplifying
Reff	const·Abu, l	const·Acc, Eq. 8 is obtained.
References
1 Sattelmayer, T., and Polifke, W., 2003, “Assessment of Methods for the Com-
putation of the Linear Stability of Combustors,” Combust. Sci. Technol.,
1753, pp. 453–476.
2 Sattelmayer, T., and Polifke, W., 2003, “A Novel Method for the Computation
of the Linear Stability of Combustors,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 1753, pp.
477–497.
3 Schuermans, B., Bellucci, V., and Paschereit, C. O., 2003, “Thermoacoustic
Modeling and Control of Multi Burner Combustion Systems,” ASME Paper
No. GT2003-38688.
4 Schuermans, B. B. H., Polifke, W., and Paschereit, C. O., 1999, “Modeling
Transfer Matrices of Premixed Flames and Comparison With Experimental
Results,” ASME Paper No. 99-GT-132.
5 Polifke, W., and Paschereit, C., 1997, “Characterization of Lean Premixed Gas
Turbine Burners as Acoustical Multi-Ports,” APS/DFD Annual Meeting, San
Francisco, CA.
6 Abom, M., 1986, “A Note on Random Errors in Frequency Response Estima-
tors,” J. Sound Vib., 107, pp. 355–358.
7 Munjal, M. L., and Doige, A. G., 1990, “Theory of a Two Source-Location
Method for Direct Experimental Evaluation of the Four-Pole Parameters of an
Aeroacoustic Element,” J. Sound Vib., 141, pp. 323–333.
8 Schuermans, B. B. H., Polifke, W., Paschereit, C. O., and van der Linden, J.
H., 2000, “Prediction of Acoustic Pressure Spectra in Combustion Systems
Using Swirl Stabilized Gas Turbine Burners,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-
0105.
9 Schuermans, B., Luebcke, H., Bajusz, D., and Flohr, P., 2005, “Thermoacous-
tic Analysis of Gas Turbine Combustion Systems Using Unsteady CFD,”
ASME Paper No. GT2005-68393.
10 Krebs, W., Prade, B., Flohr, P., and Hoffmann, S., 2002, “Thermoacoustic
Stability Chart for High-Intensity Gas Turbine Combustion Systems,” Com-
bust. Sci. Technol., 30, pp. 99–128.
11 Fanaca, D., Alemela, P. R., Ettner, F., Hirsch, C., Sattelmayer, T., and Schuer-
mans, B., 2008, “Determination and Comparison of the Dynamic Characteris-
tics of a Perfectly Premixed Flame in Both Single and Annular Combustion
Chambers,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-50781.
12 Alemela, P. R., Fanaca, D., Ettner, F., Hirsch, C., Sattelmayer, T., and Schuer-
mans, B., 2008, “Flame Transfer Matrices of a Premixed Flame and a Global
Check With Modelling and Experiments,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-50111.
13 Schuermans, B., Bellucci, V., Guethe, F., Meili, F., Flohr, P., and Paschereit,
O., 2004, “A Detailed Analysis of Thermoacoustic Interaction Mechanisms in
a Turbulent Premixed Flame,” ASME Paper No. GT2004-53831.
14 Fu, Y., Cai, J., Jeng, S.-M., and Mongia, H., 2005, “Conﬁnement Effects on the
Swirling Flow of a Counter-Rotating Swirl Cup,” ASME Paper No. GT2005-
68622.
15 Hirsch, C., Fanaca, D., Reddy, P., Polifke, W., and Sattelmayer, T., 2005,
“Inﬂuence of the Swirler Design on the Flame Transfer Function of Premixed
Flames,” ASME Paper No. GT2005-68195.
16 Panton, R. L., 1984, Incompressible Flow, Wiley, New York.
17 Thring, M., and Newby, M., 1953, “Combustion Length of Enclosed Turbulent
Jet Flames,” Fourth International Symposium on Combustion, Baltimore, MD,
pp. 789–796.
18 Hirsch, C., Kuenzi, T., Knopfel, H., Paikert, B., Steinbach, C., Geng, W., and
Döbbeling, K., 2002, “An Annular Combustor Natural Gas Ignition Model
Derived From Atmospheric Sector Experiments,” ASME Paper GT-2002-
30073.
19 Maier, P., 1968, “Untersuchung isothermer drallbehafteter Freistrahlen,” For-
sch. Ingenieurwes., 345, pp. 133–140.
L
w
M
w
MP
r
LP
r
,
M
L
w 

2
M
L










	
P

,
,
s M
s L
w
w



P

L

M

0r
M
w
L
w
0
w


M



L

MP
r
LP
r
ML
r
a)
b)
Fig. 13
Schematic ﬂow ﬁeld kinematics for a point P on the
interface between two burners at M and L. „a… Global situation.
„b… Detail at point P.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JULY 2010, Vol. 132 / 071502-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
