
--- Page 1 ---

. 
AIAA 94-0113 
TURBULENT SWIRLING REACTING FLOW 
David G. Lilley 
School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 
Oklahoma State University 
Stillwater, Oklahoma 74078 
32nd Aerospace Sciences 
Meeting & Exhibit 
January IO-13,1994 
/ Reno, NV 
W 
For permission to copy or republish, contact the Amerfcan lnstltute of Aeronautlcs and Astronautics 
370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20024 


--- Page 2 ---

W 
TURBULENT SWIRLING REACTING FLOW 
David G. Lilley' 
Oklahoma State University 
Stillwater, Oklahoma 74078 
ABSTRACT 
Many combustion systems utilize the strong 
favorable effects of applying swirl to injected air and 
fuel, so aiding the stabilization of high-intensity 
combustion 
processes, 
and 
good flowfield 
characterization is of prime concern. The improvement 
and use of modeling work will complement and 
significantly reduce the cost of experimental 
development programs. 
Numerical procedures for 
predicting combustion chamber flows (which in practice 
are models of physical processes (turbulence, radiation, 
combustion and two-phase effects) and computer 
programs for solving the appropriate level of 
sophistication of the resulting differential equations (0-, 
1-, 2- and 3-D) approaches. This paper looks at recent 
advances in the experimentation, modeling and 
prediction of combustor swirl flows, its aim being to 
review the experimental and theoretical difficulties, 
discuss developments, and demonstrate that useful 
predictions are already being made. Areas in which 
further research will be most useful are indicated, 
including the simulation of complex chemistry, the 
turbulent-reaction interaction problem, the utilization of 
finite element methods of computation, and application 
to realistic three-dimensional problems. 
I" 
React ine Flo w Prc&hms 
Practical combustion systems have complex 
flowfields, in which flame characteristics are often 
enhanced by the use of, among other things: swirling 
inlet flow, laterally induced jets and contoured boundary 
geometry. The combustor design engineer must develop 
economic, efficient and pollutant-free combustion 
systems, in which turbulent reacting multiphase 
swirling flow occurs. In design situations, costly and 
time-consuming experimental procedures must be 
supplemented with mathematical models. These models 
bring benefits, and entail costs; a good model is one 
with a high ratio of benefit to cost. Benefits include 
knowing quantitatively, in advance, what will be the 
performance of equipment which has not yet been built, 
or which has not yet been operated in the manner under 
investigation. The matbematical model cannot stand 
alone, but through its use with carefully selected 
experiments, development time and cost can he 
drastically reduced. Currently popular are mathematical 
models which simulate the physical processes 
(turbulence, radiation, combustion, pollutant formation 
and multiphase effects) and solve an associated set of 
coupled partial differential equations via an iterative 
finite difference scheme. Recent review papers provide 
the background (1-7) with recent texts (8,9) providing 
useful summaries. 
Swirl Flows 
The dramatic effects of swirl in inert and reacting 
flow systems have been known and appreciated for many 
years. Some effects are favorable and the designer 
strives to generate the required amount of swirl for his 
particular purpose. Swirling flows result from the 
application of a spiraling motion, a swirl velocity 
component (also known as a tangential or azimuthal 
velocity component) being imparted to the flow by the 
use of swirl vanes, by the use of axial-plus-tangential 
entry swirl generators or by direct tangential entry into 
the chamber. Experimental studies show that swirl has 
large-scale effects on flowfields: jet growth, entrainment 
and decay (for inert jets) and flame size, shape, stability 
and combustion intensity (for reacting flows) are affected 
by the degree of swirl imparted to the flow. This degree 
of swirl is usually characterized by the swirl number 
S, which is a nondimensional number representing axial 
flux of swirl momentum divided by axial flux of axial 
momentum, times the equivalent nozzle radius. Many 
further details can be found in a recent test (9). 
The Present Contr~butm 
. .  
Consideration is given to the major features of the 
characterization of swirl flow combustion with emphasis 
on application to practical combustors. An indication of 
diagnostic possibilities is given, including discussion of 
* Professor, School of Mechanical & Aerospace, Fellow AIAA. 
Copyright, 0 1994 by David G. Lilley. All rights reserved. 
Published by AIAA with permission. 
u 
1 


--- Page 3 ---

flowfield manifestation and problems specific to 
turbulent reacting flows. Concerning modeling, since 
solution of the basic governing equations yields 
predictions which are realistic only if the physical 
processes are correctly expressed in mathematical form, 
suitable simulation models to effect closure are given 
and followed by discussion of computer prediction 
techniques themselves. The role of fluid dynamics in 
combustion is presented from the practical point of 
view, indicating the degree of complexity of the 
processes, types of combustion, types of burning 
techniques and the specific role of fluid dynamics and, in 
particular, swirling jets. Practical application areas are 
identified including: reciprocating engines, furnaces, gas 
turbine, pulsejet, ramjet, scramjet and rocket engines. 
The final Closure summarizes the status, and highlights 
the areas in which further research will be most useful. 
FLOWFIELD DIAGNOSTICS 
Flowfield Manifestation 
Flowfields typically encountered in turbulent 
reacting or nonreacting flows are usually quite complex 
and an understanding of their fluid dynamics requires a 
knowledge of the temporal and spatial values of flow 
parameters. The insight into a physical process can 
always be improved if the physical structure produced by 
or related to that process can he analyzed with the aids of 
experimental diagnostics, on theoretical modeling, or 
both. There are several reasons for studying flowfields 
and turbulence experimentally. One experimentalist 
may wish to have a general physical picture of mean 
flow and turbulence so as to generate an empirical or 
semi-empirical relationship which may be applied to 
direct practical application to the problem under 
investigation. Another experimentalist may require 
detailed results relating to fine structures in order to 
develop and test a theoretical model. These varying 
needs can be satisfied using a variety of diagnostic 
techniques, for example, invasive physical probes and 
non-invasive optical probes. An overall view of flow 
structure produced in a physical process can be observed 
with aids to visualization. In order to trace the fluid 
motion, one must utilize a technique by which the 
flowfield may he manifested, for example, optical 
techniques. 
Flow visualization methods play an 
important role in understanding fluid dynamics by 
revealing the mean streamline flow patterns which show 
the main flow directions and relative components of 
velocity. Such techniques yield information about the 
complete flowfield under study without physically 
interfering with the flow. 
In contrast, a single 
measuring instrument, such as a velocity, temperature, 
pressure or concentration probe, provides information for 
only one point in the flowfield. In addition, it disturbs 
the flow by its physical presence and this can 
significantly affect experimental results. Intrusive 
pressure, thermocouple, and hot-wire probes, besides 
introducing disturbances into the flow, have two more 
disadvantages: low frequency response, and the signal 
response being affected by both velocity and density. At 
any point in a reacting flowfield, time-mean values of 
velocity and density parameters are constant during 
quasi-steady operation of a combustion system, but they 
may fluctuate independently and in uncertain correlation. 
Intrusive probes have the advantage that they are less 
fragile and can he used in large-size flames. In order to 
reduce the basic difficulties, there has been a continuing 
development effort to miniaturize the physical size of 
the measuring probes and to improve the quantitative 
interpretation of flow visualization techniques. Flow 
visualization techniques have played an important role in 
the understanding of complex fluid-mechanical problems 
in several areas, for example: jet flows both with and 
without swirl, mixing layers, boundary layers, and 
turbulent shear layers. 
b' 
A method of flow visualization entails the addition 
of foreign particles into the optically-transparent 
flowfield that might be gaseous or liquid. By selecting 
suitably sized particles, one is able to assume that the 
motion of these particles, both in magnitude and 
direction, is the same as that of the flowfield under 
investigation. An important feature of many flow 
visualization techniques is that one can derive semi- 
quantitative or quantitative information from the 
resulting flow picture. The visualization method is 
therefore an indirect method since the observation is 
made of the foreign particles instead of the fluid flow. 
The difference between the velocity of fluid and foreign 
particles can be minimized, hut not made zero, by 
selecting particles of the same density as that of the 
fluid. These methods yield satisfactory results in steady 
flows hut for unsteady flows, for example: reciprocating 
engines, pulsejet engines, etc., the error can he large 
because of the inertia of the particles. The method an 
also give erroneous results if the fluid flow is 
compressible with the thermodynamic state of the fluid 
varying in the flowfield. Many turbulent flow systems 
possess large eddy structures, whereas the fine, micro- 
structures are common to all turbulent systems. In order 
to categorize a flow system, the examination of large 
and fine micro-structure for their formation, growth and 
convection requires diagnostic tools which have minimal 
or no physical interference with the fluid flow. Large 
eddy structures, or sizes comparable to the width of 
v 
- 


--- Page 4 ---

mixing zones, have been identified in many flow 
systems. 
u 
Several different optical phenomena have been 
utilized as the basis for specific instruments with 
scattered light methods being most popular. The light 
scattering detection techniques can he separated into two 
categories: those that make size measurements of single 
particles, and systems that measure the light scattered by 
a collection of particles in the collimated laser beam. 
Multiple scatter detection systems can typically make 
size measurements in particle fields having a higher 
number density than corresponding single particle 
counters can handle. Unfortunately, the method does not 
provide a good spatial resolution and it does not measure 
the velocity of the droplets, thus limiting its application 
in spray nozzle measurements. In addition, the method 
assumes a priori particle size distribution which it fits 
mathematically. 
Optical methods have their own 
limitations, a major one being the need for high quality 
optical access to the test region. The limited dynamic 
range of these instruments is also of concern. The 
electrical aerosol analyzer measures the in-situ size 
distribution in the range below that of the light 
scattering method, that is helow that 0.3 um. The 
operating principle of this analyzer is that the mean 
electrical mobility of a diffusionally-charged particle is a 
function of particle size. No method, of course, is 
completely free of ambiguity and none yields ample 
information to completely characterize the local 
properties of the spray. As yet no single instrument has 
proven completely satisfactory for use over a wide size 
range, although recent developments indicate that this 
desire can eventually be fulfilled. - 
- 
In turbulent flow the eddies extract energy from the 
mean flow and retain it for a while prior to dissipating it 
in small eddies. The turbulent kinetic energy found in 
eddies is directly proportional to the sum of the normal 
77 
Reynolds stresses 77 
U 
, ? and W . The smaller 
eddies are much weaker than those that produce most of 
the Reynolds stress, since most of the energy is 
immediately transferred to the smallest eddies which are 
quickly dissipated by viscosity. The apparent mean 
stresses in turbulent flow are determined by the velocity 
fluctuations which depend upon the flow history. 
In turbulent combustion processes, knowledge of 
the time-mean properties (for example, velocity, 
temperature, pressure, concentration, etc.) are useful hut 
not sufficient to determine the reaction rate. The 
v 
temporal characteristics of a turbulent flow are important 
since they govern not only the mixing process, hut also 
the way in which the combustible mixture reacts and 
heat is transferred to the surroundings. They also yield a 
great deal of insight into pollutant emissions from, and 
combustion efficiency of, the system. A small increase 
in overall combustion efficiency can save many millions 
of dollars on a national scale. For the modeling and 
prediction of the spatial distribution of reaction rates, it 
is desirable to know the turbulence properties of the fuel 
and oxygen concentrations. 
Instantaneous and local measurements within 
turbulent reacting flows are now possible with pulsed or 
chopped laser light sources, which can be tuned to 
selected wavelengths for minimizing spectral 
interferences. Their application to studies of combustive 
flows should allow the measurement of single and joint 
probability density functions of fluctuating properties. 
Recent developments in laser probes clearly reveal that it 
is not unrealistic to measure directly one-point time- 
averaged correlations, such as components of the 
Reynolds stress tensor T~~ = - (pu ) ' u. ' , the 
turbulent heat flux vector Jhi = + (pu ) ' h ' and the 
turbulent mass flux vector for the j-th chemical species 
J,j 
= + [m. 
These stress and flux 
expressions occur in the time-averaged equations of 
conservation of momentum, energy and chemical 
species, respectively, where p is the density, u 
is 
the 
velocity component, h is the stagnation 
enthalpy, and m j 
chemical species. 
J 
ith 
is the mass fraction of the j th 
The determination of these and other correlations of 
fluctuating quantities can then he incorporated into 
models of reacting flows. To date, most methods for the 
prediction of local changes in the distribution of reaction 
rate, temperature, concentration, etc., are based on 
empirical or semi-empirical relationships. Significant 
developments have been made in laser-based 
experimental diagnostics, which are now widely used to 
measure time-mean and RMS velocity, temperature and 
concentration. Techniques for measuring fluctuating 
local temperature and concentration would he highly 
desirable. 
The development of a detailed 
microscopically-based understanding of the chemistry of 
combustion presents a considerable challenge. This is 
because in a combustion system several chemical and 
physical processes interact together and proceed 
simultaneously. What we know is that a flame involves 
3 


--- Page 5 ---

a large chemical reaction network through which heat is 
produced. The process results in steep gradients of both 
molecular concentrations and temperature; the reaction 
rates and mechanistic paths of the whole network are 
sensitively dependent upon the above parameters. It is 
clear therefore that the chemistry is woven inextricably 
with heat transfer and diffusion of reactive species 
throughout the flowfield. All these aspects must be 
considered with care and attention given to the proper 
selection of the molecular input parameters, for 
example, transport coefficients and rate constants, as 
well as detailed unambiguous verification of the results. 
This is not a small task and, at present, we only have 
the capability to picture very simple flames. The desire 
for accomplishing a microscopically-based description 
for larger turbulent diffusion flames of industrial 
importance is just now becoming feasible. 
Combust ion P roblema 
In flows with chemical reaction the flow 
characteristics are further complicated by nonlinear 
interactions between chemical and fluid dynamical 
processes. The usual concept of a turbulent flame front 
is that of a laminar flame front with irregularities caused 
by fluctuating velocity components, leading to the 
formation of a wrinkled flame front having larger surface 
area than the corresponding laminar flame front. 
Schlieren and shadow photographs of the flame fronts 
reveal that the irregularities in the flame front are a 
product of turbulent scale and intensity in the flow. The 
question of flame-generated turbulence has been a topic 
of interest at several symposia and meetings. Ignition 
of the combustible mixture in confined flows results in 
expansion and acceleration of the flow. Acceleration 
increases the shear and strain and it is not clear whether 
there are any additional mechanisms that influence the 
increase in turbulence intensity. In unconfined flows, 
however lack of dynamic confinement results in very 
little, if any, increase in pressure. Experimental results 
of mean and RMS velocity in confined flows clearly 
show expansion and acceleration. Relatively small 
increases in turbulence intensity appear to be primarily 
associated with increases in strain and the associated 
velocity gradients. It is possible that combustion occurs 
in microexplosions which in turn cause turbulence and 
local pressure increases. 
In two-phase flows, accurate size and velocity 
measurements of liquid sprays or solid particles are 
important for a broad spectrum of applications. General 
areas of application include characterization of fuel 
sprays, agricultural sprays, soot formation and growth, 
diesel engines, aerosols, pigments, evaluation of 
scrubbers, etc. Fuel spray applications are of current 
interest in combustion research because of the need to 
improve the combustion efficiency and reduce the 
particulate and other pollutants emission levels. 
Fuel sprays are complex dynamic phenomena, 
entailing atomization, coagulation, dispersion, heat and 
mass transfer, and chemistry, which are subject to 
intimate interactions within a gaseous flowfield. 
Research into fuel atomization and fuel-air preparation 
requires the measurement of fuel droplet size, velocity- 
size correlations, and mean and RMS velocities of air 
and fuel. Complete characterization of local properties 
in a spray includes such attributes as particle size 
distribution and number density, a velocity distribution 
function related to droplets of different sizes, mean 
velocity of the gas phase, local gas and liquid 
temperatures, composition of both the gas and liquid 
phases, turbulence properties, and so on. The reliable 
measurement of any one of the above properties is not 
trivial. 
Sampling techniques can, of course, be used to 
withdraw a representative sample from a particle-laiden 
flow. 
The sampling process always disturbs the 
flowfield to some extent even if the sample is withdrawn 
isokinetically. In reacting flowfields at high turbulence 
levels, it is particularly difficult to extract a 
representative sample with any degree of confidence. 
Particle agglomeration and deposition in a sampling 
system can alter the size distribution prior to 
measurement. in addition, real-time measurements are 
not possible with sampling methods and in some cases 
ample preparation and analysis can be time-consuming. 
Despite the above limitations, sampling methods are 
still useful in many instances. The increased need for 
non-perturbing real-time in-situ measurements of 
particle size has motivated the development of a wide 
variety of optical methods. Only in recent years have 
serious attempts been made to obtain in-situ particle- 
size measurements. 
-, 
Where the particles are large enough, the direct 
image photographic method is least ambiguous and 
most reliable but, unfortunately, it is rather slow and 
can be employed only for sprays of a continuous nature. 
Video systems can be used for particle analysis but even 
then the systems are intrinsically slow because of 
limitations imposed by the standard video framing rate. 
The related problem of solid particulate size 
measurements is of interest in smoke, particulate and 
pollutants reduction, fluidized bed combustion, pigments 
manufacture and other similar areas. 
A 


--- Page 6 ---

In flame combustion processes, the efficient 
utilization of energy requires maximization of the 
overall energy efficiency. In a boiler plant, the biggest 
heat loss is associated with the flue gases. In general, 
improvements in overall energy efficiency of processes 
require careful examination of combustion, mechanical 
and thermodynamic efficiency. The thermal efficiency is 
the ratio of heat gained by the load to the energy 
supplied via fuel and is influenced by the rates of heat 
transfer from flames to the combustion chamber walls 
and, hence, on temperature distributions within the 
combustion chamber. Control of the distributions of 
temperatures within the combustion chamber therefore 
has a potential which can lead to improvements in 
overall thermal efficiency. In an electrically heated 
system, approximately 2/3 of the original fuel energy is 
lost in the power generation and transmission stages, so 
that an efficiency in excess of 33 percent is difficult to 
achieve with an electrical system. 
u 
The primary concern of a combustion engineer is 
to achieve maximum combustion efficiency with 
minimum or no pollutant emissions. High combustion 
efficiency requires complete combustion of fuel supplied 
to the combustor. Any unburned fuel leaving the 
system contributes not only to combustion inefficiency 
but also the pollutant emission levels, since it is also 
considered to be a pollutant. The incentive for complete 
combustion of fuel is therefore twofold - increased 
combustion efficiency and reduced emission of percent 
can be achieved provided the fuel is maintained at 
elevated temperatures in the presence of an oxidizer for a 
sufficiently long residence time. 
Combustion 
efficiencies lower than 100 percent are primarily due to 
other design considerations - a typical example being 
refineries and oil wells where Coanda flares are used for 
the incineration of explosive gases. 
v 
SIMULXUQN 
Background 
Several previous publications focus at length on 
the problems of adequate mathematical simulation. 
Numerical prediction studies are generally based on a 
version of the TEACH computer code, (IO) of which the 
STARPIC version is described at length (11). Earlier 
nonreacting predictions (12) have been extended to 
simple chemically-reacting situations (13) in 
axisymmetric swirling flow configurations. Advances 
have also been made elsewhere and applied to other 2-D 
(14-17) and 3-D (18-23) problems of interest to the 
combustor designer. Several of these discuss at length 
W 
some of the more recent and more accurate simulations 
of the combustion process, with inclusion of radiation 
heat transfer, and carbon monoxide and nitric oxide 
prediction. 
The transport equations are all similar and contain 
terms for convection, diffusion and source S$ 
of a 
general variable 4. Introducing turbulent exchange 
coefficients and the usual turbulent diffusion-flux laws, 
it can be shown that the similarity between the 
differential equations and their diffusion relations allow 
them all to be put in the common form, 
Where $ is the general dependent variable. The forms 
of the source term s+ depend on the degree of 
sophistication used in the mathematical simulation of 
the problem under consideration. 
of the PhysLFs 
A typical simulation involves the following 
phenomena (1-9): 
Turbulence. Models are classified according to 
the turbulent flux hypothesis (whether or not turbulent 
exchange coefficients are introduced) and the number of 
extra differential equations to be solved. Models of the 
exchange coefficient type and direct stress specification 
type have been extended and applied to more complex 
flow situations, including swirl flows. Currently two- 
equation energy-length models are to be recommended 
for application in practical engineering situations; in 
particular the K-E 
model. The two-equation IC-E 
turbulence model is used to calculate the effective 
viscosity from which the exchange coefficients are 
calculated: 
p = C,pk*/E + p~ 
r, = I*/O$ 
Wall functions are employed to save computing time 
near wall boundaries. 
Chemistry. Often consideration is given to a 
simplified main exothermic chemical reaction between 
5 


--- Page 7 ---

just two species, fuel and oxidant, combining directly to 
form a third, product. Diffusion and premixed flame 
conditions need to be handled, although most furnace and 
engine flames may permit the diffusion flame 
assumptions in their outward appearance. The complex 
equations representing the route to pollutant formation, 
techniques for handling 'stiff kinetics (whereby widely 
differing reaction rate coefficients require special 
techniques for handling the source terms), and the effect 
of turbulence structure on time-mean chemical reaction 
rates are all topics of strong current interest. Realistic 
simulation of complex chemistry in turbulent reacting 
flows is probably the area in combustor modeling 
which will prove to he most useful to study, and the 
results of which will be most fruitful to apply in 
practical design situations. 
Generally, in an initial computer simulation, a 
one-step reaction scheme is used via 
-+x C02 + - 
Y H20 + n(x+$)N2 
2 
or a two-step reaction scheme with equations l,ike 
C,Hy + ($ + 4) 
Y (02 + n N, 
Y 
Y 
2 
2
4
 
-+ x CO + - H20 + n  (A + -) N, 
1 
CO + 2 02-+ co, 
In the latter model, oxidation of the hydrocarbon to 
carbon monoxide is the first step while the oxidation of 
the latter to carbon dioxide is the second step. More 
recently, four-step reaction schemes have become 
available and used in combustor chemistry. Typical 
equations then are like 
~
,
n
~
~
+
~
 
-+ xi2 ~
2
~
4
 
+ n2 
~
2
~
4
 
+ o2 --f 2co + 2n2 
co + 112 0 2  + c02 
n2 + 112 o2 --f n20 
Chemical Reaction Rates. 
In turbulent 
flows, the specification of time-mean chemical reaction 
rates is a problem receiving well-deserved attention. In 
current engineering practice, fuel and carbon monoxide 
consumption rates are assumed to be governed by the 
minimum of time-averaged Arrhenius and eddy-breakup 
models. These are, respectively, 
v 
R, = - A  p2 m,m,, 
exp (-BET) 
R, = - C pg& 
where A, B, and C are parameters. 
ration. 
. .  
The formulation is an 'integro- 
differential' one, which is especially difficult to solve. 
The equations may be represented by the 'zone' method 
or one of the 'flux' methods for 1, 2 or 3 flux sums (so- 
called two-flux, four-flux and six-flux methods). 
Although the former is more exact, it is difficult to 
incorporate with the fluid mechanics. The latter is less 
rigorous but simple to employ, and is therefore the one 
to be recommended in many cases. In axisymmetric 
simulations, a four-flux model of radiation heat transfer 
is appropriate, with two second-order equations 
and 
-- 
1 d [ r r  -)]+a(EB-Rr)+;(Rx-Rr) 
d% 
r dr 
dr 
= 0. 
v 
for the composite flux sums Rx and R ~ ,  
Thermodvnamics. Specific heats at constant 
pressure are often assumed to he given by third-order 
polynomials in terms of temperature. The density is 
calculated from an ideal gas equation of state, using 
appropriate weighted averages to obtain the mean 
mixture molecular weight. 
Multi-Phase 
Phenomena. 
Infinite drag 
assumptions may be made for small particles (solid fuel 
or liquid droplets) and differential equations solved for 
the distribution of material in particle-size space, in 
discrete ranges. Larger particles do not follow the 
streamlines, and then in addition one has to solve 
ordinary differential equations for their trajectories. 
Studies on the rate of burning of droplets, clouds and 
sprays are proving to be extremely worthwhile. 
Nitric Oxide Pollution 
The formation of thermal NO is often calculated 
via the Zeldovich mechanism, which is uncoupled from 
the hydrocarbon-air reaction. A steady state assumption 
~ 
6 


--- Page 8 ---

is made for the calculation of atomic nitrogen, while 
atomic oxygen is assumed to be in equilibrium with the 
oxygen molecule. Thus, manipulation of 
- 
Rfl 
R, 
Rf2 
Rr2 
4 
O+N2 
NO+N 
and 
--P 
N + 0 2  
NOi.0 
where Rfl and Rf2 are the fomard rates and Rrl and Q 
are the reverse rates, lead to the rate of reaction of nitric 
oxide given by 
The transport equation for nitric oxide is similar in form 
to that given earlier; it need be solved only after the 
main flowfield has been established. 
The prompt NO formation rate can exceed the 
rate produced via the thermal NO mechanism. It can be 
deduced from equations like: 
v 
d(N0)idt = I<I02]a[Nz][FuEL]exp(-E/RT) 
Nitrogen-containing organic compounds present in 
liquid and solid fossel fuels can contribute to total NO 
formed during the combustion process. This fuel 
nitrogen is a particularly important source of fuel NO 
from residual fuel-oil and coals, which typically contain 
up to 2 percent nitrogen by weight. For light liquid 
fuels, expressions like 
d@O)/dt = (A[02ja/B[FUEL w)'n 
exp[(E,,id -E -E,ed)/RT] 
are used. - 
Although some very useful 0-D and 1-D 
approaches to characterizing combustor flowfield 
v 
problems are readily available, research emphasis today 
is being directed towards 2 -D and 3-D simulations of 
the phenomena in question. This is necessary in order 
to utilize present day technology most effectively to 
meet the demands of current combustor design problem. 
Such problems entail the solution of many 
simultaneous nonlinear equations including up to three 
velocity components, pressure, stagnation enthalpy and 
species concentrations. Since their equation are all 
similar in form, the same solution algorithm can be 
used for all of them. Problem are classified according 
to their dimensionality (the number of independent 
variables from three space dimensions and time) and type 
(parabolic or elliptic). 
The flow classification of 
parabolic (possessing one coordinate direction with first- 
but without second-order derivatives - boundary layer 
type with prominent direction@)) or elliptic (possessing 
second-order derivatives in all coordinate directions 
~ 
recirculating type with upstram influence) governs the 
type of boundary conditions required and solution 
method. Marching methods are appropriate for the 
former (flows with weak swirl); relaxation methods for 
the latter (flows with strong swirl). The problems, 
methods and solutions are discussed in the references 
(1-7). 
s Between the Coda 
The essential differences between the various 
available computer codes (and those that are not 
available) include: the complexity of the equation set for 
the simulation of the physical processes, the storage 
requirements, the location of variables in the grid space 
system, the method of deriving the finite difference 
equations that are incorporated, and the solution 
technique. 
In primitive pressure-velocity variable 
formulations a staggered grid system is normally used, 
as recommended by Los Alamos for its special 
attributes. In computational fluid dynamics the 'best' 
representation of the convection terms is essential to the 
accuracy and stability of the iteration scheme or 
marching procedure. At high cell Reynolds numbers a 
certain degree of 'upstream differencing' is essential, 
using upwind differencing, a hybrid formulation or the 
Los Alamos zip, donor cell, etc. techniques for example. 
Solution procedures vary from Gauss-Seidel point 
methods to more efficient line-by-Iine SIMPLE (semi- 
implicit nethod for pessure-linked squations) methods 
for steady state problems, with corresponding explicit 
and SIMPLE methods for associated transient problems. 
Current preference is toward primitive codes, utilizing a 
staggered grid system, a hybrid formulation of the 
convective and diffusive terms, and a line-by-line 
solution scheme. The application of finite element 
7 


--- Page 9 ---

computational methods, to combustor problems with 
complex geometric configurations and complicated 
boundary conditions to apply, is in its infancy; further 
work in this fertile area will be most useful. 
Computerization 
2-D Ma rchine Methods . These are useful for 
axisymmetric 2-D parabolic boundary layer flows, with 
weak swirl and no recirculation zones. They involve 1- 
D storage, automatic expanding grid using 
nondimensionalized stream function y instead of r as the 
radial coordinate, and implicit solution procedure. Many 
examples of this type of flow exist in connection with 
combustion equipment: axisymmetric steady jets, wakes 
and flames, boundary layers on walls, flows in pipes, 
diffusers, nozzles, solid-propellant rockets, and after- 
burner reheat systems. In particular, weakly swirling 
flows without recirculation are examples of 2-D 
axisymmetric boundary layer flows. 
2-D Re laxation Methods. These methods are 
useful for axisymmetric 2-D elliptic recirculating flows, 
with recirculation zones caused by sudden expansions, 
blockages andlor strong swirl. 
They involve 2-D 
storage, stream function-vorticity y-w or primitive- 
velocity p-u-v formulation, and Gauss-Seidel or line-by- 
line SIMPLE solution procedure. Most combustion 
systems exhibit recirculation and they are therefore not 
amenable to marching integration; instead iterative 
procedures are essential. Axisymmetric steady flows 
with recirculation, flame stabilization, rocket-base 
flows, and swirling flow in a cylindrical chamber are all 
examples of these types of problems. In particular, 
strongly swirling flames with recirculation fall into this 
category. 
3-D M a r c h  i n e  M e t h o d s  . 
3-D parabolic 
boundary layer flows, which are nonaxisymmetric and 
perhaps with weak swirl, require forward marching 
solution methods. They make use of 2=D storage, 
primitive formulation, and SIMPLE solution procedure. 
When a 3-D flow possesses a single predominant 
direction with no recirculation, the equations become 
parabolic and have merely a first-order derivative in this 
main direction. Examples include many phenomena in 
furnace and process technology, axisymmetric transient 
reciprocating engines, and gas turbine combustors 
downstream of the primary zone. 
3-D Relaxation Methods. The most complex 
flow situation requires 3-D relaxation methods of 
solutions. They are use for 3-D elliptic recirculating 
flow, which are nonaxisymmetric and perhaps with 
strong swirl. They make use of 3-D storage, primitive 
formulation, and SIMPLE solution procedure. These 
general cases have first- and second-order derivatives in 
three space directions and relaxation with a 3-D frame is 
required. If transient as well, they possess additionally a 
first-order time derivative and require a time-march with 
a 3-D frame. Most interesting practical combustion 
chambers, stalled diffusers, elbows, rocket motors, 
compressor cascades, and automotive reciprocating 
engines. The computation of 3-D problems concerned 
with most interesting practical combustion phenomena 
represents design methods of the future. These problems 
are now being studied seriously, and further research 
work in these areas will be most useful. 
L' 
Problems abound in the simulation and solution of 
complex turbulent reacting flows for combustor 
applications. Areas in which further detailed numerical 
prediction research will be most useful include (for the 
nonreacting case) recirculation zone characterization, 
turbulence simulation in swirling recirculation flow, 
irregular boundary representation (via analytical or 
numerical transformation techniques of finite element 
methods), and further complexities and parameter 
influences; and (for the reacting case) the simulation of 
complex chemistry, the turbulencelchemistrylspray 
interaction problem, and application to realistic three- 
dimensional problems. 
- 
Significant computer simulation obstacles emerge 
from recent studies especially those related to the 
Combustion Fundamentals Research and Aerothermal 
Modeling assessment programs in cooperation with 
NASA Lewis Research Center. Several authors describe 
their efforts relating to the development of advanced 
numerical techniques which can be applied with 
advantage to turbulent recirculating reacting flowfields. 
A consensus of results indicates specific needs: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5 .  
8 
Improved finite difference representation (with 
versions of bounded skew upwind differencing 
and/or other techniques) 
Faster convergence techniques via improved 
numerical solution schemes 
Improved domain simulation (with boundary 
fitted coordinate system, or orthogonal grids, 
etc.) 
More accurate hot gas heat transfer input 
Improved turbulence and turbulence/chemistry 
treatment 
- 


--- Page 10 ---

There is a need to determine and incorporate new 
finite difference schemes and/or error reduction 
techniques into currently-existing computer code models. 
Improvements in accuracy of representation (differencing 
schemes) and rapidity of convergence (solution 
algorithms) are being sought before computer codes can 
give quantitative, rather than qualitative, predictions. 
Better numerics, improved understanding of inlet flow, 
improved turbulence modeling and improved 
understanding of unsteady problems are required. 
Techniques for improved accuracy (including several 
bounded versions of skewed upwind differencing), 
improved versions of the pressure-velocity coupling 
technique, and methods for speeding convergence of 
iterative procedures are needed. 
- 
Combustion research is becoming more important 
with new emphasis on development of alternate energy 
sources for application to a range of power systems 
without any adverse effect on the environment. 
Research in combustion-related areas has expanded 
significantly in recent years, particularly in area related 
to fossil fuels. The field of combustion is further 
diversified by the complex nature of most reaction 
processes. Fuel chemistry, fluid mechanics, convective 
and radiative heat transfer, gas-phase elementary 
reactions, turbulence, and particle kinetics and dynamics 
are relevant processes that often have a direct, and 
sometimes controlling influence, on the behavior of a 
particular combustion system. Recent textbooks (see 
Refs. 24 through 35) highlight the difficulties in the 
understanding of turbulent reacting flows. 
- 
DYNAMICS OF CoMBusTIQplI 
P r o c e w  
The subject of combustion aerodynamics may 
conveniently be categorized into three areas: 
1. Engineering 
practice - for example: 
gasoline engines, diesel engines, gas turbine 
engines, rockets, steam boilers, open hearth 
steel furnaces, blast furnaces, and hot flame 
cutting equipment. 
2. Mathematical models - for example: flame 
propagation, compression ignition, flame 
stabilization, detonation, spark ignition, 
solid-fuel bed combustion, laminar and 
turbulent jets 
and flames, particle 
combustion, recirculating reactor and 
catalytic combustion. 
3. Fundamental sciences - for example: 
thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, heat and 
mass transfer, and chemical kinetics. 
These levels are connected via a variety of paths, 
with the fundamental sciences providing a basis for the 
mathematical modeling approach with application to 
engineering practice. 
Recent trends are influencing 
engineering practice (pollution control, efficiency and 
change of fuel type), mathematical models (computer 
methods, validation and utilization) and fundamental 
sciences (including chemical kinetics and numerical 
mathematics). 
In steady-flow equipment, coal may be burned as 
lumps on a grate (with application to domestic heating, 
small industrial boilers, and cupola and blast furnaces) or 
as powder, suspended in an air stream (as in large 
industrial boilers and cement kilns). Light fuel oils may 
be used as vapor, from a heated tube or pot (with 
application to primus stoves, small aircraft gas turbines 
and small domestic boilers), as a spray of droplets from 
a rotating cup (as in aircraft gas turbines). Gas oil can 
be sprayed from a swirl atomizer (as in industrial gas 
turbines and larger domestic and industrial boilers), or 
impelled by steam as a jet of droplets (as in open-hearth 
furnaces). Rocket propellants in liquid form are sprayed 
via impingement of liquid jets in large rocket engines 
and in solid form are burned in perforated blocks at free 
surfaces in small rocket engines and those with instant 
readiness. In unsteady-flow equipment, gasoline is 
vaporized by contact with air and hot surfaces in spark- 
ignition internal combustion engines. 
Gas oil is 
sprayed by injection through small orifices in 
compression-ignition diesel engines. 
C o m b u s t i o n  is typically viewed as the 
exothermic chemical reaction of a fuel in an oxidant, and 
three regimes can be distinguished 
1. Slow oxidation preflame combustion - 
occurs throughout extended volume at low 
temperatures. 
2. Detonative 
combustion - combustion 
shock wave propagates supersonically 
through the mixture. 
3. Flame combustion occurs as a fast process 
with a thin reaction zone which propagates as 
a combustion wave at flame speed through 
9 


--- Page 11 ---

the reaction volume [called steady state 
deflagration flame] or occurs in a closed 
vessel with exponential reaction rate increase 
and pressure explosion [called thermal or 
branching chain explosion]. 
Most combustion aerodynamic applications are 
involved with deflagrative flame combustion, in which 
an increase of volume (and temperature), a decrease of 
density and a small decrease in pressure occur across the 
flame front. 
Two distinct applications can be 
distinguished: 
1 .  Heating applications. Here it is required 
to transfer heat from the burning gases to 
boiler tubes, metal ingots, etc. 
Within 
reason, high flame radiation is desirable. 
2. Propulsion applications. The aim is to 
increase the volume, velocity and kinetic 
energy of an air stream, in order to provide 
direct jet propulsion, or drive a turbine. 
Since gas heating is required, flame radiation 
is unnecessary, and usually undesirable. 
Often flames are formed from gaseous of 
prevaporized fuels. Furthermore, although a flame can 
propagate through a static gas mixture, it is usual to 
stabilize the flame at a fixed point by supplying a 
continuous flow of combustible mixture. Under these 
conditions, flames can be divided into two main classes: 
1. Premixed flames in which the reactants are 
completely mixed to the molecular level 
prior to combustion. They are kinetically 
controlled and the rate of flame propagation, 
called the burning velocity, is dependent 
upon chemical composition and rates of 
chemical reaction. Completely premixed 
flames are seldom used in practice for safety 
reasons of, for example, blow out and 
flashback. 
2. Diffusion flames in which the reactants 
mix by diffusion into a thin flame zone, and 
reaction rates are diffusion controlled. They 
are preferred in large-scale industrial practice 
and in gas turbines because safety is increased 
as the fuel and oxidant are kept separate, as 
well as providing greater flexibility in 
controlling flame length and shape and 
combustion intensity. Fuel and air may be 
partially premixed, with additional or 
secondary air supplied through a separate 
section of the burner. 
v 
In both the processes of propagation of the burning 
zone and the burnout of fuel in the flame, transfer of 
heat, mass and momentum play important roles. The 
transfer will he molecular in laminar flames and the 
flow of gases follows streamlines in the flow without 
turbulent diffusion. The transfer will be by turbulent 
diffusion in turbulent flames and the scale and 
intensity of turbulence affect burning rates. In practice 
the need for high combustion intensity or high heat 
release rates associated with turbulent combustion 
include: physical structure of turbulent flow, flame 
fronts, flame generated turbulence, probability density 
functions, flame propagation and noise generation. The 
discussion leads naturally to the aerodynamic effect on 
combustion processes and the strong interaction between 
them. 
Bnrnine Techniaua 
Fuel and oxidant are admitted into combustion 
chambers via devices called burners. Gaseous fuels can 
be pumped directly, but liquid and solid fuels require 
preparation. Liquid fuels are admitted as an atomized 
spray or cloud of finely dispersed droplets, and pre- 
heating to reduce viscosity is a common practice. Solid 
vi 
fuels are often pulverized, or they can be burned on 
grates or in fixed or fluid beds. Solid and liquid fuels 
involve heterogeneous combustion. This process, 
involving release of combustible gases from the solid or 
liquid phases, may be superimposed on the general flame 
zone concepts. 
Phenomena of interest include: 
atomization processes, spray characteristics, vaporization 
rates and combustion. Air is the most common and 
readily available oxidant, and it is pumped via a fan, 
blower or compressor. Fuel and oxidant are rarely 
completely premixed in the burner; they are either 
injected separately or more often the fuel is mixed with a 
small proportion of the combustion air only (primary 
air) on its path through the burner. The splitting of the 
combustion air into primary and secondary streams is 
made for reasons of flame stability and safety, such as 
prevention of flashback and explosion in the fuel supply 
lines. It also enables higher preheat temperatures to be 
used in the secondary air which in turn may favorably 
affect the thermodynamic efficiency of the system. 
Staged combustion and associated stratified 
charge engines separate the combustion into two or 
more distinct regions, usually a first stage where the 
mixture is fuel-rich followed by a second stage where it 
is fuel-lean. Typically, there is a prechamber followed 
d 
I O  


--- Page 12 ---

by a main chamber. In each, mixing rates, mean 
temperature and concentrations of reactants and products 
are maintained at particular levels. Lower temperatures 
result, since stoichiometric conditions are avoided, and 
hence lower oxices of nitrogen production rates are 
found. Fuel-rich conditions in the first stage are also 
favorable for reducing nitric oxide levels from high 
nitrogen-bearing fuels. 
- 
Turbulent jets of fuel and air issuing from 
burners play a dominant role in mixing processes. 
These jets interact with transverse jets and recirculation 
zones and provide flow and mixing patterns, for directing 
flame zones and heating which in turn determine local 
airlfuel ratios, flame zones and combustion rates. 
Round jets are most common and occur by fluid 
issuing from circular cross-section pipes and nozzles. 
Even at low flow rates and small burner diameters, the 
jet flow soon becomes turbulent. In practice, most 
burners have sizes and velocities which give rise to 
turbulent conditions at the exit. 
Annular jets 
frequently surround primary fuel round jets or oil guns 
for secondary air delivery. Sometimes bluff bodies are 
placed centrally in nozzles, so forming an annular flow 
with central recirculation zone which encourage flame 
stabilization. The combination of a round jet and 
surrounding annular jet is called a double concentric 
jet. Further downstream the combined mass flow rates 
and jet momenta characterize the coalesced flow, but near 
the burner the size and geometry of the separation 
interface strongly influences mixing, with pronounced 
effects on flame stability. 
v 
Flame stabilizing recirculation zones may also he 
provoked by strong adverse pressure gradients caused by 
spiraling motion being given to a round jet flow, so 
forming a swirling jet. 
The swirl velocity 
component (also known as tangential or azimuthal 
velocity component) may be imparted via the use of 
swirl vanes, an axial-plus-tangential entry swirl 
generator or direct tangential entry into the combustion 
chamber. The swirl strength has a large scale effect on a 
flowfield: jet growth, entrainment and decay (for inert 
jets) and flame size, shape, stability and combustion 
intensity (for reacting flows). In particular, higher 
mixing rates, higher turbulence intensities and higher 
combustion intensities result. The degree of swirl also 
offers an effective control of the proportion of nozzle 
fluid mass recirculated and hence chamber residence time 
distribution. Then good approximate calculations of 
combustion performance can be made, and it is 
extremely satisfying to be able to optimize combustion 
performance via adjustment of swirl strength and 
resulting residence time distribution A recent text (9) 
provides extensive details about the many aspects of 
complex swirl flow phenomena. 
Throttling entrainment to a turbulent jet by 
confinement in a chamber results in a confined jet 
with associated recirculation zone(s), outside the jet 
stream. Jets penetrating into a main stream flow at 
some angle are called transverse jets. They have 
frequent application as secondary and dilution air 
injection into, for example, gas turbine combustor 
flames. Usually the prediction of their parameters of 
interest for design purposes [the jet path, its penetration 
into and mixing with the main stream] proceeds via a 
semi-empirical approach. More recently, however, direct 
measurement and prediction of this and other fluid 
dynamic phenomena in combustion is possible. 
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS 
The Gasoline Enghe 
Here the combustion system must give certain 
ignition by spark, reduce heat transfer, and burn fuel 
completely under all conditions. Demands for efficiency 
led to high compression ratios and the process of 'knock 
- an uncontrolled ignition of the gaseous mixture in the 
cylinder giving rise to excessive heat transfer, noise, and 
damage to the engine. Design changes and lead-based 
fuel additives were introduced to eliminate this unwanted 
process, hut today unleaded fuel is prefemd for pollutant 
reduction reasons. A schematic of the piston-cylinder 
assembly and its working cycle with constant volume 
combustion appears in Fig. 1. 
Experiment and theory are required to help the 
designer to determine the influence of boundary shape, 
location of spark plug and spark energy, fuel properties 
and wall temperature on ignition behavior, pressure 
volume time (indicator diagram) variations, tendency to 
'knock' and the final gas composition. Past, present and 
future of the gasoline engine and pollutant emission 
problems and solutions are discussed in Refs. 36 and 37. 
Stratified charge engines SCEs include both swirl 
and squish motions and address two problems 
simultaneously - pollutant reduction and efficiency. 
Internal combustion IC engines of this type are 
illustrated schematically in Fig. 2 where a cylinder and 
piston (equipped with a 'cup' so as to produce squish) are 
drawn. The arrangement is such that the fuel/air ratio 
FAR in the vicinity of the spark plug is much richer 


--- Page 13 ---

than elsewhere in the combustion chamber. 
Combustion is 'soft' with air remote from the spark 
plug acting like a cushion. Operation is possible with 
overall FAR well below the operating limit (set by 
ignitability considerations) for conventional engines, and 
this leanness feature makes for economy. Further, 
power is controlled entirely by the rate of fuel flow, and 
not the wasteful throttling technique of conventional 
engines where the engine works against itself. The SCE 
runs always at 'full throttle' with fuel flow limitation 
controlling the action. 
High pressure encourages 
evaporation of the fuel which is directly injected into the 
cylinder head. Swirling air mixes with fuel and carries 
the mixture past the spark plug. The burning region is 
localised, and comprises a rich mixture with good 
ignitability in an overall lean mixture. Some piston 
heads are 'cupped as shown, so forcing the flow inward 
during the final stages of the compression stroke, a 
phenomenon known as 'squish'. Further work (36) 
describes at length the past, present and future of 
gasoline engine combustion, including discussion of 
swirl and squish air motions and their effect in 
combustion chamber design. Discussion includes the 
Ricardo 'bathtub' chamber, the Heron 'bowl-in-piston' 
chamber and May high compression high-turbulence 
chamber designs. The SCE design possibilities are 
interpreted in terms of swirl, squish and vortices for the 
Ricardo spark-ignited comet, the Honda CVCC, the 
MAN-FM and the Ford PROCO systems. Applications 
of SCEs to pollutant formation and control in spark- 
ignition engines are thoroughly covered by Heywood 
(37), including open chamber (Ford PROCO and Texaco 
TCCS, for example) and divided chamber (Honda small 
pre-chamber and other two-chamber concepts, for 
example) systems. 
The Diesel Svstem 
High compression must provide smooth ignition, 
use all available oxygen, reduce heat transfer, reduce 
pumping power, and emit little smoke. As compared 
with the gasoline engine, the compression ratio of the 
diesel engine has to be high so as to ignite the fuel 
spontaneously, as there is no spark in the engine, and 
combustion level is controlled by the rate of spray 
injection of the liquid fuel droplets. Maximization of 
the power of the engine by using up all the available air 
tends to yield excessive smoke, an unwanted pollutant. 
Recent advances in rotary (Wankel) and stratified charge 
engines SCEs have been stimulated through desire for 
efficient clean combustion. 
In the four stroke diesel engine, the chemical 
energy of the fuel is partially transformed into 
12 
mechanical work in four phases, in a manner similar to 
the spark-ignition engine but now there is no spark plug 
- combustion is initiated automatically via high 
compression with constant pressure combustion 
following. 
-' 
Now high compression must provide smooth 
ignition, use all available oxygen, reduce heat transfer, 
reduce pumping power, and emit little smoke. Inlet 
flow is encouraged to possess a swirl motion about 
the central axis of the cylinder and the bowl-in-piston (or 
cup-in-piston) arrangement gives a phenomenon known 
as squish as the piston nears the top of the cylinder. 
Then the radial extent of the volume of swirling flow is 
suddenly restricted, and conservation of swirl momentum 
principles leads to dramatic increase in the swirl 
velocity, so increasing turbulence and mixing levels. 
Researchers desire knowledge about the influences of 
chamber boundary shape, inlet air movement, fuel spray 
injector characteristics and fuel properties on ignition 
delay, pressure volume time variations, heat transfer to 
the piston and smoke production. The application of 
swirl and squish to air motion in diesel combustion 
is included in the review and prospects given recently by 
Shahed et al (40). These concepts are also used in 
stratified charge engines SCEs of the gasoline variety. 
Consider now what theory may contribute in the 
optimization of design and development. Increasing - 
demands for both thermal efficiency and lower pollutant 
output provide incentive for better methods of analyzing 
the aerothermodynamics in internal combustion IC 
engines. The most general approach is to compute as a 
function of three-space coordinates and time the 
complete flowfield between the top of the cylinder and 
the face of the piston throughout the complete four- 
stroke cycle - intake, compression, power and exhaust 
strokes - with the intake and exhaust valves opening and 
closing appropriately. In the gasoline engine, spark 
ignition initiates the combustion of the compressed 
gaseous mixture at the beginning of the power stroke; in 
the diesel engine, on the other hand, ignition of the fuel 
droplet spray is brought about via the high compression 
achieved on the compression stroke, and modeling is 
then a more difficult task. In both cases, it is a major 
effort to apply computational fluid dynamics in order to 
analyze and understand the complex flowfield patterns in 
reciprocating engines, and hence aid in their design and 
development. 
Until recently most models of IC engines were 
basically thermodynamic models - the combustion 
chamber was considered as a control volume, fluid 
dynamic motion was neglected and energy release rate 
d 


--- Page 14 ---

specified. Many such successful applications have been 
made. However, interest in more realistic approaches is 
essential in understanding and solving current problems 
in, for example, stratified charge engines SCEs, and 
development of spatial models are necessary. 
Furnaces 
- 
Flame control is especially important in providing 
specified distributions of radiant and convective heat 
transfer, complete combustion, freedom from noise and 
oscillation, and insensitivity to fuel changes. Figure 3 
illustrates four ways in which coal may be burned in 
industrial furnaces. In furnace design, a multitude of 
practical configurations are involved, and typical 
problems and requirements are distinctly opposite to 
those of engine designers. For example, smoke is 
needed to generate large radiant heat fluxes, but it is 
desirable to consume it all before the gases leave the 
furnace. Heat transfer rates must be high and fluxes 
must he distributed in an optimum manner. 
Yet 
overheating is to be avoided in both the material and the 
furnace roof. 
Many different types of furnaces exit - the power- 
station boiler furnace is somewhat different from the 
furnaces of the metallurgical and process industries, for 
example. The furnace takes on a role of central 
importance in modern society and its efficiency and 
pollution characteristics have far reaching consequences. 
In all cases, though, flame control is especially 
important in providing specified distributions of radiant 
and convective heat transfer, complete combustion, 
freedom from noise and oscillation, and insensitivity to 
fuel changes. Most furnaces flames are given a degree of 
swirJ for stability purposes, while others, for example 
the tangentially-fired boiler, have inlet streams which are 
directed so as to aim tangentially at the fireball that 
results in the center of the chamber. Then a weak 
cyclone-type effect of the swirl chamber or cyclone 
chamber results - a swirling motion about the geometric 
axis of the equipment. Important end-products of the 
process are temperature, heat-flux distribution to the 
walls and combustion efficiency, and these are 
intimately connected with production of pollutants, like 
soot and oxides of nitrogen. The designer and operator 
would like to know how these depend on fuel-jet 
momentum and angle, temperature of preheated air and 
the shape of the chamber. 
Needless to say, the 
simulation problem becomes quite complex, involving 
the interaction of turbulent combustion of many 
chemical species, with two-phase processes (liquid or 
solid fuel and carbon particles throughout the flowfield) 
'- 
and radiative heat transfer. 
As detailed elsewhere, 
W 
modeling involves to some extent: particle-size 
distributions (calculated in finite-size ranges at all points 
of the domain), flux or zone models of radiation heat 
transfer, and soot distribution studies (soot being formed 
by thermal decomposition of hydrocarbon molecules and 
consumed by oxidation, both of which are complex 
chemical-kineteic process). Reviews of progress in this 
area are available, and the work of the International 
Flame Research Foundation, Ijmuiden, Holland and the 
associated American Flame Research Committee is to 
noted (40,41). 
Tbe Gas Tu- 
The cycle for gas turbine combustion (the Brayton 
cycle) is similar to that of the reciprocating four stroke 
internal combustion engine, see Fig. 1, except that 
continuous rather than intermittent burning is involved 
and the combustion takes place at constant pressure 
rather than at constant volume. Figure 4 illustrates the 
gas turbine turbojet engine. The cycles of both are made 
up of four strokes: the charging, compressing, 
combusting and exhausting strokes. In the reciprocating 
engine the four strokes take place successively in the 
same cylinder, whereas in the gas turbine they take place 
simultaneously in different parts of the engine, that is: 
the compressor (with charging system), the combustion 
chamber, the turbine (with expansion), and the exhaust 
system. The continuous smooth steady state rotary 
motion of the gas turbine led to its wide use in 
stationary and mobile power plants, most noticeably in 
aircraft applications, in the form of the turbojet (pure 
jet), turboprop (most work going to the propeller) and 
turbofan (some work going to a large fan with 'by-pass' 
facility). The gas turbine produces, among other things, 
smoke and industrial and automotive application makes 
all these pollutants even less tolerable than aircraft 
applications. 
Its combustion chamber performs an essential task 
- high intensity combustion - and designers strive to 
reduce its length without making the flame too easily 
extinguishable, and to reduce its pressure drop without 
worsening the degree of mixing in the gases which 
exhaust via the turbine. Experimental 'trial and error' (or 
so-called 'cut and try' or 'cut and weld) methods are used 
for optimization of the basic design. 
Basic features of a can-type combustor chamber are 
shown in Fig. 5 (Ref. 43). Although its construction is 
quite simple, its design and development are haphazard. 
Details of its operation are quite complex and present 
knowledge of the internal aerodynamics is very 
incomplete. Note that although the figure refers to 
13 


--- Page 15 ---

combustor can flame tube, it may also he thought of as 
cross-sectional views of annular combustors. It may 
also represent directly the flame tube of a can-annular 
system. These systems find their place in high intensity 
combustion engines, in which the combustor must burn 
fuel completely, cause little pressure drop, produce gases 
of nearly uniform temperature, occupy small volume, 
and maintain stable combustion over a wide range of 
operating conditions. 
The combustor has the difficult task of burning 
large quantities of fuel, introduced in a highly atomized 
spray from a specially designed nozzle, with extensive 
volumes of air, which flows in through an upstream 
annular swirler (a vane pack with swirl angle typically 
up to 70 deg.). This task must be accomplished subject 
to certain performance requirements. The high intensity 
combustion must burn fuel completely, cause little 
pressure drop, produce gases of nearly uniform 
temperature, occupy small volume, and maintain stable 
combustion over a wide range of operating conditions. 
Typically, the 18 percent or so of the air stream 
enters as passing through swirl vanes at an angle of 
about 70 deg. to the main flow direction. This results 
in strong 'centrifugal' effects on entry to the combustor 
and very low pressure in the primary zone, resulting in 
the formation of a central toroidal recirculation 
zone CTRZ. The central hub of the swirler includes a 
fuel spray nozzle and a conical swirling spray of liquid 
kerosene droplets is projected to the CTRZ, resulting in 
high-intensity burning. Stability is enhanced by the 
recirculation of hot combustion products, and additional 
primary zone air entering via lateral injection holes. 
The designer needs to know how the host of 
requirements are influenced by the pressure and 
temperature of the inlet air, the location and size of other 
holes and film-cooling slots, swirl strength, boundary 
geometry, fuel spray angle and properties, and many 
other parameters. A review of recent advances is given 
in Ref. 24. 
Pulseiet Eneines 
Intermittent combustion is the principle used in 
the pulsejet engine, of which a schematic is seen in Fig. 
6. The duct inlet has a series of inlet valves which are 
spring-loaded into the open position. Air flows in 
through the open valves and passes into the combustion 
chamber where it is heated via the burning of fuel 
injected into the chamber. The resulting pressure rise 
causes the valves to close and the hot expanded gases are 
ejected rearward through the propelling nozzle at high 
speed providing propulsive force. But the frontal air 
entry is now closed off, and so as the exhausting gases 
escape a pressure depression occurs, thus allowing the 
valves to open and the cycle re-start. Some designs 
'V 
disperse with inlet valves by careful ducting aimed at 
controlling the changing pressures of the resonating 
cycle. The pulsejet has not been found suitable for 
aircraft propulsion because of its low thermal efficiency, 
high fuel consumption and lack of performance in 
comparison to gas turbine propulsion. It was, however, 
the power plant of the V-1 flying bomb during the 
Second World War (44). 
Ramiet and Scramiet Eneines 
Ramjet combustion offers a high specific impulse 
(range and speed capability), making it a favored choice 
for today's light and compact missiles. A schematic of a 
typical ramjet engine appears in Fig. 7. Its propulsion 
system is conceptually simple, containing no moving 
parts but requiring a high operating speed so as to 
compress the intake air by ram effect, in the intake 
section [labeled m -1 in the figure]. The air is delivered 
to a combustion chamber where fuel is injected and 
burned in the presence of flame stabilizers to provide 
efficient combustion [section 1-21. The hot expanded 
gases exit the engine via a propelling nozzle at high 
velocities, so producing the forward thrust [section 2-31. 
The high initial velocity is usually provided by booster 
rockets or a launch aircraft. A recent technology has 
evolved concerning the intergral rocket-ramjet IRR 
concept, where sequential use is made of the ramjet 
chamber as a solid rocket combustion chamber (during 
the initial stages of flight) followed by its later use as a 
ramjet combustion chamber (after a high velocity has 
been attained and the solid propellant has been burnt). It 
operates as a completely integrated propulsion system. 
Initially during the rocket boost, the ramjet fuel is sealed 
off and the ramjet air inlets are covered with blow-off 
plugs. 
When the rocked burns out, the blow-off 
fairings, inlet plugs and rocket nozzle are ejected, 
leaving a ramjet propulsion system which is then 
ignited. 
- 
One of the possibilities for powering hypersonic 
vehicles with an air-breathing engine is the scramjet (or 
supersonic combustion ramjet) (46). 
Its basic 
components are shown in Fig. 8 and consist of air 
intake, a combustion chamber and a propelling nozzle. 
Many variants of this geometry are available. 
14 


--- Page 16 ---

13ocket Ewincs 
v 
Rocket engines do not use atmospheric air as their 
working fluid, and thus they are able to function outside 
the earth's atmosphere, if desired. They also provide 
propulsive force at a vehicle velocity of zero, direct from 
the launch pad, in contrast to the ramjet which requires a 
high forward velocity to function. Both liquid and solid- 
propellant rocket engines are used. 
Figure 9 shows the basics of a liquid rocket engine 
(39). Both fuel and oxidant are carried on board. 
Typical fuels are hydrogen, kerosene and ethyl alcohol; 
typical oxidants are oxygen, hydrogen peroxide and 
fluorine. They are carried in liquid form in tanks and are 
fed to the combustion chamber via injectors [see section 
1-2 of the figure]. Sometimes a pump is used to inject 
the liquids as shown, but alternatively highly pressurized 
tanks can provide direct injection. Often the fuel being 
pumped passes through a double wall construction of 
nozzle and combustion chamber to provide some degree 
of cooling for these very high temperature components. 
In the combustion chamber [section 2-31, the reaction 
produces high temperature, high pressure and low ensity 
products of the chemical reaction. The gases expand in 
the convergent-divergent nozzle [section 3-41 are 
exhausted at high velocity to the surroundings, so 
producing propulsive force. 
d 
In the solid-propellant rocket engine, the entire 
charge of solid-propellant grain, in the form of a 
cartridge, occupies most of the combustion chamber 
volume. Propellants fall into two main classes known 
as 'double-based and 'composite' types. The former is a 
homogeneous colloidal mixture of, for example, 
nitrocellulose and an explosive plasticizer, usually 
nitroglycerine. The latter consists of a heterogeneous 
structure of particles of an oxidizer [like ammonium 
nitrate] or lithium perchlorate dispersed through a plastic 
reducing agent which acts as the fuel. Shown in fig. 10 
is a schematic of the solid-propellant rocket engine with 
its main features. Figure 11 shows typical surface 
shapes of solid-propellant grain, chosen so that certain 
burning surface areas and void volume temporal changes 
may be achieved to be consistent with engine thrust 
requirements. 
CLOSURE 
Many combustion systems utilize the strong 
favorable effects of applying swirl to injected air and 
fuel, so aiding the stabilization of hihg-intensity 
combustion 
processes, 
and 
good 
flowfield 
W' 
characterization is of prime concern. Experimental and 
computational results show some of the interesting 
effects of combustor design parameters on subsequent 
flowfield development and combustor performance. 
Theoretical and computatidhal experiments can he, 
should be, and have been performed which complement 
test cell data describing the internal flowfield 
characteristics. Theoretically, it is in the area of 
parameter influences that computer programs show their 
supremacy in terms of time and cost savings as 
compared with experimental work. Progress will lead to 
more realistic and cost-effective practical combustor 
modeling. 
Model experiments designed to highlight specific 
subproblems and their interactions (and not complex 
combustor flows) should receive attention for model 
development and validation. 
Other areas in which 
further research will be most useful include: the 
simulation of complex chemistry, the turbulent-reaction 
interraction problem, the utilization of complex mesh 
and/or finite element methods of computation, and 
application to realistic three-dimensional problems. 
This, and continued development on the accuracy of the 
simulation of the physical processes involved, should 
elevate computer modeling to an established place in 
practical combustor design and development programs. 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Patankar, S.V., and Spalding, D.B., "Mathematical 
Models of Fluid Flow and Spalding, D.B., 
"Mathematical Models of Fluid Flow and Heat 
Transfer in Furnaces: A Review", Journal of the 
Institute of Fuel, September 1973, pp. '279-283. 
2. 
Spalding, D.B., "Mathematical Models of 
Turbulent Flames: A Review", Combustion 
Science and Technology, Vol. 13, 1976, pp. 3- 
25. 
3. 
Lilley, D.G., "Swirl Flows in Combustion: A 
Review", AIAA Journal, Vol. 15, August 1977, 
pp. 2063-1078 
4. 
Edelman, R.B., and Harsha, P.T., "Laminar and 
Turbulent Gas Dynamics in Combustion - 
Current Status", Progress in Energy and 
Combustion Science, Vol. 4, Pergamon Press, 
1978, pp. 1-62. 
5 .  
Jones, Robert E., "Gas Turbine Engine Emissions 
-- Problems, Progress and Future", Progress in 


--- Page 17 ---

6. 
7. 
8 .  
9. 
10. 
1 I .  
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
Energy and Combustion Science, Vol. 4, 
Pergamon Press, Ltd., 1978, pp. 73-113. 
Lilley, D.G., "Flowfield Modeling in Practical 
Combustors: A Review", Journal of Energy, 
Vol. 3, July-August 1979, pp. 193-210. 
McDonald, H., "Combustion Modeling in Two 
and Three Dimensions -- Some Numerical 
Considerations", Progress in Energy and 
Combustion Science, Vol. 5, 1979, pp. 97-122. 
Khalil, E.E., "Modeling of Furnaces and 
Combustors", Abacus Press, Tunbridge Wells, 
England, 1982. 
Gupta, A.K., Lilley, D.G., and Syred, N., "Swirl 
Flows", Abacus Press, Tunbridge Wells, 
England, 1984. 
Gosman, A.D., and Pun, W.M., "Calculation of 
Recirculating Flows", Rept. No. HISl74112, 
Dept. of Mechanical engineering, Imperial 
College, London, England, 1974. 
Lilley, D.G., and Rhode, D.L., "A Computer Code 
for 
Swirling 
Turblent 
Axisymmetric 
Recirculating Flows in Practical Isothermal 
Combustor Geometries", Report NASA CR- 
3442, Feb. 1982. 
Rhode, D.L., Lilley, D.G., and McLaughlin, 
D.K., "On the Prediction of Swirling Flowfields 
Found 
in 
Axisymmetric 
Combustor 
Geometries", ASME Journal of Fluids Engng., 
Vol. 104, Sept. 1982, pp. 378-384. 
Lilley, D.G., Rhode, D.L., and Samples, J.W., 
"Prediction of Swirling Reacting Flow in 
Ramjet Combustors", Paper AIAA-81-1485, 
Colorado Springs, CO, July 25-27, 1981. 
Khalil, E.E.. Spalding, D.B., and Whitelaw, J.H., 
"The Calculation of Local Flow Properties in 
Two-Dimensional Furnaces", Int. J. Heat Mass 
Trans., Vol. 18, 1975, pp. 775-791. 
Novick, A.S., Miles, G.A., and Lilley, D.G., 
"Numerical 
Simulation of 
Combustor 
Flowfields: A Primitive Variable Design 
Capability", J. of Energy, Vol. 3, No. 2, March- 
April 1979, pp. 95.105. 
16. Ramos, J.I., "Exhaust Gas Emissions from a 
Swirl Stabilized 
Combustor", AIChE 
Symposium Series, R.P. Stein, ed., Vol. 77, 
No. 208, 1981, pp. 393-399. See also: Report 
CO18113, Dept. of Mech. Engng., CMU, 
Pittsburgh, PA, 1981. 
17. Samples, J.W. and Lilley, D.G., "Chemically 
Reacting Axisymmetric Flowfield Prediction", 
Paper AIAA-84-0364, Reno, NV, Jan. 9-12, 
1984. 
18. Patankar, S.V., and Spalding, D.B., "A Computer 
Model for Three-Dimensional Flow in 
Furnaces", 14th Symp. (int.) on Combustion, 
The Combustion Inst., Pittsburgh, PA, 1973, 
pp. 605-614. 
19. Serag-Eldin, M.A., and Spalding, D.B., 
"Computations of Three-Dimensional Gas- 
Turbine Combustion Chamber Flows", Trans. 
ASME J. of Eng. for Power, Vol. 101, July 
1979, pp. 326-336. 
20. Mongia, H.C., and Reynolds, R.S., "Combustor 
Design Criteria Validation, Vol. 111 - User's 
Manual", Report USARTL - 78-55C, U S .  
Army Res. and Tech. Lab., Ft. Eustis, VA, Feb. 
1979. (See also Vols. I and II). 
v 
21. 
Swithenbank, J., Turan, A,, and Felton, P.G., 
"Three-Dimensional Two-Phase Mathematical 
Modeling of Gas Turbine Combustors", in Gas 
Turbine Combustor Design Problems (Lefebvre, 
A.H., ed.), Hemisphere-McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 1980, pp. 249-314. 
22. Srivatsa, S.K., "Computations of Soot and NOx 
Emissions from Gas Turbine Combustors", 
NASA CR-167930, 1982. 
23. Sullivan, R.E., Sutton, R., Miles, G., Young, E., 
and Briehl, D., "Application of 3-D 
AerodynamiclCombustion Model to Combustor 
Primary Zone Study", Paper AIAA-83.1265, 
Seattle, WA, June 27-29, 1983. 
24. Lefebvre, A.H., "Gas Turbine Combustion", 
McGraw Hill, 1983. 
25. Toong, T.Y., "Combustion Dynamics: Dynamics 
of Chemically Reacting Fluids", McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1983. 
16 


--- Page 18 ---

26. Gupta, A.K. and Lilley, D.G., "Flowfield 
Modeling and Diagnostics", Abacus Press, 1985. 
Williams, F.A., "Combustion Theory", Second 
Edition, Benjamin Cummings, Menlo Park, 
CA, 1985. 
W 
27. 
28. Rosner, D.E., "Transport Processes in Chemically 
Reacting Flow Systems", Butterworths, Boston, 
1986. 
29. 
Kuo, K.K., "Principles of Combustion", Wiley, 
New York, 1986. 
30. Oran, E.S. and Boris, J.P., "Numerical Simulation 
of Reactive Flow", Elsevier, New York, 1987. 
31. Eckbreth, A.C., "Laser Diagnostics for 
Combustion Temperature and Species", Abacus 
PredGordon and Breach Science Publishers, 
England, 1988. 
32. Chomiak, J., "Combustion: A Study in Theory, 
Fact and Application", Abacus Press/Gordon & 
Breach, New York, 1990. 
33. Chigier, N.A., "Combustion Measurements", 
4 
Hemisphere Publishing Corp., 1991. 
34. Bartok, W. and Sarofim, A.F. (Eds.), "Fossil Fuel 
Combustion-A Source Book", Wiley, New 
York, 1991. 
35. Keating, E.L., "Applied Combustion", Marcel 
Dekker, New York, 1993. 
36. Wheeler, R.W., "Gasoline Combustion - Past, 
Present and Future", Paper D.P. 78/212 
presented at CYCSS Spring Technical Meeting 
held at Purdue University, W. Lafayette, Indiana, 
April 3-4, 1978. 
37. Heywood, J.D., "Pollutant Formation and Control 
in Spark-Ignition Engines", Prog. in Energy and 
Comb. Sci., Vol. I ,  1976, pp. 135-164 
38. Campbell, A.S., "Thermodynamic Analysis of 
Combustion Engines", Wiley, New York, 1979. 
39. Stambuleanu, A., "Flame Combustion Processes 
in Industry", Abacus Press, Tunbridge Wells, 
England, 1978. 
40. Shahed, S.M., Flynn, P.F., and Lyn, W.T., 
"Diesel Combustion: Review and Prospects", 
Paper presented at CI/CSS Spring Technical 
Meeting, held at Purdue University, W. 
Lafayette, Indiana, April 3-4, 1978. 
41. Beer, J.M., "Recent Advances in the Technology 
of Furnace Flames", J. Inst. Fuel, Vol. 45, July 
1972, pp. 370-382. 
42. Godridge, A.M., and Read, A.W., "Combustion 
and Heat Transfer in Large Boiler Furnaces", 
Prog. in Energy and Combustion Science, Vol. 
2, 1976, pp. 83-95. 
43. Anon, "The Jet Engine", Rolls Royce, Derby, 
England, 1972. 
44. 
Lichty, L.C., "Combustion Engine Processes", 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967. 
45. 
McMahon, P.J., "Aircraft Propulsion", Barnes and 
Noble Books, London A Division of Harper and 
Row, New York, 1971. 
46. Swithenbank, J., "Hypersonic Air-Breathing 
Propulsion", Prog. in Aero. Sci., Vol. 8 (D. 
Kuchemann, Ed.), Pergamon Press, Oxford, 
England, 1966, pp. 229-294. 
17 


--- Page 19 ---

AIRIFUEL 
&TAKE 
COHPRESSION 
COnBuSnON 
EXHAUST 
intennlttent 
wutr pa 
Fig.1. 
The gasoline engine piston-cylinder assembly and four stroke Otto cycle. 
Fig. 2. 
Stratified charge engine geometry. 
Arrangement of swirl injector and spark plug 
in a stratified charge engine. 
Cupped piston in stratified charge engine 
which produces “squish’ 
(a) 
(b) 
38 
Fig. 3. 
Coal combustion in industrial furnaces with 
swirl 39 
(a) 
as pulverized coal 
(b) 
inafixedted 
(c) 
in a fluidized bed 
(a) 
in a cyclone furnace 
Fig. 4. 
The gas turbine turbojet engine 43 
- 
18 


--- Page 20 ---

Fig. 5. 
Schematic of flame stabilization and general 
flow pattern in a typical axisymmetric can- 
type combustion chamber of a gas turbine 
engine 43 
r 
WullER VALVf lk 
FIRING - 
IR PIPE AND 
PROPfLLINC NOZZLE 
SUPPLY 
AIR INTAKE 
COMWJmON CHAUBLR 
Fig. 6. 
The pulsejet and its process 44 
I 
AIR lNTCKE 
I 
I 
1 
2 
3 
, 
00 
Fig. 7. 
Schematic of the ramjet engine45 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
INTAKE. 
I 
COMBUSTION I 
NOZZLE. 
I 
I 
CHAMBER. I 
I 
I 
Fig. 8. 
Schematic of the scramjet engine 46 
19 


--- Page 21 ---

45 
Fig. 9. 
Schematic of the liquid rocket engine 
Fig. 11. 
Typical surface shapes of solid-propellant 
grain in a rocket engine 39 
39 
Fig. 10. 
Schematic of the solid-propellant rocket 
1. 
the engine frame 
2. 
the exhaust nozzle 
3. 
the solid-propellant grain charge 
4. 
the electric ignition device 
5. 
6. 
the nozzle throat 
the flow uniformisation grate of the burned 
gases towards the exhaust nozzle 
C 
(a) 
for neutral burning 
(b) for regressive burning 
(c) 
for progressive burning; B - surface inhibited. 
20 
