
--- Page 1 ---

The interaction of ﬂame and ﬂow ﬁeld in a lean
premixed swirl-stabilized combustor operated
on H2/CH4/air
D.M. Wicksalla, A.K. Agrawala,*, R.W. Scheferb, J.O. Kellerb
a School of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019, USA
b Sandia National Laboratories, Combustion Research Facility, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
Abstract
The interaction of ﬂame and ﬂow ﬁeld was studied in an enclosed lean premixed swirl-stabilized
combustor operated on methane (CH4)- and hydrogen (H2)- enriched CH4. This was accomplished by
simultaneous measurements of the 2D velocity ﬁeld using particle image velocimetry and planar laser
induced ﬂuorescence imaging of the hydroxyl (OH) radical. Experiments were conducted at an inlet
Reynolds number of 13,500 and a theoretical swirl number of 1.5. The fuel was pure CH4 or a mixture
of 60% CH4 and 40% H2 by volume. The adiabatic ﬂame temperature was 1350 ± 20 C for both fuels.
Results show that the addition of H2 changes the shape of the reaction zone, producing a shorter, and
a more robust ﬂame. Fuel composition also aﬀected the location of the reaction zone, which in turn,
inﬂuenced both instantaneous and time-averaged ﬂow ﬁelds. Time-resolved measurements show vortical
structures containing regions of high OH concentration around their edges. The combustion stabilized
in regions of high compressive strain for the CH4 ﬂame but not for the H2-enriched CH4 ﬂame. In the
CH4 ﬂame, reactions extinguished in the high velocity inlet jet region, where the H2-enriched CH4 ﬂame
was able to sustain combustion.
 2004 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Gas turbine engines; Premixed turbulent ﬂames; Laser- induced ﬂuorescence
1. Introduction
Lean premixed (LPM) combustion is currently
the method of choice for reducing pollutant emis-
sions in land-based gas turbine engines. The lower
peak ﬂame temperatures in LPM combustion
abate the formation of oxides of nitrogen (NOx)
via the thermal pathway. Most of the current
LPM systems are limited to utilizing natural gas.
However, gasiﬁed coal and biomass, chemical
and reﬁnery waste, and full-cell oﬀ-gases are some
of the alternate fuel stocks that may potentially be
used in gas turbines. Understanding the role of
hydrogen (H2), typically present in these fuels, is
important to the larger goal of utilizing alternate
fuels for power generation. Hydrogen-enriched
hydrocarbon fuels may also provide a cross-over
strategy to the H2 energy infrastructure of the
future.
Past experiments have shown improvement in
ﬂame stability and/or NOx reductions when H2
was added to the hydrocarbon fuel [1–3]. Ren
1540-7489/$ - see front matter  2004 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.proci.2004.07.021
* Corresponding author. Fax: +1 405 325 1088.
E-mail address: aagrawal@ou.edu (A.K. Agrawal).
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 2875–2883
www.elsevier.com/locate/proci
Proceedings
of the
Combustion
Institute


--- Page 2 ---

et al. [4] used an opposed-jet, symmetric, twin-
ﬂame conﬁguration to ﬁnd that the presence of
H2 in methane (CH4) resulted in a substantial in-
crease of strain rate at extinction, especially at
lower equivalence ratios. Similar results were ob-
tained by Jackson et al. [5], who found early H2
breakdown increased radical production near the
base of the ﬂame and thereby, increased the burn-
ing rates. Schefer et al. [6] conducted experiments
in a swirl-stabilized combustor using CH4 and H2-
enriched CH4. Results indicated improved ﬂame
stability and extended lean blow-oﬀ(LBO) limit
with H2 addition. Moreover, the visual ﬂame
shape and OH levels were also aﬀected by the fuel
composition.
In recent years, greater insight into the reacting
ﬂow ﬁeld has been gained by utilizing particle im-
age velocimetry (PIV). Ji and Gore [7] measured
the ﬂow ﬁeld in a swirl-stabilized, unconﬁned bur-
ner and found signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
mean and instantaneous ﬂow structures. For
example, the mean ﬂow exhibited a large vortex,
while several small-scale vortices were observed
in the time-resolved ﬂow ﬁeld. Similar results were
obtained by Wicksall et al. [8] in conﬁned swirling
ﬂows, with and without chemical reactions. Heat
release in the ﬂame was found to aﬀect both mean
and
instantaneous
ﬂow
structures,
indicating
strong coupling between ﬂuid ﬂow and chemical
reactions. Results indicated that the information
about the interaction between reaction zone and
ﬂow ﬁeld is necessary to understand and to predict
the combustion process.
Several research groups have obtained simulta-
neous measurements of velocity and scalar ﬁelds
using PIV and planar laser induced ﬂuores-
cence (PLIF) imaging of hydroxyl (OH) or methyl
(CH) radical [9–14]. Rehm and Clemens [10]
found that thin OH zones are associated with re-
gions of high compressive strain in non-premixed
hydrogen jet ﬂames. Donbar et al. [11] found
highly wrinkled, but rarely broken CH layer in
turbulent non-premixed ﬂames. Data revealed
strain rates of up to 20,000s1 at the tip of the
ﬂame. Measurements by Kothnur et al. [13] show
that CH structures exhibit a stronger correlation
with changes in the ﬂow ﬁeld resulting from heat
release than OH structures. Han and Mungal
[14] found that intense combustion occurred in re-
gions of high compressive strain.
The present study seeks to understand the
interaction between reaction zone and turbulent
ﬂow ﬁeld. Unlike past studies of non-premixed
ﬂames, we consider LPM combustion typically
employed in gas turbine engines. Swirl-stabilized
combustion occurring inside a chamber is investi-
gated to represent a widely used industrial ﬂow
conﬁguration. The operating variable is the fuel
composition, i.e., pure CH4 or H2-enriched CH4,
to emphasize the role of the chemistry. Simulta-
neous measurements of the ﬂow ﬁeld and OH rad-
ical are obtained, respectively, using PIV and OH-
PLIF imaging. The rest of the paper will consist of
a description of the experimental apparatus, the
results obtained, a brief discussion, and conclud-
ing remarks.
2. Experimental apparatus
Experiments
at
atmospheric
pressure
and
temperature were conducted in an enclosed swirl-
stabilized LPM combustor described by Wicksall
et al. [8]. The fuel was injected into the air
400 mm upstream of the combustor. The entrance
to the combustor contained a six-vane axial swirler
located in the annulus around the centerbody. The
vanes were oriented at a 28 angle to the combus-
tor inlet plane. The diameter of the centerbody was
20 mm and the outer diameter of the swirler was
41 mm. The combustion chamber was a 300 mm
long quartz glass tube with an inner diameter of
83 mm and a 4 mm thick wall, which was cooled
by natural convection. Half of the inside of the
quartz tube was sand blasted to reduce reﬂection
of the laser light. Experiments were conducted at
an inlet Reynolds number of 13,500, which corre-
sponds to a bulk axial inlet velocity of 10 m/s.
The Reynolds number was calculated using the
bulk axial velocity, the hydraulic diameter of the
annulus around the centerbody, and the properties
of air. The theoretical swirl number of 1.5 was cal-
culated assuming that the ﬂow leaves the swirler
parallel to the vanes. The fuel was 99% pure CH4
or a mixture of 60% CH4 and 40% H2 by volume.
The adiabatic ﬂame temperature was 1350 ± 20 C
for both fuel mixtures. This ﬂame temperature cor-
responds to an equivalence ratio of 0.58, a value
slightly higher than the lean stability limit of the
CH4 ﬂame. These conditions pertained to typical
non-sooting blue ﬂames that were visibly stable.
Additional physical description of these ﬂames is
provided by Schefer et al. [6].
A dual-chamber Nd:YAG laser was used as
the illumination source in the PIV system. The la-
ser sheet was 50 mm high and 0.5 mm thick, and
the time delay between pulses was 15 ls. The
strong out-of-plane motion caused by the swirling
ﬂow necessitated shortening the time delay and
increasing the thickness of the laser sheet to avoid
excessive loss of particles out of the measurement
plane [7]. The laser light scattered oﬀthe alumi-
num oxide seed particles, and was recorded on
consecutive frames of a 1024 · 1024 pixels digital
camera with a ﬁeld-of-view of 30 · 30 mm. The
PIV images were analyzed using PIV LAB 2000
(version 1.50) Matlab Routines developed by
Han and Mungal [15]. The interrogation region
was 32 · 32 pixels, or 0.9 mm per side. A 50%
overlap of interrogation regions was used, result-
ing in velocity vectors at every 0.45 mm. Further
details of the PIV system used in this experiment
2876
D.M. Wicksall et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 2875–2883


--- Page 3 ---

are given by Wicksall et al. [8]. The uncertainty in
the velocity calculated using the methodology
proposed by Haste [16] was 0.31 m/s.
A Q-switched Nd:YAG laser operating at
532 nm was used to pump the dye laser in the
OH PLIF system. A beam at 283.556 nm was pro-
duced by frequency doubling the output of the dye
laser. This frequency excited the Q1(8) line of the
(1,0) band of the A2R ‹ X2P electronic transi-
tion. The Q1(8) transition was utilized because
the signal was proportional to the mole fraction
within 10% of the peak value, without the need
for population fraction and quenching corrections
[17]. The sheet forming optics utilized for the PIV
beams were also used for the PLIF system. The
PLIF laser pulse was coplanar with the two PIV
pulses and occurred between them. The PIV and
OH signals were collected with a single lens and
separated using a dichroic placed at 45 angle to
the laser sheet, which turned the OH signal per-
pendicular to the PIV signal, while the PIV signal
passed through the dichroic unaﬀected. Further
details of the OH PLIF system used in this exper-
iment are given by Schefer et al. [6].
3. Results and discussion
In this section, time-averaged data are pre-
sented followed by the simultaneous measure-
Fig. 1. Time-averaged OH PLIF image for (A) CH4
ﬂame, (B) H2-enriched ﬂame.
Fig. 2. Time-averaged OH PLIF image superimposed
with velocity vectors (only 11% of the vectors are shown)
for (A) CH4 ﬂame, (B) H2-enriched ﬂame.
D.M. Wicksall et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 2875–2883
2877


--- Page 4 ---

ments. The measurements were taken in many
separate trials as only 10 data sets could be
obtained at a time because of fouling of the quartz
combustor
by
the
seed
particles.
The
time-
averaged velocity data were computed from a
sequence of 200 instantaneous measurements,
which
were
indistinguishable
from
averages
performed with 100 data points. The averaged
OH data presented are from a set of 1000 images.
3.1. Time-averaged measurements
The overall understanding of the ﬂame structure
is gained from Fig. 1, showing time-averaged OH
images for CH4 and H2-enriched CH4 ﬂames. The
horizontal lines seen in the OH image are due to dis-
tortion by the quartz conﬁnement tube. The stan-
dard corrections for ﬂat ﬁeld, background, and
laser sheet non-uniformity have been made to all
the OH images presented in this work. In Fig. 1, a
diﬀerent color scale is used for each ﬂame. The
OH image for the CH4 ﬂame (Fig. 1A) shows long
and wide reaction zones on either side of the jet axis.
Reactions occur mainly up to the axial location,
z = 60 mm, although minor quantities of OH per-
sist farther downstream. No OH is found at the
intersection of the combustor inlet plane and wall,
indicating a lack of reactions in the corner recircu-
lation zone. In contrast, the time-averaged OH im-
age for the H2-enriched ﬂame is shorter and more
intense, with higher OH levels. The combustion is
virtually complete at z = 25 mm. High OH levels
in the corner recirculation zone demonstrate in-
tense combustion in that region. Minor asymmetry
in Fig. 1 is attributed, in part, to the diﬀerences in
velocity proﬁles at the leading and trailing edges
of the inlet swirler vanes.
Although OH data in Fig. 1 were obtained
across the full length of the combustor, simulta-
neous data were acquired on only one side of
the jet axis over the 30 · 30 mm ﬁeld-of-view of
the PIV setup. Figure 2 shows the time-averaged
OH PLIF data overlaid with velocity vectors for
both ﬂames. The ﬂow ﬁeld can be divided into sev-
eral major regions. The inlet jet denoted by the
high velocity reactant inﬂow is located at radial
positions between 10 and 20 mm. The large
backﬂow in the center of the combustor is the
centerbody recirculation region. The corner recir-
culation zone (in the lower right side of the image)
is formed at the intersection of the combustion
inlet plane and wall. The inner shear layer is lo-
cated between the centerbody recirculation zone
and the inlet jet, and an outer shear layer resides
between the inlet jet and the corner recirculation
region.
The time-averaged CH4 ﬂame data in Fig. 2A
show high OH levels in the inner shear layer near
the combustor inlet and farther downstream.
Combustion is not sustained in the high velocity
region of the inlet jet. Hot combustion products
in the inner shear layer and centerbody recircula-
tion region are shielded by the inlet jet from reach-
ing into the outer shear layer and the corner
recirculation region and hence, no reactions are
occurring in these zones. In contrast, Fig. 2B
shows combustion occurring in the inlet jet region
for the H2-enriched ﬂame. Consequently, the out-
er shear layer and corner recirculation region also
participate in combustion to help produce a short-
er ﬂame. Consumption of fuel in the corner recir-
culation zone and the resulting products, mixing
with the incoming reactants would also enhance
the reaction rates. The reduction in ﬂame length,
however, may not be entirely due to the added
combustion in the recirculation zone. Fuel-com-
position-dependent location of heat release has
also aﬀected the global features of the ﬂow ﬁeld.
The inlet jet in the H2-enriched ﬂame has a higher
momentum because of the heat release occurring
within it. The increased velocity causes the inlet
jet region to align more vertically to a 60 angle
with respect to the combustor inlet plane. In the
CH4 ﬂame, the non-reacting inlet jet region lacks
momentum and hence, the jet tilts towards the
wall upon entering the combustor. The OH image
in Fig. 2B does not show correlation with the
velocity ﬁeld at z > 20 mm because there is no
reaction zone at downstream locations as shown
in the image. The low OH levels at these locations
correspond to OH molecules persisting because of
the slow third body reactions.
Figure 3 shows proﬁles of the time-averaged
axial velocity, OH, 2D vorticity, and 2D normal
strain near the combustor inlet (z = 2.5 mm) for
both ﬂames. The vorticity and normal strain were
calculated using the path integral method to avoid
diﬀerentiation errors associated with correlated
data in an over-sampled PIV ﬁeld [18]. The uncer-
tainty in the velocity measurements has resulted in
an uncertainty in the vorticity and strain ﬁelds of
400 s1 [18]. Figure 3A shows the mean axial
velocity and OH signal for the CH4 ﬂame at axial
plane z = 2.5 mm. The velocity proﬁle shows the
centerbody recirculation zone in back ﬂow, the in-
ner shear layer where the axial velocity changes
sign, the inlet jet with its high velocities, and the
outer shear layer. The peak OH is observed in
the inner shear layer, where the ﬂame stabilizes.
Figure 3B shows vorticity and normal strain pro-
ﬁles at the same axial location as Fig. 3A. A posi-
tive vorticity peak is observed in the inner shear
layer. The peak vorticity location coincides with
the location of the negative peak normal strain.
The negative normal strain indicates compression
of ﬂuid elements in the inner shear layer. Results
show that combustion in the CH4 ﬂame is stabi-
lized in regions of high compressive strain, which
agrees with similar observations made by others in
non-premixed ﬂames [10,14]. Figure 3C shows the
axial velocity and OH proﬁles for the H2-enriched
ﬂame. Interestingly, the OH peak has shifted into
2878
D.M. Wicksall et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 2875–2883


--- Page 5 ---

the high velocity inlet jet region. The ability of the
ﬂame to stabilize in the high velocity jet region is
attributed to H2s ability to withstand higher
strain before extinction, as compared to CH4.
Furthermore, heat and combustion products from
the inlet jet help sustain combustion in the corner
recirculation zone for the H2-enriched ﬂame. Fig-
ure 3D shows vorticity and normal strain proﬁles
for the H2-enriched ﬂame. Again, we see a vortic-
ity peak associated with the inner shear layer coin-
ciding with the region of strong compression but
not the reaction zone. These results indicate that
chemical aspects take precedence over ﬂow as-
pects in determining the location of heat release
in the H2-enriched ﬂame.
3.2. Time-resolved measurements
Figure 4 shows the simultaneous OH and
velocity data at four random instants in time for
the CH4 ﬂame. The OH ﬁelds show signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent ﬂame structures, and the velocity ﬁelds
show many small vortical structures that were
not observed in the time-averaged ﬁeld. In Fig.
4A, the inlet jet region is highly erratic and with-
out combustion. A vortical structure is observed
downstream of the inlet jet at radial position,
r > 20 mm and 8.0 < z < 15.0 mm. A thin OH
layer curves around the left (inner) side of the vor-
tical structure such that the OH gradient is nearly
perpendicular to the ﬂow direction. Figure 4B
shows a similar vortical structure centered at
r = 20 mm and z = 17 mm. Again, the OH layer
is observed to wrap around the left (inner) side
of the vortex. These vortical structures may be
2D projections of 3D rotating ﬁlaments with com-
bustion occurring around them. Evidently, the
vortical structures are important to ﬂame stabil-
ization because they provide a source of heat
and radicals to the incoming reactant stream.
Combustion is observed in the outer edges of
these structures where there is mixing between
the vortex and its surroundings, but not in the
interior where there is no supply of reactants. Fig-
ure 4C shows a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent ﬂow ﬁeld
and ﬂame structure compared to that at other in-
stants. A very strong backﬂow with high OH lev-
els is located around r = 10 mm and z = 10 mm.
The backﬂow is expected to carry combustion
products to burn fresh reactants along its path.
Fig. 3. Time-averaged radial proﬁles at z = 2.5 mm. (A) and (B) CH4 ﬂame, (C) and (D) H2-enriched ﬂame.
D.M. Wicksall et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 2875–2883
2879


--- Page 6 ---

A large vortex with a surrounding OH layer is ob-
served at the jet center near the combustor inlet.
Another feature is the ﬁlaments of OH extending
downwards along the periphery of the combustor.
The ﬂow ﬁeld is observed to contain vortical
structures around the ﬁlaments and small ﬂow
velocities within the ﬁlament, possibly explaining
the stabilization of combustion. Figure 4D con-
Fig. 4. OH PLIF image superimposed with velocity vectors (only 11% of the vectors are shown) at four random instants
of time for the CH4 ﬂame.
Fig. 5. OH PLIF image superimposed with velocity vectors (only 11% of the vectors are shown) at two random instants
of time for the H2-enriched ﬂame.
2880
D.M. Wicksall et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 2875–2883


--- Page 7 ---

tains a large vortex at r = 25 mm and z = 20 mm
with much of the OH around it. Again, vortices
appear to help stabilize combustion in some
instances.
Figure 5 shows simultaneous OH and velocity
data for the H2-enriched ﬂame. Data are shown
only for two instants because ﬂame and ﬂow
structures at other instants were similar to one an-
other. The OH ﬁeld in Fig. 5A shows many small-
scale structures with intense combustion, com-
pared to the larger structures observed in the
CH4 ﬂames. The CH4 ﬂame was closer to extinc-
tion and therefore, it could not sustain combus-
tion at small scales without adequate ﬂame
stabilization. A small vortex with an OH layer
around it is seen near the combustor inlet at
r = 10 mm, and at other locations in the combus-
tor. One interesting observation is that the ﬂame
also stabilizes in regions without ﬂow recircula-
tion. For example, strong upward ﬂow coinciding
with high OH is observed at r = 10 mm and z =
15 mm, and r = 25 mm and z = 15 mm. Figure
5B contains a large vortical structure at r =
20 mm and z = 20 mm. The right (outer) side of
this vortex overlaps a signiﬁcant portion of the
OH region, and the left (inner) side has virtually
no OH. This is explained by the combustion
occurring upstream in the inlet jet, which provides
hot products to sustain combustion on the right
side of the vortex. Regions of OH in Fig. 5 indi-
cate that reactions in the corner recirculation zone
and the outer shear layer are assisted by combus-
tion occurring in the inlet jet.
Figure 6 shows proﬁles of instantaneous axial
velocity, OH, 2D vorticity, and 2D normal strain
at z = 10mm derived from data in Figs. 4A and
5A. Figure 6A shows proﬁles of axial velocity
and OH for the CH4 ﬂame. The velocity proﬁle
shows a large central recirculation region, the in-
ner shear layer, and the inlet jet. A large OH peak
is observed in the central recirculation region. Fig-
ure 6B shows the vorticity and normal strain for
the above case. There appears some correlation
between vorticity and normal strain, as spikes in
vorticity often occur near spikes in normal strain,
although the correlation in not perfect. Figure 6A
and B indicate that the peak OH occurs near the
location of peak compressive strain, as observed
previously from the time-averaged data. Figure
6C shows proﬁles of axial velocity and OH for
Fig. 6. Instantaneous radial proﬁles at z = 10.0 mm. (A) and (B) CH4 ﬂame, (C) and (D) H2-enriched ﬂame.
D.M. Wicksall et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 2875–2883
2881


--- Page 8 ---

the H2-enriched ﬂame. The location of the peak
OH has shifted towards the inlet jet region. An
OH peak is also observed in the corner recircula-
tion region. The diﬀerences in the location of the
reaction zone are explained by enhanced stability
of the H2-enriched fuel. Figure 6D shows that
the correlation between vorticity and OH level is
not observed for the H2-enriched ﬂame. Likewise,
there is lack of correlation between the OH level
and normal strain.
4. Conclusions
Simultaneous measurements of OH and veloc-
ity ﬁelds were obtained in an enclosed lean pre-
mixed swirl-stabilized combustor operated on
CH4 and H2-enriched CH4. Results show that
the ﬂame and ﬂow structures for the two cases
are diﬀerent. The CH4 ﬂame was longer, and
lacked combustion in the corner recirculation re-
gion, whereas the H2-enriched ﬂame was shorter
and more robust with reactions occurring in the
corner recirculation region. Reactions in the
CH4 ﬂame stabilized in the inner shear layer
whereas those in the H2-enriched ﬂame stabilized
in the inlet jet region. The diﬀerences in the loca-
tion of heat release for the two ﬂames will aﬀect
important combustion characteristics such as the
pattern factor and wall heat transfer. The time-
averaged ﬂow ﬁelds also diﬀered, in that the
reacting inlet jet of the H2-enriched ﬂame main-
tained its orientation farther downstream while
the non-reacting inlet jet of the CH4 ﬂame lost
its momentum and tilted towards the combustor
wall. The
simultaneous
images show
several
small-scale vortical structures wrapping OH lay-
ers around them, which was not visible in the
time-averaged ﬁelds. The H2-enriched ﬂame also
stabilized in regions without ﬂow recirculation.
Reactions in the CH4 ﬂame stabilized at the loca-
tion of the highest compressive strain. However,
reaction zones of the H2-enriched CH4 ﬂame were
less inﬂuenced by the ﬂow ﬁeld, indicating H2s
high resistance to strain providing improved
ﬂame stability.
Acknowledgment
This research was supported in part by the US
Department of Energy, Oﬃce of Hydrogen, Fuel
Cells and Infrastructure Technologies.
References
[1] D.N. Anderson, Eﬀect of Hydrogen Injection on
Stability and Emissions of an Experimental Premixed
Prevaporized Propane Burner, NASA TM X-3301,
1975.
[2] O. Nguyen, S. Samuelson, ASME Paper 99-GT-
359, 1999.
[3] J.D. Morris, R.A. Symonds, F.L. Ballard, A. Banti,
ASME Paper 98-GT-359, 1998.
[4] J.Y. Ren, W. Qin, F.N. Egolfopoulos, T.T. Tsotsis,
Combust Flame 124 (2001) 717–720.
[5] G.S. Jackson, R. Sai, J.M. Plaia, C.M. Boggs, K.T.
Kiger, Combust Flame 132 (2003) 503–511.
[6] R.W. Schefer, D.M. Wicksall, A.K. Agrawal, Proc.
Combust Inst. 29 (2002) 843–851.
[7] J. Ji, J. Gore, Proc. Combust Inst. 29 (2002) 861–867.
[8] D.M. Wicksall, A.K. Agrawal, R.W. Schefer, J.O.
Keller, J. Prop. Power, in press.
[9] P.A.M. Kalt, J.H. Frank, R.W. Bilger, Proc.
Combust Inst. 27 (1998) 751–758.
[10] J.E. Rehm, N.T. Clemens, Proc. Combust Inst. 27
(1998) 1113–1120.
[11] J.M. Donbar, J.F. Driscoll, C.D. Carter, AIAA
Paper 1998-015, 1998.
[12] K.A. Watson, K.M. Lyons, C.D. Carter, J.M.
Donbar, Proc. Combust Inst. 29 (2002) 1905–1912.
[13] P.S. Kothnur, M.S. Tsurikov, N.T. Clemens, J.M.
Donbar, C.D. Carter, Proc. Combust Inst. 29 (2002)
1921–1927.
[14] D. Han, M.G. Mungal, Combust Flame 132 (2003)
565–590.
[15] D. Han, M.G. Mungal, ‘‘PIV Lab 2000’’ ver. 1.50,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 2000.
[16] M.J. Haste, An Investigation of In-Cylinder Flow and
Combustion in a Spark Ignition Engine Using Particle
Image Velocimetry, Doctoral Dissertation, Lough-
bourough University, Leicestershire, UK, 2000.
[17] R.S. Barlow, A. Collignon, AIAA Paper 91-0179,
1991.
[18] M. Raﬀel, C. Willert, J. Kompenhans, Particle
Image Velocimetry: A Practical Guide. Springer,
New York, NY, 1984, pp. 157–166.
Comments
Bala Varatharajan, General Electric Global Research,
USA. Do you think your result will change for diﬀerent
ﬂow velocities?
Reply. The trends observed are expected to be similar
for diﬀerent ﬂow rates. However, the numerical values
may change because ﬂame properties are strain depen-
dent, and strain scales with ﬂow rate.
d
Matthew Juniper, University of Cambridge, UK. Did
you look at varying the equivalence ratio and the hydro-
gen content simultaneously? Could a series of contours
be plotted in the (U, [H2]) space, along which the
ﬂame/ﬂow ﬁeld interaction is unchanged?
Reply. We did not vary equivalence ratio and hydro-
gen content simultaneously. It is conceivable that the
ﬂame/ﬂow ﬁeld interaction would remain unchanged at
high equivalence ratios and high H2 concentrations.
2882
D.M. Wicksall et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 2875–2883


--- Page 9 ---

d
Peter Jansohn, Peter Scherrer Institute, Switzerland.
What made you choose a 60/40 = CH4/H2 mixture?
Did you perform experiments at lower H2 content and
did you experience similar eﬀects already at low H2 con-
tent in the fuel mixture?
Reply. Fuel composition was chosen to represent
moderate amounts of H2 enrichment and to readily
highlight the impact of fuel composition on ﬂame/ﬂow
ﬁeld interaction. We did not perform experiments with
lower H2 content.
d
V.M. Rodriguez-Martinez, Universidad Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain. Since the level of swirl is of high impor-
tance for the ﬂame stabilization mechanism, I would
appreciate the authors comments on:
1. The reason for a relatively high swirl number,
Sg = 7.3, if any.
2. Whether they have analyzed lower swirl numbers,
lets say 1 < Sg < 2 and what the eﬀects were/might
be on ﬂame shape, compactness, etc.?
Reply. The swirl number for experiment was 1.5; the
value of 2.3 in the presentation was erroneous and has
been corrected. We have not conducted a systematic
study of the eﬀects of swirl on simultaneous PIV/OH
PLIF measurements. However, OH PLIF measurements
performed at a lower swirl number of 0.78 have shown
similar results ([6] in paper).
d
Francesco Ciucci, Caltech, USA. I would like to
understand the purpose of the quartz tube and how it af-
fects your ﬂame structure and your OH-LIF measure-
ments.
Is
your
OH-LIF
signal
aﬀected
by
the
scattering from the tube? And are the stripes I saw in
your ﬁrst slide regarding OH-LIF generated by the scat-
tering due to the roughness of the tube? Furthermore, is
the ﬂame aﬀected by the tube (change in boundary con-
ditions), and if yes, in which measure? Regarding OH-
LIF, did you correct your signal considering the non-ho-
mogeneous spatial laser power of your laser source?
Also, what is the line-width of your laser (1 cm1) and
what kind of impact does it have on your measurement?
Reply. Quartz tube was chosen to simulate a typical
gas turbine combustor featuring enclosed swirl stabilized
ﬂame. The enclosure alleviates entrainment of surround-
ing air, constrains spreading of the jet/plume structures,
and creates a corner recirculation zone at the intersection
of the combustor inlet and wall. These changes introduced
by the enclosure also aﬀect the ﬂame structure.
The stripes observed in the OH-PLIF images are pos-
sibly caused by non-uniformity of the quartz tube. Stan-
dard
corrections
including
that
for
spatial
non-
homogeneity of the laser sheet were made. The line
width
of
the
YAG-pumped
dye
laser
is
about
0.08 cm1. The line width of the laser does not have
any impact on the measurement. It is suﬃciently small
that we are only pumping a single OH line. Also, while
the line width might aﬀect absolute OH concentrations,
we are accurately reproducing the spatial distribution
and relative OH magnitude.
D.M. Wicksall et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 30 (2005) 2875–2883
2883
