
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
www.elsevier.com/locate/combustﬂame
Feature Article
Detailed characterization of the dynamics of
thermoacoustic pulsations in a lean premixed swirl ﬂame
W. Meier ∗, P. Weigand, X.R. Duan 1, R. Giezendanner-Thoben 2
Institut für Verbrennungstechnik, Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR), Pfaffenwaldring 38,
D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany
Received 28 November 2006; received in revised form 2 April 2007; accepted 3 April 2007
Available online 23 May 2007
Abstract
A nozzle conﬁguration for technically premixed gas turbine ﬂames was operated with CH4 and air at at-
mospheric pressure. The ﬂames were conﬁned by a combustion chamber with large quartz windows, allowing
the application of optical and laser diagnostics. In a distinct range of operating conditions the ﬂames exhibited
strong self-excited thermoacoustic pulsations at a frequency around 290 Hz. A ﬂame with P = 25 kW thermal
power and an equivalence ratio of Φ = 0.7 was chosen as a target ﬂame in order to analyze the dynamics and
the feedback mechanism of the periodic instability in detail. The velocity ﬁeld was measured by three-component
laser Doppler velocimetry, the ﬂame structures were measured by chemiluminescence imaging and planar laser-
induced ﬂuorescence of OH, and the joint probability density functions of major species concentrations, mixture
fraction, and temperature were measured by laser Raman scattering. All measuring techniques were applied in a
phase-locked mode with respect to the phase angle of the periodic pulsation. In addition to the pulsating ﬂame,
a nonpulsating ﬂame with increased fuel ﬂow rate (P = 30 kW, Φ = 0.83) was studied for comparison. The mea-
surements revealed signiﬁcant differences between the structures of the pulsating and the nonpulsating (or “quiet”)
ﬂame. Effects of ﬁnite-rate chemistry and unmixedness were observed in both ﬂames but were more pronounced
in the pulsating ﬂame. The phase-locked measurements revealed large variations of all measured quantities during
an oscillation cycle. This yielded a clear picture of the sequence of events and allowed the feedback mechanism of
the instability to be identiﬁed and described quantitatively. The data set presents a very good basis for the veriﬁ-
cation of numerical combustion simulations because the boundary conditions of the experiment were well-deﬁned
and the most important quantities were measured with a high accuracy.
© 2007 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Gas turbine combustion; Combustion oscillation; Swirl ﬂame; Turbulence–chemistry interaction; Validation
measurements
* Corresponding author. Fax: +49 711 6862 578.
E-mail address: wolfgang.meier@dlr.de (W. Meier).
1 Current address: Southwestern Institute of Physics, P.O. Box 432, 610041 Chengdu Sichuan, People’s Republic of China.
2 Current address: Robert Bosch GmbH, Postfach 10 60 50, 70049 Stuttgart, Germany.
0010-2180/$ – see front matter © 2007 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2007.04.002


--- Page 2 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
3
1. Introduction
In stationary gas turbines (GT) the concept of
lean premixed combustion is widely used in order
to meet the stringent demands for low emissions of
NOx. This concept also allows the achievement of
a quite homogeneous temperature distribution at the
turbine inlet and thus a lower thermal load. Unfor-
tunately, lean premixed GT ﬂames are susceptible to
thermoacoustic instabilities driven by the combustion
process and sustained by a resonant feedback mecha-
nism coupling pressure and heat release [1–7]. These
pulsations can lead to strong perturbations in the gas
turbine and even to the destruction of system compo-
nents. The physical and chemical mechanisms driving
the instabilities are based on a complex interaction be-
tween combustor geometry, pressure, ﬂow ﬁeld, mix-
ing, chemical reactions, and heat release and are not
understood well enough yet. While active and passive
control mechanisms have been developed to reduce
or even eliminate instabilities in some industrial burn-
ers [8–12], the problem is not fundamentally solved.
Major efforts are currently being made in the devel-
opment of numerical simulation tools in order to pre-
dict unsteady combustion behavior so that improved
GT combustors can be designed with their help [1–3,
13–17]. However, a deeper understanding of the com-
plex interactions involved in combustion instabilities
is now and in the near future based on experimental
research using advanced measuring techniques with
high temporal and spatial resolution.
In order to investigate the phenomenon of com-
bustion pulsations, the German Aerospace Center
(DLR) has performed comprehensive measurements
in an atmospheric pressure GT model combustor. The
combustor was operated with premixed CH4/air and
exhibited a self-excited thermoacoustic instability.
The burner nozzle was designed by Turbomeca S.A.
[18,19]. In this conﬁguration CH4 was mixed into the
air ﬂow within the radial swirler of the nozzle [18].
The ﬂames were conﬁned by a combustion chamber
with an exhaust tube at the top. The ﬂame investigated
(equivalence ratio of Φ = 0.7, thermal power 25 kW)
exhibited a strong self-excited thermoacoustic oscilla-
tion at a frequency of about 290 Hz. For comparison,
a nonpulsating (or “quiet”) ﬂame with Φ = 0.83 and
thermal power 30 kW was also measured. The main
goals of the investigations were a deeper understand-
ing of the physical and chemical mechanisms driving
the oscillation and the provision of a database of
experimental results which shall be used for the com-
parison with numerical simulations. For the validation
purposes, great care was taken to specify the experi-
mental uncertainties and to characterize the boundary
conditions.
The combustion chamber was equipped with large
quartz windows in order to apply laser and optical
diagnostic techniques. The measurements were per-
formed with phase resolution, i.e., triggered with re-
spect to the phase of the pressure pulsation measured
by a microphone. The shape and position of the ﬂame
zone were determined by OH chemiluminescence
measurements. These measurements also yielded a
measure of the heat release rate [20,21]. The ﬂow
velocities were measured by LDV and the joint prob-
ability density functions of major species concen-
trations, temperature, and mixture fraction by laser
Raman scattering. Due to its ability of multispecies
detection, the single-shot Raman technique is of spe-
cial value for the ﬂame investigation because it yields
information about mixing and ﬁnite-rate chemistry ef-
fects [22,23]. Previous investigations in nonpremixed
and partially premixed swirl ﬂames demonstrated that
turbulence–chemistry interactions play an important
role in those ﬂames [24–26]. Furthermore, Raman
measurements characterize the mixing process, e.g.,
mixing of burnt gas from the recirculation zones with
fresh gas from the nozzle, which represents the main
stabilization mechanism in strongly swirling ﬂames.
Another important parameter is the degree of un-
mixedness in industrial-type premixed ﬂames, as this
can have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on ﬂame stabilization
and NO formation [27]. It is also known that equiva-
lence ratio ﬂuctuations can be the source of combustor
instabilities [28–32]. Thus, the measurement of the
gas composition is of great importance for this inves-
tigation.
In previous experiments at the DLR, another GT
burner was employed to study the details of thermoa-
coustic instabilities using the same optical combus-
tion chamber and the same measuring techniques [33,
34]. In that study, periodic variations of the mixing of
exhaust gas from the recirculation zones with fresh
gas were identiﬁed as the main source of the peri-
odic changes of the heat release rate. In the burner
examined in the present study, the feedback mech-
anism is of a different nature. In the current paper
the combustor conﬁguration is presented and results
from phase-resolved measurements of OH* chemilu-
minescence, ﬂow velocities, mixture fraction, temper-
ature, and species concentrations are shown. Effects
of mixing and turbulence–chemistry interactions are
addressed and periodic variations of the gas ﬂow rates
at the inlet of the combustion chamber are discussed.
2. Combustor and target ﬂames
The gas turbine model combustor was derived
from an industrial design by Turbomeca. In Fig. 1
a schematic of the nozzle design with the combus-


--- Page 3 ---

4
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
Fig. 1. Schematic of the injector with combustion chamber
and photo of the ﬂame.
tion chamber is shown. Dry air at ambient temper-
ature is fed via a plenum ( = 78 mm) through 12
radial swirler vanes to the burner nozzle. The fuel gas
(CH4) is injected into the air ﬂow through small holes
( = 1 mm) within the radial swirler with high mo-
mentum to ensure good mixing before it enters the
combustion chamber. The nozzle exit has a diame-
ter of 27.85 mm. The air and fuel ﬂows were each
measured by two different mass-ﬂow meters (Brooks
Type 5853S for air and 5851S for CH4 and Danfoss
Type 2100). The accuracy of the ﬂow measurements
was ±1.5%. The exit plane of the nozzle was deﬁned
as h = 0 for all measurements.
The combustion chamber consists of large quartz
windows of thickness 1.5 mm held by steel posts in
the corners, thus creating a conﬁnement with a square
section of 85 × 85 mm and a height of h = 114 mm.
The exit of the upright combustion chamber is cone-
shaped, leading to a short central exhaust pipe with
a diameter of 40 mm. The large windows on each
side enable unobstructed optical access to nearly the
whole ﬂame zone and in particular close to the nozzle
exit. In order to change the measuring location within
the ﬂames, the burner could be translated in axial and
radial directions. The burner position was measured
by photoelectric encoder systems. The measuring ac-
curacy for the distance between the radial and axial
measuring locations was estimated to be ±0.1 mm
and the day-to-day reproducibility to be ±0.5 mm.
Two different ﬂames were investigated: (1) An un-
steady, pulsating ﬂame operated at 25 kW with an
equivalence ratio of Φ = 0.70 that exhibited thermoa-
coustic pulsations at a frequency of f ≈290 Hz. For
these operating conditions the Reynolds number at
the exit of the nozzle, based on the cold ﬂow and the
exit diameter, is about 35,000 and the swirl number,
derived from the velocity measurements at 1.5 mm
above the exit, is approx. 0.6. (2a) A quiet ﬂame with
30 kW and Φ = 0.83 (for the LDV measurements
the ﬂame was operated under slightly different con-
ditions, i.e., 27 kW and Φ = 0.75, termed 2b). The
ﬂame parameters are summarized in Table 1. The Kol-
mogorov length scale was estimated to be on the order
of 0.1 mm in the turbulent ﬂame regions; the corre-
sponding time scale is 35 µs.
After a warm-up period of typically 30 min, the
combustor would reach a constant temperature. Con-
tact of the fuel/air mixtures with the higher tempera-
ture plenum and nozzle resulted in a slight preheating.
The fuel/air mixtures were measured to reach temper-
atures between T ≈320 and 380 K prior to entering
the combustion chamber. The pressure drop between
the plenum and the combustion chamber was on the
order of 8–9 mbar.
Whereas the LDV measurements were performed
at the DLR research facility in Berlin, the Raman,
LIF, and chemiluminescence measurements were per-
formed at the DLR facility in Stuttgart. The measure-
ment campaigns were performed on different days,
and the phase-resolved Raman measurements were
performed over several days. The ambient pressure
Table 1
Investigated ﬂames
Air
CH4
Pth
Φ
f
Tad(295 K)
sl/min
g/min
sl/min
g/min
(kW)
(K)
1
570
734.2
41.8
30
25.1
0.70
0.0391
1834
2a
570
734.2
50.0
35.9
30.0
0.83
0.0463
2037
2b
570
734.2
45.0
32.3
27.0
0.75
0.0418
1915
Note. sl/min means standard liters per minute (standard conditions are 0 ◦C and 1013 mbar). f is mixture fraction corresponding
to the equivalence ratio. Adiabatic ﬂame temperature Tad was calculated for a fresh gas temperature of 295 K.


--- Page 4 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
5
Fig. 2. Pressure signals and respective spectra from the plenum and the combustion chamber.
was 995 to 1030 mbar during the LDV measurements
and 955 to 985 mbar during the Raman measure-
ments. Because the air and fuel mass ﬂows were kept
constant (as stated in the table), the difference in am-
bient pressure resulted in a difference in ﬂow velocity
and density. It should be kept in mind that this might
have a small inﬂuence on the ﬂame behavior.
3. Pressure pulsations and phase angle
assignment
The pressure ﬂuctuations were measured with two
microphone probes (Brüel & Kjær 4939—1/4′′), one
mounted ﬂush with the inner wall of the plenum and
the other connected to an air-cooled probe in one of
the posts of the combustion chamber at the positions
shown in Fig. 1. The pressure signals from the plenum
and from the combustion chamber and their respective
power density spectra are shown in Fig. 2. The ﬁgure
shows that the trace of the signal from the plenum
is smoother than that from the combustion chamber.
As the frequency peaks in both spectra are very pro-
nounced and no shift of the frequency occurs between
the two positions, the signal from the plenum was
taken as the reference for triggering the phase-locked
measurements. The microphone signal was of sufﬁ-
cient magnitude and clarity that no ﬁltering was nec-
essary for accurate triggering. The maximum ampli-
tude of the acoustic pressure in the combustion cham-
ber was determined to be on the order of 1.2 mbar.
The acoustic pressure in the plenum was higher by
a factor of about 1.4. The measurements further re-
vealed that the pressure variation in the combustion
chamber ran ahead of the pressure variation in the
plenum by approximately 80◦. Under the conditions
prevailing in the plenum, f ≈290 Hz corresponds to
a wavelength of λ ≈1.2 m; under the conditions in
the combustion chamber to λ ≈2.8 m. These wave-
lengths are large compared to the dimensions of the
plenum and combustion chamber and the phase dif-
ferences within the plenum or combustion chamber
are on the order of 10◦–15◦.
In order to adapt the repetition rate of the ICCD-
camera system (≈1 Hz) and the pulsed laser systems
for Raman (≈5 Hz) and LIF (≈10 Hz) to the oscilla-
tion frequency of the ﬂame (f ≈290 Hz), a triggering
scheme with inhibition times was set up as follows.
The negative-to-positive transition of the microphone
signal from the plenum triggered a delay generator
(SRS, DG535), which itself generated the trigger sig-
nal for the laser or the camera systems after a time
delay dt1. The inhibition time dt1 was adjusted ac-
cording to the repetition rate of the laser and camera
systems. After the inhibition time had passed, the next
negative-to-positive transition of the microphone sig-
nal initiated the trigger sequence. In order to carry
out the measurements at different phase angles, a de-
lay time dt2 (= 0 to 1/f ) was applied as indicated in
Fig. 3 [33]. The delay time dt2 (⩽1/f ≈3.4 ms) was


--- Page 5 ---

6
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
Fig. 3. Pressure signal of the plenum with trigger scheme for
the pulsed measurements.
Fig. 4. Pressure oscillation compared to a pure sine func-
tion; the black curve shows a sine function and the red
curve displays the pressure signal of the plenum. The
markers ph1–ph8 indicate the assigned phase angles at
which measurements were performed. These were ph1 = 0◦,
ph2 = 50◦, ph3 = 105◦, ph4 = 150◦, ph5 = 195◦, ph6 =
230◦, ph7 = 270◦, and ph8 = 315◦.
small compared to dt1 (≈100 ms) and thus permitted
stable operation of the laser system.
Measurements were performed at eight phase an-
gles. The assignment of the phase angles was chosen
taking the minimum, maximum, and medium pres-
sure values as reference points ph1, ph3, ph5, and
ph7, respectively. The additional phase angles, ph2 to
ph8, were taken in the (temporal) middle between ad-
jacent phase angles. It should be noted the pressure
signal was not perfectly sinusoidal. The phase trig-
gering and the pressure trace are shown in Fig. 4 in
comparison to a pure sine wave. It can be seen that the
pressure rise (maximum at 195◦) was slightly slower
than the pressure drop. Due to a permanently present
jitter of the frequency on the scale of approx. ±5 Hz
(±1.7%), the reference points also jittered by ±1.7%,
resulting in a corresponding uncertainty of the phase
assignment. The minimum pressure in the plenum
was arbitrarily assigned as ph1 = 0◦. Accordingly, the
minimum pressure in the combustion chamber was at
−80◦or 280◦, close to ph7.
4. Measuring techniques
4.1. Laser Doppler velocimetry
The three velocity components were measured si-
multaneously by LDV using an Ar+-laser (Coherent,
Innova 90) and two orthogonally positioned Dantec-
DISA optics (DISA 55X and DISA ﬂow direction
adapter). Commercial camera lenses were used to fo-
cus the signals in forward scattering onto three pho-
tomultiplier tubes. Signal recording and pretreatment
were performed with Dantec BSA enhanced units
(57N20 + 57N35). The seeding particles (TiO2, d ≈
0.8 µm) added to the air ﬂow were small enough to
follow the large-scale turbulence up to >1 kHz [35].
In order to link the velocity signals to the pressure
ﬂuctuations, the BSA units additionally recorded trig-
ger events that were created by the positive zero cross-
ing of the pressure signal from the plenum. In a post-
processing step, the velocity signals were assorted
according to their arrival times into 72 phases (steps
of 5◦) each covering a 10◦window (±5◦). The mea-
surements were performed in one vertical plane along
radial proﬁles at the heights h = 1.5, 5, 15, 25, and
35 mm in order to capture the ﬂow ﬁeld, especially at
the nozzle exit. The radial spacing was r = 1 mm
at h = 1.5 mm and 2 mm at the other heights. At
each position 100,000–200,000 velocity data were
recorded. The resulting probe volumes were about
60 µm in diameter and 1.0 mm in length for axial
(u) and radial (v) velocity components and 120 µm
and 1.5 mm for the tangential (w) direction of the
velocity. The sorted velocity data were selected ac-
cording to the phase assignment (ph1–ph8) explained
above (Fig. 4). The uncertainty of the velocity mea-
surements for each phase is typically 1.5–2% for the
mean value and 2–2.5% for the rms value.
4.2. OH* chemiluminescence detection
OH* chemiluminescence was imaged using an in-
tensiﬁed CCD camera (Roper Scientiﬁc) equipped
with an achromatic UV lens (f = 100 mm, f/2, Halle
Nachf.) and an interference ﬁlter with high transmis-
sion between 295 and 342 nm (Laser Components
GmbH). The plane of focus of the system was located
at the center of the combustion chamber. Although
image sharpness decreased with increasing distance
from this plane, lines separated by 1 mm could still
be resolved at the forward and rear windows of the


--- Page 6 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
7
chamber. Sets of 100 images (exposure time 130 µs)
were accumulated at each of the eight phase angles
outlined above. OH* chemiluminescence intensities
from lean premixed ﬂames represent an indicator for
the heat release rate [20,21], but the correlation be-
tween OH* chemiluminescence and heat release rate
may be inﬂuenced by multiple parameters and is still
subject to research [6,36]. Thus from these images
only qualitative information can be deduced about the
phase-dependent variations in heat release and the lo-
cation and extension of the ﬂame zone. Even though
this technique is line-of-sight integrated, spatially re-
solved information can be gained by deconvolution,
taking advantage of the rotational symmetry of the
ﬂame. This results in a quasi 2-D image of the center
plane where the local distribution of the chemilumi-
nescence can be identiﬁed more clearly than in the
integral view.
4.3. Planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence of OH
PLIF of OH radicals was applied to visualize the
ﬂame structures. A pulsed Nd:YAG-pumped dye laser
was used to supply pulsed laser radiation for the exci-
tation of OH on the R2(13) line of the A2Σ+–X2Π
(ν′ = 1, ν′′ = 0) transition at λ = 282.6 nm. The
beam was formed to a vertical sheet (h ≈55 mm) and
directed into the combustion chamber intersecting the
ﬂame axis. The pulse energies at the measuring loca-
tion were typically 1.5 mJ/pulse with a band width
of about 0.45 cm−1 and a duration of 5 ns. The sheet
thickness was approximately 0.8 mm in the imaged
area. The resulting spectral laser intensities were on
the order of 1.5 MW/cm2 cm−1. Considering that
the saturation intensity is around 1 MW/cm2 cm−1,
the applied laser intensities may have resulted in a
small degree of saturation (which is mostly unimpor-
tant for the structural information gained from the
PLIF images). The excited ﬂuorescence signal was
collected at 90◦by an achromatic UV lens (f =
100 mm, f/2, Halle Nachf.) equipped with an in-
terference ﬁlter (λ ≈295–342 nm) and detected by
an intensiﬁed CCD camera (LaVision Flamestar II,
286 × 384 pixels). The temporal detection gate of the
image intensiﬁer was 50 ns. The spatial resolution of
the measurement is mainly limited by the thickness of
the laser sheet (0.8 mm). In the other two directions,
i.e., in the image plane, the spatial resolution is on the
order of 0.3 mm.
4.4. Laser Raman scattering
For the pointwise quantitative measurement of the
major species concentrations (O2, N2, CH4, H2, CO,
CO2, H2O) and the temperature, laser Raman scatter-
ing was applied [37]. The radiation of a ﬂashlamp-
pumped dye laser (Candela LFDL 20, wavelength
λ = 489 nm, pulse energy Ep ≈3 J, pulse duration
τp ≈3 µs) was focused into the combustion chamber
and the Raman scattering emitted from the measur-
ing volume (length ≈0.6 mm, diameter ≈0.6 mm)
was collected by an achromatic lens (D = 80 mm,
f = 160 mm) and relayed to the entrance slit of a
spectrograph (SPEX 1802, f = 1 m, slit width 2 mm,
dispersion ≈0.5 nm/mm). The dispersed and spa-
tially separated signals from the different species
were detected by individual photomultiplier tubes
(PMTs) in the focal plane of the spectrograph and
sampled using boxcar integrators. The species num-
ber densities were calculated from these signals using
calibration measurements and the temperature was
deduced from the total number density via the ideal
gas law [37]. The simultaneous detection of all major
species with each laser pulse also enabled the deter-
mination of the instantaneous mixture fraction [38].
In the data sets the mixture fraction deﬁned by Bilger
[39,40] is used.
Due to restrictions of the optical access of the Ra-
man setup, measurements could not be performed for
h < 6 mm and r > 30 mm. In the pulsating ﬂame,
phase-resolved measurements were performed at h =
6, 15, 25, 35, and 60 mm over a scan pattern of 50
points altogether. The radial spacing was r = 2 mm
at h = 6 mm, r = 3 mm at h = 15 mm, r = 4 mm
at h = 25 and 35 mm, and r = 5 mm or 10 mm
at h = 60 mm. At each point in the scan pattern 400
single-shot measurements were acquired. These data
were used to compute joint probability density func-
tions (PDF). At some locations, where turbulent or
phase-dependent ﬂuctuations were very small (espe-
cially in the outer region of the ﬂame), less than 400
samples were recorded. In the pulsating ﬂame, Raman
measurements were also performed without phase-
locking; i.e., the measuring system was triggered at
random phase angle. In this case, measurements were
performed at h = 6, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 60, and 80 mm,
and 500 single-shots were taken at each location. In
the quiet ﬂame Raman measurements were performed
at h = 6, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 60, and 80 mm (500 shots
at each location).
Signal interferences from C2 and PAHs were very
low in the ﬂames investigated and there was little
need for correction procedures. Nonetheless, the sig-
nal background was recorded by additional PMTs in
Raman-free spectral regions and the few samples with
signiﬁcant background were ﬁltered out in the data re-
duction routine. Single-shot measurements with PMT
saturation or unrealistic C/H or N/O ratios were also
discarded during data evaluation. Thus, the ﬁnal data
sets do not always contain 400 (or 500) single-shot
realizations. For the phase-resolved measurements in
the pulsating ﬂame the percentage of discarded sam-


--- Page 7 ---

8
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
Table 2
Summary of the measurement uncertainties (for details see text)
Measured quantity
Systematic uncertainty
Statistical uncertainty
Measuring location h, relative
±0.1 mm
Measuring location h, absolute
±0.5 mm
Measuring location r, relative
±0.1 mm
Measuring location r, absolute
±0.5 mm
Velocity
<0.5%
±1.5–2%
Temperature
±3–4%
±2.5%
Mixture fraction
±3–4%
±1%
H2O mole fraction
±3–5%
±3% (density-dependent)
O2 mole fraction
±3–5%
±7% (density-dependent)
CO2 mole fraction
±3–5%
±7% (density-dependent)
CO mole fraction
±5–10%
±20–50% (density-dependent)
H2 mole fraction
±5–10%
±10–30% (density-dependent)
CH4 mole fraction
+5–9%
±1–3% (density-dependent)
ples was 3.5% in the worst case (at h = 6 mm, r =
10 mm) and on average it was below 0.6%. For the
measurements without phase resolution in the pulsat-
ing ﬂame, the percentage of discarded samples was
4.8% in the worst case (at h = 6 mm, r = 6 mm)
and on average it was below 1.2%. For the measure-
ments in the stable ﬂame the worst case was 4.4%
(h = 6 mm, r = 10 mm) and the average percentage
of discarded samples was smaller than 0.7%. A sig-
niﬁcant bias of the joint PDFs due to ﬁltering was
not observed. For example, in the worst case in the
pulsating ﬂame, the mean values of T , f , and the
mole fractions of the major species changed by less
than 0.5% due to ﬁltering.
With respect to measurement uncertainties, one
must distinguish between systematic errors arising
from, for example, uncertainties in the calibration
procedure and statistical errors that are mainly caused
by the statistics (shot noise) of the detected Raman
photons NP in a single-shot measurement. System-
atic uncertainties were typically ±3–4% for the tem-
perature and mixture fraction, ±3–5% for the mole
fractions of O2, H2O, and CO2, and ±5–10% for
H2 and CO. The systematic errors are largely inde-
pendent of the mole fraction and temperature in the
ﬂame. In the measurements reported here, it turned
out that the evaluated CH4 mole fractions were sys-
tematically too large by about 7%. In regions with
signiﬁcant amounts of CH4 the measured mixture
fraction was therefore also biased to larger values (up
to ≈7%). The statistical uncertainties were quantiﬁed
by recording single-shot data sets in stable laminar
ﬂames. The rms ﬂuctuations in these ﬂames were, for
example, 2.5% for T at T = 1916 K, 3.2% for H2O
at a mole fraction of X(H2O) = 0.19, 7% for O2 at
X(O2) = 0.06, 7.4% for CO2 at X(CO2) = 0.068,
and 1% for the mixture fraction. In an electrically
heated ﬂow of pure CH4 the rms value was 1% at
850 K. To a good approximation the rms ﬂuctuations
scale with N−0.5
P
. Due to this dependence, the sta-
tistical uncertainties are quite large for CO and H2.
The cross talk correction for CO leads to an additional
error source, so that the statistical error for CO is 20–
50%. The uncertainties are summarized in Table 2.
The statistical uncertainty due to shot noise of de-
tected signal photons is only relevant for single-shot
measurements. For the mean value from a PDF com-
prising 500 single-shot measurements, shot noise is
negligible because the number of signal photons for
the complete PDF is 500 · NP. Systematic and sta-
tistical uncertainties are largely independent of each
other.
A further uncertainty concerns the number of
single-shot measurements necessary to reproduce the
true PDF. This question cannot be answered in gen-
eral because the necessary number of samples de-
pends on the shape of the true PDF. To estimate the
uncertainty a measured PDF can be used, and the
convergence of, e.g., the mean value with the num-
ber of samples can be considered. It turned out that
in regions with strong turbulent ﬂuctuations the ﬁnal
mean value is typically reached to within 2% after
300 samples. A number of 400 to 500 single shots
at each location thus seems a good trade-off between
measuring time and convergence.
5. Results
5.1. Time-averaged velocity distributions
Fig. 5 shows plots of the combined mean u and
v velocity components of the pulsating and quiet
ﬂames. For most of the measuring heights in the pul-
sating ﬂame, data were taken only on one side of the
ﬂame axis, because of the assumption of axial sym-
metry. In Fig. 5 the proﬁles in the upper panel (pul-
sating ﬂame) are mirrored to yield a better impression


--- Page 8 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
9
Fig. 5. Vector plot of combined mean u and v velocity com-
ponents of the pulsating and the quiet ﬂame. Negative veloc-
ities are displayed in red.
of the ﬂow ﬁeld. Three different ﬂow regions can be
distinguished: (1) The inlet ﬂow of fresh gases which
is conically shaped; (2) an inner recirculation zone
(irz); and (3) an outer recirculation zone (orz). It is
seen that the inﬂow of the quiet ﬂame is more widely
opened and exhibits a broader irz in comparison to the
pulsating ﬂame. Slight deviations from axial symme-
try are seen in the proﬁles of the quiet ﬂame within
the irz. Similar deviations can be found in the pro-
ﬁles of the other velocity components and of the rms
ﬂuctuations. These deviations are not explained by
the measurement uncertainty and are probably real.
However, the effects are small and are neglected in
the further discussion. The velocities of the reverse
ﬂow are higher in the pulsating than in the quiet
ﬂame. This can be seen more clearly in the radial pro-
ﬁles of Fig. 6, displaying the mean axial velocities at
h = 1.5 mm. The irz of the pulsating ﬂame extends
to r ≈4 mm at this height and reaches a mean axial
velocity of u ≈−24 m/s. The quiet ﬂame has nega-
tive axial velocities of up to u ≈−10 m/s and its irz
extends to r ≈6 mm at h = 1.5 mm. The mean ax-
ial velocity of the inﬂow is on the order of 35 m/s
for both ﬂames, but the radial region of the inﬂow is
broader for the pulsating ﬂame. The outer recircula-
tion zones are characterized by very low axial veloci-
ties and radial velocities that are directed to the ﬂame
axis.
From Figs. 5 and 6 it is clear the mean ﬂow
ﬁelds of the two ﬂames exhibit signiﬁcant differences.
However, it should be kept in mind that the pulsating
Fig. 6. Radial proﬁles of the mean axial velocity of the pul-
sating and the quiet ﬂame at h = 1.5 mm.
ﬂame is subject not only to turbulent ﬂuctuations but
also to periodic variations of the ﬂow ﬁeld. This will
be considered in the following section.
5.2. Phase-resolved velocity distributions
The phase-dependent variations of the mean axial,
radial, and tangential velocity components are dis-
played in Fig. 7 for the heights h = 1.5, 5, 25, and
35 mm. It is clearly seen that the ﬂowﬁeld varies
drastically during an oscillation cycle. The proﬁles
of umean near the nozzle (h = 1.5 and 5 mm) show
that the irz changes strongly in radial expansion and
velocity with a maximum expansion around ph5 and
a minimum expansion around ph1. Accordingly, the
radial extension of the inﬂow varies between r ≈
9 mm (ph5–ph7) to r ≈14 mm (ph2). In the outer
radial region the axial velocities are very small. At
h = 5 mm the variations of umean are still promi-
nent and at h = 25 mm they have become relatively
small but at h = 35 mm differences again become ap-
parent. The radial velocity component is signiﬁcantly
smaller than the axial component and the periodic
variations of vmean are not generally in phase with
umean. At h = 1.5 and 5 mm, vmean is positive (i.e.,
directed outward) out to r ≈15 mm and r ≈17 mm,
respectively, and becomes negative further outside.
The negative values of vmean characterize the outer
recirculation zone. In contrast to umean, the variations
of vmean become stronger further downstream, as can
be seen in the radial proﬁles at h = 25 and 35 mm.
At h = 25 mm the injected gases are rapidly moving
outward at around ph2 (vmean > 25 m/s), but vmean
becomes rather small around ph7. At 10 mm further
downstream (h = 35 mm) the ﬂowﬁeld looks quite
different: now vmean is very small at ph2 and the max-
imum occurs at ph4. Considering the variation of the
ﬂowﬁeld near the nozzle, the fast radial movement at
h = 25 mm is associated with a broad inﬂow and vice


--- Page 9 ---

10
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
Fig. 7. Phase-resolved radial velocity proﬁles of mean axial (u), radial (v), and tangential (w) velocity components at h = 1.5,
5, 25, and 35 mm. Note the different scales at the axis.
versa. The tangential velocity component w exhibits
signiﬁcant phase-dependent variations for all measur-
ing heights. At h = 1.5 mm maximum values around
35 m/s and steep gradients of wmean are observed.
With increasing height the proﬁles ﬂatten and be-
come broader. At h = 35 mm the maximum wmean is
around 12 m/s. Near the nozzle (h = 1.5 and 5 mm),
wmean and umean are quite well in phase with respect
to radial extension and amplitude; however, wmean is
quite low in the irz, independent of phase angle. The
proﬁles of wmean reﬂect neither a solid body rotation
near the axis (where w would linearly increase with r)
nor a potential vortex further outside (where w would
decrease as 1/r).
The pumping motion of the ﬂowﬁeld is of course
related to the pressure variations in the combustion
chamber and the plenum. However, the details of this
relationship depend on the geometry of the nozzle, the
acoustic behavior of the conﬁguration, and the tem-
perature distribution. In a very simpliﬁed approach,
assuming the inﬂow is inﬂuenced only by the pres-
sure variation in the combustion chamber (pchamber)
and that the pressure has a sinusoidal temporal vari-
ation, the axial velocity of the inﬂow would behave
according to du/dt ∼−pchamber. In this simpliﬁed
approach one would expect the velocity to reach its
maximum 90◦after the pressure minimum in the
combustion chamber. The pressure minimum in the


--- Page 10 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
11
Fig. 8. Imaged chemiluminescence intensity distribution at eight different phase angles. Each image was averaged over 100 shots
with an exposure time of 130 µs each. Scales are in mm.
combustion chamber is around ph7 (−80◦or 260◦)
and from the simpliﬁed approach one would then ex-
pect high inﬂow velocities in the nozzle around ph1,
which is in qualitative agreement with the measure-
ment. Naturally, the real situation is much more com-
plex, but a quantitative analysis is beyond the scope
of this work.
5.3. Phase-resolved OH* chemiluminescence
Fig. 8 shows the mean OH* chemiluminescence
ﬁeld measured at each of the eight phase angles stud-
ied. Each ﬁeld represents the ensemble average of 100
images and each image was acquired with a 130-µs
exposure time. Fig. 8 clearly shows that the intensity


--- Page 11 ---

12
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
Fig. 9. Fig. 9: Normalized integrated OH chemilumines-
cence and normalized pressure variation in the combustion
chamber.
varies signiﬁcantly during an oscillation cycle, with a
maximum close to ph3 and a minimum half a period
later. The chemiluminescence distributions resemble,
of course, the photo of the ﬂame in Fig. 1. The dark
regions near the nozzle are associated with the inﬂow
of the fresh gases, but include also the orz. It can fur-
ther be seen that combustion is already taking place
at h = 0 for all phase angles and that the ﬂame root
extends to h < 0. At ph1 to ph4 the main region of
heat release is at h ≈40–60 mm and r ⩾20 mm. In
these images it has to be considered that the chemilu-
minescence is integrated along the line of sight. More
details of the structure will be discussed on the basis
of the deconvoluted images below.
The OH* chemiluminescence intensity integrated
over the imaged area is displayed in Fig. 9 as a func-
tion of phase angle together with the pressure vari-
ation in the combustion chamber. It is seen that the
integrated chemiluminescence varies between 16 and
100% and that this variation is quite well in phase
with the pressure variations. Provided the integrated
chemiluminescence represents the total heat release
rate, the result demonstrates that the Rayleigh crite-
rion for self-sustained combustion pulsations is ful-
ﬁlled.
The deconvoluted chemiluminescence distribu-
tions corresponding to the images in Fig. 8 are dis-
played in Fig. 10. These represent quasi-2D cuts
through the ﬂame provided that cylindrical symme-
try is present. Here, the phase-dependent changes of
the ﬂame shape can be seen more clearly. The ﬂame is
anchored near the central bluff body at h ⩽0 mm and
for lower heights (h < 30 mm) combustion is only
taking place in the central region where r < 20 mm.
At the base of the ﬂame the chemiluminescence in-
tensity is highest around ph1–ph3, when the reverse
ﬂow increases strongly. Throughout most of the os-
cillation cycle the ﬂame is hitting the wall (located at
r = 42.5 mm) further downstream at h ≈30–70 mm.
It should be noted that the very high intensities at the
wall and also the large gradients are an artifact of the
Abel inversion routine [41]. Due to the sharp cutoff at
the wall, the gradient is overestimated by the program.
However, for ph2–ph4, there are high chemilumines-
cence intensities at h ≈40–60 mm that represent the
largest contribution to the integrated chemilumines-
cence (see Fig. 9).
5.4. Phase-resolved OH PLIF distributions
Fig. 11 shows examples of single-shot OH PLIF
images recorded in the pulsating ﬂame at four dif-
ferent phase angles. Before the results are discussed,
a few explanations about OH concentrations in ﬂames
should be given. At chemical equilibrium, the OH
concentration increases exponentially with temper-
ature. The increase is, however, different for fuel-
lean and fuel-rich mixtures [42]. In fuel-lean mix-
tures, OH concentrations are detectable above T ≈
1400–1500 K, while in fuel-rich mixtures, the OH
equilibrium concentrations are signiﬁcantly lower and
barely detectable by LIF below 1900 K. However,
in reaction zones, OH is formed in superequilibrium
concentrations, which in turbulent ﬂames are typi-
cally several times higher than at equilibrium. The
lifetime of this superequilibrium OH is several mil-
liseconds at atmospheric pressure. Thus, the highest
OH concentrations within a PLIF image stem proba-
bly from superequilibrium OH, i.e., “young” OH that
has just been formed in a reaction zone. Medium OH
concentration levels are typical of high-temperature
regions with “old” OH at chemical equilibrium. The
R2(13) line was used for excitation because two-line
OH PLIF thermometry measurements were also con-
ducted within this experiment (not reported here). The
second excitation line for those measurements was the
P1(2) line [43]. For the R2(13) line the Boltzmann
fraction fB of the initial state changes signiﬁcantly
with T ; for example, it increases by about 72% be-
tween 1500 and 2200 K. However, the quenching
rate also increases with T , and a calculation using
LASKIN [44] showed that the ﬂuorescence quan-
tum efﬁciency QE decreases by ≈37% from 1500
to 2200 K for an exhaust gas composition from sto-
ichiometric combustion. Without taking variations of
the gas composition into account, the net effect from
changes in fB and QE yields a variation of about 30%
over the temperature range considered. Within this
limit, the displayed OH LIF signals are representative
of the OH density.
The single-shot images in Fig. 11 are dominated
by turbulent ﬂuctuations and do not well reﬂect the
phase-dependent variations which are identiﬁed in the
ensemble-average images (discussed below). In the
image recorded at ph1, the region around the ﬂame


--- Page 12 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
13
Fig. 10. Abel-transformed OH chemiluminescence images corresponding to the distribution of Fig. 8.
axis shows medium OH LIF intensities (blue color)
which most probably reﬂect “old” OH at rather high
temperatures. On each side of this region there are
high OH LIF intensities (yellow and red) from h = 0
to 20 mm. These stem presumably from “young” OH,
i.e., from reaction zones and burnt gases next to the re-
action zones. The low intensity regions farther outside
(black) have to be interpreted as fresh gas or mix-
tures of fresh gas with some exhaust gas at temper-
atures below 1400 K. In the outer recirculation zones
the LIF intensities are quite low (violet) probably re-
ﬂecting “old” OH at intermediate temperatures. The
OH LIF distribution and the interpretation given are
consistent with the deconvoluted chemiluminescence


--- Page 13 ---

14
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
Fig. 11. Examples of single-shot OH PLIF images at four different phase angles. Scales at axes are in mm; color bar is given in
arbitrary units.
images displayed in Fig. 10, which show a ﬂame re-
gion in the area where high OH LIF intensities are
present. The single-shot image at ph5 shows high OH
LIF intensities on the ﬂame axis, again in agreement
with the deconvoluted chemiluminescence image. At
ph7, the OH LIF distribution shows quite nicely the
inﬂow of the fresh gases (dark area). Considering the
structures within the single-shot samples, one can see
the wrinkled and convoluted boundary layer between
the different regions of the ﬂow ﬁeld, for example be-
tween the irz and the inﬂow of fresh gases.
The ensemble averaged OH PLIF distributions are
presented in Fig. 12 for the eight phase angles stud-
ied. It is seen that the highest mean OH LIF intensities
are found in the irz, especially below h ≈30 mm,
and that this region is surrounded by a low-intensity
layer, indicative of the inﬂow of fresh gases. Also,
at ph3 and ph4, high intensities occur near the com-
bustor wall at h > 20 mm. In these averaged images
the contribution from superequilibrium OH and “old”
OH can hardly be distinguished. Only with the ad-
ditional information from the deconvoluted chemilu-
minescence images can it be stated that the high LIF
intensities are well correlated with the ﬂame zones.
Noticeable phase-dependent differences are clearly
seen in the shapes of the irz (high OH LIF levels)
and the inﬂow (very low LIF intensities). Around ph8,
the inﬂow exhibits a curved shape (resembling bull-
horns) with a bow around h = 30 mm. This bow is
very prominent at ph1 (at h ≈30 mm) and collapses
during the transition to ph2. The drastic change of
the radial velocity component between h = 25 and
35 mm at these phase angles also underlines the sig-
niﬁcant phase-dependent change of the ﬂame at this
location.
5.5. Correlation between temperature and mixture
fraction at random phase
From the simultaneous measurement of the tem-
perature and the species concentrations by laser Ra-
man scattering, the correlations between different
quantities can be derived which contain the informa-
tion about the thermochemical state of the ﬂame. The
scatterplots in Fig. 13 show the correlation between
temperature and mixture fraction for the quiet and
pulsating ﬂame, measured without phase correlation.
Each symbol represents the result from a single-shot
measurement recorded at various radial locations at
h = 6 mm. The different colors help to identify dif-
ferent radial regions of the ﬂame. The solid line is
the result of a strained laminar ﬂame calculation for
a counterﬂow diffusion geometry with a strain rate
of a = 1 s−1 [45,46], which represents a state close
to chemical equilibrium. The scatter in mixture frac-
tion demonstrates that the premixing is not perfect
and that there are variations between f ≈0.03 and
0.07 for the quiet ﬂame and between f ≈0.015 and
0.08 for the pulsating ﬂame (it should be kept in mind
that f is biased by about +7% for cold samples).


--- Page 14 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
15
Fig. 12. Phase-resolved averaged OH PLIF distributions at eight phase angles. Notice the slightly different color bar compared
to Fig. 11. Images are averaged over 200 single shots.
There are a lot of samples at room temperature that
have not reacted yet, mainly from the radial region
r ≈12–16 mm. In the inner recirculation zone the
gas is close to equilibrium with high temperatures.
The samples from the outer recirculation zone exhibit
only a low scatter in mixture fraction around fglob.
and their temperatures lie below the calculated curve.
This temperature reduction is probably due to heat
loss to the burner plate. In addition the scatterplots
contain many samples with intermediate temperatures
(i.e., between room temperature and ﬂame tempera-
ture). These partially reacted gas mixtures stem either
from local ﬂame extinction events or from the mix-
ing of cold and hot gases that have not reacted yet


--- Page 15 ---

16
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
Fig. 13. Correlation between temperature and mixture fraction for the quiet ﬂame (left) and pulsating ﬂame (right). Symbols
represent single-shot Raman measurements; the line shows a calculated curve for a near-equilibrium state. The global mixture
fractions of the ﬂames are indicated by the vertical lines; the stoichiometric mixture fraction is f = 0.055.
due to ignition delay [26]. Comparing the two scat-
terplots, the major difference lies in the degree of
unmixedness of fuel and air. The phase-resolved Ra-
man measurements will be considered further below
to determine whether the poorer mixing of the pulsat-
ing ﬂame stems from the thermoacoustic pulsations.
Fig. 14 illustrates the development of the scat-
terplots for the two ﬂames with increasing down-
stream position. As expected, the mixing and reac-
tion progress increases with downstream position, but
partially reacted mixtures are still present at h =
30 mm. The reaction progress is slightly faster for
the quiet ﬂame. This may be caused by the higher
equivalence ratio of this ﬂame and hence the higher
temperature. Burnout is complete in the quiet ﬂame
at h ≈40 mm and in the pulsating ﬂame at h ≈
60 mm (not displayed). It is further seen that un-
mixedness persists longer for the pulsating ﬂame, so
that near-stoichiometric mixtures are still present at
h = 30 mm. Finally, at h = 80 mm, mixing and re-
action are complete and the thermochemical state of
the ﬂames is very close to equilibrium. The samples
displayed in the scatterplot of the quiet ﬂame corre-
spond to a standard deviation of the mixture fraction
of 3.3% and of the temperature of 3.5%, which is
largely caused by the inherent uncertainty of the mea-
surement.
5.6. Mean temperature and mixture fraction
distributions at random phase
In order to compare the mean (Reynolds-averaged)
mixture fraction distributions of the quiet and pulsat-
ing ﬂames, Fig. 15 displays 2D charts of f . Here, the
mean values measured at the different locations were
interpolated using the program “Origin” to yield quasi
two-dimensional distributions. The scales for f are
not chosen to be identical because the global mixture
fractions are not identical. However, both scales reach
from minimum to maximum f -values in each distri-
bution. For the quiet ﬂame the mean mixture frac-
tion varies by f = 0.0048 between fmean = 0.0465
and fmean = 0.0513, and for the pulsating ﬂame by
f = 0.0114 between fmean = 0.0361 and fmean =
0.0475. This demonstrates again the different degrees
of unmixedness of the two ﬂames. In the quiet ﬂame,
high f -values are seen in the region of the inﬂow, and
the irz and orz are relatively lean. Here it must be con-
sidered that according to the systematic measurement
error of approx. +7% for CH4 the evaluated mix-
ture fraction is also biased to higher values, especially
in low-temperature regions. With increasing tempera-
ture the CH4 mole fraction and the bias of f decrease.
In the pulsating ﬂame, the mean f distribution reveals
a separation of relatively rich and lean gases within
the inﬂow with the lean gases appearing at the outer
side of the inﬂow. In order to understand this behav-
ior, the phase-dependent variations of f must be taken
into account. This will be done further below. For both
ﬂames the measured f -values were slightly higher
than expected from the fuel and air ﬂow rates. For
example, at h = 60 mm in the quiet ﬂame, the mea-
surements resulted in an average value of f ≈0.0473
in comparison to fglob. = 0.0463 and at h = 60 mm
in the pulsating ﬂame, the measured average was
f ≈0.041 in comparison to fglob. = 0.0391. This
deviation might be caused by an error of the ﬂowme-
ters, possibly together with a systematic deviation
of the Raman measurement. One must also consider
that the cross section of the combustion chamber cov-
ered by the Raman measurements (r = 0–30 mm) is
only 39% of the total cross section (85 × 85 mm), so
the average gas composition deduced from the Ra-
man measurements does not necessarily reﬂect the
volume-averaged value.
The corresponding temperature distributions are
displayed in Fig. 16. The lowest temperatures are,
of course, measured in the inﬂow of the fresh gases


--- Page 16 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
17
Fig. 14. Scatterplots of temperature versus mixture fraction for the quiet and pulsating ﬂames at h = 15, 30, and 80 mm.
and thus these distributions also visualize the aver-
age shape of the inﬂow. It can be seen that the quiet
ﬂame exhibits a larger opening angle than the pulsat-
ing ﬂame, consistent with the velocity distributions
shown in Fig. 5. The temperature level in the quiet
ﬂame is, as expected, higher than that in the pulsat-
ing ﬂame, primarily due to the different equivalence
ratios. The mean temperature gradients are steeper in
the quiet ﬂame and this ﬂame reaches a homogeneous
temperature distribution at lower heights than the pul-
sating ﬂame does. From the mean mixture fraction
and temperature distributions one gets the impression
that the structures in the pulsating ﬂame are more
smeared out than in the quiet ﬂame. This might be
attributed to the periodic movement of the ﬂowﬁeld.
5.7. Correlation between temperature and mixture
fraction at different phase angles
Fig. 17 displays T –f scatterplots at h = 6 mm.
Again, each symbol represents the result of a single-
shot measurement and the solid curve shows adia-
batic equilibrium. Colors are used to distinguish be-
tween different zones, i.e., the irz, the shear layer
between the irz, and the inﬂow of fresh gases, the
inlet ﬂow, and the orz. Because these regions can-
not be separated sharply, the colors serve more as a
guide. It can be seen that the cyclic variations in the
irz (r ⩽4–6 mm) and the orz (r ⩾16 mm) are rela-
tively small and that these samples reﬂect reacted hot
exhaust gas. Within the inﬂow and the neighboring


--- Page 17 ---

18
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
Fig. 15. Distributions of mean mixture fraction (Reynolds-averaged) constructed from interpolations of the Raman point mea-
surements. The results from the pulsating ﬂame (right-hand side) have been recorded without phase triggering.
Fig. 16. Distributions of mean temperature constructed from interpolations of the Raman point measurements. The results from
the pulsating ﬂame (right-hand side) have been recorded without phase triggering.
shear layers, large changes of temperature and mix-
ture fraction are observed. The majority of the sam-
ples from this region have not reacted (T ≈300 K),
a signiﬁcant number have partially reacted, and some
have completely reacted. Astonishing are the large
cyclic variation and the scatter of f , reaching from
f ≈0.015 (ph2–ph3) to f ≈0.1 (ph7–ph8). These
results indicate that the periodically changing pres-
sure in the combustion chamber has different impacts
on the fuel and air supply lines in such a way that
more fuel (or less air) enters the combustion chamber
around phases 7 and 8. The variations of f dimin-
ish with increasing height but are still observable at
h = 35 mm.
5.8. Mean temperature and species distributions at
different phase-angles
The phase-dependent variations of the mean val-
ues of f , T , and the mole fractions of CH4 and O2
at h = 6 mm are displayed in Fig. 18. A striking fea-
ture is the dramatic cyclic change of the mean mixture
fraction within the inﬂow. From ph1 to ph6 the shapes
of the radial proﬁles are quite similar, with a shallow


--- Page 18 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
19
Fig. 17. Phase-resolved scatterplots of temperature versus mixture fraction at h = 6 mm.


--- Page 19 ---

20
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
Fig. 18. Radial proﬁles of the mean values (Reynolds averaged) of the mixture fraction, temperature, and mole fractions of CH4
and O2 at h = 6 mm at different phase angles.
bump at r ≈5–10 mm and a dip at r ≈16 mm. At ph7
and ph8, the proﬁles exhibit a completely different
shape, resembling a burst in comparison to the other
proﬁles, and fmean exceeds even the stoichiometric
mixture fraction (fstoich. = 0.055). The correspond-
ing proﬁles of the CH4 mole fraction reveal that at
these phase angles high concentrations of CH4 are in-
jected into the combustion chamber. The maximum
mean CH4 mole fraction, measured at r = 15 mm at
ph8, is 0.116 (taking into account the measurement
bias of 7%, it would be 0.108). In comparison, at
Φ = 0.7 the mole fraction of CH4 in the unburned
premixed gas would be 0.0685. The lowest CH4 con-
centrations were measured at ph4 and ph5, where
maximum mole fractions were about 0.05. The pro-
ﬁles of O2 are quite different from those of CH4: the
maximum value of the proﬁles does not change much
with phase angle and lies between 0.18 and 0.196.
However, the width of the O2-proﬁle changes signif-
icantly during the oscillation cycle with a maximum
around ph7 and ph8 (halfwidth r ≈9 mm) and a
minimum around ph3 and ph4 (r ≈4 mm). The
proﬁles of f show a qualitative correspondence with
the CH4 proﬁle but not with the O2 proﬁle, so it can
be concluded that the mixture fraction is mainly inﬂu-
enced by the fuel ﬂow variations. The corresponding
temperature proﬁles reveal large periodic variations
of T between r ≈7 mm and 15 mm. In the orz no
changes are observed and in the irz, for r ⩽5 mm,
the changes are small. These proﬁles correspond well
with the proﬁles of O2: at low temperatures the O2
mole fractions are large and they decrease with in-
creasing T , as expected.
5.9. Estimation of phase-dependent gas ﬂow rates
into the combustion chamber
From the results considered so far, it is clear the
velocities, temperature, and species concentrations
vary with phase angle. Now an estimation is pre-
sented for the phase-dependent variations of the fuel
and air ﬂows into the combustion chamber. Therefore
the molecular ﬂuxes (number of molecules ﬂowing
through an area per time) of CH4 and O2 are consid-
ered. The instantaneous molecular ﬂux Si of a species
i through the nozzle is the product u · ni integrated
over the area of the nozzle, where ni is the mole-
cular number density of the species i and u is the
axial velocity of the gas. These quantities change with
time and location and in order to determine Si, all
quantities must be measured simultaneously over the
entire area at h = 0. As this was not possible, the


--- Page 20 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
21
Fig. 19. Approximated molecular ﬂuxes of CH4 and O2 into the combustion chamber and simpliﬁed pressure traces as a function
of phase angle.
following approximation was made: For each mea-
suring location and phase angle, the mean values of
ni (ni,mean) and u (umean) were used, with ni taken
from the Raman measurements at h = 6 mm and u
from the LDV measurements at h = 5 mm. Cylindri-
cal symmetry was also assumed for the ﬂow. Then
Si,mean(r) was integrated over the area of the inﬂow
(from r = 6 to 16 mm) for each phase angle by multi-
plying ni(r) · u(r) at each measuring location r with
the area of an annulus around r with inner radius ri =
r −1 mm and outer radius ro = r +1 mm. Finally, the
total ﬂux Si was determined by summing over all an-
nuli. Of course, there are some crude simpliﬁcations
in this calculation that must be considered: (1) The
assumption of cylindrical symmetry of the ﬂame was
conﬁrmed by taking images of the ﬂame from vari-
ous directions with respect to the square combustion
chamber. The images did not reveal a difference in
ﬂame diameter, so that the assumption of cylindri-
cal symmetry appears justiﬁed. (2) There were dif-
ferences in height between the Raman measurements
(h = 6 mm) and the LDV measurements (h = 5 mm).
From the mean ﬂow ﬁeld it was estimated that the
ﬂow expands by less than 0.5 mm from h = 5 to
h = 6 mm in the radial direction and that the changes
in axial velocity are negligible. Therefore the error
from this approximation is also quite small. (3) Us-
ing the mean values of n and u for the calculation of
S instead of the instantaneous ones is only correct if n
and u were statistically independent. This is certainly
not generally the case in this ﬂame. However, within
the inﬂow u is not expected to depend signiﬁcantly
on gas composition, at least with respect to the ratio
CH4/O2, which will be considered here. As an error
analysis is unfeasible in this case, the results concern-
ing the ﬂuxes should be considered only an approxi-
mation. With this in mind, some important trends can
be identiﬁed. The ﬂuxes of O2 and CH4 calculated
in this way are shown in Fig. 19 together with simpli-
ﬁed pressure traces from the combustion chamber and
the plenum. It is clearly seen that the approximated
molecular ﬂux into the combustion chamber changes
signiﬁcantly over an oscillation cycle and that CH4
and O2 vary in phase with one another. Both reach a
pronounced maximum at phase 8 (315◦). The calcu-
lated CH4 ﬂux varies by a factor of 5.0 and the O2
ﬂux by 2.42. For comparison, the integrated chemi-
luminescence intensity varied by a factor of 6.25.
This is mentioned because there are grounds for sup-
posing that the chemiluminescence intensity and the
fuel supply rate are correlated. The pressures in the
plenum and the combustion chamber are out of phase
by ≈80◦, as explained earlier, and it is clear that the
average pressure in the plenum is higher than that in
the combustion chamber (by about 8 mbar). However,
the traces shown in Fig. 19 and the displayed pres-
sure difference (p = pplenum −pcombustion chamber)
are simpliﬁed in this graph. Comparing p and the
ﬂuxes, it is seen that the maximum ﬂux is reached
about 100◦after the maximum of p. This value is
close to 90◦, which would be expected at the nozzle
exit for a sinusoidal pressure variation in a conﬁgura-
tion where only the pressure difference determines the
inﬂow. The ratio (O2 ﬂux/CH4 ﬂux) is related to the
equivalence ratio Φ and would be a direct measure
for Φ if no combustion occurred below h = 6 mm.
For Φ = 0.7 the ratio would be 2.86, which occurs in
Fig. 19 around the phase angles 10◦and 220◦. The
fact that the ratio changes between 1.84 (phase 8) and
4.02 (phase 3) is evidence of a different response of
the air and fuel supply lines to the pressure variations
in the combustion chamber and plenum. From the ob-
served variation of the O2 ﬂux it becomes apparent
that the air ﬂow is subject to similar variations within


--- Page 21 ---

22
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
the swirl generator and nozzle. If the CH4 injection
within the swirler varied with the same relative ampli-
tude as the air ﬂow, the measured ratio O2 ﬂux/CH4
ﬂux would be constant over the period of oscilla-
tion. This is inconsistent with the experimental result.
However, considering that CH4 is injected with high
momentum into the air within the swirler, it can be
assumed that the fuel line is less sensitive to the pres-
sure variations than was the air supply. With this as-
sumption, the qualitative explanation for the varying
equivalence ratio is as follows: When the ﬂow veloc-
ity of the air in the swirler is small due to a small p
(around ph2), relatively large amounts of CH4 accu-
mulate in the slowly ﬂowing air. When p rises, this
fuel-rich mixture is accelerated and enters the com-
bustion chamber, leading to increased ﬂow rates of
air and CH4 at h = 6 mm. This represents the ﬁrst
step of the feedback loop known as oscillating fuel
supply combined with a convective time delay [29,
47,48].
5.10. Distributions of f , CH4, and T at different
phase-angles
Fig. 20 shows the mixture fraction distribution for
the eight phase angles studied. Again, the mean values
of f measured at the different locations were inter-
polated using the program “Origin” to yield quasi-
two-dimensional distributions. As the measurements
were performed at h = 6, 15, 25, 35, and 60 mm, the
interpolation is quite coarse in the upper part of the
plots. It can be clearly seen that at ph7 and ph8 fuel-
rich mixtures are injected and that these are convected
downstream as the oscillation proceeds. Assuming an
average axial velocity of u ≈30 m/s, the gas is con-
vected about 104 mm during the oscillation period of
3.45 ms, or 13 mm within 45◦. This is in qualitative
agreement with the observed development of the fuel-
rich region between ph7 and ph2.
The next question to be addressed is where the
CH4 is consumed. Fig. 21 displays the 2D distrib-
utions of CH4 corresponding to the distributions of
f from the previous ﬁgure. The plot shows that the
increase of CH4 mole fraction near the nozzle be-
gins at ph5 and continues until ph8. The CH4 plume
also increases in size, is convected downstream, and
reaches its largest size around ph2. The region with
r > 30 mm is not captured by the Raman measure-
ments, but there are certainly signiﬁcant CH4 con-
centrations beyond this radial position. From ph2 on,
the CH4 concentrations are drastically reduced, i.e.,
CH4 is burnt. This observation is in good agreement
with the OH chemiluminescence measurement, which
exhibits a maximum around ph3. The corresponding
pressure increase in the combustion chamber decel-
erates the inﬂow into the combustion chamber and
Fig. 20. Interpolated 2D distributions of the mixture fraction
for eight phase angles from Raman measurements at h = 6,
15, 25, 35, and 60 mm.
initiates the creation of the next fuel-rich gas pocket
in the swirler.
The phase-dependent changes of the temperature
distribution are displayed in Fig. 22. The temperature


--- Page 22 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
23
Fig. 21. Interpolated 2D distributions of the CH4 mole frac-
tion for eight phase angles.
distribution is closely related to the CH4 distribution
in such a way that high concentrations of CH4 cor-
respond to low temperatures and vice versa, as ex-
pected. The depletion of CH4 beginning at ph2 goes
along with an increase in temperature. The tempera-
Fig. 22. Interpolated 2D distributions of the temperature for
eight phase angles.
ture distributions show further that the orz exhibits a
signiﬁcant lower temperature than the irz for all phase
angles. With respect to the low temperatures reﬂect-
ing the inﬂow, it is seen that this region undergoes a
signiﬁcant change in shape from a cone with a rather
small opening angle at ph1 to one with a large opening


--- Page 23 ---

24
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
angle at ph6. From this movement it becomes clear
that the time-averaged temperature distribution from
Fig. 16 appears smeared out in comparison to the non-
pulsating ﬂame.
5.11. The feedback loop of the self-sustained
pulsations
In the following, the sequence of events and the
feedback loop are brieﬂy summarized, beginning with
phase 3, where the integrated chemiluminescence in-
tensity Ichem. (and probably also the heat release rate)
is at a maximum. ph3: Ichem. and also the pressure
in the combustion chamber are at a maximum. The
ﬂow rate into the combustion chamber is low, and
CH4 is accumulated in and slightly downstream of
the swirler. ph4–ph5: Ichem. decreases together with
pcomb. chamb.; the CH4 concentration in the combus-
tion chamber drops because the inﬂow rate of CH4
is still low. ph6–ph7: Ichem. and pcomb. chamb. ap-
proach a minimum. CH4 is largely burnt in the region
of the main ﬂame zone (h ≈40–60 mm). The pres-
sure difference p has become large, the ﬂow rates
increase, and a new CH4 plume appears at the nozzle
exit. ph8: The ﬂow rate into combustion chamber (at
h = 6 mm) reaches a maximum. ph1–ph3: the CH4
plume is convected to the main ﬂame zone, leading to
enhanced combustion; Ichem. and pcomb. chamb. in-
crease.
Thus, an oscillating fuel supply is the source of
the varying combustion intensity, which in turn trig-
gers the pressure oscillation. The oscillating pressure
generates a modulation of the fuel and air supply
rates in the swirler. This modulation of the CH4 ﬂow
(and equivalence ratio) is convected to the main ﬂame
zone. For an estimate of the convective time delay the
residence time of the gas in the nozzle, τnozzle, is ap-
proximated using the ﬂow rates and dimensions of the
nozzle. The distance from the fuel injection within
the swirler to the nozzle exit (h = 0) is about 4 cm.
The mean cross section of the nozzle is approximately
6.2 cm2. The ﬂow rate of 612 slpm (see Table 1) cor-
responds to 785 lpm at the measured nozzle exit tem-
perature of T ≈350 K. This yields a mean velocity of
unozzle ≈21 m/s within the nozzle and a residence
time of τnozzle ≈1.9 ms. For the convection of the
gas from h = 0 to the main ﬂame zone at h ≈50 mm
a mean axial velocity of umean ≈30 m/s can be as-
sumed (see Fig. 7), resulting in a time of ﬂight of
τchamber ≈1.67 ms. The total convective time delay
is thus estimated to be τ ≈3.57 ms. This is in good
agreement with the oscillation period of 3.45 ms and
thus a further conﬁrmation of the proposed feedback
mechanism.
6. Summary and conclusions
A gas turbine burner for premixed ﬂames has been
equipped with an optical combustion chamber in or-
der to perform investigations at atmospheric pressure
with optical and laser measuring techniques. Two
ﬂames were studied, one with Φ = 0.7 exhibiting
pronounced thermoacoustic pulsations at f ≈290 Hz
and a second, quiet ﬂame with Φ = 0.83. The mea-
surements include pressure ﬂuctuation registration,
OH* chemiluminescence detection as an indicator for
the heat release rate, laser Doppler velocimetry, pla-
nar laser-induced ﬂuorescence of OH, and laser Ra-
man scattering for the simultaneous detection of the
major species concentration and the temperature. For
characterization of the phase-dependent variations,
phase-locked measurements were performed.
The ﬂow ﬁeld could be divided into three differ-
ent regimes: the inﬂow of fresh gases and an inner
and an outer recirculation zone. The ﬂames were an-
chored below the nozzle exit plane close to the irz,
but the main ﬂame zone appeared at h ≈40–60 mm
and r ⩾20 mm. Although CH4 and air were pre-
mixed in a manner typical of practical GT burners,
a signiﬁcant level of unmixedness was revealed by
the Raman measurements. These measurements also
identiﬁed pronounced effects of ﬁnite-rate chemistry
in both ﬂames.
Signiﬁcant differences were observed between
the pulsating and quiet ﬂames with respect to ﬂame
shape, ﬂow ﬁeld, mixing, and the reaction progress.
In the pulsating ﬂame, all measured quantities var-
ied with the frequency of the pulsation. The total
OH* chemiluminescence intensity, which is, within
certain limits, representative of the heat release rate
varied between 16 and 100% over the oscillation cy-
cle. These variations were in phase with the pressure
variation in the combustion chamber. The phase-
dependent changes of the ﬂow velocities were most
prominent near the nozzle. Here, the lower part of
the irz moved up and down during an oscillation cy-
cle, thereby changing the width of the inﬂowing gas
stream. From the phase-resolved measurements of
mean axial velocity and the molecular number den-
sities, the molecular ﬂuxes within the inﬂow were
approximated. The molecular ﬂuxes of CH4 and O2
varied in phase, but by different amounts, leading to a
periodic variation of the equivalence ratio. These vari-
ations were in qualitative agreement with the pressure
variations in the plenum and combustion chamber.
The convection of the mixtures with high or low CH4
concentrations to the main ﬂame zone triggered the
heat release rate, which in turn caused the pressure
variations. The feedback loop for this ﬂame is thus
an oscillating fuel supply combined with a convective
time delay. The reason for the oscillating fuel supply


--- Page 24 ---

W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
25
lies most probably in the different impedances of the
fuel and air supply lines of the combustor. However,
this was not explicitly determined in the investiga-
tions.
The current work yielded phase-resolved quantita-
tive data on the ﬂow velocities, the major species con-
centrations, mixture fraction, and temperature, which
are well suited for a comparison with results from
numerical simulations. In the results presented here,
mole fractions and time-averaged mean values were
used. However, the data archive also contains mass
fractions and Favre-averaged mean values. Finally, it
should be noted that the experimental data are avail-
able on request for validation of numerical codes.
Acknowledgments
The work presented was mainly performed in the
frame of the project “PRECCINSTA,” funded by the
European Union, and as part of the DLR project NA-
COS. The ﬁnancial support of these projects is grate-
fully acknowledged. We furthermore thank C. Berat
for delivering the burner nozzle, B. Lehmann for the
execution of the LDV measurements, and M. Aigner,
L. Hernandez and K. Syed for fruitful discussions.
References
[1] J.J. Keller, AIAA J. 33 (1995) 2280–2287.
[2] E.C. Fernandes, M.V. Heitor, in: F. Culick, M.V. Heitor,
J.H. Whitelaw (Eds.), Unsteady Combustion, Kluwer
Academic, Dordrecht, 1996, p. 1.
[3] C.O. Paschereit, E. Gutmark, W. Weisenstein, Com-
bust. Sci. Technol. 138 (1998) 213–232.
[4] A.H. Lefebvre, Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor &
Francis, Philadelphia, 1999.
[5] S. Candel, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002) 1–28.
[6] J.G. Lee, D.A. Santavicca, J. Propulsion Power 19
(2003) 735–750.
[7] N. Syred, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 32 (2006) 93–
161.
[8] N. Docquier, S. Candel, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 28
(2002) 107–150.
[9] I. Emiris, J.H. Whitelaw, Combust. Sci. Technol. 175
(2003) 157–184.
[10] G.A. Richards, D.L. Straub, E.H. Robey, J. Propulsion
Power 19 (2003) 795–810.
[11] H.C. Mongia, T.J. Held, G.C. Hsiao, R.P. Pandalai,
J. Propulsion Power 19 (2003) 822–829.
[12] B.T. Zinn, in: Proceedings ASME Turbo Expo 2005,
GT2005-69138.
[13] A.P. Dowling, S. Hubbard, Proc. Inst. Mech. Engrs. 214
(2000) 317–332.
[14] C. Stone, S. Menon, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002)
155–160.
[15] D.J. Cook, H. Pitsch, N. Peters, in: Proceedings ASME
Turbo Expo 2003, GT2003-38558.
[16] T. Lieuwen, J. Propulsion Power 19 (2003) 765–781.
[17] S. Roux, G. Latigue, T. Poinsot, U. Meier, C. Berat,
Combust. Flame 141 (2005) 40–54.
[18] G. Lartigue, U. Meier, C. Bérat, Appl. Therm. Eng. 24
(2004) 1583–1592.
[19] G. Kelsall, C. Troger, Appl. Therm. Eng. 24 (2004)
1571–1582.
[20] L.C. Haber, U. Vandsburger, Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol. 175 (2003) 1859–1891.
[21] Y. Hardalupas, M. Orain, Combust. Flame 139 (2004)
188–207.
[22] A.R. Masri, R.W. Dibble, R.S. Barlow, Prog. Energy
Combust. Sci. 22 (1996) 307–362.
[23] R.S. Barlow, C.D. Carter, R.W. Pitz, in: K. Kohse-
Höinghaus, J. Jeffries (Eds.), Applied Combustion Di-
agnostics, Taylor & Francis, New York, 2002, p. 384.
[24] A.R. Masri, P.A.M. Kalt, R.S. Barlow, Combust.
Flame 137 (2004) 1–37.
[25] W. Meier, X.R. Duan, P. Weigand, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 30 (2005) 835–842.
[26] W. Meier, X.R. Duan, P. Weigand, Combust. Flame 144
(2006) 225–236.
[27] K.J. Syed, E. Buchanan, in: Proceedings ASME Turbo
Expo 2005, GT-2005-68070.
[28] T. Lieuwen, H. Torres, C. Johnson, B.T. Zinn, Trans.
ASME 123 (2001) 182–189.
[29] Th. Sattelmayer, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 125
(2003) 11–19.
[30] C.J. Lawn, S. Evesque, W. Polifke, Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol. 176 (2004) 1331–1358.
[31] T.M. Muruganandam, B.-H. Kim, M.R. Moreell,
V. Nori, M. Patel, B.W. Romig, J.M. Seitzman, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 1601–1609.
[32] K.-U. Schildmacher, R. Koch, H.-J. Bauer, Flow Turb.
Combust. 76 (2006) 177–197.
[33] X.R. Duan, W. Meier, P. Weigand, B. Lehmann, Appl.
Phys. B 80 (2005) 389–396.
[34] P. Weigand, W. Meier, X.R. Duan, R. Giezendanner-
Thoben, U. Meier, Flow Turb. Combust. 75 (2005)
275–292.
[35] H.E. Albrecht, M. Borys, N. Damaschke, C. Tropea,
Laser Doppler and Phase Doppler Measurement Tech-
niques, Springer, Heidelberg, 2002.
[36] B.O. Ayoola, R. Balachandran, J.H. Frank, E. Mas-
torakos, C.F. Kaminski, Combust. Flame 144 (2005)
1–16.
[37] O. Keck, W. Meier, W. Stricker, M. Aigner, Combust.
Sci. Technol. 174 (2002) 117–151.
[38] V. Bergmann, W. Meier, D. Wolff, W. Stricker, Appl.
Phys. B 66 (1998) 489–502.
[39] R.W. Bilger, S.H. Starner, R.J. Kee, Combust. Flame 80
(1990) 135–149.
[40] http://www.dlr.de/vt/forschung/datenarchiv/tnf/jet_
flames/contents.
[41] J.C. Dasch, Appl. Opt. 31 (1992) 1146–1152.
[42] http://gaseq.co.uk.
[43] R. Giezendanner-Thoben, U. Meier, W. Meier, J.
Heinze, M. Aigner, Appl. Opt. 44 (2005) 6565–6577.
[44] U. Rahmann, A. Bütler, U. Lenhard, R. Düsing,
D. Markus, A. Brockhinke, K. Kohse-Höinghaus,
LASKIN—A simulation program for time-resolved


--- Page 25 ---

26
W. Meier et al. / Combustion and Flame 150 (2007) 2–26
LIF-spectra, International Report, University of Biele-
feld, Faculty of Chemistry, Physical Chemistry I, http://
pc1.uni-bielefeld.de/laskin, V.5.0.
[45] J.H. Miller, R.J. Kee, M.D. Smooke, J.F. Grcar, in:
Western State Section of the Combust. Inst., Spring
Meeting, 1984, Paper WSS/CI 84-10.
[46] J.Y.
Chen,
UC
Berkeley,
personal
communica-
tion.
[47] M. Zhu, A.P. Dowling, K.N.C. Bray, J. Eng. Gas Tur-
bines Power 124 (2002) 20–30.
[48] T. Lieuwen, Turbomachinery Int. 44 (2003) 16–
19.
