
--- Page 1 ---

A. Duncan Walker
e-mail: a.d.walker@lboro.ac.uk
Jon F. Carrotte
James J. McGuirk
Dept. of Aero. and Auto. Engineering,
Loughborough University Loughborough,
LE11 3TU, United Kingdom
Enhanced External Aerodynamic
Performance of a Generic
Combustor Using An Integrated
OGV/Prediffuser Design
Technique
In this paper we use experimental measurements to characterize the extent that improved
the external aerodynamic performance (reduced total pressure loss, increased ﬂow qual-
ity) of a gas-turbine combustion system may be achieved by adopting an integrated
OGV/prediffuser technique. Two OGV/prediffuser combinations were tested. The ﬁrst is a
datum design corresponding to a conventional design approach, where the OGV and
prediffuser are essentially designed in isolation. The second is an “integrated” design
where the OGV blade shape has been modiﬁed, following recommendations of earlier
CFD work (Final Report No. TT03R01, 2003), to produce a secondary ﬂow/wake struc-
ture that allows the prediffuser to operate at a higher area ratio without boundary layer
separation. This is demonstrated to increase static pressure recovery and reduce dump
losses. Experimental measurements are presented on a fully annular rig. Several traverse
planes are used to gather ﬁve-hole probe data that allow the ﬂow structure through the
OGV, at the inlet and exit of the prediffuser, and in the inner/outer annulus supply ducts
to be examined. Both overall performance measures (loss coefﬁcients) and measures of
ﬂow uniformity and quality are used to demonstrate that the integrated design is
superior. DOI: 10.1115/1.2364008
Introduction
Gas turbine combustion systems require careful design of their
external aerodynamic arrangements. These form the interface be-
tween the airﬂow supplied by the compression system and its
distribution over the various feed paths to combustor components
fuel injector, dilution ports, cooling ﬁlms, or downstream turbine
components e.g., Nozzle Guide Vane NGV cooling. The air-
ﬂow distribution has to be accomplished at minimum total pres-
sure loss to avoid associated Speciﬁc Fuel Consumption SFC
penalties. The optimum conﬁguration/layout of combustor exter-
nal aerodynamics needs to be reviewed, since legislation for the
emission of pollutants from aerogas turbines is dictating a signiﬁ-
cant change to the architecture of future combustor systems. Lean
combustion is essential for the achievement of the envisaged NOx
reduction targets. This requires excess air in the primary combus-
tion zone, leading to much larger air fractions than typical for
conventional annular combustors entering the forward part of
the ﬂame tube. Hence, lean combustion impacts the airﬂow into
the combustion system in several ways:
•
Lean fuel injection modules are signiﬁcantly larger than tra-
ditional airspray counterparts, thus necessitating a deeper
ﬂame tube. This will adversely affect the loss due to in-
creased turning within the dump region.
•
If lean fuel injection modules are to be operated satisfacto-
rily, the airﬂow feed quality e.g., uniformity of pressure
proﬁle over the injector inlet area may need to be controlled
much more closely than in traditional systems.
•
Flow distribution within the combustor is signiﬁcantly al-
tered because the majority of the compressor efﬂux now
passes directly through the injector, with only a small
amount of ﬂow passing down the annuli.
•
The cooling ﬂow itself must be reduced in order to provide
sufﬁcient air for lean combustion, requiring new cooling
technologies to be developed. The air feed to these new
cooling arrangements must be of appropriate quality, but is
often taken from the low total pressure air near the diffuser
walls, necessitating possible external aerodynamic changes.
Existing design rules for the external aerodynamic layout of
conventional combustion systems may not therefore be easily ex-
trapolated to lean low emission combustors.
This is particularly true for the prediffuser, which in a conven-
tional system is required to provide an exit proﬁle with a radially
and circumferentially uniform distribution with maximum static
pressure recovery but minimum total pressure loss. For future
combustors, a nonuniform ﬂow, varying for example circumferen-
tially with the location of the fuel injectors, may be appropriate.
Nevertheless, feed to the individual fuel injectors must still be of
high quality with low loss and uniform distribution in order to
ensure homogeneous mixing of the air and fuel. Further, the feed
annulus ﬂows around the ﬂame tube will be made up predomi-
nantly of prediffuser boundary layer ﬂow, which, already of poor
quality, will have to turn and ﬂow around a ﬂame tube of increas-
ing depth. The aerodynamic quality of this air is also critical, since
the cooling systems must strive to maintain acceptable tempera-
tures, despite the reduced supply of cooling air.
Additionally, changes in combustor geometry and ﬂow distri-
bution will affect the operation and performance of the prediffuser
itself. The circumferential variation in downstream blockage and
the likely desirable distribution of bulk pitch angle at exit will
undoubtedly result in different optimum conﬁgurations of predif-
fuser area ratio and geometry than has been typical to date. Thus,
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute IGTI of ASME for pub-
lication in the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Paper presented
at the ASME Turbo Expo 2006, Barcelona, Spain, May 8 – 11 2006, Paper No.
GT2006-90184. Manuscript received October 1, 2005; ﬁnal manuscript received
February 1, 2006. IGTI Review Chair: R. S. Abhari.
80 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Copyright © 2007 by ASME
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/129/1/80/5892814/80_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 2 ---

for lean module combustion to be successful, it is argued that it is
important that the design of the combustion system is a fully
integrated concept with each component being optimized to allow
the effect of, and the effect on, upstream and downstream compo-
nents to be considered. In this paper we present recent work car-
ried out to study how this may be achieved for the compressor
OGV/prediffuser interaction.
The prediffuser/dump diffuser design concept has become es-
tablished as the standard design philosophy over the last 20 years
Klein 1. It is well known, however, that the performance of
annular prediffusers is sensitive to the inlet conditions presented
to them Stevens et al. 2; Klein 3. Similarly, the introduction
of load-bearing radial struts into the prediffuser can have beneﬁ-
cial effects swirl level reduction, more uniform and stable annu-
lus ﬂow feed to ﬂame tube features, but also performance reduc-
ing effects extra pressure loss and poorer feed quality to burners
in line with struts, so that careful aerodynamic design is needed
Barker et al. 4. The importance of compressor exit conditions
Outlet Guide Vane OGV wake structure and turbulence ﬁeld
on combustor annular diffuser performance has led to several
studies to capture the characteristics of the ﬂow entering the
prediffuser in great detail Zierer 5, Carrotte et al. 6, and Ma
and Jiang 7. It is observed, for example, that diffusers in turbo-
machinery environments achieve a considerably higher pressure
recovery than with classical “clean” ducted ﬂow inlet conditions
1,5 due to the increased turbulent mixing associated with com-
pressor exit ﬂow ﬁelds. OGV exit ﬂow structure is fairly complex,
with regions of relatively high loss located near the junction of
OGV blade suction surface and inner/outer casings, thin wakes,
and signiﬁcant secondary ﬂows 6. This implies that diffuser per-
formance will only be maximized when the diffuser and turboma-
chinery are aerodynamically matched.
This has been comprehensively examined recently by Barker
and Carrotte 8,9. By examining diffusers of various area ratios
downstream of an engine representative OGV row behind a single
stage compressor, it was possible to determine that increases in
loss associated with OGV wake mixing in the diffuser adverse
pressure gradient ﬁeld were mainly associated with the low energy
ﬂow adjacent to the casings. The data also conﬁrmed that the
diffuser pressure rise was enhanced by the OGV blade wake mix-
ing process, leading to pressure increase beyond that which the
casing wall boundary layer could sustain if simple axisymmetric
inlet conditions had been present. Finally, a detailed analysis of
the stream tube evolution within the diffuser indicated regions
where the secondary ﬂow convected high energy ﬂow toward the
diffuser endwalls, simultaneously removing low energy boundary
layer ﬂuid. The ﬂuid element streakline paths were predominantly
associated with the diffuser inlet conditions provided by the up-
stream OGV blade. These results conﬁrmed that the secondary
ﬂow ﬁeld generated at the OGV exit is signiﬁcant in controlling
endwall boundary layer growth and delaying ﬂow separation in
the diffuser. This implies that a ﬂow control approach to OGV/
prediffuser design could be adopted to optimize aerodynamic
matching and allow, for example, maximum prediffuser area ratio
to be achieved while retaining acceptable and stable ﬂow quality
within the diffuser for interactions with components farther
downstream.
Diffuser/combustor ﬂow interaction has been a longstanding
area of interest in CFD studies of combustor external aerodynam-
ics Karki et al. 10; Koutmos and McGuirk 11. However,
emphasis to date has focused on an analysis of a prescribed
diffuser/combustor annulus geometry in terms of the resulting
pressure loss and quality of air feed to injector, ﬂame tube ports,
etc. An alternative philosophy would be to use an optimization
approach to ﬁnd, for example, the best OGV/prediffuser arrange-
ment that would lead to the overall best performance.
The idea of integrated consideration and optimization of com-
ponents in gas-turbine turbomachinery is receiving much attention
currently. Shahpar 12, for example, has outlined the develop-
ment and application of a design system for automatic optimiza-
tion used within a Rolls Royce SOPHY, and has provided ex-
amples of industrial engine exhaust diffuser and bypass exhaust
nozzle optimization. Schlüter et al. 13 have recently proposed a
method for the simultaneous solution of a complete compressor/
combustor/turbine ﬂow, also including both RANS and LES CFD
ﬂow solvers. It is currently difﬁcult to imagine such an approach
being used for optimization purposes since overall compute times
are long and optimization methods typically involve tens or hun-
dreds of CFD solutions. However, the optimization of strongly
coupled components such as the OGV row and downstream pre-
diffuser certainly merit further study. To this end, Barker et al.
14, as part of an EU project entitled “LOPOCOTEP” LOw
POllutant COmbustor TEchnology Programme conducted a de-
tailed experimental and computational study comparing the per-
formance of a conventional OGV/diffuser design i.e., essentially
designed on an isolated component basis with the OGV design
ignoring the ﬂow ﬁeld within the diffuser, and vice versa, with an
integrated optimized OGV design IOGV obtained from numeri-
cal predictions, which took account of the strong interaction be-
tween the components. This work demonstrated how the OGV
geometry could be modiﬁed e.g., via blade lean, sweep, etc. to
manipulate the secondary ﬂow emerging from the OGV passage
such as to create beneﬁcial effects in the diffuser ﬂow and allow
increased area ratio and a gain in the overall system performance.
The experimental part of this work provided inlet condition data
both mean and turbulence components for CFD predictions of
the OGV row and prediffuser and also validation data to assess the
extent that the improved performance inferred by the CFD was
achieved in practice.
The success reported in 14 has directly led to the present
work. The experimental data gathered in 14 was restricted to the
OGV/prediffuser itself; it was not possible to conduct measure-
ments in the dump region or assess the overall system perfor-
mance in terms of pressure loss improvements to the annulus re-
gions surrounding the combustor. Accordingly, an experimental
program was set in place as part of a further EU project entitled
“INTELLECT” INTEgrated Lean Low Emission CombusTor.
This allowed a complete dataset to be gathered, for the same
compressor rotor and dump region geometry, both for a conven-
tional OGV/prediffuser design referred to here as the “Datum”
design and for the optimized integrated OGV/prediffuser design
recommended by 14 referred to here as the “LOPOCOTEP”
design. Detailed ﬂow structure measurements from the rotor exit
through to inner and outer annulus ducts surrounding a generic
combustor ﬂame tube were undertaken. This enabled OGV perfor-
mance, prediffuser performance, and dump performance all to be
assessed. The advantage of using a fairly simple and generic ﬂame
tube shape and providing measurements from rotor inlet through
to annulus ducts means that the dataset is suitable for the valida-
tion of computational methods that capture both turbomachinery
stage and combustor ﬂow processes, such as reported in 13. The
dataset also allows a full and comprehensive assessment of the
advantages of adopting an integrated approach for combustor ex-
ternal aerodynamics.
Experimental Facility and Instrumentation
Experimental Facility. All experimental data were obtained on
a low speed isothermal test facility operating at nominally atmo-
spheric conditions Figs. 1 and 2. Air is drawn into a large inlet
plenum above the vertically mounted facility, before passing
through an inlet ﬂare and honeycomb ﬂow straightener. The air is
then accelerated over a bell-mouth intake section prior to passing
into the test section that comprises a single stage axial compressor
with Inlet Guide Vanes IGVs, an OGV/prediffuser assembly, and
a downstream generic combustion system Fig. 3. The mean ra-
dius of the IGV, rotor, and OGV rows is 375 mm with a passage
height of 36.6 mm hinlet. The IGV row consists of 80 vanes
preceding a rotor operated at a ﬁxed nondimensional mass ﬂow
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2007, Vol. 129 / 81
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/129/1/80/5892814/80_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 3 ---

condition m˙ RT/AP and speed ND/ RT correspond-
ing to a ﬂow coefﬁcient Va/U of =0.403 and a mass ﬂow of
approximately 4 kg s−1. This results in an axial velocity through
the blade rows of approximately 40 m/s Mach No. 0.12 and an
OGV Reynolds number of approximately 1.6105. The OGV is
presented with approximately 450 of swirl by the rotor. After the
ﬂow passes through the OGV/prediffuser assembly its distribution
to the feed annuli and combustor cowl ports simulated fuel injec-
tor ﬂow is controlled by a system of downstream throttles, while
a further throttle within the exhaust system ensures that the com-
pressor is maintained on the desired operating point.
OGV/Prediffuser Geometries.
Datum OGV/Prediffuser. The OGV row for this conﬁguration
consists of 160 vanes note this is 2 per IGV each of 39 mm
chord, with a thickness to chord ratio of 6% and a constant blade
section from hub to tip; in addition, the blade section was 2D, i.e.,
at any radius it was positioned in the same axial and circumfer-
ential location along the whole span. The prediffuser is a simple
design having an area ratio of 1.6 and a nondimensional length
L/hinlet of 2.23. Although designed using conventional design
rules, if considered in isolation from the OGV row and down-
stream combustor, the datum prediffuser has a slightly larger area
ratio than would be recommended using the design criteria as
described in Howard et al. 15, whose experiments were con-
ducted with axisymmetric thin boundary layers at the annular dif-
fuser inlet. According to Howard et al. 15, for a nondimensional
length of 2.23, the stall line corresponds to an area ratio of 1.58.
However, Barker et al. 14 demonstrated that downstream of a
single stage axial compressor the datum prediffuser, in fact, re-
mains within a stable ﬂow regime, which highlights the impor-
tance of diffuser inlet conditions.
Integrated (LOPOCOTEP) OGV/Prediffuser. The OGV row for
this conﬁguration also contains 160 vanes, however, as recom-
mended in 14, OGV blade geometry changes were introduced.
Based on the same chord and basic blade proﬁle as the Datum
vane and using computational techniques, Barker et al. 14 manu-
ally optimized the blade by moving at each radial position across
the span the section axially sweep or circumferentially lean
Fig. 1
Experimental facility—Test cell schematic
Fig. 2
Experimental facility—Test section photograph
Fig. 3
Test section showing traverse plane locations
82 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/129/1/80/5892814/80_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 4 ---

relative to the hub location. This changes the aerodynamic loading
along the span. In addition, a small change to the trailing edge
camber of some sections was introduced to reduce the residual
swirl level at exit from the OGV row. The resultant spanwise
velocity components were observed to help reduce blade loading
toward the hub and the tip and encourage higher momentum ﬂuid
transport toward the walls, thus off-loading the end wall boundary
layers at the prediffuser inlet. Hence, although still a simple de-
sign, the LOPOCOTEP Integrated OGV/prediffuser was able to
perform satisfactorily at an overall area ratio of 1.8. At the same
nondimensional length of 2.23, this should undoubtedly have re-
sulted in separation according to Howard et al. 15. Figure 4
illustrates the geometry differences between the two designs in
illustrative format and also contrasts the diffuser area ratios. Fig-
ure 5 plots the two diffusers on a nondimensional length/area ratio
chart, showing the stall line implied by the Howard et al. 15
data. As already mentioned, even the Datum prediffuser operates
satisfactorily, even though it is just above the “clean” inlet stall
line, and the prediffuser for the LOPOCOTEP IOGV design is
well above this stall line.
Generic Flame Tube Geometry. The ﬂame tube geometry
downstream of the prediffuser exit has been intentionally made
simple for the present tests. While still presenting a realistic level
of blockage, the combustor has been simpliﬁed such that it con-
tains a typical dump region geometry, a fully annular ﬂame tube
of appropriate radial depth and inner/outer annulus ﬂow heights,
but a clean outer surface with no attempts made to include dilu-
tion ports or cooling ﬁlm features. The only porosity in the ﬂame
tube is a series of 20 round holes to represent the path of air
passing into the fuel injector no burner arm or other features are
used; see Fig. 6. Lean ﬂow combustors often do not feature air
admission ports in the annuli and are also likely to incorporate
new cooling technologies. Hence removal/omission of these fea-
tures seems logical at this stage. Figure 6 shows a close-up of the
ﬂame tube and dump region. The nondimensional distance from
the OGV exit to the ﬂame tube was maintained at 3.63 hinlet. The
20 round holes in the cowl have an effective area radius
20 mm, which allows in the present tests approximately 30%
of the prediffuser efﬂux to enter the cowl. Here 30% is typical of
conventional combustors for fuel injector plus head cooling mass
ﬂow, rather than the much higher cowl mass ﬂow of lean burn fuel
injector designs. The intention here is, in this ﬁrst step, to inves-
tigate the beneﬁts of the IOGV approach for a conventional sys-
tem and then, in future measurements, to quantify the perfor-
mance beneﬁts for a higher cowl mass ﬂow system. This step-by-
step approach was necessary since the optimum IOGV design will
certainly be inﬂuenced by the cowl mass ﬂow and the LOPO-
COTEP design adopted here was determined using 30% cowl
ﬂow. The remaining mass ﬂow is evenly split between inner and
outer annuli.
Instrumentation. The aerodynamic performance of each sys-
tem was assessed using suitably calibrated miniature ﬁve-hole
Fig. 4
Datum „top…, integrated „middle… geometries, and cross-
section comparison „bottom…
Fig. 5
Datum and integrated geometries on diffuser chart
Fig. 6
Flame tube conﬁguration and mass ﬂow split
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2007, Vol. 129 / 83
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/129/1/80/5892814/80_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 5 ---

probes of overall diameter 1.5 mm, as described by Wray and
Carrotte 16. The probes were employed in the non-nulled mode
to determine the local ﬂow vector and total and static pressures.
As indicated in Fig. 3, ﬁve-hole probe area traverses were con-
ducted at rig inlet X1, rotor exit X2, OGV exit X3, predif-
fuser exit X4, and within the inner XI5 and outer XO5 feed
annuli. The number of measurement points per area traverse plane
was 820 41 circumferential x 20 radial. Pressures were recorded
using Furness FCO44 pressure transducers and corrected to ICAO
standard day conditions i.e., 101325 Pa and 288.15 K. The
probes were traversed in the radial direction using a stepper motor
powered linear guide attached to the external casings of the test
section. Circumferential traversing was achieved by either rotation
of the casing about the test section or rotation of the IGV, OGV,
and ﬂame tube using a dc motor. Operation of the test rig, posi-
tioning of the instrumentation, and digitization of all pressure sig-
nals was PC controlled. Further details of the mechanical arrange-
ments of the rig and traversing systems are fully described in 16.
Data Reduction and Errors. The overall aerodynamic perfor-
mance was quantiﬁed in terms of total pressure loss and static
pressure recovery coefﬁcients derived from the ﬁve-hole probe
area traverse data. Thus, at any measurement plane the air mass
ﬂow rate and local bulk average velocity are deﬁned as:
m˙ = U dA = U¯ A
For the experiments described here, the resulting mass ﬂow bal-
ance on area traverse planes was generally within ±1% of the
measured total air mass ﬂow entering the test facility measured
via a single ﬁve-hole probe traverse at inlet to the IGV row X1.
Spatially averaged values of total and static pressure at each plane
were derived using the mass-weighted technique described by
Klein 15:
P˜ = 1
m˙  P dm˙ =
1
U¯ A PU dA
P˜ = p˜ + 1
2U¯ 2,
 = 1
A
U
U¯	
3
dA
A−B = P˜ A −P˜ B
P˜ A −p˜A
,
CpA−B = p˜B −p˜A
P˜ A −p˜A
For spatially non-uniform incompressible ﬂow which is in a pre-
dominantly axial direction it follows that:
Where the kinetic energy ﬂux coefﬁcient, , represents the ratio
of the mass weighted mean kinetic energy of the non-uniform
ﬂow to that of a uniform ﬂow through the same passage area with
the same mass ﬂow rate. Changes in the spatially averaged pres-
sures between measurement planes A and B are expressed in terms
of the mass-weighted total pressure loss  and static pressure
rise Cp coefﬁcients as follows:
The mass-weighted total pressures derived at each of the
traverse planes shown in Fig. 3 were repeatable to within ±1 mm
H2O, a variation that amounts to less than ±0.5% of the dynamic
pressure recorded at OGV exit. Thus, the repeatability of the de-
rived total pressure loss and static pressure rise coefﬁcients relat-
ing to overall performance was better than ±0.005 of the values
presented here.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Preliminary Rig Commissioning Measurements. As men-
tioned previously, the present measurements, conducted as part of
the INTELLECT project, are following on from an earlier study
conducted during the LOPOCOTEP project. In between these
studies the experimental facility has been considerably modiﬁed;
it was considered wise therefore to conduct a preliminary rig re-
commissioning test to make sure earlier data could be reproduced.
With the inlet section IGVs and rotor, compressor OGV/pre-
diffuser assembly, and operating conditions in common, it was
important to ensure that the ﬂow ﬁeld, particularly the boundary
layer growth at the rotor inlet and exit, were consistent with pre-
vious work. Figure 7 illustrates a single radial traverse for mean
axial velocity taken at rotor inlet X1 and shows excellent agree-
ment between previous and current builds for both Datum and
IOGV conﬁgurations studied in the present investigation. It is
clear that the effects of geometry modiﬁcations downstream have
not penetrated upstream past the rotor. The inlet ﬂow to the rotor
is maintained as one with small boundary layer growth on the
inner 12% h and outer 16% h casing walls, with a ﬂat core.
At the rotor exit X2 the measurement sector corresponds to one
OGV space and circumferentially averaged proﬁles of axial veloc-
ity and total pressure Fig. 8 again show good agreement with
previous data. The data shown are for the IOGV geometry only,
but it is important to note that, within experimental error, results at
X2 are comparable between Datum and IOGV designs. In other
words the changes to the OGV and prediffuser geometry have also
not inﬂuenced the static pressure ﬁeld at rotor exit, which might
Fig. 7
Axial velocity proﬁle at rotor inlet „X1…
Fig. 8
Axial velocity and total pressure proﬁles „IOGV… at rotor
exit „X2…
84 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/129/1/80/5892814/80_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 6 ---

have led to a change in the work proﬁle along the span of the
rotor. Any interaction effects between the rotor and the different
OGV/prediffuser systems have been minimized. It can be seen
that at the rotor trailing edge the boundary layer growth is now
25% of passage height and there is clear evidence of the work
proﬁle of the rotor and of a rotor tip vortex loss process in the
total pressure proﬁle.
OGV Exit (X3). The above data were considered adequate
proof that the test facility had been successfully recommissioned.
Attention was now turned to measurements that quantiﬁed both
aerodynamic performance and allowed a comparison between Da-
tum and IOGV designs. The ﬁrst plane to be studied was OGV
exit X3. Axial velocity contours and secondary velocity vectors
at station X3 are presented in Fig. 9, plotted over a two OGV
measurement sector for both OGV/prediffuser conﬁgurations. The
secondary velocity vectors plotted in Fig. 9 and elsewhere later
represent simply the local ratio of radial to circumferential veloc-
ity components. A 2-OGV passage sector was chosen as the ratio
of IGVs to OGVs could still be identiﬁed in neighboring OGV
wakes at X3; see Fig. 9. For the Datum blade the wakes are
relatively thin and contain two regions of low momentum near the
hub and at two-thirds blade height, the latter associated with the
rotor tip vortex. The secondary ﬂow pattern of the Datum blade
shows a small amount of residual swirl remains, with the radial
ﬂow being predominantly inward. The blade geometry of the
IOGV design has clearly manipulated the wake structure in the
vicinity of the endwalls. The secondary ﬂow is directed by the
blade toward each end wall and has already at X3 had the effect of
energizing the endwall boundary layers; the wakes are, however,
noticeably thicker near midpassage height. Table 1 summarizes
the performance parameters for the OGV row; the IOGV design
incurs a slightly higher loss as it is performing more work by
imparting an increased radial component on the ﬂow, and has
thicker wakes.
Prediffuser Exit (X4). Velocity contours and secondary ﬂow
vectors at the prediffuser exit X4 for the Datum and IOGV de-
signs are presented next. Sector data were again initially collected
over 2 OGV passages, to capture the IGV/OGV interaction men-
tioned previously, which can still be identiﬁed at the prediffuser
exit see Fig. 10 for the Datum geometry. In future experiments,
when the injector mass ﬂow will be increased, the prediffuser exit
ﬂow ﬁeld may exhibit stronger evidence of the circumferential
variation in downstream blockage. Under these circumstances it
will be necessary to conduct measurements over a complete injec-
tor sector eight OGV passages in order to capture the circumfer-
entially repeating pattern. To examine the acceptability of main-
taining the number of measurement points at 820, an area traverse
over an 8 OGV sector was conducted, and this is also shown in
Fig. 10. It can be seen that the essential ﬂow features at the pred-
iffuser exit are still captured well by the lower spatial resolution of
the complete injector sector, and hence this sector size was used in
all further measurements. The prediffuser exit comparison in Fig.
11 demonstrates the differences in the development of the OGV
wake structure and secondary ﬂow ﬁeld caused by the IOGV de-
sign. This design produces thinner high velocity zones, and a
more endwall directed secondary ﬂow with lower levels of re-
sidual swirl. As a consequence, the inner endwall boundary layer,
in particular, is in better condition, even though the area ratio is
12.5% larger. This overall effect at the prediffuser exit is more
apparent in the circumferentially averaged proﬁles shown in Fig.
12. Circumferential averaging was conducted by averaging data
over all measured points at the same radius across either an OGV
blade sector or a combustor sector. The averaging was done on an
area basis for velocity and pitch angle, but a mass-weighted basis
for pressure pitch angle was deﬁned locally via the ratio of radial
to axial components and then area-weighted circumferentially av-
eraged. For the Datum design the axial velocity proﬁle is char-
acterized by relatively thick boundary layers 20% of the pre-
diffuser exit height and a noticeable peak at approximately mid-
passage height. Although this type of proﬁle may feed the injector
satisfactorily, the feed to the annuli will be comprised of the poor
quality boundary layer ﬂow that will, in turn, compromise the
quality of the air delivered to the annuli. For the IOGV design, not
only is the ﬂow fully attached for a loading that would tradition-
ally separate, but a high proportion of the ﬂow has migrated out-
board, resulting in much thinner and healthier boundary layers
now only approximately 10% of the prediffuser exit height. In
addition, the ﬂow pitch angles near the endwalls have increased
by 30%, so that the ﬂow is already starting to turn more toward
Fig. 9
OGV exit „X3… axial velocity contours and secondary
ﬂow vectors: Datum „left…; IOGV „right…
Table 1
OGV pressure loss and Cp coefﬁcients
Geometry
X2-X3
CpX2-X3
Datum
0.12
0.38
IOGV
0.14
0.38
Fig. 10
Axial velocity contours and secondary ﬂow vectors at
pre-diffuser exit „X4… datum design 2 OGV sector „left…; 8 OGV
sector „right…
Fig. 11
Axial velocity contours and secondary ﬂow vectors at
prediffuser exit „X4… datum design „left…; integrated design
„right…
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2007, Vol. 129 / 85
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/129/1/80/5892814/80_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 7 ---

the feed annulus at the diffuser exit. This and the lower bulk
average velocity due to the higher area ratio of the IOGV predif-
fuser all contribute positively to reducing dump and turning losses
in the downstream region.
In terms of performance at the prediffuser exit, Table 2 presents
the mass-weighted total pressure loss and static pressure recovery
coefﬁcients. These are quoted with respect to both rotor exit X2
and OGV exit X3, allowing a comparison of the combined
OGV/prediffuser performance or just the prediffuser in isolation.
In both cases the IOGV design incurs a higher overall loss that the
Datum. However, the majority of the additional loss occurs within
the blade row, with the prediffuser itself incurring only a small
rise in loss due to increased secondary ﬂow mixing. Further, Table
2 shows that with its increased prediffuser area ratio the IOGV
prediffuser is able to produce a notable increase 18% in static
pressure recovery. This, in conjunction with an enhanced exit pro-
ﬁle, means that this design should result in improved ﬂow distri-
bution and lower losses in the downstream combustor.
Inner (XI5) and Outer (XO5) Annuli. The ﬁnal aerodynamic
aspect examined in this study was the feed quality to the annuli
and whether the enhanced prediffuser exit proﬁle and static pres-
sure recovery coefﬁcient of the IOGV design provided any overall
system beneﬁt. The interest in placing emphasis on these aspects
is that improved annulus feed quality and reduced system loss are
likely to be a prime concern of the deeper ﬂame tube designs
implied by lean module injectors.
Differences in the annulus ﬂow ﬁelds are best revealed by an
examination of circumferentially averaged proﬁles Fig. 13. The
axial velocity proﬁles are essentially the same for both designs;
however, Fig. 13 shows that the pitch and yaw angles of the ﬂow
in both inner and outer annuli are different. This is not unexpected
as, with reference to Fig. 11, the near endwall ﬂow at prediffuser
exit differs noticeably between the two designs, and it is this ﬂow
that passes into the annuli. The stream tubes feeding the annuli
undergo diffusion between prediffuser exit and annulus entry,
which will have a tendency to amplify the differences. Addition-
ally, the fact that the ﬂow is moving to a different radius means
that the conservation of angular momentum will cause any swirl
present at the prediffuser exit to increase in the inner annulus and
decrease in the outer. Figure 13 shows that both pitch and yaw
angles are reduced in the IOGV design, particularly the latter in
the inner annulus, hence improving feed quality to any ﬂame tube
features. The ﬁnal system performance data are presented in
Tables 3 and 4.
It is clearly demonstrated that, considering the overall ﬂow path
from rotor to annulus ﬂow, the loss to both annuli is signiﬁcantly
reduced. For example, with respect to the OGV exit X3 the loss
coefﬁcient is reduced by 37% and 50% to the inner and outer feed
annuli, respectively. Even taking the increased OGV blade loss
into account, the system loss X2-X5 has been reduced by 10%
inner and 20% outer, and the two annuli regions are much
better balanced. The change in loss for the combined OGV 
prediffuser  dump system through to the feed annuli clearly
illustrates the beneﬁts to the whole system of the integrated ap-
proach, even just one that considers only the OGV/prediffuser
assembly. It is worth noting that the effect on the isolated OGV
Fig. 12
Axial velocity and pitch angle proﬁles at X4
Table 2
Pressure loss  and pressure recovery Cp
Geometry
X2-X4
X3-X4
CpX2-X4
CpX3−X4
Datum
0.15
0.055
0.66
0.55
IOGV
0.18
0.062
0.69
0.65
Fig. 13
Circumferentially averaged pitch and yaw angles in
annuli: inner „XI5… top; outer „XO5… bottom
Table 3
Inner Annulus Coefﬁcients:  and Cp
Geometry
X2-XI5
X3-XI5
CpX2-XI5
CpX3-XI5
Datum
0.246
0.252
0.678
0.593
IOGV
0.224
0.159
0.713
0.708
Table 4
Outer annulus coefﬁcients:  and Cp
Geometry
X2-XO5
X3-XO5
CpX2-XO5
CpX3-XO5
Datum
0.277
0.317
0.654
0.544
IOGV
0.221
0.152
0.791
0.722
86 / Vol. 129, JANUARY 2007
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/129/1/80/5892814/80_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026


--- Page 8 ---

performance of the lean/sweep blade changes means that such
modiﬁcations would probably not be considered within a conven-
tional design approach, since these lead to increased loss across
the OGV, with the potential beneﬁts to the downstream ﬂow not
being considered during the OGV design process. However, in an
integrated approach, it is the overall performance that is consid-
ered, and in this case, the experimental data show that the in-
creased OGV loss is acceptable because the overall loss from
OGV inlet to combustor feed annuli has been reduced.
Summary and Conclusions
The present paper has focused attention on the possibility of
improving the performance of one particular component of com-
bustor external aerodynamics, namely the prediffuser/dump dif-
fuser combination, by adopting an integrated OGV/diffuser design
approach. While various other diffuser alternatives have been sug-
gested in the past e.g., a fully faired system 17 or a hybrid bled
diffuser system 18, emphasis has been placed here on improv-
ing the prediffuser/dump diffuser concept. A fully faired system
offers the potential for a signiﬁcant reduction in loss, but this is
acknowledged to be at the expense of system stability. Bled dif-
fusers offer the potential for operation at higher area ratios within
a given overall axial length, but their use is limited by the in-
creased complexity of the bleed, and the need to use the bled air
efﬁciently within the engine cycle. Hence, the better stability and
simplicity of the prediffuser/dump diffuser concept is still to be
preferred and methods for improving its aerodynamic perfor-
mance are of signiﬁcant interest.
A detailed experimental study has been presented that has in-
vestigated the improvement in combustor external aerodynamics
achieved using by an integrated design approach for the OGV/
prediffuser components. Following suggestions made in 14, an
alternative and integrated OGV/prediffuser design was investi-
gated and compared to a traditional design. Experimental data
showed that improvements in both feed quality to the annulus
regions and overall pressure loss reductions could be achieved
using the integrated approach. The main improvements were as
follows: an increased diffuser area ratio from 1.6 to 1.8, static
pressure recovery increased by 5% with respect to rotor exit, loss
to inner/outer annuli reduced by 10% and 20%. The integrated
approach is therefore considered worthy of future investigation
and development, particularly its use in optimizing the external
aerodynamic arrangements of future low emissions combustors.
Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the
European
Commission
Contract
No.
FP6-AST3-CT-2003-
502961, Project No. INTELLECT_DM. The authors would also
like to express their appreciation to L. Monk, W. Niven, and A.
Fardoe for their help in the construction of the test facility. The
helpful technical support provided by A. Barker is also gratefully
acknowledged.
Nomenclature
A 	 passage area
AR 	 area ratio of prediffuser
c 	 outlet guide vane chord
Cp 	 static pressure rise coefﬁcient
h 	 annulus passage height
L 	 diffuser length
m˙ 	 mass ﬂow rate
N 	 rotor speed
P,p 	 local total or static pressure
R 	 gas constant for air perfect gas law
Rn 	 nondimensional radius r−ri/ro−ri
r 	 radius relative to rig centerline
ri, ro 	 inner casing, outer casing radius
s 	 blade pitch
T,t 	 total or static temperature
U 	 rotor midpassage blade speed
Va 	 rotor midpassage axial velocity
x 	 axial distance
 	 kinetic energy ﬂux coefﬁcient
 	 ﬂow coefﬁcient Va/U
 	 air density
 	 total pressure loss coefﬁcient
Subscripts
Inlet 	 prediffuser inlet
X1 	 rotor inlet traverse plane
X2 	 rotor exit/OGV inlet traverse plane
X3 	 OGV exit traverse plane
X4 	 prediffuser exit traverse plane
XI5 	 inner annulus traverse plane
XO5 	 outer annulus traverse plane
Superscripts
- 	 area weighted spatially averaged value
 	 mass weighted spatially averaged value
References
1 Klein, A., 1995, “Characteristics of Combustor Diffusers,” Prog. Aerosp. Sci.,
31, pp. 171–271.
2 Stevens, S. J., Harasgama, S. P., and Wray, A. P., 1984, “The Inﬂuence of
Blade Wakes on Combustor Shortened Pre-diffusers,” J. Aircr., 21, pp. 641–
648.
3 Klein, A., 1988, “The Relation Between Losses and Entry Flow Conditions in
Short Dump Diffusers for Combustors,” Z. Flugwiss. Weltraumforsch., 12,
pp. 286–292.
4 Barker, A. G., Carrotte, J. F., and Frodsham, C. W., 1997, “The Effect on
Combustor Diffuser Performance of Structural OGV/Pre-Diffuser Systems,”
ASME Paper No. 97-GT-304.
5 Zierer, T., 1993, “Experimental Investigation of the Flow in Diffusers Behind
an Axial Flow Compressor,” ASME Paper No. 93-GT-347.
6 Carrotte, J. F., Young, K. F., and Stevens, S. J., 1995, “Measurements of the
Flowﬁeld Within a Compressor Outlet Guide Vane Passage,” ASME J. Tur-
bomach., 117, pp. 29–37.
7 Ma, H., and Jiang, H., 2000, “Three-Dimensional Turbulent Flowﬁeld Down-
stream of a Single Stage Axial Compressor Rotor,” ASME Paper No. 2000-
GT-499.
8 Barker, A. G., and Carrotte, J. F., 2001, “The Inﬂuence of Compressor Exit
Conditions on Combustor Annular Diffusers - Part I: Diffuser Performance,” J.
Propul. Power, 17, pp. 678–686.
9 Barker, A. G., and Carrotte, J. F., 2001, “The Inﬂuence of Compressor Exit
Conditions on Combustor Annular Diffusers - Part II: Flow Redistribution
Within the Diffuser,” J. Propul. Power, 17, pp. 687–694.
10 Karki, K. C., Oechsle, V. L., and Mongia, H. C., 1990, “A Computational
Procedure for Diffuser-Combustor Flow Interaction Analysis,” ASME Paper
No. 90-GT-35.
11 Koutmos, P., and McGuirk, J. J., 1989, “Numerical Calculations of the Flow in
Annular Combustor Dump Diffuser Geometries,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part
C: J. Mech. Eng. Sci., 203, pp. 319–331.
12 Shahpar, S., 2005, “SOPHY: An Integrated CFD Based automatic Design Op-
timisation System,” Paper No. ISABE-2005-1086.
13 Schlüter, J., Wu, X., Pitsch, M., Kim, S., and Alonso, S., 2005, “Integrated
Simulations of a Compressor Combustor Turbine Assembly of a Gas Turbine
Engine,” ASME Paper No. GT2005-68-204.
14 Barker, A. G., Carrotte, J. F., Luff, J., and McGuirk, J. J., 2003, “Design of an
Integrated OGV/Diffuser System,” Final Report No. TT03R01, for EU FP5
project, GRD1-2000-25062: “LOPOCOTEP.”
15 Howard, J. H. G., Henseler, H. J., and Thornton-Trump, A. B., 1967, “Perfor-
mance and Flow Regimes for Annular Diffusers,” ASME Paper No. 67-WA/
FE-21.
16 Wray, A. P., and Carrotte, J. F., 1993, “The Development of a Large Annular
Facility for Testing Gas Turbine Combustor Diffuser Systems,” AIAA Paper
No. AIAA-93-2546.
17 Carrotte, J. F., Denman, P. A., Wray, A. P., and Fry, P., 1994, “Detailed Per-
formance Comparison of a dump and a Short Faired Combustor Diffuser Sys-
tem,” Trans. ASME: J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 116, pp. 517–526.
18 Walker, A. D., Denman, P. A., and McGuirk, J. J., 2004, “Experimental and
Computational Study of Hybrid Diffusers for Gas Turbine Combustors,”
Trans. ASME: J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 126, pp. 717–725.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2007, Vol. 129 / 87
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/129/1/80/5892814/80_1.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 05 January 2026
