
--- Page 1 ---

Full Length Article
Experimental analysis and numerical identification of flame transfer 
functions at high Reynolds numbers in a premixed swirl combustor
Zhijian Yu a,**
, Enguang Liang b, Huiying Sang c, Yongqing Xu b,*
, Guangzhi Cui a, Min Zhu b
a Beijing Mechanical Equipment Institute, Beijing 100854, China
b Key Laboratory for Thermal Science and Power Engineering of Ministry of Education, Department of Energy and Power Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 
100084, China
c Cummins Fuel Systems Wuhan Co. Ltd., Wuhan 430056, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Flame transfer function
Swirl number
Spectral proper orthogonal decomposition
High Reynolds number
CFD/System identification
A B S T R A C T
Modern low-emission gas turbine combustors encounter serious combustion thermo-acoustic instabilities, 
particularly when burning hydrogen. Analyzing the open-loop flame response (Flame Transfer Function, FTF), is 
essential for mitigating these instabilities. Currently, FTF measurements are primarily conducted at relatively low 
flow velocities, which differ from the high velocities present in actual combustors due to the limitations of 
excitation devices. This study aims to investigate FTFs of partially premixed swirl flames at high Reynolds 
numbers by employing a well-designed siren, and to develop a high-efficiency numerical identification method. 
The spectral proper orthogonal decomposition technique is used to extract coherent flame structures. As the 
equivalence ratio increases, the FTF gain in the 0–400 Hz range monotonically declines, while gains above 400 
Hz increase. The rise in laminar burning velocity causes the flame base to move closer to the dump plane, thereby 
suppressing axial flame volume oscillations. As the swirl number decreases from 0.885 to 0.623, FTF gains in the 
0–400 Hz range initially decline and then increase. At a high swirl number, precessing motions contribute to 
elevated gains. At a moderate swirl number, azimuthal vortical disturbances interact with axial flow distur­
bances. At a low swirl number, the flame exhibits a larger lift-off, resulting in intense axial flame volume os­
cillations. There is an optimal ratio of radial to axial momentum that achieves the most stable flame. The 
developed computational fluid dynamics/system identification approach, using a modified discrete random bi­
nary signal, can accurately determine FTFs through a single calculation.
1. Introduction
Gas turbine plants are essential components of the future smart grid, 
as they can effectively regulate peak demand due to their operational 
flexibility [1] and high power density. To meet strict emission standards, 
the lean premixed combustion technique has been developed for modern 
low-emission gas turbine combustors. However, serious thermo-acoustic 
instabilities are encountered, as flame Heat Release Rate (HRR) fluctu­
ations may easily couple with pressure fluctuations [2]. Using gas tur­
bines to burn green hydrogen offers a near-zero carbon emission 
pathway. However, hydrogen’s high chemical reactivity complicates the 
management of thermo-acoustic instabilities [3,4]. The flame acts as an 
acoustic source that drives thermo-acoustic instabilities, making the 
analysis of its response dynamics essential [5,6]. Moreover, flame 
dynamics can be incorporated into acoustic models to predict the closed- 
loop thermo-acoustic instability. The flame response in the frequency 
domain is known as the Flame Transfer Function (FTF) [7,8]. This 
concept can be extended to a weakly nonlinear format (Flame 
Describing Function, FDF) [9], representing the flame response to 
various upstream fluctuation levels.
The flame response is influenced by two primary mechanisms: axial 
velocity fluctuations and flame angle variations [10]. These processes 
are fundamentally influenced by hydrodynamic instabilities [11]. Key 
hydrodynamic structures identified in swirling flames include the Vor­
tex Breakdown Bubble (VBB) [12], Precessing Vortex Core (PVC) [13], 
Helical Vortex Core (HVC) [14], and vortex shedding [15,16]. Conse­
quently, many parameters affect FTFs of swirling flames, including 
operating conditions (e.g., equivalence ratio, air flow rate), burner 
* Corresponding author at: Tsinghua University, No.30 Shuang Qin Road, Beijing 100190, China.
** Corresponding author at: Beijing Mechanical Equipment Institute, No.50 Yong ding Road, Beijing 100854, China.
E-mail addresses: zhjyu@outlook.com (Z. Yu), xuyongqing@hust.edu.cn (Y. Xu). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Fuel
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fuel
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2025.136880
Received 14 July 2025; Received in revised form 26 August 2025; Accepted 13 September 2025  
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
Available online 19 September 2025 
0016-2361/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 


--- Page 2 ---

configurations (e.g., swirl number, premixing length, multiple burners), 
types of fuel, and forcing amplitudes [17]. Regarding the equivalence 
ratio, as it increases, the FTF gain initially rises and then declines, 
associated with the enhanced laminar burning velocity and flame tem­
perature that influence the acoustically generated vortex [18,19]. At low 
equivalence ratios, vortex shedding and recirculation zones are critical 
in inducing HRR fluctuations, while PVCs become more prominent at 
higher equivalence ratios [20].
With respect to the impact of swirl number, a moderate increase in 
swirl number significantly affects the FTF amplitude [21]. As the swirl 
number increases, the frequency range exhibiting high levels of flame 
response broadens, and the time lag decreases [22]. An increase in swirl 
number leads to a reduction in the FTF gain, which results from a larger 
central recirculation zone and an increased flame expansion angle 
[23,24]. The flame shapes transition from ‘V’ to ‘W’ to ‘T’ as the swirl 
number increases from 0.43 to 0.74 to 1.23 [25]. Other nozzle shapes 
also significantly influence flame shape and stability. Longer nozzles 
tend to produce jet-like flames, while shorter nozzles yield more stable 
V-shaped flames [26]. Compared to circular nozzles of equivalent 
diameter, rectangular nozzles enhance flame stability due to improved 
turbulent mixing and reduced flame length [27]. Additionally, 
converging nozzles contribute to flame stabilization by increasing 
pressure and turbulence within the combustor. Regarding the effect of 
fuel types, numerous studies indicate that the addition of hydrogen 
enhances the receptivity of the flame sheet to upstream perturbations 
[28,29]. Specifically, the blending of ammonia significantly reduces the 
FTF gain, thereby enhancing flame stability [30–32].
Loudspeakers are currently the predominant excitation device for 
measuring FTFs. However, the disturbance levels this type of apparatus 
can generate are limited. Consequently, the flow velocity reported in 
previous studies is typically less than 20 m/s to achieve a favorable 
signal-to-noise ratio. In actual gas turbine combustors, the flow velocity 
generally exceeds 50 m/s, and the interaction between flames and hy­
drodynamics at elevated Reynolds numbers and turbulence levels differs 
significantly from that observed at lower flow rates. Recently, jet actu­
ators, including jet fluidic oscillators [33], plasma synthetic jet actuators 
[34], and piezoelectric jet actuators [35], have been widely employed 
for highly flexible active flow control. These devices generate high- 
speed, high-frequency pulses without moving parts. Although these 
techniques have not yet been applied to FTF measurements, they show 
great potential. In this study, a siren device is specifically designed to 
generate excitation with a high signal-to-noise ratio at high Reynolds 
numbers. Although Schuermans [36] and Kim [37] have conducted FTF 
measurements using a siren, the effects of geometrical configurations 
and operating parameters remain underexplored. Therefore, one of the 
objectives of this study is to investigate the influence of critical pa­
rameters on FTFs under high turbulence levels.
In terms of flame response mechanisms, mode decomposition 
methods have been applied to extract low-order flow modes. The pri­
mary techniques include Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD), 
Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD), and Spectral Proper Orthogonal 
Decomposition (SPOD) [38–40]. Table 1 presents a comparison of these 
decomposition methods in terms of their key characteristics. The POD 
method sorts modes based on their energy levels, unable to obtain 
coherent structures with a single frequency. Although the DMD method 
can yield decomposed modes defined by a single frequency, it lacks a 
universal standard for mode sorting. The SPOD technique facilitates the 
sorting of decomposed modes according to their energy levels, with each 
mode corresponding to a single frequency, thereby clarifying the rela­
tionship between pulsation frequency and coherent structure. This 
technique also demonstrates greater robustness to noise. This paper 
employs the SPOD technique to extract coherent flame morphology, 
which has been rarely reported in the analysis of forced flames.
Obtaining FTFs through experimental methods can be costly. Alter­
natively, the FTFs can be derived from multiple Computational Fluid 
Dynamics (CFD) simulations [41] by applying harmonic excitations 
[42,43]. Another approach involves using broadband excitation and 
combining it with system identification techniques, such as the Wiener- 
Hopf method [44,45] or the Auto-Regressive with Extra inputs (ARX) 
[46] method. The experimental validation of FTFs at high Reynolds 
numbers remains limited. In most previous studies, validation has been 
indirect: computed FTFs are integrated into acoustic models, and the 
predicted eigenfrequencies of self-excited oscillations are compared 
against experimental data. Regarding identification techniques, har­
monic excitation is commonly used to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio; 
however, this approach requires multiple simulations and is computa­
tionally expensive. Therefore, it is urgent to develop a high-efficient 
identification method capable of extracting FTFs from response time 
series contaminated by noise, as well as to determine the optimal 
broadband forcing signal. Moreover, the robustness of this method 
should be evaluated for various burner configurations at high Reynolds 
numbers.
This study aims to explore the influence of operating parameters and 
swirl number on FTFs of partially premixed swirl flames at high Rey­
nolds numbers, and to develop a high-efficiency numerical method for 
determining these FTFs. A siren is specifically designed to generate 
harmonic excitations with a high signal-to-noise ratio at high Reynolds 
numbers. The SPOD technique is employed to extract coherent flame 
structures from transient forced flame images. In addition to experi­
mental work, a numerical method that combines improved Unsteady 
Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (URANS) equations with System 
Identification (SI) is developed. The performance of various broadband 
excitation signals for obtaining FTFs through a single calculation is also 
investigated.
2. Experimental apparatus and numerical identification 
approach
2.1. Premixed swirl combustor
The partially premixed swirl flame, which is commonly employed in 
actual gas turbine combustors, is investigated in this study. The response 
of this flame involves velocity fluctuations and equivalence ratio oscil­
lations, the latter partially induced by the former, resulting in a complex 
mechanism that requires further investigation. The diagram of the 
experimental system for measuring FTFs is depicted in Fig. 1(a), while 
the sketch of the partially premixed swirl combustor is illustrated in 
Fig. 1(b). The experimental setup consists of a swirl combustor, air and 
Table 1 
Comparison of the POD, DMD, and SPOD methods.
Feature
POD
DMD
SPOD
Mathematical 
Basis
Singular value 
decomposition.
Approximates 
eigenmodes of 
Koopman operator.
Combines POD 
with Fourier 
transform.
Temporal 
Dynamics
No explicit temporal 
information; modes 
are static.
Provides growth/ 
decay rates and 
frequencies.
Frequency- 
resolved modes 
with energy- 
ranked 
structures.
Frequency 
Resolution
None.
Yes (via 
eigenvalues).
Explicit (modes 
are filtered in 
frequency bands).
Mode Ranking
Modes ranked by 
energy.
Lacks a universal 
standard for 
ranking modes.
Energy-ranked by 
frequency bands.
Output Modes
Spatial modes, 
temporal 
coefficients.
Spatial modes (not 
orthogonal), 
eigenvalues.
Frequency- 
dependent spatial 
modes, energy 
spectra.
Robustness to 
Noise
Moderate
Sensitive (noise 
can corrupt 
eigenvalues).
High (averaging 
in frequency 
domain reduces 
noise).
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
2 


--- Page 3 ---

fuel supply systems, an excitation system, a measurement system, and a 
circulating cooling water system. The swirl combustor includes, from 
left to right, a forcing apparatus, a plenum, a premixing tube, and a 
combustion chamber. Given the maximum air mass flow rate of 80 g/s 
during the experiments, it is challenging for electric loudspeakers to 
produce perturbations with a high signal-to-noise ratio across a broad 
frequency range. Thus, a siren has been specifically designed to generate 
upstream perturbations.
An axial swirler with eight vanes is employed to generate swirl 
flames, featuring four fuel injection holes with a diameter of 1.5 mm on 
both the pressure and suction sides of each vane. The inner radius of the 
swirler ri is 6.35 mm, and the outer radius ro measures 16 mm. Methane 
is injected from the holes on the vanes to mix with the incoming air, 
resulting in a swirling flow. The swirl number SN [10] is defined as the 
ratio of the axial flux of tangential momentum to the product of the axial 
flux of axial momentum and the characteristic length of the swirler. 
SN =
∫ro
ri uauθr2dr
ro
∫ro
ri u2
ardr ≈2
3
[
1 −(ri/ro)3]
[
1 −(ri/ro)2] tanβ
(1) 
where ua and uθ are the mean axial and tangential velocities, respec­
tively, and β is the swirler vane angle. Swirlers with vane angles of 50◦, 
45◦, and 40◦were manufactured using a laser melting additive 
manufacturing technique, resulting in swirl numbers of 0.885, 0.743, 
and 0.623, respectively.
The diameter of the center lance is 12.7 mm, which serves to anchor 
the flame, and the premixing tube length is 195 mm. Four measurement 
Fig. 1. Sketch of (a) the experimental system for measuring FTFs and (b) the partially premixed swirl combustor.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
3 


--- Page 4 ---

points are located upstream of the dump plane, employing the semi- 
infinite method for dynamic pressure measurement. Velocity fluctua­
tions are calculated using the multi-microphone technique [47]. The 
combustion chamber has a diameter of 120 mm and a length of 488 mm, 
with the outlet converging to 40 mm to simulate the accelerating con­
dition in actual combustors. Under this configuration, no self-excited 
oscillations are observed within the experimental conditions, allowing 
for the decoupling of flame dynamics from self-excited oscillations. A 
rectangular quartz glass window with a size of 202 mm × 62 mm is 
installed upstream of the combustion chamber. An electric spark device 
is positioned at the burner outlet for ignition. The combustion chamber 
features a double-shell structure filled with circulating water to cool the 
wall surface under high thermal power.
Air is supplied by an air compressor and subsequently dried by a 
lyophilizer. The air flow rate, with a maximum value of 80 g/s, is 
measured using a Coriolis mass flow meter (0–120 g/s) manufactured by 
Emerson Corporation. The fuel is supplied from natural gas cylinders 
and is measured with a mass flow controller (Bronkhorst F-203AV, 
0–800 L/min). Due to the relatively high air flow rates, the siren device 
is designed to generate a high signal-to-noise ratio excitation. This de­
vice generates pulsations by periodically releasing air flow through a 
pair of disks with specifically shaped orifices. To achieve harmonic 
perturbations, the rotor features a sinusoidal hole shape, while the stator 
has a sector-shaped hole, as illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The equations rep­
resenting the upper and lower profiles of the stator in polar coordinates 
are expressed as 
ra(θ) = R + rcos(nθ)
(2) 
rb(θ) = R −rcos(nθ)
(3) 
where R = 35mm denotes the radius of the center circle, r = 6mm de­
notes the maximum height of the hole profile relative to the center 
circle, and θ is the rotation angle associated with the number of holes m 
(m = 8). For the k-th hole, θ ∈[(4k −1)π/(2m), (4k +1)π/(2m)]. The 
outer radius of the disk is 48 mm. The minimum structural resonance 
frequency is 512.7 Hz (supplementary material Table S1), which lies 
beyond the forcing frequency range. As illustrated in Fig. 2(b), the 
evolution of the circulation area as a function of the rotation angle ex­
hibits a sinusoidal waveform, indicating that harmonic perturbations 
can be generated. The rotor is driven by a servo motor (Knico Corp.) 
with a maximum rotation speed of 3600 rpm. The forcing frequency f 
can be expressed as a function of the number of holes and the rotation 
speed (rpm), as shown in Eq. (4). The final forcing frequencies for FTF 
calculations are calibrated based on the fluctuation frequencies 
measured by dynamic pressure transducers. 
f = rpm
60 • m
(4) 
The dynamic pressure transducer (PCB 112A22), with a sensitivity of 
14.5 mV/kPa and a resolution of 7 Pa, is employed to measure pressure 
fluctuations. The sensitivity of each transducer is initially calibrated 
using a standard sound source (G.R.A.S. 42AG). The signals are condi­
tioned and amplified by a factor of 100 using a signal conditioner (PCB 
482C16) before being connected to the NI PXIe acquisition system. 
Flame heat release is detected using a photomultiplier tube (Hamamatsu 
H10722-04) equipped with an OH* optical filter (310 ± 5 nm). A DC 
power supply (Hamamatsu C10709) is used. This photomultiplier tube 
has a spectral response range of 185 to 870 nm, a maximum output 
voltage of 4 V, and a maximum peak-to-peak ripple noise of 0.5 mV. The 
PMT is calibrated using a mercury lamp. The flame heat release can be 
represented by the intensity of the OH* signal, which is generally pro­
portional to that intensity [36]. The pressure fluctuation and HRR sig­
nals are synchronously measured by the NI acquisition card, with a 
sampling frequency of 10,000 Hz. Data is recorded using an in-house 
LabVIEW program. The dynamic behavior of the flame is captured 
with the Phantom V210 high-speed camera equipped with a Nikon lens. 
This camera has a resolution of 1024 × 512 pixels and a frame speed of 
4200 frames per second.
2.2. Flame transfer function
The FTF represents the flame response to upstream perturbations, 
and the expression is given as 
FTF(ωr) = G(ωr) • exp(iφ(ωr) ) =
̂Q(ωr)/Q
̂u • nref
/
uref
(5) 
where ωr denotes the real part of the complex angular frequency, G and 
φ denote the gain and phase, respectively. The reference position is 
selected at the premixing tube outlet to decouple the flame response 
from the acoustic characteristics of the nozzle. ̂u is the complex velocity 
fluctuation, uref is the average axial velocity at the reference plane, nref is 
the unit vector, ̂Q represents the global HRR fluctuation, and Q denotes 
the average HRR.
Harmonic signals are generated using a siren device, with the forcing 
frequencies ranging from 40 to 480 Hz in increments of approximately 
40 Hz. The measured forcing amplitudes at the reference plane are all 
below 10 %, indicating that the flame response remains within the linear 
region. Consequently, the variation in forcing amplitude has a slight 
impact on the FTFs within this amplitude range. The experimental 
Fig. 2. (a) Sketch of the siren orifice disks and (b) the evolution of the circulation area as a function of the rotation angle.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
4 


--- Page 5 ---

conditions are summarized in Table 2. The uncertainty analysis of the 
equivalence ratio and other directly calculated parameters is presented 
in Appendix A. FTFs are measured for three different swirl numbers, 
with associated air mass flow rates of 60 and 80 g/s. The axial velocities 
ub upstream of the swirler are 67.5 m/s and 90.0 m/s, respectively, 
which are relatively close to the conditions observed in actual gas tur­
bine combustors. It has been determined that the flame extinction 
equivalence ratio Φ is approximately 0.70; therefore, the equivalence 
ratios for experiments are 0.73, 0.80, and 0.90. The corresponding 
thermal power ranges from 128 to 210 kW, and the Reynolds number 
varies from 0.11 to 0.15 million. The laminar burning velocities, 
calculated using ANSYS Chemkin 2022 R1, for various equivalence ra­
tios range from 0.19 to 0.30 m/s.
2.3. Spectral proper orthogonal decomposition
The SPOD method is employed to extract coherent structures from 
flame images subjected to various forcing frequencies. This technique 
identifies modes that are sorted by energy level and are mutually 
orthogonal. Initially, a snapshot matrix of the flame images HRR =
[hrr1, hrr2, ⋯, hrrN] is constructed. Using the Welch method, the snap­
shot matrix is divided into multiple overlapping blocks. The block 
snapshot matrix HRR(n) is defined as 
HRR(n) =
[
hrr(n)
1 , hrr(n)
2 , ⋯, hrr(n)
Nf
]
; 1 ≤n ≤Nb
(6) 
where Nb represents the number of blocks, Nf represents the number of 
snapshots for each block, and N is the total number of snapshots. The k- 
th snapshot in the n-th block is given as 
HRR(n)
k
= HRRk+(n−1)(Nf −N0); 1 ≤k ≤Nf
(7) 
where N0 represents the number of overlapping snapshots between 
blocks. The discrete Fourier transformation is applied to each block 
snapshot matrix, resulting in the following snapshot matrix. 
̂
HRR
(n) =
[
hrr(n)
1 , ̂
hrr
(n)
2 , ⋯, hrr(n)
Nf
]
(8) 
Then, the k-th snapshot in the n-th block is expressed as 
̂
hrr
(n)
k
=
1̅̅̅̅̅
Nf
√
∑
Nf
j=1
ωjhrr(n)
j e
−i2π(k−1)
[
(j−1)
Nf
]
(9) 
The window function is employed to minimize spectral leakage 
resulting from the non-periodicity of each block. The weight ωj signifies 
the node value of the window function. The correlation matrix Cfk at a 
given frequency of fk is defined as 
Cfk = Δt
sNb
∑
Nb
n=1
̂
hrr
(n)
k
(
̂
hrr
(n)
k
)H
(10) 
where s = ∑Nf
j=1ω2
j . The Fourier components of each block are sorted 
according to their frequency values, resulting in a new snapshot matrix 
̂
HRRfk. 
̂
HRRfk =
̅̅χ
√[
̂
hrr
(1)
k , ̂
hrr
(2)
k , ⋯, hrr(Nb)
k
]
(11) 
here χ = Δt/(sNb). Thus, the correlation matrix is represented as 
Cfk = ̂
HRRfk
( ̂
HRRfk
)H
(12) 
The matrix ̃φfk representing the SPOD mode at the k-th frequency can 
be obtained by solving the eigenvalue problem of the correlation matrix 
Cfk. These modes are sorted according to the magnitude of their corre­
sponding eigenvalues, which indicate the energy levels of each mode.
2.4. CFD/system identification
In addition to experiments, FTFs can be calculated using numerical 
methods, which facilitates a low-cost evaluation of flame stability. 
Imposing a weak disturbance at the inlet, the HRR fluctuations can be 
sampled to identify the FTF. However, the number of calculation cases 
can be excessive and the costs can be high when using harmonic exci­
tation. By applying broadband forcing signals, FTFs can be determined 
from a single CFD simulation. The effect of harmonic signals, modified 
Discrete Random Binary Signals (DRBS), and multi-sinusoidal signals on 
the identified FTFs is compared.
Although the Large Eddy Simulation (LES) can provide more detailed 
flow structures [48], its computational cost is high. Since the objective is 
to obtain the lumped flame response, this paper evaluates the relatively 
low-cost 
improved 
Unsteady 
Reynolds-Averaged 
Navier-Stokes 
(URANS) method [49]. The stress-omega Reynolds stress turbulence 
model, which includes seven equations, is employed to achieve a quasi- 
steady state, and the Scale Adaptive Simulation (SAS) is used to capture 
vortex motion. This turbulence model is effective in simulating swirling 
flows. An incompressible solver is implemented to avoid self-excited 
instabilities and to focus on the open-loop flame response. The Flame­
let Generated Manifold (FGM) model is adopted for combustion simu­
lations, and the reaction mechanism is GRI-Mech 3.0. The 
pressure–velocity coupling is resolved using a coupled algorithm. The 
momentum equation and time terms are discretized using a bounded 
central differencing scheme, while other terms are discretized using a 
second-order upwind scheme. The simulations are conducted using 
ANSYS Fluent 2022 R1.
The computational domain and mesh are illustrated in Fig. 3. The air 
Table 2 
Experimental condition.
Swirl 
number
Air mass flow 
rate, g/s
Methane mass flow 
rate, g/s
Equivalence 
ratio Φ
Axial velocity upstream of 
the swirler ub, m/s
Reynolds number in the 
premixing tube
Thermal 
power, kW
Laminar burning 
velocity, m/s
0.623 
0.743 
0.885
60.0 ± 0.9
2.55 ± 0.05
0.730 ± 0.020
67.5 ± 1.0
112,915
127.75
0.19
2.80 ± 0.05
0.800 ± 0.021
113,686
140.00
0.24
3.15 ± 0.05
0.900 ± 0.022
114,788
157.50
0.30
80.0 ± 0.9
3.40 ± 0.05
0.730 ± 0.015
90.0 ± 1.0
150,554
170.33
0.19
3.73 ± 0.05
0.800 ± 0.016
151,582
186.67
0.24
4.19 ± 0.05
0.900 ± 0.017
153,051
210.00
0.30
Fig. 3. Computational domain and mesh.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
5 


--- Page 6 ---

inlet, where the forcing signal is imposed, is positioned approximately 
four times the outer diameter upstream of the swirler. Polyhedral 
meshes are employed for the computational domain, except for the wall 
surfaces, which use three layers of prism cells. The mesh resolutions for 
the flame zone, swirler, premixing tube, and downstream of the com­
bustion chamber are 1 mm, 0.5 mm, 1.25 mm and 5 mm, respectively. 
The mesh independence analysis is presented in supplementary material 
S.1. The time step Δt is set to 1.25 × 10-5 s to ensure that the global 
Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) number remains below 1. This time step 
is also validated through a time-independence analysis, as presented in 
supplementary material S.2, where HRR fluctuations and FTF values for 
three time steps under a forcing Strouhal number of 0.06 are compared.
Mass inlet boundary conditions are implemented for both the air and 
fuel inlets, while the outlet employs pressure outlet boundary condi­
tions. Considering the effect of circulating cooling water, the tempera­
ture of the flame tube walls and the dump plane is set to 750 K [50]. The 
validation of the numerical method is conducted using a similar swirl 
combustor [51]. Comparisons of the mean axial velocity of the CH4/air 
flame reacting flow field, derived from particle image velocimetry 
measurements and calculated results at various axial positions, are 
presented in supplementary material S.3. The reacting flow field and the 
location of the recirculation zone are generally consistent with the 
experimental results, although there is a slight deviation in the velocity 
distribution near the side walls.
An unsteady calculation of 0.08 s is performed to achieve fully 
developed flow. This duration exceeds five times the flow-through time. 
Subsequently, perturbations are imposed at the air inlet, and the 
calculation continues for an additional 0.15 s. The final sampled data of 
0.1 s is employed for post-processing, resulting in a resolution of 10 Hz. 
The modified DRBS is generated by exerting a shifting sampling tech­
nique and a low-pass filter to the raw DRBS. This approach concentrates 
the spectral energy of fluctuations within the range of 0–900 Hz, thereby 
enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio in the frequency band of interest. The 
expression for the modified DRBS is provided as follows: 
˙mʹ = Amp • {sign[rand(n) −0.5 ] }, n = 1, 2, ⋯, N.
(13) 
P = floor
(
fnyq
/
fc
)
(14) 
˙mʹ
p(n) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
˙mʹ(1), ifn = 1
˙mʹ(n/P), ifn = kp
˙mʹ(n −1), ifn ∕= kp
(15) 
˙mʹ
f = filter
(
˙mʹ
p(n), low pass
)
(16) 
˙m = m •
(
1 + ˙mʹ
f
)
(17) 
where Amp = 0.1 is the forcing amplitude, rand() is a random number 
generator, sign is the sign function, fnyq = 1/(2Δt) is the Nyquist fre­
quency, fc = 900 Hz is the desired maximum frequency, and m denotes 
the average mass flow rate. The cut-off frequency of the low-pass filter is 
1000 Hz.
The multi-sinusoidal signal is expressed as 
˙mʹ = Amp •
∑
N
n=1
sin
{
2π
(
f1 + n(f2 −f1)
N
)
t + 2π • rand(n)
}
(18) 
˙m = m • (1 + ˙mʹ)
(19) 
where N, set to 89, is the number of sine functions, f1 = 20Hz is the 
minimal frequency and f2 = 900Hz is the maximum frequency.
To identify the system response from signals superimposed with 
noise, both the Wiener-Hopf method proposed by Polifke [44,45] and 
the ARX model [46] can be employed. The Wiener-Hopf method seeks to 
minimize the discrepancy between the actual and ideal outputs, thereby 
deriving the FTF. The identification procedure is illustrated in Fig. 4. 
First, perform autocorrelation and cross-correlation on both the input 
signal r and the output signal s to calculate the system impulse response 
h. By applying the z-transform to the impulse response h, the frequency 
response function FTF(ω) can be obtained as 
FTF(ω) =
∑
L
k=0
hke−iωΔtk
(20) 
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Effect of operating conditions on FTFs
3.1.1. Flame transfer function
Fig. 5 illustrates the pressure and HRR pulsations at SN = 0.885, ub =
67.5 m/s, and ϕ = 0.8 under forcing frequencies of 0 Hz and 123 Hz. In 
the absence of excitation, neither the pressure nor the HRR pulsations 
exhibit a distinct dominant frequency. At a forcing frequency of 123 Hz, 
the pressure pulsation exhibits a sinusoidal curve, and the HRR pulsa­
tion reveals an eigenfrequency of 123 Hz in the frequency spectrum. 
This eigenfrequency aligns with the forcing frequency. This finding in­
dicates that the specifically designed siren device can generate favorable 
signal-to-noise ratio perturbations for measuring FTFs at high flow 
velocities.
Fig. 6 illustrates the gain and phase values of the measured FTFs for 
three different equivalence ratios at ub = 67.5 m/s and 90.0 m/s, 
respectively. Solid dots represent experimental values, while solid lines 
indicate the results of spline interpolation. For each forcing frequency, 
data are recorded over a duration of 20 s. From these recordings, random 
segments of 5 s are extracted to compute the FTF, and this procedure is 
repeated across 10 independent trials. 95 % confidence intervals are 
used to represent the error bar. When the equivalence ratio is 0.73, the 
FTFs exhibit high gains in the frequency range of 40–120 Hz or 40–160 
Hz, demonstrating a low-pass gain characteristic. A second gain peak 
emerges in the range of 120–360 Hz, indicating band-pass gain 
behavior. Previous research [5] suggests that acoustic and convection 
mechanisms may significantly contribute to the low-pass and band-pass 
high gains, respectively. The gain curves show a valley at approximately 
400 Hz, indicating the cut-off frequency behavior. As the equivalence 
ratio increases, the gain in the range of 0–400 Hz exhibits a mono­
tonically decreasing trend, consistent with previous studies [18,19]. As 
the equivalence ratio increases from 0.73 to 0.9, the laminar burning 
velocity rises from 0.19 m/s to 0.30 m/s, resulting in a decreased dis­
tance between the flame base and the dump plane. This phenomenon 
results in a more stable flame anchored to the center lance tip, leading to 
a decrease in the FTF gains. The frequency corresponding to the low-pass 
peak remains unchanged, while the frequency associated with the band- 
pass peak experiences a slight increase. This occurs because, as the 
equivalence ratio increases, the flame becomes more compact, 
enhancing its acceptance to high frequencies. Above 400 Hz, the gain 
continues to increase with the rising equivalence ratio.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the phase of the FTFs is approximately pro­
portional to frequency, with the slope indicating the time delay. The 
phase rebounds observed in certain curves are a result of the unwrap­
ping algorithm. As the equivalence ratio increases, the slope tends to 
decrease. Under identical flow conditions, a higher equivalence ratio 
leads to a greater laminar burning velocity, inducing the flame base 
closer to the dump plane. Consequently, the average time delay for 
perturbations to propagate from the dump plane to the flame front is 
reduced.
3.1.2. Flame morphology
Fig. 7 presents time-averaged flame images processed using the Abel 
inverse transformation for various equivalence ratios without excitation 
at SN = 0.623 and ub = 67.5 m/s. The Abel inverse transformation 
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
6 


--- Page 7 ---

algorithm requires strict axisymmetry of the flame about the central 
axis. However, the rectangular glass window may partially disrupt this 
axisymmetry. Optical distortions can arise in flames with strong gradi­
ents in temperature and species concentration. Despite these limitations, 
the reconstructed flame image provides a useful approximation of the 
cross-sectional distribution, clearly revealing a V-shaped lifted flame 
structure [52], which is consistent with theoretical analysis. This flame 
is characterized by a Central Recirculation Zone (CRZ) located down­
stream of the V-shaped flame and Outer Recirculation Zones (ORZs) on 
both sides. As the equivalence ratio increases, both the flame chem­
iluminescence intensity and the temperature rise. The lift-off height of 
the flame decreases due to the increasing laminar burning velocity. The 
effect of fuel properties on flame morphology is particularly pronounced 
in synthetic fuels [53].
3.1.3. SPOD results
The FTF points used for the SPOD analysis are shown in Fig. 6(c). In 
this study, the window size, overlap, and block number are set to 476, 
50 %, and 4, respectively. A sensitivity analysis of the SPOD parameter 
configurations is presented in supplementary material Table S2. The 
results indicate that variations in the dominant frequency and mode 
shape remain limited when the baseline parameters are adjusted within 
a specific range. Figs. 8 and 9 illustrate the spectra of the SPOD mode 
energy and the corresponding dominant SPOD mode shapes at forcing 
frequencies of 79.2 Hz, 202.6 Hz, 366.8 Hz, and 486.6 Hz, respectively. 
These four forcing frequencies correspond to the low-pass peak, the 
band-pass peak, the FTF valley, and the highest frequency, respectively. 
At the forcing frequency of the low-pass peak (79.2 Hz), the spectrum of 
the first-order mode energy exhibits a distinct frequency peak corre­
sponding to the forcing frequency. At the forcing frequency of the band- 
pass peak (202.6 Hz), a secondary peak emerges at either 123.5 Hz or 
70.6 Hz. This sub-motion occupies a portion of the forcing energy, 
leading to a reduction of FTF gains. Near the FTF valley frequency, no 
distinct eigenfrequency is observed. The periodic motion becomes un­
clear at this forcing frequency, resulting in weak HRR fluctuations. As 
the forcing frequency continues to increase, although a frequency peak 
corresponding to the forcing frequency can be identified, low-frequency 
chaotic motions still occupy significant energy, which constrains the 
increase in HRR pulsations.
At low equivalence ratios, the eigenfrequencies in the spectrum are 
distinctly observed at forcing frequencies of 79.2 Hz and 202.6 Hz. As 
the equivalence ratio increases, the proportion of energy below the 
eigenfrequency gradually rises, leading to a corresponding decrease in 
the kinetic energy associated with the eigenfrequency. At higher forcing 
frequencies, an increase in the equivalence ratio amplifies the frequency 
peak. This finding suggests that flames with high equivalence ratios are 
more susceptible to high-frequency stimulation.
As illustrated in Fig. 9, at the forcing frequency of 79.2 Hz, the 
dominant mode displays a pronounced pattern of large-scale bright­
ening and darkening. As the equivalence ratio increases, the area of this 
feature diminishes. This reduction in area results in decreased HRR 
fluctuations, which, in turn, leads to a lower FTF gain. At the forcing 
frequency of 202.6 Hz, as the equivalence ratio increases, the region 
exhibiting this feature contracts, particularly near the centerline, while 
the significance of the sub-mode is gradually enhanced. As the equiva­
lence ratio rises, the laminar burning velocity increases, inducing the 
Fig. 4. Diagram of the Wiener-Hopf method for identifying FTFs.
Fig. 5. Experimentally measured pressure and HRR pulsations at SN = 0.885, ub = 67.5 m/s, and ϕ = 0.8. ((a) without excitation and (b) with 123 Hz excitation.).
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
7 


--- Page 8 ---

Fig. 6. Comparison of FTFs for different equivalence ratios at two air flow rates and three swirl numbers. ((a) SN = 0.885, ub = 67.5 m/s. (b) SN = 0.743, ub = 67.5 
m/s. (c) SN = 0.623, ub = 67.5 m/s. (d) SN = 0.885, ub = 90.0 m/s. (e) SN = 0.743, ub = 90.0 m/s. (f) SN = 0.623, ub = 90.0 m/s.).
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
8 


--- Page 9 ---

flame base to move closer to the dump plane. Consequently, axial flame 
bulk oscillations induced by large-scale vortex motion are suppressed, 
while vortex shedding rolling up from the shear layers and flame tips is 
maintained.
At the forcing frequency near the FTF valley (366.8 Hz), the domi­
nant mode exhibits an eigenfrequency that differs from the forcing fre­
quency. This indicates that large-scale hydrodynamic instabilities 
cannot be triggered by this forcing frequency. At a higher forcing 
frequency of 486.6 Hz, the mode associated with this frequency is 
classified as a sub-mode. As the equivalence ratio increases, the pro­
portion of mode energy at 486.6 Hz gradually rises from 36.5 % to 50.0 
% in comparison to the dominant mode, resulting in a monotonic in­
crease in FTF gain at this frequency. The mode shape of 486.6 Hz 
demonstrates a V-shaped evolution pattern, suggesting that large-scale 
vortex motions can still be stimulated at elevated frequencies.
3.2. Effect of swirl number on FTFs
3.2.1. Flame transfer function
Fig. 10 illustrates a comparison of the measured gain and phase 
values of the FTFs for three different swirl numbers under various 
operating conditions. Overall, as the swirl number decreases, the gain of 
the FTFs initially declines and then increases, indicating a non- 
monotonic trend. A higher swirl number means a greater proportion 
of radial momentum, resulting in a larger flame expansion angle and 
enhanced entrainment of combustion products. Previous literature 
[10,22] indicates that at higher swirl numbers, a stronger precessing 
vortex core develops, leading to increased flame fluctuations caused by 
hydrodynamic instabilities.
As the swirl number decreases to 0.743, the proportion of axial 
momentum increases, causing the azimuthal vortical disturbances and 
axial flow disturbances to counterbalance each other. This interference 
ultimately results in a reduction of the flame response level. A further 
reduction in the swirl number to 0.623 results in significant flame lift, 
making it difficult for the flame base to stabilize at the center lance tip. 
Consequently, the flame becomes more susceptible to disturbances, 
resulting in an increase in the FTF gain. There is an optimal swirl number 
that achieves the most stable flame by regulating the ratio of radial to 
axial momentum. As the swirl number decreases, the frequencies of the 
low-pass and band-pass gain peaks exhibit a slight reduction. This 
decrease in frequency is attributed to the longer flame length associated 
with lower swirl numbers, as longer flames are related to lower 
Fig. 7. Time-averaged flame images processed using the Abel inverse trans­
formation for various equivalence ratios without excitation at SN = 0.623 and 
ub = 67.5 m/s.
Fig. 8. Comparison of SPOD mode energy spectra for different equivalence ratios at various forcing frequencies with SN = 0.623 and ub = 67.5 m/s.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
9 


--- Page 10 ---

frequency transmission. At a higher equivalence ratio, the gain above 
400 Hz for the flame with SN = 0.623 exceeds that of the flame with SN 
= 0.885.
As the swirl number decreases, the time delay monotonically in­
creases. A reduction in the swirl number results in a higher flame lift-off 
height. Since the reference plane is positioned at the premixing tube 
outlet, this consequently leads to a longer time delay for disturbances to 
propagate from the reference position to the flame front.
Fig. 11 illustrates the Nyquist plots of the FTFs for analyzing closed- 
loop thermo-acoustic instabilities, with the horizontal and vertical axes 
representing the real and imaginary components of the FTFs, respec­
tively. The Nyquist plots display clockwise spiral curves that gradually 
approach the origin as the phase increases. At a low equivalence ratio, 
the number of loops around the point (−1, 0) increases, indicating 
enhanced stability. As the swirl number decreases, the average radius of 
the curve initially diminishes and then increases. The valley positions of 
the curve correspond to transitions in the gain mechanisms. As the swirl 
number decreases, the transition position initially advances and then 
delays, suggesting that the gain mechanisms shift as the swirl number 
changes.
3.2.2. Flame morphology
Fig. 12(a) and (b) present time-averaged forced flame images pro­
cessed using the Abel inverse transformation and calculated cold flow 
fields in the absence of excitation, for various swirl numbers at ub = 67.5 
m/s and Φ = 0.80, respectively. At a high swirl number of 0.885, the 
flame is anchored to the center lance tip, exhibiting a large expansion 
angle. The flame interacts violently with the walls of the flame tube, 
resulting in intense shear motion. Simultaneously, the intensity of the 
PVC is enhanced. Under the influence of this hydrodynamic structure, 
the HRR fluctuations are amplified. This result is closely linked to the 
cold flow field, suggesting that higher swirl numbers tend to expand the 
CRZ and enlarge the flow expansion angle due to greater centrifugal 
forces. These observations align with findings reported in previous 
studies [22,24]. Conversely, a reduction in swirl number weakens the 
tangential momentum of the flow, resulting in a corresponding 
contraction of the CRZ. Consequently, the flame expansion angle is 
reduced. The precessing behavior is also suppressed as the swirl number 
decreases. These changes lead to reduced HRR fluctuations and FTF 
gains. As the swirl number further decreases, the flame lift increases, 
leading to greater instability at the flame base. This detached flame root 
enhances the axial bulk movement of the flame, making it more sus­
ceptible to upstream perturbations. Although the contraction of the CRZ 
approaches saturation, the tangential momentum component continues 
to diminish, resulting in radial convergence of the flow and a down­
stream extension of the ORZ.
3.2.3. SPOD results
The FTF points with various swirl numbers for the SPOD analysis are 
shown in Fig. 10(b). Figs. 13 and 14 illustrate the energy spectra of the 
SPOD mode and the dominant mode shapes at forcing frequencies of 
123 Hz, 243 Hz, 406.8 Hz, and 486.6 Hz for various swirl numbers. At 
the forcing frequencies near the low-pass and band-pass gain peaks (123 
Hz and 243 Hz), as the swirl number decreases from 0.885 to 0.623, the 
prominence of the dominant peak reflected in the mode energy spectrum 
initially declines and then increases. At a swirl number of 0.743, the 
mode energy spectrum indicates that the secondary frequency peak 
becomes more pronounced, with the flame motions associated with this 
Fig. 9. Comparison of the SPOD mode shapes for different equivalence ratios at various forcing frequencies at SN = 0.623 and ub = 67.5 m/s.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
10 


--- Page 11 ---

frequency occupying significant portions of the forcing energy. This 
results in a reduction of HRR pulsations at that swirl number. Regarding 
mode shapes, at the forcing frequency near the low-pass gain peak (123 
Hz), the dominant mode exhibits a distinct pattern of large-scale 
brightening and darkening, located near the dump plane.
As the swirl number gradually decreases, the area of the featured 
regions initially diminishes and then increases, with the positions of 
these regions progressively moving away from the dump plane. At SN =
0.743, the featured area is significantly suppressed near the central axis. 
The evolution of the area in these featured regions aligns with the trend 
of the FTF gain value, which first decreases and then increases. At SN =
0.743, the vortical disturbances generated by the azimuthal momentum 
and the intensity of the precessing motion both diminish, resulting in a 
decrease in FTF gain. As the swirl number decreases to 0.623, the flame 
exhibits a larger lift-off, with the flame base moving away from the 
center lance tip. This lift-off flame is more susceptible to acoustic exci­
tation, leading to intense axial flame volume oscillations. The improved 
URANS method is employed to analyze vortex structures in the 
combustor under thermal conditions. Instantaneous vortex structures 
are identified using iso-surfaces of pressure and the Q-criterion, as pre­
sented in supplementary material S.4. At SN = 0.885, large-scale pre­
cessing structures are observed, as illustrated in Figs. S4(a) and (b). At 
SN = 0.743, small-scale vortices concentrate near the sidewalls of the 
combustion chamber. At SN = 0.623, a large-scale, lumped vortex core 
forms at the downstream center. These hydrodynamic structures are 
closely associated with the characteristic flame mode shapes.
At the forcing frequency near the band-pass peak (243 Hz), as the 
swirl number gradually decreases, the region exhibiting pronounced 
variations first contracts and then expands, accompanied by the emer­
gence of sub-modes. Compared to the energy level of the dominant 
Fig. 10. Comparison of FTFs for various swirl numbers at two air flow rates. ((a) ub = 67.5 m/s, Φ = 0.73. (b) ub = 67.5 m/s, Φ = 0.80. (c) ub = 67.5 m/s, Φ = 0.90. 
(d) ub = 90.0 m/s, Φ = 0.73. (e) ub = 90.0 m/s, Φ = 0.80. (f) ub = 90.0 m/s, Φ = 0.90.).
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
11 


--- Page 12 ---

mode, as the swirl number decreases, the proportion of mode energy at 
the forcing frequency first drops to 66 % and then rises to 78 %, causing 
the FTF gain to initially decrease and then increase.
At the forcing frequency near the FTF gain valley (406.8 Hz), the 
spectrum indicates that the forcing frequency is not dominant, and low- 
frequency motions receive a greater share of the forcing energy. The 
area of the highlighted regions, as indicated by the mode shape at 406.8 
Hz, is significantly smaller than those at 123 Hz and 243 Hz. These 
factors contribute to the emergence of the FTF valley. At f = 486.6 Hz, as 
the swirl number decreases, the frequency peak in the energy level 
spectrum is markedly attenuated. However, the dominant mode shape 
reveals that at a high swirl number, vortex shedding rolls up from both 
sides of the flame shear layers at 486.6 Hz. In contrast, at lower swirl 
numbers of 0.743 and 0.623, a V-shaped pattern is observed along the 
centerline in the mode shape, suggesting that the axial volume oscilla­
tion of the flame is the predominant hydrodynamic instability. This 
phenomenon corresponds with the FTF results that as the swirl number 
decreases, the FTF gain at 486.6 Hz monotonically increases. Flames 
with lower swirl numbers, characterized by an elevated flame root and 
reduced radial momentum, are more susceptible to high-frequency 
disturbances, resulting in intense axial volume oscillations and 
enhanced FTF gains.
3.3. CFD/system identification for FTFs
A comparison between calculated and experimentally measured 
time-averaged flame images for various swirl numbers without excita­
tion is presented in Fig. 15. The computed flame angle and lift-off height 
show close agreement with the experimental images. The discrepancies 
may be attributed to inherent limitations of the Abel inverse technique, 
which cannot fully eliminate the residual intensity near the center axis 
under imperfect flame axisymmetry. Furthermore, upstream hydrody­
namic turbulence may amplify fluctuations near the measured flame 
front.
Fig. 16 illustrates the comparison of calculated axial velocity fluc­
tuations at the reference plane and HRR fluctuations for different types 
of forcing signals at SN = 0.743, ub = 67.5 m/s and Φ = 0.80. Under 
harmonic excitation, once the flow tends to stabilize, the HRR pulsation 
exhibits a sinusoidal pattern with the same frequency as the forcing 
signal. Under the excitation of the modified DRBS and the multi- 
sinusoidal signal, the HRR fluctuates between 100 and 200 kW, 
demonstrating a favorable signal-to-noise ratio. Table 3 compares the 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR(dB) = 20 • lg
(
RMSsignal/RMSnoise
)
), spectral 
leakage, and core-hour consumption for various forcing signals. The 
HRR obtained using the DRBS exhibits a higher signal-to-noise ratio than 
Fig. 11. Nyquist plots for various swirl numbers at (a) ub = 67.5 m/s, Φ = 0.73. (b) ub = 67.5 m/s, Φ = 0.80. (c) ub = 90.0 m/s, Φ = 0.73, and (d) ub = 90.0 m/s, Φ 
= 0.80.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
12 


--- Page 13 ---

those derived from the multi-sinusoidal signal. To minimize spectral 
leakage in the FFT analysis of harmonic signals, a Hann window and 
integer-period sampling are applied. The Wiener-Hopf method, based on 
a least squares approach, does not involve spectral leakage. Acquisition 
of FTFs at 12 frequencies ranging from 40 to 480 Hz using harmonic 
excitation required approximately 187,950 core-hours, whereas the use 
Fig. 12. (a) Time-averaged flame images processed using the Abel inverse transformation and (b) calculated cold flow fields for various swirl numbers at ub = 67.5 
m/s and Φ = 0.80.
Fig. 13. Comparison of SPOD mode energy spectra for different swirl numbers at various forcing frequencies at ub = 67.5 m/s and Φ = 0.80.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
13 


--- Page 14 ---

of multi-sinusoidal signals and DRBS reduced the computational cost to 
31,950 core-hours for obtaining equivalent FTFs in a single simulation.
Fig. 17 presents a comparison of calculated and experimentally 
measured FTFs at ub = 67.5 m/s and Φ = 0.80. The horizontal axis is 
normalized by the Strouhal number (St = fDoutlet/ub). The calculated 
FTFs for different forcing signals are illustrated in Fig. 17(a). The FTFs 
obtained using the broadband excitation signal are consistent with those 
derived from harmonic excitation signals. This finding suggests that an 
appropriate broadband excitation signal can effectively replace har­
monic signals, enabling the acquisition of FTFs with a single CFD 
calculation. The gain of FTF obtained from using the multi-sinusoidal 
signal exhibits significant deviations from the experimental gain when 
St < 0.03, indicating substantial frequency leakage in the low-frequency 
range. When St > 0.08, the FTF gain deviations from the experimental 
data remain pronounced. By employing the modified DRBS, the FTF gain 
aligns closely with the experimental results when St < 0.2, although 
there is a slight gain leakage in the low-frequency range. The peaks and 
valleys of the FTF gains have been accurately detected. When St > 0.2, a 
significant calculation error is observed, which may be attributed to the 
complex high-gain mechanisms present in the high-frequency range. 
The improved URANS model has limitations in resolving high-frequency 
flow details [54]. However, the LES method can achieve a higher gain 
value and a larger HRR fluctuation amplitude, as presented by the data 
at St = 0.21 (HRR fluctuation curves are provided in supplementary 
material S.5.). Regarding FTF phases, the calculation results obtained 
using the three forcing signals are in good agreement with the experi­
mental data. The calculated FTFs using various turbulence closure 
models are presented in Fig. 17(b). Compared to the k-omega SST and 
transition k-k1-omega models, the Reynolds stress SAS turbulence 
model used in this study demonstrates greater accuracy in calculating 
FTFs, particularly in predicting gain values.
Fig. 17(c)–(e) present a comparison between the calculated FTF re­
sults obtained using a modified DRBS and the experimental values at 
Fig. 14. Comparison of the SPOD mode shapes for different swirl numbers at various forcing frequencies at ub = 67.5 m/s and Φ = 0.80.
Fig. 15. Comparison between calculated and experimentally measured time- 
averaged flame images for various swirl numbers without excitation at ub =
67.5 m/s and Φ = 0.80.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
14 


--- Page 15 ---

various swirl numbers. For the three swirl numbers examined, the slopes 
of the calculated and measured phases are generally consistent. The 
calculated gains closely align with the experimental values, although 
some discrepancies arise in the low-frequency range. This deviation may 
result from the inability of the current numerical model to adequately 
capture the complex low-frequency flow structures and their in­
teractions with flames. Overall, the FTF can be effectively represented 
by the CFD/system identification approach, demonstrating robust per­
formance across diverse swirl numbers.
4. Conclusion
The effects of operating conditions and swirl number on FTFs of 
partially premixed swirl flames at high Reynolds numbers are 
investigated using a well-designed siren capable of generating high 
signal-to-noise ratio excitations. The SPOD method is employed to 
extract coherent structures from transient forced flame images. 
Furthermore, a high-efficiency numerical approach integrating CFD 
with system identification is developed, enabling the determination of 
FTFs within a single simulation.
As the equivalence ratio increases, the gain in the range of 0–400 Hz 
monotonically declines, while gains above 400 Hz increase. At forcing 
frequencies near the gain peaks, the dominant frequency can be iden­
tified in the SPOD energy spectrum. Moreover, the characteristic region 
in the SPOD mode shape diminishes with increasing equivalence ratio. 
The increase in the laminar burning velocity causes the flame base to 
move closer to the dump plane, thereby suppressing axial flame oscil­
lations while maintaining vortex shedding rolling from the shear layers 
and flame tips. The mode shape observed at 486.6 Hz displays a V- 
shaped structure, indicating that an elevated laminar burning velocity 
improves the flame’s capability to wrap around vortices at high 
frequencies.
As the swirl number decreases from 0.885 to 0.623, the FTF gain 
within the 0–400 Hz range exhibits a non-monotonic trend, character­
ized by an initial decrease followed by an increase. At the forcing fre­
quency near gain peaks, a decrease in the swirl number leads to a 
diminished area of the region exhibiting a featured pattern. Higher swirl 
numbers promote the formation of PVCs, which enhances FTF gain 
values. At SN = 0.743, interactions between azimuthal vortical distur­
bances and axial flow disturbances result in a decrease of FTF gain. At SN 
= 0.623, the flame, characterized by lower radial momentum, exhibits a 
Fig. 16. Comparison of calculated axial velocity fluctuations at the reference plane and HRR fluctuations for various types of forcing signals at SN = 0.743, ub = 67.5 
m/s and Φ = 0.80. ((a) modified DRBS. (b) Multi-sinusoidal signal, and (c) harmonic signal.).
Table 3 
Comparison of the performance of various forcing signals.
Parameter
Harmonic signal
Multi- 
sinusoidal 
signal
DRBS
Signal-to-noise 
ratio of HRR, dB
Max 12.8 (St = 0.06) 
Min 1.7 (St = 0.19)
10.2
11.3
Spectral leakage
Low (Hann window and integer- 
period sampling are used for the 
FFT.)
/
/
Consumed core- 
hours
≈187,950 (12 frequencies 
ranging from 40 to 480 Hz)
≈31,950
≈
31,950
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
15 


--- Page 16 ---

larger lift-off height. This flame is more susceptible to acoustic excita­
tion, leading to intense axial volume oscillations. There is an optimal 
ratio of radial to axial momentum that achieves the most stable flame. At 
486.6 Hz, vortex shedding is observed in the SPOD mode at SN = 0.885.
FTFs obtained from the CFD/SI approach, using the broadband 
excitation signals within a single CFD calculation, are consistent with 
those derived from harmonic excitation. The FTF gains computed using 
the modified DRBS demonstrates greater accuracy than those obtained 
from the multi-sinusoidal signal. The predicted FTFs closely align with 
the experimental values across various swirl numbers.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zhijian Yu: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Enguang Liang: Writing – review & editing, Formal 
analysis. Huiying Sang: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis. 
Yongqing Xu: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis. Guangzhi Cui: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis. 
Min Zhu: Supervision, Project administration, Methodology.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
Fig. 17. Comparison of numerically calculated and experimentally measured FTFs at ub = 67.5 m/s and Φ = 0.80. ((a) Comparison of various forcing signals at SN =
0.743. (b) Comparison of various turbulence closure models using the modified DRBS. (c) Modified DRBS at SN = 0.885. (d) Modified DRBS at SN = 0.743, and (e) 
modified DRBS at SN = 0.623.).
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
16 


--- Page 17 ---

interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (Grant number: 52206147). We would like to thank the editor and 
the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments.
Appendix A 
The equivalence ratio Φ is defined as follows: 
Φ =
(
˙mfuel
/
˙mair
)
actual
(
˙mfuel
/
˙mair
)
stoich
(A1) 
According to the principle of uncertainty propagation, the uncertainty in the equivalence ratio u(Φ) is calculated as follows: 
u2(Φ) = c2
1u2
(
˙mfuel
)
+ c2
2u2
(
˙mair
)
(A2) 
c1 =
(
1
/
˙mair
)
actual
(
˙mfuel
/
˙mair
)
stoich
(A3) 
c2 =
−
(
˙mfuel
/(
˙mair
)2 )
actual
(
˙mfuel
/
˙mair
)
stoich
(A4) 
where u
(
˙mfuel
)
and u
(
˙mair
)
are the standard uncertainties in measuring the mass flow rates of fuel and air, respectively. c1 and c2 are the corre­
sponding sensitivity coefficients.
The accuracy of the fuel mass flow controller and the air Coriolis mass flow meter is ± 0.5 % F.S. (±4 L/min) and ± 0.75 % F.S. (±0.9 g/s), 
respectively. Assuming the errors follow a uniform distribution, the standard uncertainties u
(
˙mfuel
)
and u
(
˙mair
)
are given as follows: 
u
(
˙mfuel
)
= 0.717 × 4
60
/
̅̅̅
3
√
≈0.0276g
/
s
(A5) 
u
(
˙mair
)
= 0.9
/
̅̅̅
3
√
≈0.52g
/
s
(A6) 
Thus, the uncertainty in the equivalence ratio u(Φ) for various operating conditions can be calculated using Eq. A(2), as summarized in Table A1.
Table A1 
Uncertainty analysis for the equivalence ratio.
Air mass flow 
rate, g/s
Methane mass flow 
rate, g/s
Sensitivity 
coefficient c1
Sensitivity 
coefficient c2
Standard uncertainty 
u(Φ)
Expanded uncertainty U(Φ) =
2 × u(Φ)
Equivalence ratio 
Φ
60
2.55
0.286
−0.012
0.010
0.020
0.730 ± 0.020
2.80
0.286
−0.013
0.011
0.021
0.800 ± 0.021
3.15
0.286
−0.015
0.011
0.022
0.900 ± 0.022
80
3.40
0.215
−0.009
0.008
0.015
0.730 ± 0.015
3.73
0.215
−0.010
0.008
0.016
0.800 ± 0.016
4.19
0.215
−0.011
0.008
0.017
0.900 ± 0.017
Appendix B. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2025.136880.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
17 


--- Page 18 ---

References
[1] Wang K, Liu X, Wang G. Self-scheduled direct thrust control for gas turbine engine 
based on EME approach with bounded parameter variation. Chin J Aeronaut 2025; 
38(6):103392.
[2] Morgans AS, Yang D. Thermoacoustic instability in combustors. Annu Rev Fluid 
Mech 2025;57:9–33.
[3] Casel M, Ghani A. Analysis of the flame dynamics in methane/hydrogen fuel blends 
at elevated pressures. Proc Combust Inst 2023;39(4):4631–40.
[4] Veiga-L´opez F, Martínez-Ruiz D, Kuznetsov M, S´anchez-Sanz M. Thermoacoustic 
analysis of lean premixed hydrogen flames in narrow vertical channels. Fuel 2020; 
278:118212.
[5] Polifke W. Modeling and analysis of premixed flame dynamics by means of 
distributed time delays. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2020;79:100845.
[6] Æsøy E, Dawson JR, Moeck JP. Systematic modulation of the flame transfer 
function and its effect on thermoacoustic stability. Combust Flame 2024;265: 
113494.
[7] Crocco L. Aspects of combustion stability in liquid propellant rocket motors part I: 
Fundamentals. Low frequency instability with monopropellants. J Am Rocket Soc 
1951;21(6):163–78.
[8] Tian Y, Liang X, Zhang S, Zhang Y, Yang L, Li J. Experimental study on conical 
flame transfer functions considering velocity profiles. Fuel 2024;363:130903.
[9] Noiray N, Durox D, Schuller T, Candel S. A unified framework for nonlinear 
combustion instability analysis based on the flame describing function. J Fluid 
Mech 2008;615:139–67.
[10] Candel S, Durox D, Schuller T, Bourgouin JF, Moeck JP. Dynamics of swirling 
flames. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 2014;46(1):147–73.
[11] O’Connor J. Understanding the role of flow dynamics in thermoacoustic 
combustion instability. Proc Combust Inst 2023;39(4):4583–610.
[12] O’Connor J, Lieuwen T. Recirculation zone dynamics of a transversely excited swirl 
flow and flame. Phys Fluids 2012;24(7):075107.
[13] Karmarkar A, Gupta S, Boxx I, Hemchandra S, O’Connor J. Impact of precessing 
vortex core dynamics on the thermoacoustic instabilities in a swirl-stabilized 
combustor. J Fluid Mech 2022;946:A36.
[14] Taamallah S, Dagan Y, Chakroun N, Shanbhogue S, Vogiatzaki K, Ghoniem AF. 
Helical vortex core dynamics and flame interaction in turbulent premixed swirl 
combustion: a combined experimental and large eddy simulation investigation. 
Phys Fluids 2019;31(2):025108.
[15] Schadow KC, Gutmark E. Combustion instability related to vortex shedding in 
dump combustors and their passive control. Prog Energy Combust Sci Technol 
1992;18(2):117–32.
[16] Yu Z, Ji M, Xu Y, Cui G, Zhu M. Investigation of high-gain mechanisms for 
nonlinear flame responses in a swirled premixed combustor. Fuel 2025;395: 
135200.
[17] Kallifronas DP, Massey JC, Chen ZX, Balachandran R, Swaminathan N. Effect of 
swirl on premixed flame response at high forcing amplitudes. Fuel 2023;347: 
128358.
[18] Di Sabatino F, Guiberti TF, Moeck JP, Roberts WL, Lacoste DA. Fuel and 
equivalence ratio effects on transfer functions of premixed swirl flames. J Propul 
Power 2020;36(2):271–84.
[19] Nygård HT, Worth NA. Flame transfer functions and dynamics of a closely confined 
premixed bluff body stabilized flame with swirl. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2021; 
143(4):041011.
[20] Zhang B, Shahsavari M, Rao Z, Yang S, Wang B. Contributions of hydrodynamic 
features of a swirling flow to thermoacoustic instabilities in a lean premixed swirl 
stabilized combustor. Phys Fluids 2019;31(7):075106.
[21] Palies P, Durox D, Schuller T, Candel S. Experimental study on the effect of swirler 
geometry and swirl Number on flame describing functions. Combust Sci Technol 
2011;183(7):704–17.
[22] Durox D, Moeck JP, Bourgouin JF, Morenton P, Viallon M, Schuller T, et al. Flame 
dynamics of a variable swirl number system and instability control. Combust Flame 
2013;160(9):1729–42.
[23] Gatti M, Gaudron R, Mirat C, Zimmer L, Schuller T. A comparison of the transfer 
functions and flow fields of flames with increasing swirl number. In: Proceedings of 
ASME Turbo Expo 2018: Power for Land, Sea and Air, 2018, Oslo, Norway.
[24] Gatti M, Gaudron R, Mirat C, Zimmer L, Schuller T. Impact of swirl and bluff-body 
on the transfer function of premixed flames. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37(4): 
5197–204.
[25] Zhao D. System identification and impulse response of a methane-fuelled swirling 
thermoacoustic combustor. Therm Sci Eng Prog 2023;37:101575.
[26] Davies J, Sato D, Mashruk S, Valera-Medina A. Experimental analysis of swirl 
number and nozzle design for scale-up of partially cracked ammonia flames. Appl 
Energy Combust Sci 2025;22:100338.
[27] Iyogun CO, Birouk M, Kozinski JA. Experimental investigation of the effect of fuel 
nozzle geometry on the stability of a swirling non-premixed methane flame. Fuel 
2011;90(4):1416–23.
[28] Schuller T, Marragou S, Oztarlik G, Poinsot T, Selle L. Influence of hydrogen 
content and injection scheme on the describing function of swirled flames. 
Combust Flame 2022;240:111974.
[29] Æsøy E, Indlekofer T, Bothien MR, Dawson JR. The effect of hydrogen on nonlinear 
flame saturation. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2023;145(11):111019.
[30] Shahin TT, Hodge AJ, Murdock BK, McLean TN, Koenig KC, Gejji RM, et al. 
Dynamics of hydrogen–ammonia–natural gas lean-premixed high-pressure flames. 
Fuel 2025;385:134016.
[31] Liu C, Yang H, Ruan C, Yu L, Nan J, Li J, et al. Experimental study on effects of 
ammonia enrichment on the thermoacoustic instability of lean premixed swirling 
methane flames. Fuel 2024;357:129796.
[32] Zhang W, Shi L, Xia W, Du Y, Yao L. Research on the anharmonic effect of main 
reactions of important intermediate species in NH3/DME mixed combustion. Chem 
Phys Lett 2025;874–875:142170.
[33] Martinke S, Woszidlo R, Nayeri C, Paschereit C. Characteristics of modified fluidic 
oscillator with adjustable flow parameters. AIAA J 2025;63(7):1–10.
[34] Chen J, Zong H, Song H, Wu Y, Liang H, Su Z. Closed-loop plasma flow control of a 
turbulent cylinder wake flow using machine learning at Reynolds number of 28 
000. Phys Fluids 2024;36(1):015123.
[35] Gungordu B, Jabbal M, Popov AA. Enhancing jet velocity and power conversion 
efficiency of piezoelectric synthetic jet actuators. AIAA J 2023;61(10):4321–31.
[36] Schuermans B. Thermoacoustic modeling of a gas turbine using transfer functions 
measured under full engine pressure. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2010;132(11): 
111503.
[37] Kim KT, Lee JG, Quay BD, Santavicca DA. Spatially distributed flame transfer 
functions for predicting combustion dynamics in lean premixed gas turbine 
combustors. Combust Flame 2010;157(9):1718–30.
[38] Sieber M, Paschereit CO, Oberleithner K. Spectral proper orthogonal 
decomposition. J Fluid Mech 2016;792:798–828.
[39] Towne A, Schmidt OT, Colonius T. Spectral proper orthogonal decomposition and 
its relationship to dynamic mode decomposition and resolvent analysis. J Fluid 
Mech 2018;847:821–67.
[40] Yang N, Shan M, Shi G, Guo H, Xiong S, Luo M, et al. Physicochemical state 
classification of heat-treated TC4 samples based on laser-induced breakdown 
spectroscopy (LIBS). At Spectrosc 2024;45(4):324–35.
[41] Ma N, Meng J, Luo J, Liu Q. Optimization of thermal-fluid-structure coupling for 
variable-span inflatable wings considering case correlation. Aerosp Sci Technol 
2024;153:109448.
[42] Dupuy F, Gatti M, Mirat C, Gicquel L, Nicoud F, Schuller T. Combining analytical 
models and LES data to determine the transfer function from swirled premixed 
flames. Combust Flame 2020;217:222–36.
[43] Pampaloni D, Andreini A, Facchini B, Paschereit CO. Large-eddy-simulation 
modeling of the flame describing function of a lean-premixed swirl-stabilized 
flame. J Propul Power 2019;35(5):994–1004.
[44] Andreas H, Wolfgang P. Dynamics of practical premixed flames, part II: 
Identification and interpretation of CFD data. Int J Spray Combust 2009;1(2): 
229–50.
[45] Chong LTW, Komarek T, Kaess R, Foller S, Polifke W. Identification of flame 
transfer functions from LES of a premixed swirl burner. In: Proceedings of ASME 
Turbo Expo 2010: Power for Land, Sea and Air, 2010, Glasgow, UK.
[46] Zhu M, Dowling A, Bray K. Transfer function calculations for aeroengine 
combustion oscillations. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2005;127(1):18–26.
[47] Jang SH, Ih JG. On the multiple microphone method for measuring in-duct acoustic 
properties in the presence of mean flow. J Acous Soc Am 1998;103(3):1520–6.
[48] Chen H, Zhu D, Guo Q, Zhao F, Zhu Y, Yao H. Simulation, verification, and 
prediction of thermal response of bridgewire in electro-explosive device. Meas 
2025;253:117483.
[49] Deng Z, Fan Y, Theuerkauf J, Jacob KV, Umbanhowar PB, Lueptow RM. Modeling 
segregation of polydisperse granular materials in hopper discharge. Powder 
Technol 2020;374:389–98.
[50] Sun X, Li Z, Zhang L, Tian A, Chai WS, Jing T, et al. Heat transfer augmentation, 
endothermic pyrolysis and surface coking of hydrocarbon fuel in manifold 
microchannels at a supercritical pressure. Int Commun Heat Mass Transfer 2025; 
161:108564.
[51] Wei X, Zhang M, An Z, Wang J, Huang Z, Tan H. Large eddy simulation on flame 
topologies and the blow-off characteristics of ammonia/air flame in a model gas 
turbine combustor. Fuel 2021;298:120846.
[52] Chen L, Cui B, Zhang C, Hu X, Wang Y, Li G, et al. Impacts of fuel stage ratio on the 
morphological and nanostructural characteristics of soot emissions from a twin 
annular premixing swirler combustor. Environ Sci Technol 2024;58(24):10558–66.
[53] Zhang S, Li J, Tian Y, Fang S, Li C, Yu X, et al. Probing the combustion 
characteristics of micron-sized aluminum particles enhanced with graphene 
fluoride. Combust Flame 2025;272:113858.
[54] Tang Y, Wei X, Liu Y. Hybrid RANS-LES simulation of rotor-stator interaction in a 
compressor stage using grid-adaptive simulation method. In: Proceedings of ASME 
Turbo Expo 2024: Power for Land, Sea and Air, 2024, London, UK.
Z. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Fuel 406 (2026) 136880 
18 
