
--- Page 1 ---

Omar B. Ramadan
e-mail: omarbabr@gmail.com
J. E. Donald Gauthier
e-mail: donald_gauthier@carleton.ca
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Department,
Carleton University,
Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6, Canada
Patrick M. Hughes
e-mail: phughes@nrcan.gc.ca
Robert Brandon
e-mail: rob.brandon@nrcan.gc.ca
CANMET Energy Technology Centre,
Natural Resources Canada,
Nepean, ON, K1A 1M1, Canada
Design Procedure of a Novel
Microturbine Low NOx Conical
Wire-Mesh Duct Burner
Nowadays, air pollution and climate change have become a global environmental prob-
lem. As a result, government regulations worldwide are becoming increasingly stringent.
This has led to an urgent need to develop new designs and methods for improving
combustion systems to minimize the production of toxic emissions, such as nitrogen
oxides. Microturbine based cogeneration units are one of the interesting alternatives for
combined electrical power and heat generation (CHP). Microturbine CHP technology
still needs to be developed to increase efﬁciency and heat-to-power ratio and to improve
operating ﬂexibility. This can all be obtained by adding a duct burner to the CHP unit.
This paper documents the design process for a novel low NOx conical wire-mesh duct
burner for the development of a more efﬁcient microcogeneration unit. This burner pro-
vides the thermal energy necessary to raise the microturbine exhaust gas temperature to
increase the heat recovery capability. The duct burner implements both lean premixed
and surface combustion techniques to achieve low NOx and CO emission levels. The
design process includes a set of preliminary design procedures relating the use of em-
pirical and semiempirical models. The preliminary design procedures were veriﬁed and
validated for key components, such as the duct burner premixer, using the laser sheet
illumination (LSI) technique. The LSI was used to study the mixing process inside the
premixer ﬁtted with different swirlers. The designed duct burner successfully operated in
a blue ﬂame mode over a wide range of conditions with NOx emissions of less than 5
ppmv and CO emissions of less than 10 ppmv (corrected to 15% O2).
DOI: 10.1115/1.2968867
1
Introduction
The wire-mesh duct burner DB for microturbine MT CHP
units presented in this paper is a new concept. The design proce-
dure was derived from elements available in the literature and
from observations of many previously developed gas turbine com-
bustors and of radiant or conventional burners. The goal of this
work was to design a DB to provide the thermal energy necessary
to raise the microturbine exhaust gas temperature MTEGT to the
required temperature while maintaining low NOx and CO emis-
sion levels. The preliminary design procedures involved in the
design and construction of the mesh DB are discussed in this
paper. At the ﬁrst stages of the design, the LSI technique was used
to verify some of the design procedures implemented, such as the
one used to design the DB premixer. The LSI results indicated that
the premixer effectively mixed the two ﬂuid streams. After the
system was designed and built, it was tested, and successful com-
bustion results were obtained.
2
Design Strategies
The overall DB design strategy Fig. 1 followed in this paper
starts by deﬁning and understanding the concept, completing a
literature review, and selecting the type of the burner; these parts
were covered in a previous publication 1. Second, the design
process, which is the topic of this paper, involves ﬁve main com-
ponents: 1 Design speciﬁcations and requirements: these lead to
the deﬁnition of the design parameters. 2 Preliminary design: In
this step the overall dimensions of the DB were determined. 3
Mechanical design: in a coordinated way this step elevates the
design concept to production drawing. Solid models 3D drawing
are also needed for a detailed design step e.g., for thermal analy-
sis and computational ﬂuid dynamics CFD modeling. 4 De-
tailed design: the performance of key components e.g., DB pre-
mixer was veriﬁed and validated using LSI and CFD. 5 DB
manufacturing and testing for evaluation. Only the ﬁrst two steps
will be covered in this paper. Part of the experimental testing was
covered in previous publications by the same authors 1,2.
3
Speciﬁcations
The basic requirements for the DB design were 1 low manu-
facturing cost, 2 simple compact design, 3 easy installation and
startup, 4 good ignition and stable and efﬁcient combustion, 5
reliable and safe operation, 6 low burner pressure drop, 7 low
gas pressure, 8 operation on natural gas NG, 9 controlled
generation of NOx to meet environmental regulations, and 10
good load control. During the preliminary design stage, the DB
design point was ﬁxed, with the inputs and speciﬁcation listed in
Table 1.
4
Preliminary Design
The DB preliminary design procedure is the main topic of this
paper in which the design steps were covered and the overall
dimensions of the DB were determined. The DB preliminary de-
sign was covered by two main tasks referred to in this paper as 1
the combustion problem and 2 the ﬂuid dynamics problem Fig.
1.
4.1
The Combustion Problem. The concept was to design a
DB that can produce stable ﬂame and ultralow NOx. To accom-
plish this, the DB was designed to operate in the lean burn mode,
and the combustion process was to be completed over the surface
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received April
5, 2008; ﬁnal manuscript received April 10, 2008; published online July 13, 2009.
Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the ASME Turbo Expo
2008: Land, Sea and Air GT2008, Berlin, Germany, June 9–13, 2008.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2009, Vol. 131 / 062301-1
Copyright © 2009 by Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, as represented by the Minister of Natural Resources
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

of a conical wire-mesh burner in the blue ﬂame mode. The com-
bustion calculations based on the concept lean premixed surface
combustion are brieﬂy presented in this section.
Figure 2 shows the schematic of the DB with the quantities to
be calculated during the combustion problem. This problem
sought to determine the ﬂows of exhaust gases and fuel needed to
obtain the desired mode of operation and ﬁnal temperature. Cal-
culations were based on the 70 kW MT at its design point Table
1. Referring to Fig. 2, the oxygen contained in the MTEG from
the CHP unit recuperator is split into two streams. One stream
bypasses the conical burner, and the other burns with the added
fuel inside the DB and over the conical burner. The bypass ex-
haust stream is then mixed with the hot products of combustion,
diluting and cooling these. The DB fuel was natural gas and was
assumed to be 100% methane.
4.1.1
Mass Flow Rate. Combustion calculations and the deter-
mination of the adiabatic ﬂame temperature and heat of reaction
were carried out using the JANNAF tables 3. We assumed per-
fect mixing, completed combustion reactions, no dissociation, and
no heat losses. In addition, it was assumed that the only species
present in the product of combustion, for the stoichiometric case,
were CO2, H2O, and N2 and, in the lean case, CO2, H2O, N2, and
O2. The MTEG were analyzed and used as an oxidant in the DB
combustion process. The measured components of NOx, SO2, and
CO are of little relevance to the combustion heat release calcula-
tion because they are present in very small quantities. Hence, for
Fig. 1
Overall duct burner design strategy
Table 1
Duct burner design point and speciﬁcations
Parameter
Design values
Ambient temperature
25°C 298 K
Operating pressure
Atmospheric
Microturbine used
MT70 kW IR CHP unit
Microturbine EGT range
200–250°C
Microturbine exhaust pipe diameter
0.254 m 10 in.
Microturbine exhaust gases composition
vol %
CO2 1.3%, O2 18%,
N2 78.6%, H2O 2.35%
Micro-turbine CHP heat recovery system status
Disabled
DB exhaust temperature range
500–700°C
DB inlet ﬂow rate
0.745 kg/s
DB combustion efﬁciency
99.9%
Maximum pressure drop across DB
249 Pa 1 in. H2O
DB fuel type
Natural gas 100% CH4
Energy content of methane LHV
50,050 kJ/kg
Methane auto-ignition temperature
580°C
Methane standard ﬂame speed
0.43 m/s
Fuel line pressure
2–5 psigauge
Excess oxidant in combustion zone
100% Ø=0.5
Combustion concept
Surface combustion
Emission limit for NOx and CO
Less than 10 ppm
Type of burner
Porous wire-mesh burner
Porous burner geometry
Conical shape
Operating mode
Blue ﬂame mode
Combustion intensity
2500 kW/m2
Material for all the DB components
Stainless steel SS
Fig. 2
DB schematic „combustion problem…
062301-2 / Vol. 131, NOVEMBER 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

convenience, they were combined together and presented as CO in
the calculation. Therefore the simpliﬁed MTEG composition used
in the calculation as an oxidant was
Oxidant = x1O2 + x2CO2 + x3CO + x4H2O + x5N2
1
The combustion equations mole basis used for the stoichiometric
case Eq. 2 and the lean burn case Eq. 3 are
aCH4 + mstoichoxidant = bCO2 + cH2O + dN2
2
a1CH4 + mactoxidant = b1CO2 + c1H2O + d1N2 + fO2
3
where the constants a,a1,x1,x2,x3,x4,x5,b,b1,c,c1,d,d1, f are
gas mole fractions. The coefﬁcients mstoich and mact are the
stoichiometric and actual mole fractions of the oxidant used in the
combustion process.
The atom conservation principle was used to solve the combus-
tion equations for the values of the relative mole fractions of the
reactants and products, and then the stoichiometric O/Fstoich
and actual oxidant-to-fuel ratios by mass were computed as fol-
lows:
O/Fstoich =
m˙ oxid
m˙ fuel
stoich
=
mstoich
a 
MWoxid
MWfuel
4
O/Fact =
m˙ oxid
m˙ fuel
act
=
mact
a1 
MWoxid
MWfuel
5
where m˙ oxid, m˙ fuel, MWoxid, and MWfuel are, respectively, the mass
ﬂow rate of the oxidant, the fuel ﬂow rate, the molecular weight of
the oxidant, and the molecular weight of the fuel. Knowing the
total mass ﬂow rate of the MTEG, the design equivalence ratio,
and other design parameters listed in Table 1, the fuel ﬂow rate
and the amount of oxidant needed for combustion were computed.
This section describes the equations used during the computa-
tion. The overall actual oxidant-to-fuel ratio O/Fov-actual was
estimated using the following equation:
O/Fov-act = LHV −CPTav  Texit
CPTav  Texit −Tinlet
6
where CpTav is the constant pressure speciﬁc heat of gases at the
average temperature between the DB exit Texit and inlet tem-
peratures Tinlet.
The equivalence ratio  is deﬁned as follows:
 = O/Fstoich
O/Fact
7
The fuel ﬂow rate was calculated using
m˙ fuel =
m˙ total
O/Fov-act
8
The amount of oxidant needed for the combustion process to pro-
duce blue ﬂame over the conical mesh burner surface was esti-
mated using
m˙ cone =
m˙ fuel
local/O/Fstoich
9
where local is the local equivalence ratio combustion zone.
4.1.2
Flame Temperature Tflame. Assuming a steady ﬂow
process, the absence of work interaction, the fact that the oxidant
and the combustion gases are ideal gases, and the negligible
change in potential and kinetic energies, the steady ﬂow energy
equation leads to
 nprodh¯ f +
Tref
T
C¯ PiTdT
prod
= nreacth¯ f +
Tref
T
C¯ PiTdTreact
10
where nprod, nreact, h¯ f, and C¯ PiT are, respectively, the products’
and the reactants’ component mole fractions, the enthalpy of for-
mation, and the constant pressure speciﬁc heat on a molar basis.
T and Tref are the actual and reference 298.15 K temperatures.
The solution for the adiabatic ﬂame temperature is a trial-and-
error solution of Eq. 10. The Tflame for nondissociating products
of combustion, such as those shown in Eqs. 2 and 3, is usually
called the adiabatic frozen-ﬂame temperature 4.
4.1.3
Burner Heat Release. The heat of reaction is the heat
transferred for a certain chemical reaction, such as that presented
in Eq. 3, when the reactants and the products are at the same
temperature and the pressure is kept constant. Then the steady
ﬂow energy equation leads to
Q = nprodh¯ f + h¯ −h¯prod − nreacth¯ f + h¯ −h¯react 11
where h¯ and h¯ are the enthalpy of the gas at the reaction tem-
perature and the reference enthalpy of the reaction on a molar
basis.
Expanding Eq. 11 by replacing the sums with the appropriate
terms and their values leads to the solution of the heat release
equation.
4.1.4
Homogeneous Burning Velocity (HBV). The burning ve-
locity is an important parameter that must be accounted for in the
design of the DB because it is desirable that the velocity of the
oxidant through the mesh burner would be equal to the ﬂame
speed 5. If this happens, the ﬂame will be stable on the wire-
mesh surface. A simpliﬁed form of the Semenov equation 6 was
used in the present work for the estimation of the burning velocity
during the DB design process,
HBV =	
KTum
2 Tflame
5
exp
−E
RuTflame
Tflame −Tum3
12
where K, Tum, E, and Ru are, respectively, the constant of propor-
tionality, the unburned mixture temperature, the activation energy,
and the universal gas constant.
4.1.5
Combustion Problem Closing. The results show that ap-
proximately 75% of the MT exhaust had to bypass the combustion
zone to achieve the design equivalence ratio of 0.5. The remaining
exhaust is the amount of oxidant to be burned with the appropriate
amount of methane it was calculated to be 0.0048 kg/s over the
DB conical mesh surface. This combustion was expected to pro-
duce low NOx combustion products, with a temperature of
1250°C and 235 kW of heat release at the mesh surface. The
combustion products were then mixed with bypass exhaust, and
the ﬁnal temperature of the mixture was in the range of
500–700°C.
4.2
The Fluid Dynamics Problem. This section discusses the
following general topics: 1 the geometry of the DB, 2 the study
and design of the proper mixing system, 3 the establishment of a
way to deliver the different ﬂows to each zone, and 4 the study
of the method to protect the ﬂame from the bypass ﬂow. A
concentric-duct-and-conical-burner design was considered Fig.
3. The different dimensions shown in Fig. 3 were calculated in
this phase. The presence of the metal ﬁber burner and its support
structure in an exhaust gas stream contained within an exhaust
duct of a MT unit will cause a resistance to the ﬂow and a result-
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2009, Vol. 131 / 062301-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

ing pressure drop. The total pressure drop due to the DB was
speciﬁed to be no more than 1.0 in. of water to maintain the MT
efﬁciency.
Figure 4 shows the ﬂuid dynamics problem ﬂowchart in which
the ﬁve main components of the DB are listed. A short description
of the geometrical design parameters and design steps used for
each component will be provided after a review of some general
common design parameters in this section.
4.2.1
Design Parameters
4.2.1.1
DB materials. Materials appropriate for burners or any
combustion system design, which would give the required life and
performance for most applications, are available. In the present
design, grade 304 stainless steel SS was selected as the material
for the test DB. Grade 304 SS provides acceptable performance
and life. Standard SS pipes, tubes, and sheets were used for the
manufacturing of the DB.
4.2.1.2
DB reference velocity Vref. Following the approach
used by gas turbine combustor designers 7–9, the reference ve-
locity in the present work was deﬁned as the mean velocity across
the plane of the maximum cross-sectional area of the DB housing.
The DB inlet velocity was measured by traversing the Pitot-static
tube across the MT exhaust pipe, and it was measured to be 18
m/s. The Vref was calculated after the expansion at the maximum
cross-sectional area using the continuity equation. It was calcu-
lated to be 12 m/s.
4.2.1.3
DB reference diameter Dref. The DB reference diam-
eter is the maximum diameter of the DB housing where the Vref
was deﬁned. The diameter was assigned based on different factors
such as DB total pressure drop, ﬂame speed, MT exhaust gas mass
ﬂow rate, DB inlet velocity, MT exhaust pipe diameter, and avail-
able standard pipe sizing for cost saving. Compromise must be
made between the mentioned parameters to select the DB refer-
ence diameter. However, the DB size must be adequate to allow
the insertion of probes for measurements without sharp distur-
bance of the ﬂow. At the same time, the DB must be small to be
practical for a MT CHP package application. The Dref was se-
lected to be 0.315 m 12.39 in.. The cross-sectional area based on
this diameter is the reference area.
4.2.2
Burner Housing. The DB housing was composed of sec-
tions. The sizing of these sections affects important performance
aspects such as pressure drop, mixing, and ﬂow stability. In addi-
tion, the size of some of the DB sections was controlled by the
internal pieces located inside these sections. As many geometrical
parameters were studied in the present work, ease of disassembly
was also considered. Figure 5 shows a schematic of the DB hous-
ing’s main components with their dimensions. SS standard pipe
pieces were used for the DB housing. The dimensions of the pipe
used were schedule 10S 0.315 m 12.39 in. inner diameter and
4.6 mm 0.18 in. wall thickness. The DB housing consists of six
main pieces. Pipes 1 and 6 are the DB inlet and exit pipes. Both
are similar. They connect the DB with the MT exhaust system.
The expansion to a larger area is used to reduce the velocity for
ﬂame stability reason, to reduce pressure loss, and to gain more
space for measurement. Pipe 2 is the premixer inlet pipe, which
was made to stabilize the ﬂow after the diffuser. Pipe 3 is the
premixer housing pipe. The length of this section was made equal
to the premixer length 0.3 m. The premixer via its supports was
mounted in this section. Pipe 4 is the conical wire-mesh burner
housing, where the visualization ports are located. Pipe 5 is the
exhaust pipe, where the hot products mix with the bypassed ﬂow.
All the parts of the DB are ﬂanged together to form a 2 m long
test rig with 30 probing ports and 4 sight ports.
This section describes the equations used during the computa-
tion of the duct housing components. The diffuser design formula
used was based on the area ratio 8, which was deﬁned as the
ratio between the diffuser exit and inlet cross-sectional areas,
ARdiff = 1 + 4Ldiff
D1
tan +
2Ldiff
D1
tan
2
13
where ARdiff is the diffuser area ratio, D1 is the diffuser inlet
diameter, Ldiff is the diffuser length, and  is the diffuser half
angle. The diffuser section pressure drop was estimated by the
following equation 8:
Pdiff = 0.5V12
1 −
1
ARdiff2
14
where  is the loss coefﬁcient given by 0.45, V1 is the diffuser
inlet velocity, and  is the ﬂuid density. For the straight SS pipe
Fig. 3
DB schematic „ﬂuid dynamics problem…
Fig. 4
Fluid dynamics problem ﬂowchart
Fig. 5
DB housing components and assembly „right…
062301-4 / Vol. 131, NOVEMBER 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

sections, the formulations used during the pressure drop calcula-
tions are
Ppipe = Vref
2
2
fpipe
Lpipe
Dref
15
where fpipe is the friction factor given by
fpipe =1.14 −2  log
	
Dref
+ 21.25
Re0.9
−2
16
where 	 is the absolute roughness and Re is the Reynolds num-
ber.
4.2.3
Premixer. Swirling ﬂow is the method used in this work
to rapidly mix the fuel and the oxidant inside the DB premixer.
Swirl can be imparted to the ﬂow by different means 10,11. In
the present work the swirling motion of the ﬂow was imported by
utilizing a static mixer.
4.2.3.1
Static mixer (swirler) design. The goal of the static
mixer is to impart sufﬁcient swirl to the ﬂow to thoroughly mix
the oxidant and the fuel in the premixer prior to combustion while
minimizing the pressure losses. The design procedure followed
during the swirler design process was based on Ref. 10: 1
selecting the model for a tangential velocity, 2 determining the
swirl strength, which is characterized by the swirl number S, and
3 developing the swirl vane geometry, which is based on the
experimental foundation or other standard rules.
In the present work the axial swirler design of the constant
angle model was selected for ease of manufacture. The swirl num-
ber is approximated by the ratio of the axial ﬂux of the swirl
momentum to the axial ﬂux of the axial momentum times the
equivalent nozzle radius 12. The swirl number was estimated
with
S = 2
3 
1 −
dh
do
3
1 −
dh
do
2
 tan

17
See Fig. 6 for parameter deﬁnitions. The swirl number has a
strong impact on recirculation. Little or no axial recirculation oc-
curs below the critical value of 0.6, where the adverse pressure
gradient is not enough to cause axial recirculation. Above or equal
to this value, a central recirculation zone forms due to the pres-
ence of strong radial and axial pressure gradients near the swirler
exit 13.
Figure 6 deﬁnes all the geometrical design variables for the
swirler used. Typical axial swirler designs have blade angles be-
tween 30 deg and 70 deg, blade thicknesses between 0.75 mm and
1.5 mm, number of swirler blades between 8 and 16, and blade
widths between 0.2 and 0.4 times the outer radius 11,14.
Swirler pressure drop Psw. Different correlations are avail-
able in the literature to estimate the swirler pressure drop e.g., see
Refs. 11,15,16. The empirical formula used to estimate the pres-
sure drop through the swirl thin blades in this work is given by
16
Psw = Vref
2
2 0.02625
2 −2.1
 + 45.5
for 
  40 deg
18
Psw = Vref
2
2 0.0875

for 
  40 deg
19
Swirler effective area Asweff. The effective area, which was
used for the computation of the swirler airﬂow, is deﬁned as the
annulus area or the swirler physical area, corrected for swirl and
ﬂow blockages and multiplied by the swirler discharge coefﬁcient
Cdsw 9,
Asweff = Cdsw 

4 do
2 −dh
2cos
 −Nbtbhb
20
For thin axial blades, the discharge coefﬁcient could be as-
sumed to be 1.0 16. In an axial blade swirler, the width of the
ﬂow passage at the blade root is smaller than that at the blade tip.
Therefore to avoid and reduce the resistance to the ﬂow at the root
of the blades, the blade root is designed as shown in Figs. 6 and 7
11.
4.2.3.2
Fuel caps. A simple plain oriﬁce fuel injector was de-
signed for the DB. In this design Bernoulli’s principle was used to
compute the fuel velocity at the nozzle exit in terms of the fuel
ﬂow rate, fuel pressure, fuel temperature, and discharge coefﬁ-
cient. Treating the gaseous fuel as an ideal gas, the equation of
state was used to calculate the fuel density. Then the total nozzle
area was calculated by using the continuity equation. To provide a
more uniform distribution of the fuel inside the DB premixer and
to improve the mixing between the fuel and the oxidizer, the total
nozzle area was divided into eight small holes 17. According to
the calculated parameters, the fuel pipe diameter was selected, and
hence the premixer inner swirler diameter was ﬁxed hub diam-
eter see Fig. 7. Two types of fuel caps were designed for test-
ing: ﬂat and round caps in which fuel is injected at 90 deg and 45
deg to the main ﬂow direction, respectively. The aim of the
present fuel injection technique was to inject the fuel radially from
the center into the swirl turbulent region to achieve the maximum
utilization of the turbulence for fuel oxidant mixing. Fuel caps
with hole diameters of 1.8 mm Cap-1, 2.3 mm Cap-2, 2.5 mm
Cap-3, and 3 mm Cap-4 were tested during the LSI phase to
study the affect of the different velocity ratios, fuel injection
angles, and fuel jet penetration distances on mixing. For the pur-
pose of initiating the design, the maximum penetration distance of
round jets was estimated using the following equation 8:
Fig. 6
Axial blade geometry
Fig. 7
DB premixer component dimensions
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2009, Vol. 131 / 062301-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

Ymax = 1.25DjetJ0.5
m˙ flow
m˙ flow + m˙ jet
21
where Djet, Ymax, J, m˙ jet, and m˙ flow are, respectively, the round jet
diameter, maximum penetration distance, the momentum ﬂux ra-
tio, the jet mass ﬂow rate, and the main cross ﬂow rate.
4.2.3.3
Premixer pipe. The premixer pipe was designed to en-
sure good mixing at all operating conditions. A SS standard pipe
of 0.168 m 6.625 in. pipe Sch-5S outer diameter was used for
the premixer pipe. The size of the premixer pipe was dictated by
two parameters: the conical wire-mesh burner dimensions and the
best mixing length. The diameter of the premixer pipe was ﬁxed
as the conical wire-mesh burner base diameter. The premixer pipe
length was selected to be two diameters of the conical wire-mesh
burner base diameter to give more mixing time and measurement
space see Fig. 7. The premixer was mounted coaxially in the DB
housing by means of two pairs of four supports. One pair was
made hollow and used as ports to the temperature measurements
made inside the premixer and as support to the cone shield.
4.2.4
Conical Wire-Mesh Burner Design. The results of this
design process were the dimensions of the cone template and its
pressure drop estimation. The base frame of the conical wire-mesh
burner design was based on the following parameters: pressure
drop assigned to the conical burner, premixer dimensions, and the
required combustion intensity. First the conical mesh burner sur-
face area was computed by dividing the previous calculated heat
release Eq. 11 by the speciﬁed combustion intensity Table 1.
Then, the height of the cone Hcone was geometrically calculated
using the formula
Hcone =	 
Q
Qin
0.5Dcone
2
−
Dcone
2 
2
22
where Dcone is the cone base diameter, which is equal to the pre-
mixer pipe diameter in this case. Correlations from Ref. 18 were
used to estimate the pressure drop of the conical burner as a func-
tion of the area ratio open area/total area. The pressure drop
estimated was approximately 74.7 Pa 0.3 in. of water. For this
value, the results show that the mesh burner must have an area
ratio of approximately 95%. The effect of the conical burner pres-
sure drop on the performance of the DB was studied during the
combustion test phase of this study. Three conical mesh burners
with different nominal pressure drops Cone-1=74.7 Pa 0.3 in.
H2O, Cone-2=149 Pa 0.6 in. H2O, and Cone-3=224 Pa 0.9
in. H2O were manufactured and tested. The dimensions and the
materials used in the manufacturing of the conical wire-mesh
burner were previously reported by Ramadan et al. 1.
4.2.5
Annular Passage. The shaded area shown in Fig. 8 rep-
resents the annular passage of the DB, which starts from the lead-
ing edge of the premixer and ends at the trailing edge of the cone
shield. The length and the width of the annular passage depend on
the shield length and diameter used in a particular test. During the
conceptual design process of the DB, key assumptions were made
in both the combustion and the ﬂuid dynamics calculations. Those
assumptions lead to some uncertainty. Therefore, eight ﬂat axial
manually adjustable blades were introduced 8 cm downstream
from the leading edge of the annular passage to provide ﬂexibility
and control for stable combustion over a range of operating con-
ditions. Figure 8 shows an overview of the annular ﬂow control
blade AFCB operation. The blades adjust the MTEG ﬂow split
between the conical wire-mesh and the annular passage to achieve
a trade-off between emissions, pressure drop. and ﬂame stability.
The open cross section, shown in Fig. 8, indicates the way to
operate the AFCB between 0 deg and 90 deg. The AFCB are
operated in a way that the MTEG ﬂows in convergent and diver-
gent passages to avoid a generation of swirling ﬂow in the annular
region for ﬂow measurement reason.
4.2.6
Mesh Burner Shield (Cone Shield). The function of the
cone shield is to provide a calm region to ignite and start the
combustion until the ﬂame stabilizes at the surface of the mesh
burner, providing a continuous source of ignition for the incoming
mixture ﬂowing through the wire-mesh burner. In other words, the
cone shield was used at this stage to protect or minimize the
interaction of the bypass ﬂow with the mesh burner surface to
avoid ﬂame quenching. The conical burner shield in the present
work has some similar functions as those of a gas turbine com-
bustor liner. It was reported in the literature that for a conventional
Fig. 8
Schematic of the annular passage and the blade operation
062301-6 / Vol. 131, NOVEMBER 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

combustor, the ratio of the liner cross-sectional area to the com-
bustor reference area should be kept within 60–72% 17, and for
a tubular combustor with a constant annulus cross section; the
area ratio should be in the range of 50–60% for minimum pressure
losses 19. In the present paper the ratio of the burner shield
cross-sectional area to the burner reference area was referred to as
the blockage ratio BR. Based on this ratio, two different shield
designs were used in this investigation, with blockage ratio values
of 0.4 and 0.6. As the blockage ratio increases, the pressure drop
across the DB increases, leading to more MTEG entering the
combustion zone. To study the effect of shield parameters on the
stability of the ﬂame, different shield designs were tested. Shields
covering 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of the conical mesh burner
length with varying BRs were used, and their effect on ﬂame
stability and emission levels NOx and CO was measured. In
addition to the mentioned shields, two measurement shields were
used to provide a smooth uniform ﬂow for the Pitot-static tube
measurements performed prior to the combustion test to check the
mass ﬂow split between the DB regions. Figure 9 shows the sche-
matics of all the shields used in the present investigation with
their parameters. The holes on the shields were aligned to the
visualization ports located at the DB outer housing Pipe 4. One
port was used as an igniter port, and the lower semicircular cut
was used for setting the shield on the premixer hollow support.
5
Combustion Results Sample
A series of extensive parametric tests were conducted in which
the effect of varying the different geometries mixers, fuel caps,
cones, annular blade angle setting, and shields and ﬁring rates
FRs on the NOx, CO, and ﬂame stability was determined. In
previous papers by the present authors 1,2, combustion results
were presented for the single-swirl mixer SM 30 deg case only.
In this paper sample combustion results from both the SM and the
double-swirl mixer DM 30 deg cases will be provided. A
HORIBA model PG-250 portable gas analyzer was used for the
concentration measurements. All reported NOx and CO emission
values in this paper were for the DB only total minus MT cor-
rected to 15% O2. The MT NOx and CO emissions were reported
in Ref. 1.
Figure 10 shows the DB operating in a blue ﬂame mode. The
ﬂame images are shown, along with the associated ﬁxed burner
parameters and resulting emissions. The NOx emissions as a func-
tion of ﬁring rate for different AFCB angles are presented in Fig.
11. The ﬁgure shows lines of constant equivalence ratios. As the
equivalence ratio decreases, the NOx emissions decrease high
excess oxidant. While at a given AFCB angle, the NOx emissions
decrease with the ﬁring rate until the lower stability limit was
reached blow-off limit. During the course of testing, the AFCB
angle was found to have a greater effect on the DB overall pres-
sure drop than on the conical wire-mesh burner itself. The two
limits used to deﬁne the operating range are the blow-off limit and
the high NOx limit 10 ppm.
Fig. 9
Schematic of the shields used
Fig. 10
DB operating in a blue ﬂame mode „SM, left; DM, right…
Fig. 11
Effect of AFCB angles and FR on NOx emission „SM,
Sh2, Cap-2, and Cone-3…
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
NOVEMBER 2009, Vol. 131 / 062301-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

The NOx and CO emission results as a function of ﬁring rate for
different BRs are presented in Fig. 12. The ﬁgure shows that as
the BR increases to 0.6 Sh7, the lower emission values were
obtained at higher ﬁring rates. The test results also show that the
DB operating range is wider with low BR shields. The ﬁgure also
shows that the CO emissions become excessive at very low ﬁring
rates due to incomplete combustion near the blow-off limit. The
lower CO 5 ppm and NOx 5 ppm emissions at FR in the
range of 250–330 kW were recorded when the DB used Sh7 and
Sh8 BR=0.6, Cap-4, a SM, and both Cone-2 and Cone-3.
Figure 13 shows the effect of four different geometrical com-
binations on the stability range and NOx emission levels. The
ﬁgure shows that for a constant ﬁring rate and a ﬁxed AFCB angle
0 deg, the NOx emissions decrease as the conical mesh burner
pressure drop decreases higher porosity Cone-1 allows more ex-
cess oxidant to ﬂow through the combustion zone, thus reducing
NOx. Also at a ﬁxed AFCB angle, the higher conical pressure
drop burner extends the lower ﬁring rate range. Hence the oper-
ating zone becomes wider lower porosity Cone-2 increases the
local exhaust gas momentum. Using DM shows Fig. 13 lower
NOx emission due to the better premixing between the oxidant
and the fuel. The lower strength mixer, SM, extends the lower
ﬁring rate range. Hence the operating zone becomes wider, and
the ﬂame stabilizes at leaner fuel/oxidant mixture ratios. Return-
ing to Fig. 10, we can see the effect of using different mixers on
the ﬂame structure. The ﬁgure shows that the DM provides a
better overall ﬂame height uniformity compared with SM.
6
Conclusion
The procedures discussed in this paper form a methodology for
the preliminary design of a conical wire-mesh DB. The combus-
tion results proved that the design procedures that were used to
design this novel MT wire-mesh DB were successful. This DB
was veriﬁed to operate in the blue ﬂame mode stably with ul-
tralow concentration of pollutants. Sample combustion results
were presented, and ﬂame images showing the DB operating in a
blue ﬂame mode were provided.
During the course of the evaluation tests, the DB displayed a
stable low emission operation throughout the surface ﬁring rate
range of 148–328 kW 1574–3489 kW/m2. Emissions of less
than 5 ppm for both NOx and CO emissions were recorded, while
the DB successfully raised the MTEGT from about 230°C to as
high as 700°C. The DB overall pressure drop throughout all the
conducted tests was below the design point of 249 Pa. 1 in. H2O.
Acknowledgment
This study was supported by the CANMET Energy Technology
Centre, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
Nomenclature
IR  Ingersoll Rand
LHV  lower heating value
LP  lean premixed
MW  molecular weight
References
1 Ramadan, O. B., Gauthier, J. E. D., Hughes, P. M., and Brandon, R., 2007,
“Experimental Investigation and Evaluation of a Low NOx Natural Gas-Fired
Mesh Duct Burner,” ASME Paper No. GT2007-28350.
2 Ramadan, O. B., Gauthier, J. E. D., Hughes, P. M., and Brandon, R., 2007,
“Testing of a Low NOx Wire-Mesh Duct Burner for Micro-Cogeneration
Unit,” CANCAM-2007, Toronto, Canada, June 3–7.
3 Chase, M. W., 1998, JANNAF Thermochemical Tables, 3rd ed., American
Chemical Society, American Institute of Physics, and National Bureau of Stan-
dards, Woodbury, NY, Vol. 14, Pts. I and II.
4 Kuo, K. K., 2005, Principles of Combustion, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York.
5 Bathie, W., 1996, Fundamentals of Gas Turbines, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York.
6 Gauthier, J. E. D., Bardon, M. F., and Rao, V. K., 1996, “General Flame-
Propagation Model for Fuel droplet, Particle and Vapour Mixtures in Air,” J.
Inst. Energy, 69, pp. 59–67.
7 Turns, S. R., 2000, An Introduction to Combustion: Concepts and Applica-
tions, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York.
8 Lefebvre, A. H., 1999, Gas Turbine Combustion, 2nd ed., Taylor & Francis,
London.
9 Mellor, A. M., 1990, Design of Modern Turbine Combustor, Academic, New
York.
10 Gupta, A. K., Lilley, D. G., and Syred, N., 1984, Swirl Flows, Abacus, Lon-
don.
11 Basu, P., Kefa, C., and Jestin, L., 1999, Boilers and Burners Design and
Theory, Springer, New York.
12 Beer, J. M., and Chigier, N. A., 1972, Combustion Aerodynamics, Applied
Science, London.
13 Lilley, D. G., 1977, “Swirl Flows in Combustion: A Review,” AIAA J., 158,
pp. 1063–1078.
14 Dodds, W. J., and Bahr, D. W., 1990, Combustion System Design, Academic,
New York.
15 Mathur, M. L., and Maccallum, N. R. L., 1967, “Swirling Air Jets Issuing
From Vane Swirlers, Part 2: Enclosed Jets,” J. Inst. Fuel, 40, pp. 238–245.
16 Baukal, C. E., Jr., Gershtein, V., and Jimmyli, X., 2000, Computational Fluid
Dynamics in Industrial Combustion, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
17 Sawyer, J. W., 1985, Sawyer’s Gas Turbine Engineering Handbook, 3rd ed.,
Turbomachinery International, Norwalk, CT.
18 Blevins, R. D., 1984, Applied Fluid Dynamics Handbook, Van Nostrand Re-
inhold, New York.
19 Grobman, J. S., Dittrich, R. T., and Gravs, C. C., 1957, “Pressure Drop and Air
Flow Distribution in Gas Turbine Combustors,” Trans. ASME, 79, pp. 1601–
1607.
Fig. 13
Effect of different mixer-cone combinations as a func-
tion of FR on NOx emission „Sh2, Cap-2, and AFCB=0 deg…
Fig. 12
Effect of BR and FR on NOx and CO emissions „SM,
Cap-4, Cone-3, and AFCB=0 deg…
062301-8 / Vol. 131, NOVEMBER 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
