
--- Page 1 ---

Experiments in Fluids 10, 41-49 (1990) 
Experiments in Fluids 
9 Springer-Verlag 1990 
Quantitative imaging of concentration by planar 
laser-induced fluorescence 
I. van Cruyningen, A. Lozano, and R. K. Hanson 
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305 USA 
Abstract. The planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF) technique is 
attractive for instantaneous and non-intrusive imaging of species 
concentration in gaseous flows. This paper provides a framework for 
determining the experimental resolution in PLIF experiments and 
gives error estimates for concentration measurements in turbulent 
jet mixing experiments using biacetyl as the molecular tracer. The 
procedures to correct for experimental artifacts in the PLIF images 
are outlined. Images of the instantaneous, average, rms, and dissipa- 
tion of concentration in a turbulent jet are presented. 
1 Introduction 
Planar imaging techniques provide a non-intrusive means of 
instantaneously determining concentration at all points in a 
cut through the flow. The flow is illuminated with a laser 
sheet and images are formed from light scattered by 
molecules in the flow (Hanson 1987). Fluorescence tech- 
niques exhibit some of the largest scattering cross-sections 
and have been demonstrated in liquids (Liu et al. 1977, 
Dimotakis etal. 1983, Dahm and Dimotakis 1987, and 
Shlien 1988), reacting flows (Kychakoff et al. 1982 and Dyer 
and Crosley 1982), and non-reacting gaseous flows (Kycha- 
koffet al. 1987). Early work in quantifying the error sources 
in these techniques was presented by Kychakoff et al. (1984), 
Cattolica and Vosen (1985), Hiller (1986), Winter etal. 
(1987), and Allen (1987). Paul et al. (1990) advanced this 
work and described the selection of the optimum camera for 
a given experiment. This paper outlines the means for exper- 
imentally determining resolution limits and gives detailed 
error correction procedures. The analysis is applied to a set 
of turbulent mixing measurements using biacetyl as a tracer 
molecule in a turbulent jet, and images of the instantaneous, 
average, root-mean-square, and dissipation of concentration 
are presented. 
2 Experiment 
The setup for the turbulent jet experiment is illustrated in 
Fig. 1. Laser light from a pulsed XeF excimer laser (Questek 
2,220, 2=351 nm, ~90 mJ per 20 ns pulse with stable res- 
onator optics) was formed into a thin sheet approx. 50 cm 
high and 600 ~tm thick. This sheet was double-passed 
through the center of a nitrogen jet flowing downward at 
8.5 m/s from a 1 cm diameter vertical nozzle (Re = 8,500). A 
mirror reflected the sheet back through the flow for a second 
pass. The atmospheric pressure jet was seeded with the 
molecular tracer biacetyl (2-3 Butanedione) to a saturation 
concentration of 40 torr partial pressure (~ five percent mole 
fraction). A uniform coflow of 10 cm/s across the 60 cm x 
60 cm tunnel prevented recirculation of the biacetyl and 
provided an ambient background of pure nitrogen. 
The laser light excited the biacetyl molecules which subse- 
quently either fluoresced with a decay time of 50 ns, phos- 
phoresced with a decay time of 1.1 ms, or were collisionally 
deexcited. The broadband emitted light was imaged onto a 
cooled CCD array (Photometrics Model 81-S camera with 
384 x 576 pixel Thompson CSF TH 7882-CDA array). The 
signal from the array was digitized and stored on an IBM AT 
computer. Final corrections and processing were done on a 
Sun 3/160C and Pixar Image Computer. 
3 Laser characterization 
In order to freeze the motion of the flow, PLIF experiments 
use either pulsed lasers or shuttered cw laser sources. Hence, 
the following analysis will be done on a per laser pulse basis. 
The laser can be characterized by its spectral fluence as 
distributed over space, time, and frequency, ~(y, z, t, v) 
[J/cm 2 s Hz], using the coordinate system shown in Fig. 1. 
The time variation is important when acquiring multiple 
images from one pulse or if peak powers in the laser pulse 
can cause saturation of the fluorescence species. The fre- 
quency variation is important when the laser linewidth is 
equal to or larger than the absorption spectrum of the spe- 
cies probed; or if the laser and absorption lines have only a 
partial overlap. In these cases only part of the laser energy 
is available for inducing fluorescence. If the PLIF experi- 
ment uses a collimated sheet with a narrow laser linewidth 


--- Page 2 ---

42 
Experiments in Fluids 10 (1990) 
image acquired. For jet flows, the potential core at the nozzle 
exit provides a known, fully seeded concentration as a point 
of reference. A Hamamatsu photodiode (S1723-05) was used 
as an independent energy measurement during acquisition 
of the turbulent jet images. 
Fig. 1. Experimental apparatus 
and one image is acquired per pulse, the variations in thick- 
ness, time, and frequency can all be integrated out. Only the 
variation with height remains important. 
Optical beam irradiance for near monochromatic light 
can be specified either in terms of an energy flux or as the 
photon flux at the specified wavelength. To facilitate a shot 
noise determination, the remaining calculations in this paper 
shall be done in terms of number of photons. The laser can 
be characterized by the number of photons per unit height 
incident on the flow: 
e (y) = N qS'~ (y) 
8'(y) = 
(1) 
where the prime on ~ denotes per unit height; e(y) is the 
laser energy distribution per unit height in J/cm; h = 6.63 x 
10-34j s is Planck's constant; v is the laser centerline fre- 
quency in Hz; N~ is the total number of photons per pulse; 
and dp'i(y ) is the photon distribution in the y direction, 
normalized to integrate to 1.0. 
For unstable resonator or high gain dye lasers the nor- 
malized photon distribution, ~b'i(y), may vary significantly 
from pulse to pulse. It must be measured using a linear array 
(or a second area array) for each image acquired. Stable 
resonator lasers with lower gain media, such as the XeF 
excimer used here, can provide more consistent energy dis- 
tributions. Images of a static cell filled with biacetyl showed 
variations of less than 0.5% rms at any point in the sheet 
profile. 
The rms fluctuation in the total number of photons per 
pulse, N~ (calculated by integrating the sheet profiles), was 
approx9 1.2%. The laser energy fluctuations are small, but 
they must be accounted for when 1) performing statistics on 
groups of images, 2) comparing images from a time series, or 
3) constructing data volumes from three dimensional data 
sets. These variations can be compensated by either includ- 
ing a known concentration reference in each image, or by 
making an independent pulse energy measurement for each 
4 Species characterization 
The species monitored in PLIF experiments is either seeded 
into the flow (e.g. biacetyl, O 2 , I z, NO, or fluorescein dye), 
or it is a radical produced as a result of a reaction (e.g. CH, 
OH, C 2 , or CO). The laser light is tuned to excite a particu- 
lar electronic transition in the tracer and a fraction of the 
molecules in the appropriate lower energy level absorb the 
incident light and transfer to the higher energy level. These 
excited molecules either emit a photon through spontaneous 
emission on short time scales (fluorescence); undergo trans- 
fer to a different electronic state and then emit light on a 
much longer time scale (phosphorescence); predissociate to 
lower electronic states; or collisionally quench with other 
molecules. The total light emission per unit sheet area for 
unsaturated excitation is given by: 
N"(x, y, v, t) 
--{Photons Incident per unit Height} 
9 {Photons Absorbed per unit Length} 
9 {Photons Emitted per Photon Absorbed} 
= {N[(y) e ~v)+~sc~x,y~ax} {~(v) C(x,y)} {qs(v,t)} 
(2) 
where the double prime on N" denotes per unit area; e(v) is 
the absorption cross-section of the tracer in cm2; a is the 
Rayleigh scattering cross-section of the tracer in cm 2 (often 
negligible); C (x, y) is the concentration of the absorbing spe- 
cies in cm -3 in the lower energy level; and q~(v, t) is the 
species 'quantum efficiency' or Stern-Vollmer factor for this 
transition9 
The first term is the incident laser photon distribution 
derived in the previous section, attenuated by the absorp- 
tion and scattering the beam has already encountered. The 
absorption coefficients for many species are available in the 
extensive spectroscopy literature. The optical depth is given 
by 
1 
t 
(3) 
(~ + a) C.~ o 
where C,~ o is an estimate of the average absorbing species 
concentration along the beam path. 
If the extent of the flowfield is much less than the optical 
depth (x ~/), the absorption of the laser beam is negligible 
and the exponential term can be ignored. This significantly 
simplifies the equation and makes it linear in the absorbing 
species concentration. 
C(x, y) is the concentration in the molecular energy level 
which is being depleted by the laser pumping. For gases at 
room temperature this is almost always the ground state and 


--- Page 3 ---

I. van Cruyningen et al.: Quantitative imaging of concentration by planar laser-induced fluorescence 
43 
C(x, y) equals the species concentration. For radicals in re- 
acting flows, the laser may induce transitions from a higher 
energy level, or a significant fraction of the radical popula- 
tion may exist in other energy levels (Vincenti and Kruger 
1982). In these cases the radical concentration must be mul- 
tiplied by the appropriate Boltzmann factors to determine 
C(x, y) 
The Stern-Vollmer factor, ~h(v, t), contains all the details 
of the photon conversion process. It is a function of frequen- 
cy and time because the excited species can fluoresce and 
phosphoresce into several different frequencies with different 
timescales. For diatomic or simple triatomic molecules the 
Stern-Vollmer factor can be estimated from the Einstein 
spontaneous (A) and stimulated (B) emission coefficients. A 
two-level model was developed by Piepmeier (1972) and 
extended for biacetyl emission by LiU et al. (1988). If 1 de- 
notes the lower level, 2 the upper level, Q the quenching rate, 
and I the laser intensity, 
A21 
(4) 
qn = Q21 +A21 +(B12+B21) I 
Unfortunately the largest term in the denominator, Q21, is 
seldom known and difficult to predict. 
For species stable at room temperature, this factor, ~/s, 
can be established by measuring the emission from a static 
cell for known species concentrations and pulse energies. It 
should be independent of biacetyt concentration unless 
self-quenching occurs. The variation of emission with bi- 
acetyl concentration was measured in an atmospheric pres- 
sure static cell filled with nitrogen. For excitation with 
1.4 x 1016 photons/cm 2 at 351 nm the emission is a linear 
function of concentration with 6.8 • 109 (___3%) photons/ 
cm 2 emitted per torr of biacetyl partial pressure. This agrees 
with the measurements of Liu et al. (1988) for 435 nm excita- 
tion. The Stern-Vollmer factor should also be independent of 
laser power except near saturation of the transition. In the 
same static cell experiment the biacetyl emission was mea- 
sured to be a linear function of incident photon density for 
the laser energy levels used in ~he image acquisition. For a 
biacetyl partial pressure of 32 torr and excitation at 351 nm, 
1.3 x 10-5 (_+2%) photons/cm 2 were emitted per photon/ 
cm z incident. Neither self-quenching nor saturation oc- 
curred for the species concentrations or laser energies used 
in the turbulent jet experiments. 
A prism spectrograph was used to determine the biacetyl 
emission spectrum and photomultiplier measurements were 
used to determine the phosphorescent and fluorescent life- 
times (van Cruyningen, 1990). The prism spectrograph al- 
lowed simultaneous measurements of both the fluorescence 
and phosphorescence emission for wavelengths between 430 
and 600 nm. The spectrograph dispersion was first calibrat- 
ed with a mercury lamp and then the variation in the array 
quantum efficiency over the wavelength range was deter- 
mined from a tungsten source. Finally a static cell filled with 
5% mole fraction biacetyl in one atmosphere nitrogen was 
excited by the excimer laser at 351 nm and the emission 
o 
~ 
3 
8 
8 ~2 
,'7 
''''l''''l'''' 
Fluorescence 
2.0 
i,,,,i,,,,i,,,, 
t 
Phosphorescence 
0.5 
, , ~ ,  
i i i i I i i i i 
0 
1.5 
~- 
o 
x 
v 
8 
1.0 
o ~ 
g_ 
425 
450 
475 
500 
525 
550 
575 
Wavelength (nm) 
Fig. 2. Normalized biacetyl emission spectra for 351 nm excitation. 
Fluorescence and phosphorescence spectra normalized to unit area 
imaged into the spectrograph. The rescaled emission spectra, 
Ffz(v) and Fph (v), (Fig. 2) were normalized so that the inte- 
grals under each curve are equal. The ratio of phosphores- 
cence to fluorescence emission integrated over time and 
wavelength, Kph/Kfl, was measured to be 78 (_+ 5%) in rea- 
sonable agreement with the measurements of Okabe and 
Noyes (1957). The measured Stern-Vollmer factor can be 
expressed as: 
tls (v, t) = K fl Fy l (v) exp ( - t/z yl ) + Kph Fph (V) exp (-- t/zph) 
(5) 
where Ffl(v) and Fph(V) are the normalized fluorescent and 
phosphorescent emission spectra (Fig. 2); Kit and Kph re- 
present the strengths of the two types of emission; and 
zyt~50 ns and zph~l.1 ms are the 1/e decay times for the 
fluorescent and phosphorescent emission respectively. 
5 Collection optics 
characterization 
The collection optics serve to image the fluorescence emis- 
sion onto the camera. This usually includes one or more 
camera lenses, a filter to remove scattered laser light, and 
possibly an intensifier with fiberoptic coupler to provide 
signal gain. In addition to the signal level, the spatial resolu- 
tion, geometric distortion, and flat field non-uniformity of 
the optics must be examined. This discussion summarizes 
procedures for experimentally determining the appropriate 
performance parameters; a more detailed discussion is given 
in Paul et al. (1990). 
The number of photons per pixel reaching the camera is 
given by 
Npp (x, y, v, t) 
(6) 
= {Emission per unit Area} {Area} ~ 
--- 
" 
~Solicl Angle~ 
( 
47r 
) 
9 {Gain or Loss} {Spectral Filter} {Temporal Filter} 
={N~'(x,y,v,t)+N~'(x,y,v,t)} {LxLy ) (4nz2) {GF(v)T(t)) 


--- Page 4 ---

44 
Experiments in Fluids t0 (1990) 
where N[' (x, y, v) is any background emission per unit area, 
including scattered laser light, dark current, and ambient 
light; L~ and Ly are the dimensions of the measuring volume 
per pixel related to the pixel size, l~, and magnification, m, by 
Lx=lx/m; r t is the radius of the limiting aperture in the 
collection optics; zl is the distance from the laser sheet to the 
limiting aperture; G allows for the losses from lens and filter 
surfaces (~ 4% for normal incidence on an uncoated surface) 
and the photon gain from intensification (if used); F (v) is the 
spectral transmittance function of any filters used and/or the 
wavelength shift produced by the intensifier; T(t) is the 
transmissicm function of the shutter or gating electronics 
which can be integrated out if it is longer than the longest 
species emission lifetime. 
The fraction of the light emitted by the tracer species 
which is actually observed in the camera is controlled by the 
limiting aperture (often the first lens) in the collection optics. 
The signal level per pixel is related to the lens f # (ratio of 
focal length to lens diameter) and the magnification, m, by 
the following relation: 
L L 
r2 
l~ly 
1 
Npp(X,y,v,t) oc 
x y 4z { oc 16(1+m)2 (f4e)2 
(7) 
For a fixed laser energy and collection optics f ~, the 
signal levels will vary inversely with the sheet height. If the 
laser sheet fills the field of view, the signal levels scale as 
m/(1 + m) z. 
For a fixed field of view, the signal levels scale inversely 
as the square of the f # and the signal to noise ratio will 
scale as the inverse of f ~ in the shot noise limit. Low f 
number lenses are thus very desirable. The effective focal 
length of a given lens can be reduced by extension tubes or 
with the appropriate close-up lens. However, low f ~ lenses 
provide a very small depth of field and require accurate 
focussing as discussed below. 
Commerical camera lenses are designed for infinite conju- 
gate ratios (m --* 0) and to match the spatial resolution of 
film (~ 6 ~tm grain size). In PLIF experiments the magnifica- 
tion is often much larger and arrays with large pixels are 
desirable for improved signal levels. Using these lenses with 
large-pixel arrays results in aliasing of all frequencies above 
the Nyquist frequency of the array, i.e. the information in the 
high spatial frequencies folds over into the lower frequencies 
causing spurious signals (Pratt 1978). Low f~'s 
reduce 
aliasing problems by degrading lens performance, but the 
contrast transfer function at the Nyquist frequency is also 
reduced (van Cruyningen, 1990). 
The target shown in Fig. 3 was developed to aid in fo- 
cussing and to allow direct measurement of the magnifica- 
tion, contrast transfer function, and image registration under 
experimental conditions. It is produced from a PostScripff M 
program and can be readily printed at low cost by commer- 
cial printers at 2,400 lines per inch on a Linotronic TM printer. 
The aspect ratio, the overall size, and the line thicknesses can 
be adjusted to match the array size, field of view, and pixel 
Fig. 3. Focussing target and camera image of target 
dimensions in the experiment, respectively. This target is 
aligned with the laser sheet in the flow facility and the three 
center fans are used for the coarse focussing. As the target 
comes into focus, contrast reversals, as well as Moire Pat- 
terns, will appear in the four corner fans. The contrast rever- 
sal is illustrated in Goodman (1968) and is analyzed in Born 
and Wolf (1980). The width of e/~ch black or white line in the 
corner fans is four pixels at the maximum radius. The lens 
and array cutoff frequencies are matched when the first con- 
trast reversal occurs at one quarter of the corner fan radii, i.e. 
the point where the rays are one pixel width wide. When the 
contrast reversal occurs at the same radius in all four fans, 
the array will be square with the target. The center fan is 
curved so the spatial frequency varies from 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, and 
2.0 line pairs per pixel at the top, one-third, two-thirds, and 
bottom of the target, respectively. This fan allows detailed 
measurement of the contrast transfer function under actual 
experimental conditions. 
The collection optics must be checked for two additional 
possible errors, namely geometric distortion and flat field 
non-uniformities. Short focal length lenses produce barrel 
distortion. The regularly spaced crosses in the target of 
Fig. 3 provide registration points to allow calculation of 
warping coefficients during image correction. Further, at low 
f #'s, points far from the optical axis do not present the 
limiting aperture with the same solid angle as points close to 
the axis. Thus a uniformly lit target will appear dimmer near 
the edges of the image. This effect can be corrected by divid- 
ing the flowfield images by an image of a flat field. The flat 
field can be produced by either 1) an array of a large number 
of light emitting diodes behind a frosted glass plate, 2) an 
integrating sphere, or 3) a uniformly lit fluorescent surface. 
6 Camera characterization 
The camera converts the incident photons to electrical 
charge, which in turn produces an output voltage. This 


--- Page 5 ---

I. van Cruyningen et al.: Quantitative imaging of concentration by planar laser-induced fluorescence 
45 
voltage is amplified, digitized, and stored on a computer. 
Following Janesick et al. (1985) or Janesick et al. (1987), the 
digital signal level observed per pixel is 
No(x, y)= {Incident Photons} {Electrons per Photon} 
9 {Volts per Electron} {Amplification} 
9 {Digital Units per Volt} 
= S Npp(X, y, v) WE(Y) SvA 1 a 2 dv 
(8) 
v 
where Npp is the number of incident photons as derived in the 
previous section integrated over the exposure time; t/E is the 
quantum efficiency of the array in electrons per photon; S v 
is the array sensitivity in volts per electron; A 1 is the analog 
amplification of the signal; A2 is the analog to digital conver- 
sion setting in digital numbers (DN) per volt. 
The last three constants are normally grouped as K = 
(S o A1 A2 )- 1 [e-/DN], since they depend only on the camera 
settings and can be measured once for an experiment. They 
can be experimentally determined by the photon-transfer 
technique for shot-noise limited operation. For the Photo- 
metrics camera at operating conditions K ~ 1.3 [e-/DN] and 
a R ~ 18 DN = 24 e-. The dark current was measured to be 
less than ten counts per minute at 153 K, so for the milli- 
second exposure times used, the dark current is negligible 
relative to the analog amplifier noise. 
The variation of quantum efficiency with wavelength can 
be measured with a greybody source (tungsten lamp) and a 
prism spectrograph (van Cruyningen, 1990). Thompson 
specifies a quantum efficiency of ~ 30% for the array at the 
peak of the biacetyl phosphorescence (520 nm). The pixel-to- 
pixel uniformity for flat field illumination was measured to 
be better than 1%. The linearity of the array sensitivity, Sv, 
was observed to be better than one-half of one percent in a 
series of images with different exposure times. The linearity 
of the analog amplifier gain, A~, was checked in a series of 
exposures of a constant light source, taken at different gains. 
The deviation from linearity was less than 0.5%. Finally the 
reciprocity, i.e. a short exposure at high gain vs. a long 
exposure at low gain, was verified to be within 1.0%. 
7 Experimental resolution 
The derivations of the previous sections will now be applied 
to find values for the six parameters describing a PLIF 
experiment, namely the spatial resolution, the spatial dy- 
namic range, the minimum detectable signal, the signal dy- 
namic range, the temporal resolution, and the framing rate. 
The measuring volume size is determined by the magnifi- 
cation of the collection optics, the pixel size, and the sheet 
thickness9 For a field of view of 45 nozzle diameters (45 cm) 
the magnification was 1/34. The camera pixel size (23 x 
23 ~tm) gives a measuring volume of 0.8 x 0.8 x 0.6 mm per 
pixel. The last dimension comes from the sheet thickness as 
measured by traversing a knife edge across the beam and 
measuring its attenuation with a photodiode. 
In accordance with the Nyquist theorem, the smallest 
observable spatial scale is twice the measuring volume size. 
The largest observable spatial scale is of the order of the field 
of view. For a 576 • 384 pixel array the spatial dynamic 
range is thus 288 x 192. 
The minimum detectable signal occurs for a signal to 
noise ratio of 1.0. This corresponds to the noise floor, 
~rg=18 DN=24 e-. Using r/E=0.3 at 520 nm (the peak of 
the biacetyl emission) in Eq. (8), gives Npp > 80 photons per 
pixel. To find the equivalent biacetyl concentration, the 
equations from the earlier sections are invoked. The collec- 
tion optics consisted of one f ~ 1.2 lens with a two diopter 
close-up lens to give an effective f ~ of 1.09. No filter was 
required to block scattered light from the laser since the 
quantum efficiency of the array is effectively zero at 351 nm 
(F (v) = 1 in Eq. (6). The 50 ms shutter time was much longer 
than the biacetyl phosphorescence lifetime, so all the emis- 
sion is collected and T(t) = 1. The lens consisted of a number 
of elements in several groups, but the internal surfaces are 
coated. The loss is thus taken to be G~0.92. Using a magni- 
fication of 1/34 in Eq. (6) gives 2.4 x 10 -7 photons collected 
per pixel per (photon/cm 2) emitted. About one out of every 
four million photons emitted per cm z by the biacetyl is 
imaged onto a single pixel for this large magnification. For 
Npp >= 80 photons per pixel requires N~'> 3.3 x 10 a photons/ 
cm 2, neglecting the background emission. 
The emission versus laser power data gives 1.3 x 10 -5 
photons/cm 2 emitted per incident photon/cm 2. For 32 torr 
partial pressure biacetyl, Eq. (2) gives c~ qs ~- 1.1 x 10- 23 cm 2 . 
This value may now be used to estimate the corresponding 
biacetyl concentration in the imaging experiments. A laser 
intensity of 100 mJ at 351 nm (8.55 x 1014 Hz) over a 45 cm 
high sheet gives 4.0 x 1015 photons incident per cm height9 
Using N" > 3.3 • 108 in Eq. 4.1, the minimum detectable bi- 
acetyl concentration is 7.5 x 1015 cm-3 or 280 ppm. 
The signal dynamic range is limited by the lesser of the 
range in detectable biacetyl concentrations, the pixel well 
depth, or the analog to digital convertor range. The satura- 
tion biacetyl concentration is 50,000 ppm, so a minimum 
detectable signal of 280 ppm gives a dynamic range of 180. 
The pixel well depth is 350,000 e- and the camera noise floor 
is 24 e- which gives a dynamic range of 14,600. Finally the 
A/D convertor digitizes to 14 bits which gives a dynamic 
range of 16,000. The signal dynamic range is limited by the 
large field of view in these experiments. For fixed laser ener- 
gy and fixed collection optics f #, the signal dynamic range 
varies inversely with the height of the laser sheet9 
The 50 ms shutter time in this experiment was significant- 
ly longer than the phosphorescence lifetime, so the latter 
limits the temporal resolution. The phosphorescence decays 
to its 1/e value in 1.1 ms (van Cruyningen, 1990). If one 
* For excitation at 420 nm, c~ ~ 8 x 10 -20 ClTI 2 (Okabe and Noyes, 
1957) and qs -~ 0.15 (Epstein, 1974). These values provide much 
higher conversion efficiencies compared to pumping at 351 nm, but 
a 420 nm excitation source was not available at the time of the 
experiment 


--- Page 6 ---

46 
Experiments in Fluids 10 (1990) 
adopts a stringent blurring criteria that not more than two 
pixels should detect emission from the same fluid element, 
i.e. a fluid element does not move more than one measuring 
volume distance during the exposure time, then the phos- 
phorescence lifetime limits the flow velocities to less than 
2 m/s at this magnification. This is valid for downstream 
distances greater than 20 jet diameters. 
The framing rate in this experiment was 0.03 Hz since 
double-correlated sampling was required to reduce the noise 
in the charge to voltage conversion during the array readout. 
8 Image corrections 
The analysis of the experimental components given in 
sections 3-6 provides the framework for correction of the 
experimental images. The errors accumulate as the signal 
propagates through the experiment, so they are best correct- 
ed in the reverse order. The functional dependence of all the 
corrections is given below. Functions of x and y are images 
which result in image operations; functions of either x or y 
are vectors which result in row or column operations on an 
image; functions of digital number (DN) are functional 
remappings of the image data; and constants result in scal- 
ing of the entire image. 
- First the flow field image is divided by an image of the 
non-uniformities in pixel response, U (x, y). This is an im- 
age of a flat field taken without any lenses in front of the 
array. If the camera response is not a linear function of 
incident light, this correction will be a function of DN as 
well: U(x, y, DN). This will necessitate a (possibly differ- 
ent) remapping at each pixel. Point defects in the array, i.e. 
'dead pixels' are replaced with the average value of their 
neighbors. 
The previous result is warped using the image registration 
function, R (x, y; x', y'), to correct for an3' geometric distor- 
tion in the collection optics. This function is a bilinear 
interpolation whose coefficients are determined from the 
registration points in an image of the focussing target. 
- The geometrically corrected image is divided by the fiat 
field non-uniformity of the collection optics, FF(x, y). To 
determine FF (x, y), an image of a uniform light source is 
taken with the identical optics as used in the flow field 
image acquisition. The corrections described above are 
then applied to the fiat field image to produce FF (x, y). 
For lowf # lens configurations points located off the axis 
in the object plane view a smaller solid angle of the lens. 
This deviation follows the Lambertian cosine law. 
Following the fiat-field correction, the background light 
N[,'(x, y), is subtracted. This image is acquired with no 
tracer in the flow, but the laser still firing and is corrected 
with the steps described above. This correction includes 
subtraction of the dark current and subtraction of any 
scattered laser light. 
- The Stern-Vollmer factor may not be a linear function of 
concentration if self-quenching occurs, or it may not be a 
linear function of laser energy near saturation intensities. 
In these situations each pixel must be remapped using the 
inverse of the actual functional dependencies, N (N) and 
I(I). 
- If the optical depth of the seeded flow is of the same order 
as the flow width, corrections for beam attenuation must 
be applied. From Eq. 4.1, the x dependence is 
N~'(x) oc e -('+`) I c(x) a,, C(x) 
(9) 
The multiplicative correction factor, OD(x), is given by 
solving the following equation pixel by pixel in a predic- 
tor-corrector scheme following the path of the laser beam: 
OD(x) = (e -('+') s c(x) ax)-1 
(10) 
The initial estimate for C(x) is the pixel value where the 
beam enters the image. An estimate of the correction, and 
thus C(x), is calculated stepping forward pixel by pixel. 
The estimate is derived by taking a derivative of digital 
data and thus is very susceptible to noise. Averaging over 
several rows or fitting earlier points with a cubic spline 
improves the result. 
- The laser sheet is normally not uniformly distributed with 
height. This results in a laser sheet correction where each 
row in the flowfield image is divided by r (Y). If the laser 
sheet is not collimated, a sheot image is required for this 
correction. The sheet image must be processed using the 
aforementioned procedures. 
- Finally, the images have to be normalized by the number 
of photons in the laser pulse, N~. This is simply a multipli- 
cation of the entire image by a constant. 
Flat Field 
w/o Lens 
Target 
Image 
Flat Field 
w/ Lens 
Background ~.. 
Light 
Stern- 
Vollmer 
Optical 
Depth 
Sheet 
Profile 
Laser 
Energy 
Flowfield 
,.. 
Image 
U(x,y) 
R(x,y; ; x',y') 
/ U(x,y) 
~" 
/ U(x,y) 
N-t(N)I-I(I) 
OD(x) 
N;(y) 
Ni 
/ U(x,y) 
- N ~' (x, y) 
r 
/ N;(y) 
~ [ [ 
Fig. 4. Image correction procedure 
R(x, y; ; x', y') ] ~
~
 
R(x, y; ; x', y') ] ~
-
~
 
II 
~ [ 
NI(N)I'I(I) 
/ N i 


--- Page 7 ---

I. van Cruyningen et al.: Quantitative imaging of concentration by planar laser-induced fluorescence 
47 
These correction steps are illustrated in Fig. 4. This is an 
extensive list of possible error sources and not all corrections 
will be applicable in every experiment. If, for example, the 
geometric distortion in the collection optics is negligible, the 
two flat field corrections can be combined. In the applica- 
tions of these corrections numerous division steps occur. If 
the divisor is a small number at any pixel in the image, the 
operation will produce very large values at that pixel. These 
operations will tend to accentuate the noise in the darker 
areas of the original image. This effect can be overcome by 
using Weiner filtering techniques as described in Pratt 
(1978). 
9 Results 
Figure 5 a shows an image of the first 45 diameters of an 
isothermal turbulent jet (Re = 8,500). To the left of the image 
are three cross-sections at the locations shown by lines in the 
image and to the right of the image is a streamwise section. 
Figure 5 b is a fully corrected image. The instantaneous con- 
centrations were measured to 1.5 % accuracy for points with- 
in an image and approx. 2% between images. 
Figure 6a shows the mean concentration obtained by 
averaging 25 instantaneous frames. The centerline values in 
the mean image were fit to the self-similarity law (Tennekes 
and Lumley 1978), 
K 
C(x, 0) = Co, 
, 
(11) 
where Xo is a virtual origin for the jet; Co is the centerline 
concentration at the virtual origin; and K is the decay con- 
stant. 
Rescaling of the images according to self-similarity 
(Fig. 6 b) allows pixel values at all downstream locations to 
be directly compared. The cross stream profiles of the mean 
jet tend towards a Gaussian profile, whereas the instanta- 
neous profiles have very steep edges. 
The root-mean-square concentration fluctuations shown 
in Figure 7 a were calculated by subtracting the individual 
images from the mean image, squaring and summing the 
difference images, and dividing by the total number of im- 
ages. Large-scale motions of the jet produce most of the 
fluctuations near the jet exit, but variations internal to the jet 
dominate further downstream. On average, the rms concen- 
tration fluctuations at a pixel were 34% of the mean value 
at that pixel. 
Figure 7 b is an instantaneous image of 
e = \a~] 
kay/ 
which is an approximation to the scalar dissipation in this 
jet. The measuring volume dimensions are approx, eight 
times the Kolmogorov scale size at forty diameters down- 
stream, so the gradients are taken over several Kolmogorov 
scales. Dowling (1988) has shown this may be sufficient to 
resolve all the spatial scales in the flow. The factor of two in 
(12) is due to the assumption that the radial and axial gradi- 
ents are equal (Namazian et al. 1988). Figure 7c is an aver- 
a 
b 
Fig. 5a and b. Instantaneous concentration in a turbulent jet; a image of biacetyl concentration in first 45 diameters of a Re= 8,500 nitrogen 
jet seeded with 5% mole fraction biacetyl; b image corrected for lens response, background light, laser sheet variations, and laser energy 


--- Page 8 ---

48 
Experiments in Fluids 10 (1990) 
a 
b 
Fig. 6a and b. Mean concentration in a turbulent jet; a concentration averaged over 25 frames; b mean concentration image scaled according 
to self-similarity constants determined from a centerline fit of the data 
a 
b 
c 
Fig. 7a-c. RMS concentration fluctuations and dissipation in a turbulent jet; a RMS fluctuations calculated over 25 frames; b estimate of 
instantaneous dissipation; c average of 25 dissipation images 


--- Page 9 ---

I. van Cruyningen et al.: Quantitative imaging of concentration by planar laser-induced fluorescence 
49 
age of 25 instantaneous dissipation images. Note the lines of 
maximum dissipation are aligned with the principal axis of 
strain in this flow. 
10 Conclusions 
A framework for analyzing the propagation of signals 
through a PLIF experiment has been developed. The error 
sources have been quantified and the image corrections 
detailed. An experiment involving concentration measure- 
ments of the molecular tracer biacetyl in a turbulent jet has 
illustrated the application of the experimental method. 
Images of the instantaneous, average, root-mean-square, 
and dissipation of concentration illustrate the investigative 
power and resolution of the PLIF technique. This flow visu- 
alization technique can provide accurate, quantitative data 
at all points in a plane simultaneously which is of great value 
in studies of mixing and turbulent structure. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful discussions with J.M. 
Seitzman, Dr. P.H. Paul, Prof. M.G. Mungal, and A. Spilman of 
the High Temperature Gasdynamics Laboratory. This research was 
sponsored by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Aerospace 
Sciences Directorate, with J. Tishkoff as the Technical Monitor. 
References 
Allen, M. G. 1987: Digital imaging techniques for single and multi- 
phase reacting flows. PhD Thesis in Mechanical Engineering, 
Stanford University 
Born M.; Wolf, E. 1980: Principles of optics. New York: Pergamon 
Cattolica, R. J.; Vosen, S. R. 1985: Two dimensional measurements 
of OH in a constant volume combustion chamber. 20th sym. 
(int.) on combustion, Pittsburgh 1985 
Dahm, W. J. A.; Dimotakis, P. E. 1987: Measurements of entrain- 
ment and mixing in turbulent jets. AIAA J 24, 1216-1233 
Dimotakis, P. E.; Miake-Lye, R. C.; Papantoniou, D. A. 1983: 
Structure and dynamics of round turbulent jets. Phys Fluids 26, 
11, 3185-3192 
Dowling, D. 1988: Mixing in gas phase turbulent jets. PhD Thesis 
in Mechanical Engineering, California Inst. of Technology 
Dyer, M. J.; Crosley, D. R. 1982: Two-dimensional imaging of OH 
laser-induced fluorescence in a flame. Opt Lett 7, 8, 382-384 
Epstein, A. H. 1974: Fluorescent gaseous tracers for three dimen- 
sional flow visualization. GTL, Mass. Inst. of Technology, Re- 
port no. 117 
Goodman, J. W. 1968: Introduction to fourier optics. New York: 
McGraw-Hill 
Hanson, R. K. 1987: Combustion diagnostics: Planar imaging tech- 
niques. In: Twenty-first symposium (International) on combus- 
tion. The Combustion Institute 1677-1691 
Hiller, B. 1986: Combined planar measurements of velocity and 
pressure fields in compressible gas flows using laser-induced 
iodine fluorescence. PhD Thesis in Mechanical Engineering, 
Stanford University 
Janesick, J.; Klaasen, K.; Elliot, T. 1985: CCD charge collection 
efficiency and the photon transfer technique. In: Solid State 
Imaging Arrays. (eds. Prettyjohns, K. N.; Dereniak, E. L.) Proc. 
SPIE 570, 7-19 
Janesick, J. R.; Elliot, T.; Collins, S.; Blouke, M. M.; Freeman, J. 
1987: Scientific charge coupled devices. Opt Eng 26, 8, 622-714 
Kychakoff, G.; Howe, R. D.; Hanson, R. K.; McDaniel, J. C. 1982: 
Quantitative visualization of combustion species in a plane. 
Appl Opt 21, 18, 3225-3227 
Kychakoff, G.; Howe, R. D.; Hanson, R. K. 1984: Quantitative flow 
visualization technique for measurements in combustion gases. 
Appl Opt 23, 5, 704-712 
Kychakoff, G.; Paul, P. H.; van Cryningen, I. L.; Hanson, R. K. 
1987: Movies and 3-d images of flow fields using planar laser- 
induced fluorescence. Appl Opt 26, 2498-2500 
Liu, H.-T.; Lin, J.-T.; Delisi, D. P.; Robben, E A. 1977: Feasibility 
study of a dye-fluorescence technique for measuring concentra- 
tions in fluids. NBS Special Publication no. 484, Proc. of the 
symposium on flow in open channels and closed conduits held 
at NBS, Gaithersburg, MD, Feb 23-25 
Liu, J. B.; Pan, Q.; Liu, C. S.; Shi, J. R. 1988: Principles of flow 
diagnostics by laser induced biacetyl phosphorescence. Exp Flu- 
ids 6, 505-513 
Namazian, N.; Scheffer, R. W.; Kelly, J. 1988: Scalar dissipation 
measurements in the developing region of a jet. Comb and 
Flame 74, 2, 147 160 
Okabe, H.; Noyes, W. AI 1957: The relative intensities of fluores- 
cence and phosphorescence in biacetyl vapor. J Am Chem Soc 
79, 801-806 
Paul, P. H.; van Cruyningen, I.; Hanson, R. K.; Kychakoff, G. 1990: 
High resolution digital flow-field imaging of jets. Exp Fluids (in 
press) 
Piepmeier, E. H. 1972: Theory of laser saturated atomic resonance. 
Spectrochimica Acta 27B, 431 
Pratt, W. K. 1978: Digital image processing. New York: Wiley Inter- 
science 
Shlien, D. J. 1988: Instantaneous concentration field measurement 
technique from flow visualization photographs. Exp Fluids 6, 
541 546 
Tennekes, H.; Lumley, J. L. 1972: A first course in turbulence. Cam- 
bridge, MA: MIT Press 
van Cruyningen, I. J. 1990: Quantitative planar laser-induced fluo- 
rescence imaging in turbulent gaseous jets. PhD Thesis in Me- 
chanical Engineering, Stanford University 
Vincenti, W. G.; Kruger, C. K. 1982: Physical gas dynamics. Mala- 
bar, Florida: R. E. Kreiger 
Winter, M.; Lam, J. K.; Long, M. B. 1987 : Techniques for high-speed 
digital imaging of gas concentrations in turbulent flows. Exp 
Fluids 5, 177-183 
Received May 22, 1990 
