
--- Page 1 ---

Review of modern low emissions combustion technologies for aero gas
turbine engines
Yize Liu a,*, Xiaoxiao Sun a, Vishal Sethi a, Devaiah Nalianda a, Yi-Guang Li a, Lu Wang b
a Propulsion Engineering Centre, Cranﬁeld University, Bedfordshire MK43 0AL, UK
b AECC Hunan Aviation Powerplant Research Institute, Zhuzhou, Hunan, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Low emissions
Technologies
Combustion
Aero engines
Rich burn
Lean burn
A B S T R A C T
Pollutant emissions from aircraft in the vicinity of airports and at altitude are of great public concern due to their
impact on environment and human health. The legislations aimed at limiting aircraft emissions have become
more stringent over the past few decades. This has resulted in an urgent need to develop low emissions com-
bustors in order to meet legislative requirements and reduce the impact of civil aviation on the environment.
This article provides a comprehensive review of low emissions combustion technologies for modern aero gas
turbines. The review considers current high Technologies Readiness Level (TRL) technologies including Rich-Burn
Quick-quench Lean-burn (RQL), Double Annular Combustor (DAC), Twin Annular Premixing Swirler combustors
(TAPS), Lean Direct Injection (LDI). It further reviews some of the advanced technologies at lower TRL. These
include NASA multi-point LDI, Lean Premixed Prevaporised (LPP), Axially Staged Combustors (ASC) and Variable
Geometry Combustors (VGC).
The focus of the review is placed on working principles, a review of the key technologies (includes the key
technology features, methods of realising the technology, associated technology advantages and design chal-
lenges, progress in development), technology application and emissions mitigation potential. The article con-
cludes the technology review by providing a technology evaluation matrix based on a number of combustion
performance criteria including altitude relight auto-ignition ﬂashback, combustion stability, combustion efﬁ-
ciency, pressure loss, size and weight, liner life and exit temperature distribution.
1. Introduction
The main pollutants emitted by aircraft are in the form of NOx
(comprising NO and NO2), Unburned Hydrocarbons UHC, CO, Sulphur
Oxides (SOx) and Particulate matter PM that contains mainly smoke/
soot. The effect of emissions on human health is summarised in Table 1
[152]. Aviation emissions generally have two main impacts: one on the
local air quality, speciﬁcally in the vicinity of airports; and the second on
global climate. In the vicinity of airports, the pollutant emission of pri-
mary concern is NOx (NO and NO2), is produced by aircraft, ground
services equipment and access road trafﬁc. Aircraft NOx emissions
contribute between 70% and 80% of total airport NOx emissions. A
comprehensive global prediction of future emission trends that affect
local air quality has been conducted by the Committee on Aviation
Environmental Protection (CAEP) [152]. As shown in Fig. 1, results
indicate that NOx emissions below 3000 feet will increase from 0.25
million metric tonnes (Mt) in 2006, as the baseline, to between 0.52Mt
and 0.72Mt in 2036. NOx emitted by aircraft at low altitude contributes
to the formation of the ozone that leads to human health issues and local
air quality, whereas at high altitude NOx depletes ozone and results in
the increase in the ground level Ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
The early combustor technology: ‘conventional’ combustors have
been evolved over seven decades. Combustion is initiated in the primary
zone with a fuel-air ratio close to stoichiometric value that leads to
maximum heat release. Air that is initially bypassed from the combustor
dome entry is then gradually admitted into the primary, secondary and
tertiary zones to enable stable and complete combustion process and
control of exit temperature distribution. The schematic drawing is shown
in Fig. 52. Older conventional combustors contain longer liners (with
length to dome ratio is greater than 2.0) hence resulting in longer resi-
dence time to assure high combustion efﬁciency. Pressure atomisers with
diffusion based combustion were also extensively employed as it was
advantageous in having wider stability limits, strong ﬂashback resistance
and improved engine operability. On the other hand, the less uniform
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: yizeliu.liu@cranﬁeld.ac.uk (Y. Liu).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Progress in Aerospace Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/paerosci
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2017.08.001
Received 4 November 2016; Received in revised form 4 July 2017; Accepted 22 August 2017
Available online 12 September 2017
0376-0421/© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45


--- Page 2 ---

fuel-air mixing resulted in higher local temperature and rich stoichiom-
etry, leading to large NOx production and soot formation. The general
emissions levels for conventional combustors (thrust levels over 26.7kN)
are greater than CAEP/1 or ICAO 1986 standard, as summarised
in Table 2.
Over the past 40–50 years, the aviation industry has been capable of
reducing fuel consumption by 70% while also limiting noise and
reducing gaseous CO and HC emissions by approximately 50 and 90%,
respectively [15]. This is mainly due to technology improvement in
materials and cooling that enable engines to operate at higher Overall
Pressure Ratios OPRs and Turbine Entry Temperatures (TET) to increase
thermal efﬁciency which in turn reduces the engine speciﬁc fuel con-
sumption (SFC) for economic beneﬁt. This leads to high combustor inlet
temperature and pressure. These wide environmental beneﬁts (e.g. CO2
reduction) achieved through higher OPR and TET therefore also led to an
increase in NOx emission. Until 1970s, when larger OPR engines were
developed less attention was paid to NOx emissions until serious con-
cerns were raised by the general public on the effects of NOx on human
health and climate.
These concerns gave rise to the ﬁrst ofﬁcial aircraft emissions regu-
lations, which were imposed in the 1960s and 1970s. Later the Interna-
tional Civil Aeronautics Organisation (ICAO) adopted a standard that
applied to all in-production engines in 1986, namely the CAEP/1 or ICAO
1986 standard. ICAO has updated and published more stringent stan-
dards for NOx emissions during subsequent ICAO meetings. These reg-
ulations drive the development of low emissions technology and the
consequence of which is that several emission reduction targets were
implemented worldwide to fulﬁl the future legislative requirements.
The development of low emission combustor concepts for aero en-
gines has been underway since the mid-1970s based on the experience
gained from single annular conventional combustors (sometimes referred
to as PreLEC, such as in Ref. [10]). The improvements of fuel injection
devices along with combustion and dilution ﬂow optimisation led to the
state-of-the-art (at the time) Low-Emissions Combustor (LEC) technology
[11–14], termed as ‘old single annular’ that is distinct from old con-
ventional combustor, in Fig. 2 which also summarises the emissions level
as a function of engine OPRs for different CAEP standards. Lean dome
combustion was later followed by the creation of Double Annular
Combustor (DAC) being considered as an alternative to LEC. The DAC
technology enabled achieving up to 60% reduction from the ﬁrst Inter-
national Civil Aeronautics Organisation (ICAO) standard as well as a 50%
reduction in cruise NOx [15]. In order to further reduce emissions, lean
partially premixed combustion was introduced. This was achieved
through the inception of Twin Annular Premixing Swirler TAPS combus-
tors. This technology was developed later as the next generation for
further emission reduction and achieved a remarkable reduction of 60%
against CAEP/6. In the meantime, some advanced rich dome combustion
technologies were developed based on experience gained from LEC
technology. Typical examples include the Pratt & Whitney P&W TALON
series and Rolls Royce Phase 5. Both TAPS and advanced rich burn
technologies feature a single annular version, shown as ‘current single
annular’ in Fig. 2.
Future aero gas turbines will develop technologies to improve the fuel
efﬁciency by increasing the engine Overall Pressure Ratios OPRs (from
25 to 60–75) when compared with generation of previous engines. The
higher OPRs have made it challenging to contain NOx level without
changing the fuel injection concept. Therefore, some new concepts such
as NASA multi-point injection are currently under development. Future
high OPR engines pose a design challenge for premixed combustion due
to risks of auto-ignition and ﬂashback. These risks can be mitigated by
Lean Direction Injection such as Rolls Royce LDI that is under develop-
ment and approaching a Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of 7. The
Nomenclature
ACARE
Advisory Council for Aviation Research and Innovation
in Europe
ACS
Axial Controlled Stoichiometry
ASC
Axially Staged Combustor
CAEE
Committee on Aircraft Engine Emissions
CAEP
Committee on Aviation Environmental Protection
CAN
Committee on Aircraft Noise
CMC
Ceramic Matrix Composite
COMAC
Commercial Aircraft Corporation of China
CRZ
Corner Recirculation Zone
DAC
Double Annular Combustor
ECCP
Experimental Clean Combustor Program
EEC
Electronic Engine Control
EI
Emission Index
ERA
Environmentally Responsible Aviation
ETS
Emissions Trading Scheme
FAA
Federal Aviation Administration
FAR
Fuel Air Ratio
FBN
Fuel Bonded Nitrogen
HC
Hydrocarbon
HSR
High Speed Research
ICAO
International Civil Aviation Organisation
IE
Independent Expert
IRA
Intercooled Recuperative
LBO
Lean Blowout
LDI
Lean Direct Injection
LEMCOTEC
Low Emission Core Engine Technology
LPP
Lean Premixed Prevaporised
LT
Long Term
LTO
Landing-takeoff
MFTF
Mixed Flow Turbofan
MLDI
Multipoint Lean Direct Injection
MRA
Multistage Radial/Axial
MT
Mid Term
NEWAC
New Aero Engine Core
NCC
National Combustion Code
OPR
Overall Pressure Ratio
OTDF
Overall Temperature Distribution Factor
PFC
Perﬂuorocarbon
PM
Particular Matter
PR
Pressure Ratio
P3
Combustor inlet pressure
RQL
Rich-burn Quick-quench Lean-burn
RTDF
Radial Temperature Distribution Factor
SAC
Single Annular Combustor
SD
Stepped Dome
SFC
Speciﬁc Fuel Consumption
SLS
Sea Level Static
SN
Smoke Number
SV-LDI
Swirl-Venturi Lean Direct Injection
TAPS
Twin Annular Premixing Swirler
TALON
Technology for Advanced Low NOx
TCLA
Turbine Cooling and Leakage Air
TET
Turbine Entry Temperature
TRL
Technologies Readiness Level
T3
Combustor inlet temperature
UHC
Unburned Hydrocarbons
UV
Ultraviolet
VGC
Variable Geometry Combustor
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
13


--- Page 3 ---

emissions controlling mechanisms are described in section 1.3.
Publications usually pay attention to certain low emissions technol-
ogy with a focus placed on speciﬁc aspects of technology development.
The motivation for writing this article is to conduct a comprehensive
review of low emissions combustion technologies. The focus is on high-
lighting their working principles, and key technology features, ap-
proaches of realising the technology, associated technology advantages
and design challenges, progress in technology development and appli-
cations and emissions level. The article concludes the technology review
by providing a technology evaluation matrix based on a number of
combustion performance aspects including altitude relight auto-ignition
ﬂashback, combustion stability, combustion efﬁciency, pressure loss, size
and weight, liner life and exit temperature distribution.
1.1. Legislative regulations and standards status
The emissions regulations for aircraft are established by the Inter-
national Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) adopting a standard landing
take-off (LTO) cycle intended to simulate the aircraft operation below
3000 feet altitude. For subsonic civil aero engines, it is composed of four
operating modes (idle, take-off, climb-out and approach) measured at sea
level, static and standard day conditions (Fig. 3). For supersonic aircraft
engines, descent is added into the cycle. Emissions are measured as a part
of the airworthiness certiﬁcation process under the supervision of a na-
tional airworthiness authority. (e.g. European Aviation Safety Agency,
EASA or the U.S Federal Aviation Administration, FAA). During the test,
the fuel ﬂow, gaseous emissions (NOx, UHC, CO) and smoke are
measured using sampling, gas analysis and a typical smoke measurement
method speciﬁed in ICAO Annex 16, Volume II [1]. The mass of gaseous
emissions for each species (Dp) is determined then by summing all modes
in the LTO cycle. The standards for gaseous emissions (NOx, UHC and
CO) are based on calculated Dp for each species divided by the maximum
sea level static rated thrust (Foo) to take account of engine size. The ICAO
Emissions Standards set maximum limits on Dp /Foo of each gaseous
emission. The standards apply to the subsonic aircraft engines whose Foo
is above 26.7kN (6000 Ib) and therefore do not regulate smaller subsonic
Table 1
Main combustion pollutants and their health effect [152].
Pollutant
Health Effect
CO – Carbon Monoxide
Cardiovascular effects, especially in those persons with heart conditions
HC – Unburned Hydrocarbons (a primary component of Volatile Organic Compounds, or VOC)
Eye and respiratory tract infection
Headaches
Dizziness
Visual disorders
Memory impairment
NOx-Nitrogen Oxides
Lung irritation
Lower resistance to respiratory infections
O3 - Ozone (HC is a precursor for ground-level O3 formation)
Lung function impairment
Effects on exercise performance
Increased airway responsiveness
Increased susceptibility to respiratory infection
Increased hospital admissions and emergency room visits
Pulmonary inﬂammation, lung structure damage
PM - Particulate Matter (smoke is a primary component of PM.)
Premature mortality
Aggravation of respiratory and cardiovascular disease
Changes in lung function
Increased respiratory symptoms
Changes to lung tissues and structure
Altered respiratory defence mechanisms
Fig. 1. Global prediction of future emission trends that affect local air quality [152].
Table 2
The ﬁrst ICAO emissions standard for CO, UHC, soot and NOx (CAEP/1) [57].
Standard
Engine OPRs
Foo, kN
CO, g/kN
Smok, SN
UHC, g/kN
NOx, g/kN
CAEP/1 or ICAO 1986
All
> 26:7kN
118
83:6  ðFooÞ0:274
19.6
40þ2  OPR
OPR ¼ overall pressure Ratio SN ¼ smoke number.
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
14


--- Page 4 ---

engines as they make a minor contribution to the total emissions. Smoke
is measured by locating a ﬁlter downstream of the engine through which
the exhaust passes, and it is measured in terms of Smoke Number (SN)
which is a function of rated thrust (Foo).
The ﬁrst ICAO standard was regulated by the ICAO Committee on
Aviation Engine Emissions, (CAEE) in 1981. Later, the CAEE was com-
bined with Committee on Aircraft Noise (CAN) and the Committee on
Aviation Environmental Protection (CAEP) was established in 1983. In
order to reduce the impact of aircraft emissions on the environment,
CAEP meets every three years to continually formulate and update the
emission standards [2]. The standards for smoke, CO and UHC remain
unchanged in subsequent review. As NOx has been considered as a pri-
mary issue, ICAO adopted a more stringent standard for NOx emissions at
the 2nd, 4th, 6th and 8th meetings of CAEP. (i.e. CAEP/2 1993, CAEP/4
1999, CAEP/6 2005, CAEP/8 2011), as indicated in Fig. 3. The NOx
emission currently remains at the CAEP/8 standard.
In recent years, the focus of CAEP has been expanded to develop
global standards for CO2 emission and non-volatile particulate matter
standard (nvPM). Consequently, during the CAEP/10 meeting in 2016,
recommendations have been made for the two complementary new
standards for the emissions. The CO2 standard will apply to subsonic
aircraft of new type design starting in 2020, and to those in production in
2023 [4]. Additionally, attention is also been accorded to address the
impact of emissions at high altitude (i.e. NOx at climb and cruise) [3].
1.2. Main pollutants generation mechanism
1.2.1. Nitrogen Oxides
Nitrogen oxides are a primary air pollutant which is linked to
tropospheric ozone (O3): (i.e. ozone formation in the troposphere) and
has an adverse impact on human health. This emission is known to cause
respiratory illness, impaired vision, headaches, hearing disorder and al-
lergies [5]. The formation mechanisms are:
NO2⇌NO þ O
(R1)
O þ O2⇋O3
(R2)
Nitrogen oxides (NOx) are also linked to ozone layer depletion in the
Stratosphere whose relevant formations are:
NO þ O3 ⇋NO2 þ O2
(R3)
NO2 þ O⇋NO þ O2
(R4)
The NO produced at the end of reaction will in turn further deplete
the ozone layer and chain reaction takes place. The ozone layer depletion
in the Stratosphere will increase the ground level UV radiation and cause
skin cancer and eye diseases. NOx is also linked to photochemical smog,
acid rain and global warming [6].
The thermal NO is one of the major sources of NOx produced in
practical gas turbine combustors. It is produced in the post ﬂame region
where the ﬂame temperature is above 1800 K. The chemical reaction is
endothermic (i.e. atomic dissociation occurs when diatomic oxygen (O2)
gains enough energy through heat absorption to break into two oxygen
atoms). The set of reactions is known as the Zeldovich mechanism and
details are shown below:
O2⇌2O
(R5)
Fig. 2. Evolution of Low Emissions Combustors and their NOx emission level relative to
ICAO standards [134].
Fig. 3. Illustration of ICAO landing-takeoff cycle (LTO cycle) [134].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
15


--- Page 5 ---

N2 þ O⇌NO þ N
(R6)
N þ O2⇌NO þ O
(R7)
N þ OH⇌NO þ H
(R8)
Nitrogen Oxide (NO) is produced when nitrogen reacts with oxygen
atoms via R5 at high temperatures. A chain reaction is then initiated as
the nitrogen atom which is produced in R5 can react with molecular
oxygen (O2Þ (shown in R7) and OH radical in R8 to form NO with O and H
atmos. The concentration of atomic oxygen in the ﬂame front is largely an
exponential function of temperature, and NO formation via the Zeldovich
mechanism has a similar relationship with ﬂame temperature. Therefore,
the thermal NO is increased exponentially with ﬂame temperature for
both premixed and diffusion systems.
Prompt NO formation is an attribute of hydrocarbon ﬂames where
hydrocarbon radicals such as CH react with molecular N2 [7].
Formation of NO from chemically bound nitrogen is complex due to
the varying structure of the nitrogen bonding to the parent molecule.
According to Glarborg et al. [8] most of the fuel bound nitrogen is con-
verted to HCN and NH3 to react with combustion radical to form NO.
1.2.2. Carbon monoxide
CO is produced when an engine is operating fuel rich due to lack of
sufﬁcient oxygen to complete the reaction to CO2. Also, it implies the
inadequate combustion efﬁciency in gas turbines. However, high level
concentration of CO is formed at low power condition where the
combustor inlet temperature, pressure and equivalence ratio are rela-
tively low. These lead to a relatively low reaction rate of converting CO to
CO2. When the fuel air mixture is stoichiometric and ﬂame temperature
peaks above 1800K, the dissociation of CO2 occurs. Therefore a signiﬁ-
cant quantity of CO is also produced. CO, in terms of its effects on human
health, reduces the capacity of the blood to absorb oxygen and, in high
concentrations, can cause asphyxiation and even death [9].
1.2.3. Unburned Hydrocarbons
Unburned hydrocarbons UHC are in form of fuel drops or the products
of thermal degradation of parent fuel into species of lower molecular
weight [9]. It indicates the wastage of fuels, hence increases the engine
operating cost. The formation of UHC mainly stems from unsatisfactory
quality of fuel atomisation, inadequate reaction rate, local quenching,
incomplete combustion and combination of any of these. The chemical
kinetics of UHC is more complex than CO. Nevertheless, the main
inﬂuencing factors for UHC and CO productions are similar.
1.2.4. Sulphur oxides
Sulphur oxides (SOx) are usually formed when the fuel containing
sulphur compounds react with oxygen during the combustion. It is toxic
and corrosive which leads to reduction in turbine blade life, and for-
mation of sulfuric acid in the atmosphere. The sulphur contained in the
fuel is oxidised to SO2 at high temperature in aircraft engine combustion.
The level of sulphur contained in the fuel is constrained by fuel speciation
for Jet A and JetA-1 to be less than 3000 ppmm (parts per million by
mass) or 0.3 weight percent [5,132]. Therefore, emissions of sulphur
oxides in the combustor are limited by reducing or eliminating the
sulphur content from the fuel. In fact, most fuels fall below this speciﬁ-
cation, and typical fuel sulphur levels for aviation jet fuel are between
200 and 1200 ppmm. The small quantity of sulphur contained in jet fuel
is believed to be beneﬁcial in preventing the erosion of the fuel delivery
system because of its lubricity [7].
1.2.5. Soot/smoke
Soot/smoke is produced in the fuel-rich regions of the ﬂames, where
burned gases move toward the fuel injector where local rich fuel pockets
are enveloped by deﬁcient oxygen gases at high temperature [5]. Also, it
can be produced anywhere in the combustor where mixing is inadequate
[9]. Most soot is formed in the primary zone and is consumed down-
stream at high temperature; namely the primary zone governs formation
of the soot and the high temperature downstream regions (e.g. inter-
mediate and dilution) determine its consumption. The main inﬂuencing
factors for soot formation are pressure, equivalence ratio, and fuel type
and atomisation quality. Studies indicate that soot formation increases
with increase in pressure. To elaborate, when the pressure is increased,
the limit of ﬂammability is extended such that soot produced earlier that
is too rich to burn at lower pressures can now burn. Also with an increase
in pressure, the chemical reaction rate is accelerated with fuels burned in
the fuel rich region and hence soot is formed.
1.3. Emission controlling mechanisms
Amongst all factors inﬂuencing the pollutant emissions from gas
turbine combustors, the most important is the ﬂame temperature in the
combustor primary zone. Fig. 4 indicates the emissions as function of
ﬂame temperatures: below 1670 K signiﬁcant CO is produced whereas
when it is above 1900K, excessive amount of NOx is produced. Between
1670 K and 1900K, there is a narrow band where CO and NOx emissions
are relatively low (i.e. 25ppmv for CO and 15ppmv for NOx). As previ-
ously stated, modern engines have higher OPR and TET in order to in-
crease
the
thermal
efﬁciency
and
reduce
engine
speciﬁc
fuel
Fig. 4. NOx and CO emissions vs primary temperature and Temperature vs AFR [9].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
16


--- Page 6 ---

consumption SFC; therefore, the ‘low emissions band’ may shift right-
ward to the plot. The basic strategy for limiting the pollutant emissions is
therefore controlling the temperature of the primary combustion zone
within this narrow band over the entire power ranges of the engine.
The NOx reduction is realised by moving the fuel air ratio away from
the stoichiometric value since maximum heat release hence highest ﬂame
temperature occurs close to that value. Therefore, combustion can be
initiated with less air (rich burn) or excessive air (lean burn). In the latter
case, a large fraction of the air ﬂows through the combustion dome and is
mixed with fuel so that a lower ﬂame temperature can be achieved
compared to rich burn. However, this poses a stability challenge at low
power where the fuel-air ratio may approach the lean extinction limit.
Fuel staging is employed such that part of the fuel injectors is turned
off at low power. In this manner, the local equivalence ratio is maintained
close to the stoichiometric value at the operating fuel injection zones so
as to maintain high combustion efﬁciency and stability. Fig. 5 shows the
NOx distribution within the LTO cycle for rich and lean burn. Increased
reduction in high power NOx can be achieved by lean burn since the
ﬂame temperature gradient is higher for the lean side than the rich side.
However, the low power emissions for both mechanisms show similar
characteristics. This is primarily due to the increase in ﬂame temperature
via fuel staging, as previously described.
The bulk equivalence ratio either for rich burn or lean burn in the
primary zone represents only a rough guide to emission reductions. The
actual values are heavily dependent on the effective fuel-air mixing.
Unsatisfactory mixing quality would produce a large variation in local
fuel air distribution; the rich pocket yielding a local hot ‘spot’ which
would produce higher NOx and smoke emissions. Therefore, good fuel
atomisation and fuel air mixing are vital for low emission reduction.
The ﬂow residence time within the combustor zone is also a crucial
factor that needs to be controlled. Sufﬁcient residence time should be
allowed for complete combustion to ensure that CO and UHC are
reduced; on the other hand the residence time should not be long for
excessive NOx production.
1.4. Worldwide emissions reduction targets
1.4.1. ICAO NOx mid-term and long-term goals
The NOx goals have been highlighted by the CAEP Independent
Expert (IE) group. It issued a report (ICAO Doc 9887) which stated that
the LTO NOx reduction goals for medium term and long term are: 45%
reduction of CAEP/6 for 2016 and 60% reduction of CAEP/6 for 2026,
respectively. The two goals are taking CAEP/6 as the reference point,
which applies for the new engines manufactured since the year
2008 [16].
1.4.2. ACARE vision 2020 and ﬂightpath 2050
ACARE is the Advisory Council for Aviation Research and Innovation,
led by the European Commission. It set out the two challenging goals for
emissions reduction to be achieved by the time frame 2020 and 2050
relative to year 2000 technology: Vision 2020 and Flightpath 2050. LTO
NOx emissions goals are: 80% reduction that is equivalent to 60%
CAEP/6 (Vision 2020) and 90% reduction of NOx (e.g. 75% CAEP/6)
for Flightpath 2050 [17]. The cruise NOx targets were also incorporated
with the same reduction level as for LTO NOx.
1.4.3. NASA Nþ1, Nþ2 and Nþ3
In order to develop new subsonic transport low emissions technology
that could achieve the Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of 6, NASA
established three goals that are distinguished by the time frames and
emissions levels, namely Nþ1 (i.e. by the time frame 2015), Nþ2(2020)
and Nþ3 (2025) [18,145]. Both LTO and cruise NOx emissions targets
were included in the goal metrics: 60% CAEP/6, 75% CAEP/6 and
80% CAEP/6 for LTO NOx and 33%, 70% and 80% relative to year
2005 best technology for cruise NOx. Speciﬁcally, the Nþ1 and Nþ2
values are referenced to a single aisle aircraft (i.e. 737–800) with CFM56-
7B engines and Nþ2 is to a twin-aisle aircraft (i.e. 777–200) with GE-90
engines [18].
2. Low emissions combustion technologies
2.1. Rich-Burn Quick-quench lean-burn combustors (RQL)
2.1.1. Working principle
The working principle of RQL belongs to rich burn emission con-
trolling mechanism. The concept is schematically depicted in Fig. 6,
where the combustion is initiated by a fuel-rich mixture in the primary
zone with equivalence ratio normally 1.2–1.8. The rich burn generally
has a twofold advantage: 1. the combustion stability is enhanced due to
rich burn producing a high concentration of energetic hydrogen and
hydrocarbon radical species. 2. The NOx production is minimised due to
relatively low ﬂame temperatures and low concentration of oxygen
containing intermediate species. The hot efﬂux gas from the primary
zone contains a high amount of CO, UHC and smoke that cannot be
exhausted without further processing [20]. Therefore, a quench section is
employed downstream of the rich zone. A large proportion of dilution
airﬂow is admitted into the quench section to oxidise CO, hydrogen and
hydrocarbon intermediates. However, the addition of airﬂow may lead to
a zonal equivalence ratio close to the stoichiometric value, resulting in
rapid formation of thermal NOx, as shown in Fig. 8. To achieve low NOx
production, therefore the air has to mix rapidly with the primary zone
efﬂuent such that it can be quickly switched from the rich burn to the
Fig. 5. NOx distribution within LTO cycle for RQL vs Lean Burn [133].
Fig. 6. RQL working principle schematics and NOx formation routes [19].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
17


--- Page 7 ---

lean burn mode to minimise the formation of thermal NOx, as shown the
bottom route in Fig. 8. This process is than followed by the lean burn
section being employed to further consume CO and UHC such that an
exhaust at the exit of the combustor contains a major combustion pro-
duction of CO2, N2, O2 and H2O. The lean burn section is also respon-
sible for controlling the combustor outlet temperature distribution
quality. Typical equivalence ratio in lean burn is in the range of 0.5–0.7.
2.1.2. Key technology review
The concept was introduced in 1980 by Mosier et al. [21] as a strategy
to reduce oxides of nitrogen (NOx) emissions from stationary gas turbine
engines using fuels that were high in fuel-bound nitrogen. One of most
distinctive features for RQL approach compared to the conventionally
designed combustor is the modiﬁcation of combustor stoichiometry
distribution for reduced NOx Emission. This is realised by air ﬂow dis-
tribution and therefore, a less complex fuel scheduling system is required
compared to lean fuel staged combustor. The early development of the
RQL technology is based on conventional combustors. Relatively low
development cost and short development time can be achieved because
conventional design rules can be adopted when applied to RQL.
There are two major concerns when RQL technology is applied to
conventional combustors: one is how rich the system can burn, and the
other is how effective the quench can be supplied through standard air
admission by dilution jets [22].
Rich burn: The ﬁrst concern is initially addressed through the opti-
misation of primary zone ﬂows to control stoichiometry: the dome front
end is fuel rich at high power to ensure it addresses the principal emission
challenges, namely NOx and smoke. At low power condition it is close to
the stoichiometric value to achieve high combustion efﬁciency and sta-
bility. This approach has been commonly adopted by main Original En-
gine Manufacturers (OEMs) [23–25]. The typical air ﬂow distribution for
dome, inner and outer passage ﬂows are around 30%, 40% and 30%,
respectively [26]. The distribution of bulk equivalence ratio among
different zones in RQL combustor represents only a rough guide to
emissions reductions. The actual values are heavily dependent on effec-
tive fuel-air mixing, namely mixing quality. Pratt & Whitney has devel-
oped the TALON (Technology for Advanced Low NOx) family of RQL
combustors for commercial aircraft gas turbine engines. The recent
TALON X combustor utilises a type of high shear injector, as shown in
Fig. 7, to enhance the fuel vaporisation, distribution and fuel-air mixing.
The injector is composed of a fuel nozzle and a compound radial inﬂow
swirler [28]. Fuel is spread onto a large diameter ﬁlming surface, on
which a thin ﬁlm forms and leads to very small droplets and rapid fuel
vaporisation. Air is introduced into two passages: inner and outer, where
high swirl initiated to enhance rapid mixing with fuel droplets. Atom-
isation is then enhanced when fuel vapours discharge at the atomising lip
into the interface between the two swirling airstreams. The spray zone
angle and primary zone aerodynamics can be modiﬁed by changing the
swirl angles of two air swirling passages, and airﬂow split between them
[27]. GE's RQL technology named LEC (Low Emissions Combustors) has
developed several mixers (i.e. swirl cup combined with dual oriﬁce
pressure atomisers): wherein different conﬁgurations of swirl cups were
developed (i.e. radial or axial, twin-row radial swirlers with counter or
co-rotating directions) with optimised air split between primary, sec-
ondary and ﬂare air intended to create uniform fuel-air mixture [29].
Effective quench: As previously discussed, it is critical that rapid
mixing is achieved to complete combustion of the rich mixture exiting
the primary zone with minimum NOx production. The technologies for
improving quench effectiveness are realised through different ap-
proaches by OEMs. These may be described as follows:
1. Closer spacing between primary and quench jet: This method
essentially entails the quench holes locations being moved towards
the primary holes. It comprises two beneﬁts: one is to enhance the
quench mixing strength with primary air; the other being acceleration
of the switching process from the rich burn to the lean burn. This
approach is commonly adopted by P&W in TALON I [44] and GE's
LEC combustors [29]. The resulting effect of reduced temperature in
the quench zone is shown in Fig. 8.
2. Through the optimisation of jet hole pattern including the
spacing, size and geometry: Numerous studies have been conducted
to investigate the jet penetration, structure and ﬂow ﬁeld distribution
resulting from jet mixing in jets in crossﬂow. Focused research has
been conducted on single and multiple jets, bounded and unbounded
[31–37]. Jet oriﬁce geometries have been extensively studied and
design methodology for cylindrical and rectangular conﬁguration for
a conﬁned ﬂow has been proposed by Cranﬁeld to determine an op-
timum hole size with given momentum-ﬂux ratio [38]. NASA also
conducted numerous non-reacting ﬂow studies of jets in crossﬂow to
evaluate geometrical features including hole spacing, shape, ﬂow
area, etc. The investigation leads to the determination of the optimum
number of holes. Recently, the TALON X developed an optimised
single row of dilution holes with a focus on circumferential and size
Fig. 7. High shear swirl injector (TALON X) [27].
Fig. 8. The effect of dilution holes moved forward on NOx reduction [30].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
18


--- Page 8 ---

location variation based on the jet mixing experiment and gas sam-
pling instrument as well as the in-house analytical tools [29].
3. Reduced combustor residence time in the quench zone: The NOx
production increases with ﬂow residence time. As described in sec-
tion 2.1.1, as the gas travels from the rich burn to the lean burn, the
region where rapid NOx forming mixture strengths are inevitably
existent. It is important the time spent by the mixture in these regions
is minimised. This approach is adopted by TALON X and is realised by
optimisation of the combustor volume and distribution of combustor
area as a function of length. The resulting residence time for TALON X
has been reduced by a factor of 2 compared to older TALON used in
the PW4098 engine, and the corresponding emission index of NOx at
take-off consequently is reduced by a factor of 3. The Phase 5
combustor technology by Rolls-Royce has also successfully optimised
this approach [24].
4. Adding the local cooling air: Fig. 9 shows a typical axial gas tem-
perature distribution along an RQL combustor. The gas temperature
peaks at the quench section, resulting in the rapid NOx formation. GE
LEC designed a series of small local cooling holes (Fig. 10) down-
stream of the primary holes: this effectively reduces the local peak gas
as well as near wall temperatures, leading to a further reduction in
NOx and higher liner durability. This design feature has been
patented [39].
Liner wall cooling: in addition to the two major issues this is also of
concern for RQL technology, primarily due to two reasons: ﬁrstly due to
larger content of carbon in rich burn higher luminous radiation is
observed, because of which the inner liner wall surface temperature rises
signiﬁcantly and the peak temperature forms near the quench section;
the second is because the RQL technology demands a larger proportion of
dilution air for rapid quenching, it results in limited quantities of
remaining air available for cooling. In order to address this concern,
several advanced cooling technologies have been employed in RQL
combustors. Examples include P&W adoption of combined impingement
and ﬁlm cooling in TALON combustors and the recent TALON X which
adopts an optimised ﬂoat-wall conﬁguration for cooling and achieves
higher cooling efﬁciency with a usage of 20% combustor exit air
compared to 33% for baseline PW4084 combustor [29]. The RR phase 5
combustor utilises tiles on the supporting shells that effectively decouples
the mechanical stresses from the thermal stresses, and the tiles can be
cast from blade alloy materials that have higher temperature capability
(>100
C) than typical combustor alloys. Also, the introduction of
ceramic structures for ultimate cooling ﬂow reduction has been consid-
ered in RR RQL technology improvements [40]. If dome ﬁlm cooling is
used to provide a protective layer for preventing convective heat transfer
from high temperature gases, the presence of cooling air enables the NOx
formation toward the high NOx route. In some design, the atomising air is
arranged to ﬂow over the outside of liner wall in rich zone before
entering into the fuel nozzle such that regenerative backside convective
cooling is implemented to alleviate this problem.
In addition to improving the quench effectiveness that is crucial to
NOx reduction, the dilution jets also serve the purpose of improving the
exit plane mixing which is crucial to pattern factor reduction and hence
improved turbine life. An advanced CFD-based analysis system, named
Allstar has been developed at Pratt & Whitney, which has been used to
optimise combustor exit temperature distribution. The CFD code was
initially veriﬁed by comparing the predictive turbine proﬁle with data
measured in full annular rig tests for three aero gas turbine combustors.
Fig. 11 shows one of the results for a PW4098 combustor. It captures the
major features in exit plane temperatures and shows a consistent tem-
perature distribution with rig test data. In subsequent research, the code
was used to assist the optimisation of the PW6000 combustor exit tem-
perature proﬁle. It was accomplished by investigating the effect of
dilution hole pattern changes on the exit temperature proﬁle, and a direct
Fig. 9. The axial gas temperature in a typical RQL combustor [7].
Fig. 10. The local small cooling holes to reduce the wall peak temperature (US patent 2008/0010991) [39].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
19


--- Page 9 ---

correlation between the dilution hole pattern and pattern factor was
established [41,42].
Continuous effort is made to design the new generation of the TALON
X combustor by P&W in a recent NASA ERA program, the research is
focused on swirler injector design, and aims to further reduce the smoke
and NOx emissions [43]. In summary, the RQL approach has been
implemented for many years in gas turbine combustors. It is a reliable,
relatively lower cost approach with many advantages in meeting the full
range of combustion system requirements.
2.1.3. Technology application
Pratt & Whitney has developed the TALON family of RQL combustor
for commercial aircraft gas turbine engines. The ﬁrst generation, TALON
I, that powers PW4098 entered into service in 1999 with ﬂight hours of
145345 h (37761 cycles), no unscheduled engine removals and no in-
ﬂight shutdowns reported [44]. Second generation, TALON II which
ﬁts in PW6000 engine entered into service in 2005 and demonstrated the
improved service and achieved further emissions reduction. Recent
TALON X was used in PW1500, PW1130G-JM, PW1133G1-JM, etc. It has
demonstrated NOx reduction by 25% compared to TALON II in rig and
engine tests [45]. RQL combustors have also been used for other engines
such as new Rolls-Royce Trent 1000 with rated thrusts 268kN-350.9kN
with OPRs 36.3–46.1 and GE's CFM56 series with rated thrusts ranging
over 97.9 kN-142.3kN and with corresponding OPRs 23.1–32.6. Early
RQL combustors such as V2500 have longer axial length because of extra
space required for quick quench and lean burn. The ratio of liner length
to height is 2.24 compared to 2.0 for conventional combustors [47].
Modern TALON II and X achieved design goals while maintaining similar
length as conventional combustors. Overall RQL combustors are applied
from small to large engine categories for a wide range of engine thrust
and OPRs.
2.1.4. Emissions status and characteristics
The low emissions technology is commonly assessed by plotting take-
off EINOx denoted as the emissions index of NOx emission. It is deﬁned by
the amount of NOx produced in gram, per kilogram of fuel (i.e. unit g/kg)
as a function of engine OPR since NOx emissions are impacted by
combustor operating conditions (i.e. Pressure, temperature and residence
time) and modern engines have comparable thermal efﬁciencies and
overall fuel-air ratio for given thrust levels.
The NOx emissions analysis for recent RQL in-service products
including GE P&W and RR was performed in Ref. [25], based on ICAO
engine emissions testing database. The analysis concludes that RQL
technology from different OEMs yields a very similar result in terms of
EInox as a function of OPR. Fig. 12 gives the details. Based on the similar
emission index characteristics, a correlation was proposed subsequently
and shown in the same ﬁgure. For LTO NOx emissions levels, reference
[40] indicates that the typical modern rich burn combustor technology
delivers NOx in the range of 55–70% CAEP/6 for small engines intended
to power regional jets and 55–65% CAEP/6 for medium sized engines.
RQL technology produces higher soot production with normally an order
of magnitude higher than lean burn technology. The amount of smoke is
determined by the capability of the combustion system to consume the
smoke within the chamber. However, the recent RR Phase 5 RQL com-
bustors control the smoke to a constant characteristic number: 6.5.
Recent sector rig testing conducted by P&W for new TALON develop-
ment indicated that the NOx level of 72% margin to CAEP/6. These
promising results indicate that the RQL is still considered as a viable
approach for the current aero combustors.
2.1.5. Summary of technology advantages and challenges
Technology Advantages
As previously discussed in section 2.1.1 through 2.1.4, the main
technology advantages for RQL are summarised as follows:
1. The dome rich burn provides a high level of resistance to ﬂame out,
particularly at low power where the combustor is running very lean
and the dome fuel air ratio is close to the stoichiometric value (i.e.
relative high temperature can be maintained to enhance the com-
bustion efﬁciency and stability). As a consequence, this technology
demonstrates high reliability with excellent service history.
2. Relative low development cost and short development time since it is
based on conventional combustion technology, empirical approaches
and conventional design rules can be readily adopted.
3. The lack of oxygen due to rich burn discourages the oxidation of fuels,
which prevents the conversion of fuel bound nitrogen to HCN and
NH3 that react with combustion radicals to form NO [48]. Instead, it
converts fuel bonded nitrogen FBN into nonreactiveN2 [49].
4. It is advantageous in meeting the full range of combustion system
requirements in addition to those of emissions since the requirements
of safety, relight capability, operability etc. are considered as high
priorities.
Technology Design Challenges
As previously discussed, the main technology design challenges are
summarised as follow:
1. The airﬂow distribution needs to be optimised to control smoke/soot
emission.
2. The higher OPR engine makes it much more difﬁcult to contain NOx
level without changing the fuel injection concept. Advanced fuel
spray nozzle is needed to improve the fuel-air mixing.
Fig. 12. Take-off NOx emissions vs engine OPR for recent RQL combustors [25].
Fig. 11. CFD and rig data comparison of combustor exit temperature for PW4098
RQL [41].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
20


--- Page 10 ---

3. The advanced cooling scheme is required for optimum use of dilution
jet for quenching and improved liner durability (i.e. higher luminous
ﬂame radiation due to rich burn).
4. Cooling of the dome should be carefully designed to avoid NOx for-
mation toward the high NOx route
2.2. Double annular combustors (DAC)
2.2.1. Working principle
The double annular combustors adopt a radially staging strategy. The
working principle is schematically shown in Fig. 13. The combustion
stoichiometry and hence temperature is controlled through the use of
fuel injection in multiple combustion locations. At low power settings,
part of combustion zones operates and refers to the pilot zone (i.e. the
outer annulus) (Fig. 13) to raise the equivalence ratio (around 0.8) so as
to increase the combustion efﬁciency and reduce CO and UHC. The pilot
zones which are represented by outer circumferentially arranged circles
and red colour indicates the injectors are fuel ﬁlled and operating. The
local high combustion stoichiometry also mitigates the risk of lean
instability. At higher power settings, typically at approach condition,
zones that are called main (i.e. the inner annulus) get fuelled and ignited.
The equivalence ratios for both zones are usually kept at 0.6 [9]. The
objective is to achieve lean combustion for NOx and smoke reduction at
high power. During mid-power, part of the main zone is fuelled and
operated, this aims to increase the transition efﬁciency and more than
one staging point is employed.
2.2.2. Key technology review
The concept of DAC was ﬁrst conceived by Bahr and Gleason in the
1970s [51]. The most distinctive feature from the conﬁguration
perspective is the twin radially arranged combustion zones. The two
zones are separated by a centre body (CB in Fig. 13), this essentially helps
to minimise local quench (thus the reduction of CO and UHC) of the pilot
ﬂame by main air ﬂow at low power conditions where only the pilot zone
is alight. The resulting effect is the extension of the radial height. This
contributes to larger surface area than single annular combustors (SAC)
and hence, cooling tends to be demanding and less air is available for the
lean burn. Especially at high power, dome front end equivalence ratio
raises resulting in higher EINOx. Higher OPR DAC engines are more sus-
ceptible to this problem. For example, GE90 with PR ¼ 40, even though it
has multi-hole cooling, the cooling requirement is too high and primary
zone equivalence ratio is 0.9 at high power [10]. This design challenge
would limit its further development for future ultra-high OPR engines.
On the other hand, the radial conﬁguration enables the combustion
goals including low emissions, stability, efﬁciency, etc. to attain reduced
length and weight. This is advantageous for reducing problems such as
rotor dynamics, resulting from length since the shaft torsional vibration
is directly proportional to its length.
The fuel staging is through the change of the fuel splits into different
zones according to change in power conditions while maintaining the
unchanged airﬂow distribution. To achieve this, a more complex fuel
control system and the addition of fuel manifolds, are required compared
to the conventional single annular combustor. The fuel nozzle used in
DAC features a twin-fuel nozzle tip that is attached to the commonly
shared feed arm, as shown in Fig. 14, as power conditions change, in
order to provide the rapid response of fuel supply into the different
combustion zone both main and pilot system are fuelled in advance. This
increases the potential risk for fuel coking. Coking refers to the hard
carbonaceous compounds formed in the internal passages of the fuel
system when the fuel undergoes pyrolysis reactions when it is heated in
the absence of air. Such compounds can block or reduce the ﬂow of fuel
through the main stage hardware. However, the commonly shared feed
system enables the pilot fuel ﬂow to continuously ﬂow over the outer side
of the main ﬂow, providing the protective cooling. In order to effectively
Fig. 13. DAC working principles with fuel staging schemes: low power only outer annulus injectors operating, mid power outer þ part of inner, full power outer þ inner [50].
Fig. 14. GE-DAC Twin-tip fuel injector with main nozzle cooled by the pilot fuel ﬂowing
around it to provide effective cooling [9].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
21


--- Page 11 ---

direct the airﬂow into separated zones, a double passage pre-diffuser is
employed on GE90 engines series and the studies were conducted under
NASA/GE Energy Efﬁcient Engine (E3) programme. The study reveals
that the 50% of reduction in pre-diffuser length can be achieved
compared to a single passage conﬁguration having the same area ratio
[52]. Several rig tests have been conducted to measure the overall
pressure loss coefﬁcient, and the loss contributes to 35% of the total
combustor pressure loss [53].
Control of pattern factor presents a major challenge in the develop-
ment of DAC: the less dilution air available in DAC has a difﬁculty in
mixing the pilot and main streams to achieve ideal exit temperature
proﬁle. Furthermore, since injectors are radially arranged, more hot spots
could form at the exit plane of the combustor. The temperature outlet
distribution has been experimentally investigated under the E3 program
with the goals set for a radial temperature distribution factor (RTDF) of
0.125. Baseline sectors and modiﬁed versions have been investigated.
Fig. 15 shows the measured proﬁle at idle. The pilot stage is only oper-
ating at idle, yielding an outer peak average proﬁle of 0.6 with the
maximum proﬁle factor (PF) of 1.2. The effects of fuel ﬂow split between
the pilot zone and main zone on exit temperature proﬁles as well as NOx
emissions are also investigated at simulated take-off condition. The study
indicated that with lowest pilot ﬂow split the RTDF of 0.3 and PF of 0.5
were obtained for minimum NOx production. The increase in pilot ﬂow
split generally decreases both RTDF and PF but leads to an increase in
NOx emissions.
The radial temperature proﬁle design challenge not only compro-
mises the turbine durability but also impacts on the turbine work
extraction efﬁciency. As a consequence, higher mission fuel burn is
required compared to the single annular version. The deﬁcient temper-
ature proﬁle, especially during idle condition, causes a 7%–15% increase
in SFC at idle compared to its corresponding single annular version [55].
The transition of fuel staging occurs at mid power (e.g. approach 30%
power) where the main zones are also operated in addition to the pilot
zone. The local fuel-air ratios, temperature, pressure of main zones are
not as high as those at high power. The combustion efﬁciency and sta-
bility are unfavourable. This affects engine acceleration. More recent
designs apply more than one staging points. As shown in Fig. 13, an extra
staging point can be applied at mid power such that part of the main zone
is brought into operation, which raises the local equivalence ratio to
enhance the efﬁciency and improve the staging smoothness. Yet, this
introduces complexity for fuel control, and additionally the circumfer-
ential staging results in non-uniformity temperature exit, and challenges
in turbine durability.
2.2.3. Development and application
The product was introduced into CFM56-5B, 5B/P, and 7B models
during the year 1995–1998. The GE90 also adopted this design; the en-
gine was tested in February 1995. The CFM56 series DAC combustors are
introduced to power Airbus A320 and A321 aircraft. The GE90 series
now power the Boeing 777 aircraft [56]. In general, this type of low
emissions combustors usually applies to the engines in medium and large
categories with rated thrust in the range of 102.2kN (CFM56-5B9/2P
DAC) to 504.9kN (GE90-113B DAC) [57].
2.2.4. Emissions status and characteristics
Fig. 16 summarises the ICAO LTO characteristic emissions for DAC
combustors for the CFM56 series (i.e. CFM56-5B DAC; SLS thrust level of
117.9–133.5 and OPRs 27.1–31.2 and CFM56-5B DAC II; thrust levels of
120.1–142.4 kN and OPRs 27.7–32.8) and GE90 DAC versions (SLS
thrust level of 363.4–426.7 kN and OPRs 35.3–40.6).
Overall, all the DAC versions yield a similar trend for NOx emissions.
As engine OPRs increase up to around 32, the DAC combustors demon-
strate NOx emission levels with overall 20% margin from the CAEP/6,
the margin widens gradually at lower OPRs with a 40% margin obtained
at OPR ¼ 24.6. This generally shows a wider NOx margin compared to
RQL combustors. However, very narrow margins occur as engine OPRs
tend to increase. One of the possible reasons stems from the demanding
cooling ﬂow due to the larger surface area resulting from the radially
arranged conﬁguration; less air is available for lean combustion.
A comprehensive emissions assessment for the DAC technology was
performed by Mongia. The idle EICO verses EInox for several CFM's and
GE's DAC combustors against rich dome combustors are analysed by
Mongia based on the ICAO emissions databank [58]. The main obser-
vation shows that DAC technology is competitive with rich dome com-
bustors at lower OPRs for a trade-off between the CO and NOx emissions,
as indicated in Fig. 17. However, higher EICO and EInox are produced at
Fig. 15. E3 DAC sector testing on temperature exit distribution [59].
Fig. 16. LTO NOx vs Engine Pressure Ratio for DAC combustors (data from ICAO engine
testing emission databank) [57].
Fig. 17. EIco vs EInox for DAC combustors compared with rich burn combustors (ICAO
data from engine testing and picture adapt from Mongia) [58].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
22


--- Page 12 ---

increased engine OPRs. The main reason for having higher CO emissions
at idle is primarily due to the quenching effect between the two com-
bustion domes. The UHC emissions yield the similar trends. The smoke
emissions for DAC (Fig. 18) are generally lower than RQL combustors
with the overall level below 6 over the OPR ranges shown. Nonetheless,
the considerable amount of smoke generated in the CFM56-5B DAC
shows a relatively high level. The possible reasons may be attributed to
the following:
1) The radial arrangement limits the space available for consuming the
smoke downstream of the rich pilot ﬂame zone at lower power.
2) The main unfuelled air when mixing with the pilot gas in the down-
stream mixing zone lowers the zonal temperature, which slows down
the rate of soot consumption.
2.2.5. Technology advantages and design challenges
Technology advantages
As discussed in section 2.2.1–2.2.2, the technology advantages for the
DAC are summarised as follows:
1. The radially staged conﬁguration enables performance to be attained
within the length comparable to a single annular version. The rotor
dynamics problem is effectively reduced.
2. The commonly shared feed arm enables the pilot fuel to cool the main
fuel, lowering the risks for fuel coking.
3. The lean combustion is operated at high power providing the po-
tential to reduce the NOx emissions.
Technology Design Challenges
The technology challenges for the DAC are summarised as follow:
1. Control of pattern factor and turbine transverse quality
2. Excessive mission fuel burn due to the radial proﬁle design challenge
3. Challenges in cooling due to lager dome surface areas
4. Unfavourable transition combustion efﬁciency in the mid power
range.
2.3. Axially staged combustors (ASC)
2.3.1. Working principle
The axially staged combustors have a similar working principle as of
the DAC but fuel staging is achieved through the fuel injection zones
placed in the axial direction. As shown in Fig. 19, the pilot zone is placed
at the upstream of the combustor, and main is placed downstream. The
zonal equivalence ratios are similar to the DAC for different power
conditions (i.e. Low power pilot averaged ϕ ¼ 0.8 and high power both
pilot and main having averaged ϕ ¼ 0.6) unlike the DAC, the pilot and
main
zones
have
an
arrangement
for
two
separate
fuel
deliv-
ering systems.
2.3.2. Key technology review
The concept of axially staged combustion was conceived roughly in
the same timeframe as DAC in the 1970s. The technology was developed
by Pratt & Whitney in the NASA Experimental Clean Combustor Program
ECCP. The baseline engine is the PW JT9D engine [13]. Later, it was
utilised as a low emission alternative for the baseline IAE V2500-A5
engine in the 1990s. For many reasons including business decisions,
the ASC has not been introduced into service today [15]. However, in
recent years, the ASC has been reconsidered for further development by
P&W in the NASA TRA program [59,60].
Since the main stage of the ASC is downstream of the pilot, it has good
combustion stability for the pilot because of the elimination of the local
quench effect from the main unfuelled airﬂow. On the other hand, from
the main perspective, the upstream hot gases from the pilot provide a
continuous source of heat, and ignition from the main is rapid and reli-
able. As a consequence, the pilot hot gases improve the main combustion
efﬁciency and stability with the ability to assure low CO, UHC. However,
due to the separated fuel nozzles arrangement for the pilot and main, the
main fuel nozzles cannot be cooled by pilot fuel as previously discussed in
DAC. Moreover, the main injectors are immersed with hotter gases from
the upstream pilot. Therefore, fuel coking became an issue. The
arrangement for the pilot and main zones poses a challenge for the casing
structural integrity. The pilot and main system require separated pene-
trations of the combustor casing, from the structural perspective, requires
a higher casing strength and stiffness.
The axially staged combustors, in general, have longer axial length
compared to the conventional combustors. In order to address this, the
packing of the main stage becomes a concern. In the V2500 ASC's design,
the pilot zone is located toward the centreline of the combustor and the
main zone is outboard and downstream of the pilot. The inboard location
of the pilot is believed to reduce the susceptibility of lean blowout during
heavy rain since the compressor centrifuges the water toward the outer
portion of the ﬂow path. Also the outboard location of the main peaks the
temperature toward the tip of the blade so as to maintain the designed
temperature proﬁle during operation, effectively reducing the problem of
proﬁle deterioration. The in-line arrangement presents a major challenge
(i.e. the local pitch radius of the combustor is difﬁcult to be collinear) A
large misalignment between two stages results in larger pressure losses of
ﬂow because the ﬂow path is not smooth from the design perspective.
In the recent NASA TRA program, P&W conducted further develop-
ment for ASC and termed this technology as Axial Controlled Stoichi-
ometry ACS. The pilot system relies on experience gained in developing
Fig. 18. Smoke number vs OPR for different DAC engines and data from ICAO engine
testing database [57].
Fig. 19. Pratt &Whitney V2500-A5 ASC axial staged combustor [9].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
23


--- Page 13 ---

TALON combustors. Therefore, the pilot stage was kept simple and no
signiﬁcant change was made. To address the packing of the main, the
new ACS intends to have a simpler fashion than the early V2500 version.
Various designs for the main were conceptualised. There are two con-
ﬁgurations for the main that are developed so far in ERA Phase I and
Phase II: In phase I, the pilot injectors are located on the front dome and
main injectors are placed on both top and bottom of the combustor
downstream of the pilot. For phase II, main injectors are placed on top
only. The schematics drawing for both conﬁgurations are shown in
Fig. 20. In this manner, both conﬁgurations effectively address the main
packing issue with smoother ﬂow path obtained compared to V2500's
fashion. In addition to this, the higher upstream temperature results in
the main stage burning the fuel with a high efﬁciency even with a low
residence time. As a consequence, the length of ASC can be effectively
reduced to some extent. As discussed previously, the NOx is a function of
residence time; this assures the low high-power NOx emissions.
In order to achieve further reduction of NOx emission, the design of
the main mixers is created with the assistance of the CFD analysis.
However, due to the main mixers being still under development, and
limited information released in public domain, detailed analysis for this
main mixer is challenging.
2.3.3. Technology application
The early ASC combustors were intended to be used in the IAE V2500
engine, a two-shaft with BPR ¼ 5 and thrust level ranging from 105kN to
140kN. The engine series power the Airbus A320 family. The new P&W
axially staged combustion developed within the NASA ERA program
were intended to be applied on advanced Geared Turbofan GTF engines
with high Bypass Ratio BPR of around 12 and higher OPR (i.e. exceeding
60) for the next generation of propulsion engines.
2.3.4. Emissions status and characteristics
Fig. 21 illustrates the NOx emissions as a function of engine power for
conventional and staged combustors. It is believed that 40% reduction in
LTO NOx can be achieved by staged combustion, and 50% reduction in
cruise NOx. Table 3 summarises the emissions results for baseline V2500
engine and axially staged model. A reduction of 43% for EINOx at take-off
is achieved. The idle CO emissions of EICO Idle ¼ 4.1 is achieved for the
axially staged engine, which demonstrates the potential of reducing the
problem of high CO emission at low power as in DAC combustors.
The ACS combustor 3-sector rig testing was completed at NASA
Advanced Subsonic Combustion Rig (ASCR). The test yields very low
NOx emissions for the LTO NOx emissions and has been veriﬁed to be
88% (Fig. 22), relative to CAEP/6 for Phase I and 76% relative to
CAEP/6 for Phase II, thereby exceeding the ERA project goal of 75%
reduction [43]. Moreover, the efﬁciency testing was also performed,
indicating 99.9% at full load condition [59,60]. Cruise NOx was also
investigated and EINOx is less than 2 at typical cruise conditions for an
Fig. 20. The new underdeveloped P&W Axially Staged Combustor Conﬁguration Sche-
matics with two conﬁgurations investigated [60].
Fig. 21. NOx emissions vs power for conventional and axially staged combustors [153].
Table 3
Emissions characteristic of baseline V2500 engine and the axially staged combustor [47].
Engine Model
V2500-A5 (Baseline)
V2500 ASC (Axially
staged combustor)
Pressure Ratio (EPR)
33
33
Rated Thrust (FooÞ kN
133.45
133.45
Bypass Ratio (BPR)
5.0
5.0
EINOx Take off (g/kg)
33.8
19.4
EINOx Climb (g/kg)
27.1
17.0
EINOx Approach (g/kg)
10.1
7.1
EINOx Idle (g/kg)
5.0
5.2
EICO Take off (g/kg)
0.45
4.4
EICO Climb (g/kg)
0.52
4.0
EICO Approach (g/kg)
1.81
11.1
EICO Idle (g/kg)
10.95
4.1
Fig. 22. P&W ASC and new TALON X 3 experimental cup test results [43].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
24


--- Page 14 ---

advanced Geared Turbofan (GTF) cycle.
2.3.5. Summary of advantages and design challenges
Technology Advantages:
As discussed in 2.3.1–2.3.2, the technology advantages for the ASC
are summarised as follows;
1. The good combustion efﬁciency and stability for the main stage are
attributed to higher upstream temperature provided by the pilot.
2. The rapid and reliable ignition for the main are due to similar reasons
mentioned in 1.
3. The lower level of NOx at high power that can be achieved for
reduced residence time since the main stage can burn efﬁciently.
Technology Design Challenges:
1. There exists a fuel coking risk due to separated arrangement for the
pilot and main. Main fuel cannot be cooled by the pilot fuel and the
main injectors are immersed within hotter ambient temperatures
from the upstream pilot gases.
2. The pilot and main system require separated penetration of the cas-
ing, thereby requiring higher casing strength and stiffness.
3. The packing issue of the main is a concern due to possibility of large
misalignment for the pilot and main zone, thereby posing a challenge
in maintaining low ﬂow pressure losses.
2.4. Twin Annular Premixing Swirler combustors (TAPS)
2.4.1. Working principle
It is more appropriate that, TAPS technology is categorised as
partially premixed combustion based on the mechanisms although some
literature term this as LDI or LPP [46,70]. Fig. 23 shows the concept
schematics. At ﬁrst sight, the conﬁguration is very similar to conven-
tional single annular combustor SAC, however, the main difference lies in
the fuel injector heads, wherein TAPS adopts internally staged partially
premixed technology. It is composed of pilot and main stages with both
concentrically mounted. The pilot uses a simplex atomiser (other means
including pure or piloted airblast have also been investigated) to spray
the fuel onto the pre-ﬁlm lip where it is atomised in an air blast mode
between the two axial air streams. The fuel sprays interact with the
surrounding co-rotating or counter rotating swirl to generate a pilot
recirculation zone (Termed PRZ in Fig. 23) which stabilises the pilot
ﬂame. The pilot only mode operates to maintain sufﬁciently high com-
bustion efﬁciency and stability at low power including ignition through
to idle. At higher power, the main is also turned on, and partial premixing
is achieved through the mixing of the discrete liquid jets issuing radially
outward into the premixing channel (i.e. cavity) with high swirling air
stream generated from Cyclone swirlers (indicated as a cross in Fig. 23).
The main ﬂame is stabilised in the mixing layer between pilot and main.
The small recirculation (termed LRZ in Fig. 23) is crucial as it stores
radicals from the pilot combustion which stabilises the main ﬂame. The
airﬂow split for GEnx TAPS is such that 70% of the air ﬂows through the
mixer and the remaining 30% is for dome and liner cooling with no air for
dilution. In summary, the TAPS combustor evolved based on lessons
learned with fuel staging of DAC, and also beneﬁted from the experience
with Dry Low Emissions lean premixing combustors in aero-derivative
industrial gas turbines [62].
2.4.2. Key technology review
As previously discussed in section 2.2.2 the approach of the DAC has
some degree of difﬁculty in meeting the turbine proﬁle requirement
without which optimum turbine work cannot be extracted. Multi-
concentric ﬂame technology development which mostly applied in sin-
gle annular combustors (SACs) has been a new focused research, which
leads to TAPS combustion technology. Several key technologies are
reviewed as follows:
Premixed Combustion: This is one of the most distinctive features in
TAPS and successfully applied into the aero application. The premixed
combustion is realised by the main mixer in TAPS. Fig. 24 shows a typical
conﬁguration: The mixer is composed of a radial inﬂow swirler and a fuel
injector where the tip has holes drilled in single or double rows. The
multi-point injection is realised by these circumferentially drilled fuel
oriﬁces, therefore providing the evenly distributed fuel to be mixed with
air in the primary zone. The radial swirler imparts a higher tangential
velocity to initiate the radially inward airﬂow in order to realise the rapid
mixing process with fuel within a bounded cavity. Although early TAPS
development relied heavily on experimental rig testing followed by data
analysis, the role of the CFD in the development process is considered to
be beneﬁcial. In the GEnx TAPS combustor development process, CFD
analysis was utilised in design optimisation. For example, RANS analysis
was performed to optimise the pilot and main fuel-air mixing for low
NOx. Speciﬁcally, the number of main fuel jets, axial location and oriﬁce
diameters are the main parameters to optimise the circumferential and
radial fuel distribution at the exit of the main mixer [63]. Fig. 25 illus-
trates the optimisation studies. The local hot spots are therefore effec-
tively reduced and liner durability is improved since less luminous ﬂame
radiation transferred to the liner with uniform lean burn. In premixing
passage of TAPS combustor, the risk of auto-ignition is of primary
Fig. 23. Schematic representation of TAPS ﬂow and injector head (right) [136].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
25


--- Page 15 ---

concern as it can occur at sufﬁciently high temperature, pressure and
residence time. The premixing devices could be damaged if the ﬂame is
stabilised there. The prediction of auto-ignition time is therefore neces-
sary in the design of the premixing system to assure the ﬂow residence
time must not exceed it. Several experimental studies were conducted by
Liang et al., Zhukov, Shariatmader et al. and Guin [64–67]. It turns out
that for high OPR engines (of over 40) and inlet temperature (of over
900 K), the auto-ignition time would be less than 1ms. Therefore, to
mitigate the risk for auto-ignition, the allowable premixing passage
shortens. This poses a challenge for premixing since complete premixing
cannot be achieved within a short passage. The resulting effect is the
compromise for mixing quality. In order to address this concern, GE has
developed different main conﬁgurations: instead of having a single radial
inﬂow swirler, an additional axial swirler was also utilised intending to
further improve the fuel air mixedness without increasing residence time
in the premixing passage, leading to low risk for auto-ignition as well
reduction in NOx emissions [68]. The resulting effect is more complex
fuel injection system and good thermal management for nozzles because
the increased cross-sectional area promotes the heat transfer process of
the incoming hot combustor inlet air and nozzle wall. Another issue of
concern is ﬂashback. Unlike the pilot for DAC which is closed to the spark
plug and ignition is rapid, the fuel spray from the TAPS pilot have to cross
Fig. 24. Fuel nozzle assembly for reduced exhaust emissions US Patent 6,389,815 May 21, 2002 [62].
Fig. 25. Equivalence ratio contour at high power of GEnx TAPS main mixer design [61].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
26


--- Page 16 ---

the main ﬂow ﬁeld to achieve ignition. The corner recirculation zone
(CRZ) helps to transport the pilot sprays to the spark plug to achieve
quick ignition. However, the presence of CRZ could results in ﬂashback
that causes periodic combustion unsteadiness. The detailed explanation
is provided by Huang and Yang [69]. This reference explains that a part
of reactants in the main ﬂow are detained in CRZ, and heated by the pilot
ﬂame. The ﬂame speed is then increased such that the ﬂame can prop-
agate upstream through the CRZ. As the ﬂame consumes the reactants in
the CRZ, it reaches the upstream wall of the combustor and is extin-
guished due to no more reactants available. At this point, new reactants
ﬁll the CRZ and the process repeats itself and drives the periodic
unsteadiness.
Internally
staged
conﬁgurations:
This
conﬁguration
has
an
advantage over DAC in maintaining the desired combustor exit temper-
ature distribution. The twin annular ﬂame applied in a single annular
combustor enables the temperature to peak near the top centre of the
blade. In this manner, the turbine life can be improved as well as the
reduction in mission fuel burn, as previously discussed. On the other
hand, the internally staged system poses a design challenge because the
spark has to achieve ignition across unfuelled main zone airﬂow. The
quenching of the spark would compromise the ignition capability.
However, GE has successfully addressed this issue, and altitude relight
tests were performed. Steady state windmill capability to altitudes in
excess of 30,000 feet has been demonstrated. However, limited infor-
mation released in the public domain explains how this is realised.
Flow characteristics: The ﬂow characteristics of TAPS contain a very
distinctive feature compared to that in the conventional combustors. The
recirculation zone in the pilot presents a difference for non-reacting and
reacting conditions. The planar laser induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) and
particle image velocimetry (PIV) diagnostics have been conducted by
Sulabh K et al. [70]. The study observed that, with non-reacting ﬂow, the
central recirculation zone displays an ellipsoidal shape with the ﬂow
moving towards the upstream direction which is similar to the central
recirculation feature captured in a conventional combustor. However
with reacting ﬂow, the recirculation zone is toroidal with ﬂow moves
downstream. The two features can be seen at the bottom of Fig. 26. The
explanation of the change in ﬂow direction, as demonstrated experi-
mentally, is due primarily to the geometry of the fuel injector and
blockage of the main ﬂame causing more airﬂow through the pilot. The
study also investigated the twin ﬂame interaction, and concluded that the
stabilisation of the main ﬂame is realised by a shear layer between the
pilot and main ﬂames where it stores the radicals from the pilot com-
bustion. The size of the shear layer determines the ﬂame stability as well
as NOx emissions. Therefore, knowledge is required for detailed ﬂow
dynamics and heat release analysis at mixing layer where the main ﬂame
is stabilised. The velocity gradient in the mixing layer should be main-
tained at different off-design conditions such that the ﬂame is less prone
to blowout or ﬂashback.
Pilot Mixers: As for all staged combustion, the pilot system is used to
maintain the combustion stability particularly at low power. A pressure
Fig. 26. Mean velocity ﬁeld: a) reacting, case main and pilot ﬂames, b) reacting, pilot only preheat; and c) pilot non-reacting ﬂow ﬁeld [70].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
27


--- Page 17 ---

atomiser was chosen in early development. Several other conﬁgurations
are also developed including air blast or piloted air blast system. One of
the most distinctive pilot designs is shown in Fig. 27, GE has developed a
type of active combustion dynamic control device, namely a plasma
generating nozzle, such that the pilot fuel passes through it and causes in-
situ dissociation of fuel into partially decomposed components of fuel
into hydrogen. This can effectively help to extend the lean blowout
margin because hydrogen has wider combustion stability range with
lower lean blowout limit. The technology was eventually patented and
intended for industrial applications.
Fuel coking is generally undesirable because it increases the risks for
blocking the internal and external passage of the fuel injector, leading to
reduced fuel discharge rate, component life and undesired fuel spray
characteristics. However, during the development for TAPS I, GE
observed that the occurrence of carbon deposits on the pilot exit outer
wall is beneﬁcial to improve the idle combustion efﬁciency. They termed
this effect as good karma or good coke [68]. This observation leads to a
later patented design for pilot exit outer wall that aims to reproduce the
effect of carbon deposits. The details of the design can be found in
Ref. [143], however, limited information is in the public domain to
explain the details.
Zero dilution zones: A traditional approach for improving the
combustor downstream mixing and temperature exit distribution is
through the optimisation of dilution holes. Since the fuel-air mixing is
signiﬁcantly enhanced by TAPS mixers, the need for adopting additional
dilution holes seems unnecessary. The large fraction of air and pressure
drop are utilised for lean premixed combustion, which further limits the
addition of dilution zone. However, on the other hand, the elimination of
large dilution holes from TAPS, in fact, reduces the local stress concen-
tration of the liner. In this sense, the liner structural integrity can be
effectively improved. Furthermore, since the dilution zone is eliminated,
the length of the combustor can be made shorter so that it can be applied
in smaller engines where size and weight are primarily important.
Advanced liner material: Higher OPR engines require combustor
liners to be able to withstand higher temperature. Ceramic matrix com-
posite liner material is proven to withstand higher temperature while
using less cooling airﬂow. Recent development for new generation of
TAPS, TAPS III, includes utilisation of CMC materials with advanced
cooling. The rig combustor test successfully demonstrated the material
capabilities of the CMC combustor liners, which will be the ﬁrst contin-
uous CMC combustor liners in a commercial jet engine [72].
Additive manufacturing technology: The complexity of the fuel
injection
system
highly
demands
advanced
technology
for
manufacturing. The new TAPS III combustor features fuel nozzle tips
manufactured using additive technology [72]. For example, in patent US
8,806,871B2 the fuel nozzle comprises at least one component made
using a rapid manufacturing process. The rapid manufacturing process is
a laser sintering process.
Overall, TAPS demonstrates the high capability for achieving ultra-
low NOx emissions, high combustion efﬁciency, desired exit tempera-
ture proﬁle and operability, enhanced liner durability and effective
control in combustion dynamics, etc. The new generation of TAPS will be
developed based on previous experience from legacy TAPS design. The
new TAPS concept will focus on further reduction in NOx emissions,
aiming to achieve the NASA Nþ3 goals. To attain this goal, an even larger
proportion of air greater than 70% compared to previous TAPS [73],
would be employed for ultra-lean combustion. At the same time, the
focus of the research is also placed on further enhancement of fuel-air
mixing. A series of design challenges including combustion instability,
system reliability, trade-offs between emissions and operability, the
complexity of control for fuel staging and combustion dynamics, etc.
would be present with the progress of the development.
2.4.3. Technology application
The development of the TAPS combustor started in 1996 [74], under
GE and NASA sponsored programmes. (e.g. AST and UEET) The early
development efforts involve the technology demonstration in GE DAC
engines in the late 1990's. Later in the early 2000's primary focus of
development was shifted to single annular combustor (SAS) versions of
TAPS. The SAC TAPS was demonstrated in a CFM56 7-B engine. Even-
tually, TAPS transitioned to the GEnx series of engines, as shown in
Fig. 28. It entered into service in 2010 and now powers wide body
aircraft, the Boeing 747-8F and 787 [61]. The ﬁrst emissions certiﬁcation
data for GEnx TAPS was completed in October 2009 and was undertaken
for 13 models, whose OPR range from 35.1 to 46.5 and rated thrust
of 255–345kN.
After the successful integration of TAPS combustors to larger engines,
GE and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) launched the program for
scaling TAPS technology, namely TAPS II, to narrow body applications.
TAPS II is intended to be implemented as a part of LEAP engine for
powering the COMAC 919, Airbus A320 NEO and Boeing 737 Max [75].
More recently, TAPS has been applied to power different classes of thrust
Fig. 27. Multi-swirler mixers with plasma generating nozzle US patent 6455660 [71].
Fig. 28. GEnx SAC TAPS combustor (Certiﬁed in October 2009) [61].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
28


--- Page 18 ---

and
pressure ratio including the
current GE Passport, powering
Bombardier Global 7000/8000 business jets with rated thrust level of
74kN and pressure ratio of 22 [76].
2.4.4. Emissions status and characteristics
The LTO engine testing NOx emissions levels for current in-service
TAPS combustors for different OPRs (i.e. 35.5–47.0. with correspond-
ing thrust levels of 255.3–345.2kN) engines are summarised in Fig. 29.
The Genx TAPS combustors demonstrate a remarkable NOx emissions
reduction levels. The margin is 60% from CAEP/6 at OPR around 35 and
40% margin at higher OPR around 47.
The recent TAPS III technology adopts Ceramic Matrix CMC liner in a
TRA project and by the end of the phase I, a 5 sector testing was per-
formed that has achieved the project emissions goals of NOx (i.e. 75%
reduction relative to CAEP/6) at TRL level of 4 [73]. Fig. 30 summarises
the testing results. In the meantime, the measurement for simulating
cruise NOx and efﬁciency were also performed and data resulted in up to
70% reduction in EInox compared the 2005 state-of-the-art and over
99.9% efﬁciency obtained at TRL of 4.
2.4.5. Summary of technology advantages and design challenges
Technology Advantages
As discussed in 2.4.1–2.4.2, the technology advantages for TAPS are
summarised as follow;
1. Ultra-low NOx emissions due to premixed combustion demonstrate
the potential in achieving long term NOx goals.
2. Improved combustor exit temperature distribution due to internally
stage conﬁguration. This enhances the turbine life and reduces the
mission fuel burn (i.e. engine SFC).
3. Liner life is signiﬁcantly improved due to the introduction of the
advanced CMC liners. The liner temperature is reduced as well as the
cooling ﬂow. Thereby allowing more air to be utilised for ultra-lean
combustion.
4. Improved liner structural integrity due to elimination of the large
dilution holes that cause the local stress concentration.
5. Advanced fuel nozzle manufacturing technology enables the complex
fuel nozzle system to be applied in the further application.
Technology Design Challenges
The main design challenges include the following aspects:
1. Control of the auto-ignition and ﬂashback due to premixed combus-
tion, rapid mixing is therefore required to avoid exceeding of the
auto-ignition delay time.
2. Good thermal management is required for fuel nozzles due to
complexity of the fuel injection system.
3. Combustion instability requires knowledge of detailed ﬂow dynamics
and heat release analysis at critical regions such as the mixing layer.
4. Due to the internally staged conﬁguration, good ignition is required
since the spark has to achieve ignition across the unfuelled main
airﬂow.
2.5. Lean direct injection combustors (LDI)
2.5.1. The Rolls Royce LDI combustors
2.5.1.1. Working principle. The LDI works by injecting the fuel directly
into the combustor chamber and quickly mixing the fuel with a large
fraction of air. By adopting LDI, the peak ﬂame temperature at medium to
high power can be reduced if fuel and air can be well mixed before the
reaction is completed. Since a greater proportion of air has to be intro-
duced through the injector, dilution air is greatly reduced or eliminated
[77]. As shown in Fig. 31, the LDI injector occupies much of the dome
area so as to pass the large fraction of the total air. The air split for RR LDI
combustor is such that 60–70 percent of air passes through the injector
system and the remaining air for cooling [78]. Like TAPS, the RR LDI
combustor is also ﬁtted with an internally staged singular annular
conﬁguration. Pilot and main are concentrically mounted. The pilot
nozzle has two versions: pressure atomising type and airblast. The main
nozzle uses airblast. The pilot and main ﬂow ﬁeld are separated by a
splitter which sets up a wake, called bifurcated ﬂow ﬁeld leading to the
separated pilot and main ﬂame. At low power, the pilot operates and the
ﬂame is stabilised in the bifurcated ﬂow ﬁeld to sustain the combustion
efﬁciency and stability. As power is increased, the main mixture is
injected into the main bifurcated ﬂow ﬁeld, and the wide cone angle
leads to rapid fuel evaporation and low residence time regions for low
NOx at high power. A lean blowout at idle at equivalence ratio of 0.04 has
been achieved. As power is increased to approach, the fuel ﬂow at pilot is
reduced and part of main is fuelled. At cruise to full power, approxi-
mately 10% of fuel enters into the pilot and 90% goes to main. At full
power, the local equivalence ratio at main is 0.6–0.65 to minimise NOx
emissions [78].
2.5.1.2. Key
technology
review. Since
modern
civil
engines
have
increasingly high OPRs in order to reduce engine SFC, the combustor
inlet pressure and temperature signiﬁcantly shorten the ignition delay
time which presents a great challenge for premixed combustion. In order
to further reduce the emissions, a direct injection method becomes a
preferred option. Several key technologies in RR LDI combustors are
discussed as follows:
Lean direct Injection: As the fuel is directly injected into the com-
bustion zone, it mitigates the risks of auto-ignition and ﬂashback. In
order to achieve a high degree of mixture uniformity, fuel and air have to
be well mixed before the reaction takes place, in other words, rapid
mixing has to be achieved within a short distance once fuel is issued from
the injection system. As indicated in Fig. 33, RR LDI adopts the preﬁlmed
airblast injector for the main that combined with two-stage axial air
swirlers to enhance the process of the fuel-air mixing with reduced ﬂow
residence time. Since a large fraction of air passes through the injector
head and also the introduction of the axial swirlers for rapid mixing, the
Fig. 29. GEnx TAPS ICAO SLS LTO NOx emissions level (engine testing data [57]).
Fig. 30. GE 5-Cup experimental emissions testing results for LTO NOx [43].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
29


--- Page 19 ---

resulting effect is a large cross-sectional area which promotes heat
transfer, as previously discussed good thermal management is required to
reduce the coking risk. Additionally, due to increased size and weight of
the injectors, stress and vibration would be other issues. These affect the
casing integrity since it has to withstand higher stresses.
Internally fuel-staged conﬁguration: Similar to TAPS, RR LDI em-
ploys this conﬁguration with an aim to reduce the combustor surface
areas
while
improving
combustor
exit
temperature
distribution
compared to DAC technology. The internally staged conﬁguration may
pose an ignition challenge, as previously discussed in TAPS combustors.
However, this concern has been addressed successfully by RR: the
investigation of the engine windmilling ignition (i.e. altitude relight) was
conducted by the E3E Core Engine Test Programme. The engine test
demonstrated satisfactory results indicating full windmill relight loops,
achieving it at altitudes beyond 30000 feet [135].
Another concern for fuel staged combustion is to achieve optimum
fuel split (i.e. split is the ratio of pilot fuel ﬂow to total fuel ﬂow). The
effect of fuel split on emissions and detailed ﬂame characteristics has
been experimentally investigated through digital imaging and measure-
ment of heat release by OH* chemiluminescence. Fig. 32 shows the ﬂame
(top) and OH* chemiluminescence. The main observation from the study
indicated that, for low pilot fuel split, the pilot and main heat release
zones are separated (left) with low NOx emissions produced. On the
other hand, with high pilot fuel split, both ﬂames are merged into a single
one and the NOx emissions are increased. The effects of fuel split on
combustion efﬁciency and NOx emissions were further experimentally
investigated by RR. Engine condition is at cruise with combustor inlet
pressure P3 ¼ 9.4 bar, T3 ¼ 713 K and AFR ¼ 30. The study concluded
that a very strong inﬂuence of fuel split is prevalent on NOx and efﬁ-
ciency, and the optimal range for fuel split at this condition for low NOx
and high efﬁciency is 30%–45% [133].
Two-step fuel staging strategy: In order to contain higher ﬂexibility
for fuel staging, RR LDI add another staging point such that the staging
utilises pilot alone for idle, pilot and part of the mains for approach, and
pilot and all mains for cruise and higher power conditions. The two-step
staging is achieved essentially by staging in circumferential direction,
similar to one in Fig. 13. The continuous variation with fuel in open and
closed position, during operation is achieved by the fuel control system.
Therefore, the complex fuel scheduling system is required in the design.
The research investigated combustion efﬁciency and compared it with
RQL. It is observed that deﬁcient combustion occurs at mid power. It is
primarily due to the main combustion being quenched by the adjacent
unfuelled main airﬂow. Therefore, optimisations of burner-to-burner
interaction as well as fuel injector conﬁgurations etc. are required for
further technology reﬁnement.
Bifurcated ﬂow ﬁeld: This is the one of the most distinctive fea-
tures in RR LDI. For fuel-staged combustion, the pilot and main ﬂames
are usually separated such that the combustion in each zone can achieve
its best purpose (i.e. low power stability and high power low NOx
emission). The way of addressing this is the key technology. RR LDI
realises this by utilising a patented device called a splitter [81], as
Fig. 31. RR LDI combustor layout and injector schematics (Top) [19].
Fig. 32. Flame imaging and emissions measurement for different fuel splits [78].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
30


--- Page 20 ---

shown in Fig. 33. The result is such that the ﬂow structure is created as
a bifurcated pattern, with the pilot ﬂow having a smaller pilot recir-
culation zone and the main ﬂow having a wide cone angle. The former
has a beneﬁt in maintaining pilot ﬂame stability because it minimises
the interaction with cold main ﬂow during engine low power compared
to the conventional larger central recirculation zone. The latter has
beneﬁt in producing the lower high-power NOx because of wide cone
angle, resulting in reduced residence time and hence rapid mixing.
There is an interaction zone between pilot and main ﬂame through
turbulence driven by vortex breakdown and shear layers. This critical
region presents a design challenge wherein as the pilot is operating rich,
the main is quenching the reaction and hence compromising ignition,
LBO and combustion efﬁciency. As the main stage is operating lean, fuel
preparation and combustion efﬁciency are adversely affected. Thus, the
pilot ﬂame needs to sustain the main combustion. The interaction is
inﬂuenced by many factors. A key factor is the swirl strength within the
pilot and main, the effect of pilot swirl strength on ignition and lean
blowout was investigated by RR at atmospheric conditions. Fig. 34
shows the different pilot ﬂames with weak and strong pilot swirling
strength. The weak swirling strength features a narrow cone angle,
whereas a strong swirling strength provides a wide cone angle of ﬂame.
The study concludes that the high strength ﬂow generally improved
ignition performance, but compromised the lean blowout. Other factors
including geometrical characteristics of ﬂare, (i.e. converging and
diverging passage of the outer main swirler) as well as other parameters
within the injection system and combustor dome were identiﬁed to have
an effect and need to be optimised.
Advanced cooling system: To efﬁciently cool the liner wall the
design uses effusion and tiles cooling schemes. Double skin walls are also
used where heat-resistant tiles are attached to the liners to take the
thermal load so as to decouple the thermal and mechanical stresses. The
cooling of tiles is accomplished by an impingement effusion where air
impinges the outer walls (cold side) through an array of holes and merges
as a ﬁlm at exit to the inner walls (hot side) such that the ﬁlm cooling
scheme is subsequently initiated.
2.5.1.3. Technology application
The LDI concept has been investigated in the framework of
NEWAC, New Aero Engine Core concepts. The objective of the pro-
gramme was to develop and validate the lean combustion technology
up to TRL 5–6, demonstrating 60%–70% reduction of NOx emission
against LTO CAEP/2 standard while maintaining the combustor full
operability. Within the NEWAC programme, the LDI targeted the po-
tential high pressure ratio engine applications (i.e. OPR>30) including
inter-cooled (IC) core concept, ﬂow-controlled (FCC) core concept and
active core (AC) concept. Fig. 39 illustrates that the LDI combustor is a
part of the E3E core engine components whose HP system demon-
strated a pressure ratio of 22:1. The LDI is subsequently further
investigated in a programme called LEMCOTEC (Low Emission Core
Engine Technology) as a continuation of programme after NEWAC
[79]. The LDI is targeting the potential large turbofan cycle that aims
at an overall pressure ratio up to 70. It is designed for a long range
mission and the core module is integrated in the advanced 3-shaft
engine architecture [54]. The objective of this programme with
respect to emission is to attain and exceed the ACARE 2020 goal on
CO2 and NOx. (50% and 80% reduction respectively with reference to
the technology year 2010) [55], The RR LDI combustor is reported to
demonstrate a NOx reduction of 60% against the CAEP/6 at TRL 6 for
an engine with pressure ratio of 39. In summary, current TRL for LDI is
approaching 7; the emission performance may however degrade once
the TRL 9 is achieved. Details of design features for this technology
can be found in Refs. [80–82].
2.5.1.4. Emissions status and characteristics. Limited emissions data are
available in the public domain for RR LDI because it is still under
development and the current TRL has not reached 9. No ICAO certiﬁed
data have yet been produced. The NEWAC report [83] claims that a 70%
reduction of NOx emissions relative to CAEP/2 is attained by this tech-
nology. Fig. 35 shows the same result based on ﬁrst full annular testing in
the programme. The engine testing for the E3E core that ﬁts RR LDI
combustor was performed in the subsequent development. The tests have
indicated NOx levels in the region of 35%–45%, relative to CAEP/6 have
been obtained, which shows a 30%–35% reduction compared to rich
burn [40].
Fig. 34. Pilot ﬂames with weak (left) and strong (right) pilot swirling strength [78].
Fig. 33. LDI injector head with bifurcated ﬂow created by a splitter [US patent 6,272,840,2001 [81]].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
31


--- Page 21 ---

2.5.1.5. Summary
of
technology
advantages
and
design
challenges. Technology Advantages
As discussed in 2.5.1.1–2.5.1.2, the technology advantages for RR LDI
are summarised as follows;
1. No risk of auto-ignition and ﬂashback compared to premixed
combustion.
2. Ultra-low NOx emissions due to premixed combustion demonstrating
the potential in achieving long term NOx goals.
3. Improved combustor exit temperature distribution due to internally
stage conﬁguration. This enhances the turbine life and reduces the
mission fuel burn (i.e. engine SFC).
4. Liner life is signiﬁcantly improved due to the introduction of the
advanced cooling system as well as less luminous radiation resulting
from lean burn.
5. More staging points lead to more ﬂexible fuel staging intended to
improve the part load lean staged combustion efﬁciency and
operability.
Technology Design Challenges
The main design challenges include the following aspects:
1. Rapid mixing should be achieved before the reaction takes place.
2. The pilot and main ﬂame interaction require trade-offs such as igni-
tion
capability
and
lean
blowout,
NOx/smoke
and
CO/UHC
emissions.
3. Good thermal management is required for the fuel nozzles due to
complexity of the fuel injection system.
4. Combustion instability demands knowledge of detailed ﬂow dy-
namics and heat release analysis at critical regions such as the mixing
layer.
5. The large injector head requires a strong casing strength.
2.5.2. The NASA LDI multipoint injection concept (MLDI)
2.5.2.1. Working principle. The working principle behind the NASA
multipoint injection concept is that: the fuel is distributed to a number of
points in the fuel path, as shown in Fig. 48. Therefore, a conventional
single injector is broken down into a number of separated injectors where
each of them is ﬁtted with air swirlers to provide a local quick and uni-
form mixing and small recirculation zone (Fig. 36) for burning to provide
shorter burning residence time. The uniform mixedness and shorter
residence time contribute to lower NOx production. A lean burn is
combined with this to achieve ultra-low emissions. NASA achieved the
solution to generate matrix combustors composed of small LDI injectors
[85–87]. As with other lean burn combustors, all of the air excluding air
for liner cooling enters through the combustor dome.
2.5.2.2. Key technology review. Multipoint injection: This is the most
distinctive feature for the MLDI concept. An effective way to distribute
the fuel uniformly into the combustor zone is the minimisation of the size
of the fuel injectors. Instead of having a conventional single large
injector, it is broken down into a number of separated injectors. A sector
test was performed with advanced laser diagnostic imaging utilised by
NASA to evaluate the fuel distribution for a multi-injection conﬁguration.
Ref. [151] gives the details of the facility and testing method. Views of
the fuel distribution were obtained using Planar-Laser-Induced Fluores-
cence PLIF [150]. The fuel distribution is colour coded using a loga-
rithmic scale. Fig. 53 shows the end view of the fuel distribution image by
PLIF for the middle of the array section of the MLDI. It can be seen that a
relatively uniform pattern for fuel distribution was obtained just 5 mm
downstream of the injection dome, showing that a rapid mixing process
can be realised by this technology. Because of this, the combustor liner
length could be reduced, which remains attractive because it has the
potential for compact low emissions combustors if part load operation
issues can be resolved. Another beneﬁt is control of outlet temperature
distribution: since the fuel distribution is uniform, the temperature dis-
tribution can be actively controlled by regulating the fuel-air ratios for
each injector. Therefore, a desired radial temperature proﬁle at
combustor exit can be tailored via optimising the local fuel-air ratios for
each injector. This leads to a further beneﬁt wherein the dilution zone
can be eliminated. This therefore leads to a further reduction in
combustor length.
NASA has investigated the different numbers of the multi-point such
as 9, 25, 39 and 49 points with 9 points studied as baseline concept. Also,
the 9 point MLDI has been tested with an inlet pressure of up to 5500kPa
under the NASA Glenn High Pressure Low NOx Emissions Research
Scheme. Overall, the ﬁrst generation of SV-LDI demonstrated a substi-
tutional reduction in NOx emissions: with an assumed cooling fraction of
15%, the measured LTO NOx emission is 63% below CAEP/2 standard
[88]. Each injector is composed of a simplex atomiser, an axial ﬂow
swirler and a venturi. The matrix conﬁguration from this concept im-
poses a challenge for manufacturability: the densely packed structure
demands high manufacturing technologies to minimise the dimension
discrepancy tolerance for each injector. If fuel staging is applied, high
ﬂexibility of fuel control and supply is essential. Moreover, the air and
fuel distribution should be carefully designed to ensure each local
burning zone produces lower emissions while maintaining good stability.
Increasing pressure loss generally decreases NOx emissions. It is caused
by increasing the cold ﬂow bulk velocity, which in turn decreases the
residence time. However, with an allowable range of pressure losses (e.g.
ΔP=P3  5%) the current concept is still far from a homogeneous reactor.
In addition, the ﬂame front is closed to the injector face due to small
recirculation formed; fuel coking is another design issue. Furthermore,
Fig. 36. A Schematic of the multipoint integrated LDI module by NASA [84].
Fig. 35. Experimental sector testing results for LTO NOx vs OPR for different technologies
(i.e. RR LDI, PERM and LPP) [154].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
32


--- Page 22 ---

the shorter residence time imposes a design challenge for altitude relight
because it depends on the volume of recirculating ﬂow downstream of
the injectors. This reduces approximately in proportion to the number of
injectors [89].
Fuel-staged conﬁguration: Perhaps one of the main challenges for
multiple injections is to minimise the local quench between the adjacent
injectors such that the low power operability, as well as emissions of CO
and UHC, can be controlled. In order to achieve this goal, a second
generation SV-LDI concepts has been developed. There are 3 distinctive
second generation SV-LDI concepts that were developed by the Parker
Hanniﬁn Corporation (Fig. 37), Goodrich Corporation (Fig. 38) and
Woodward FST (Fig. 39), respectively.
A 3-zone MLDI developed by the Parker Hanniﬁn Corporation con-
sists of 15 fuel-air mixers arranged in three outwardly-canted panels in
place of a single conventional fuel injector, as depicted in Fig. 37. The
three zones are formed by canting the side fuel nozzles away from the
middle to minimise the interaction between the injectors [90]. Each
panel is fed by a separate fuel circuit and becomes a staged zone. Each
mixer is composed of the air passage and the air swirler with the fuel
nozzle inserted through the centre of the swirler body. Three stages are
categorised by the pilot, main 1 and main 2. The pilot operates only at
light off condition and pilot and main1 are used at lower power condi-
tions where the overall fuel air ratio is relatively low; pilot, main1 and
main2 are all operating at higher power. The Goodrich MLDI [94,95]
concept consists of 5 row radially staged injectors in place of a conven-
tional single injector. The pilot is located in the centre row and sur-
rounded by two rows of intermediate injectors. The remaining two rows
of the outer injectors are located in the outer ring. Fuel staging is also
applied, with the pilot operating at idle condition and as power is
increased; the intermediate injectors also brought into operation, fol-
lowed by all injectors with the outer ones operating at high power con-
ditions. The Woodward FST concept consists of two conﬁgurations: ﬂat
and 5-recess MLDI (Fig. 39). A large pilot is located in the centre of the
matrix, surrounded by main injectors which are main1, main2, and
main3. Each of the main has 4 identical conﬁgurations. Table 4 provides
detailed parameters for both conﬁgurations. Both main 1use simplex
injectors and main 2 and main 3 use airblast. The angles of air swirler for
main 1, main 2 and main3 are the same (i.e. 45) though swirl orienta-
tions are different. The major difference between ﬂat MLDI and the
5-recess model is a recess made for covering pilot and main1 in the
5-recess model. The design aims to improve the lean operability during
low power conditions. The fuel stage zones are fed by 3 fuel lines with
main 2 and main 3 having the same supply [91].
In summary, the 2nd generation of NASA MLDI had made two major
technology improvements compared to 1st generation: the ﬁrst is the
effective fuel staged conﬁguration (either in form of outwardly-canted as
in Parker Hanniﬁn, or the pilot is recessed as in Woodward FST) that
Fig. 38. 5-row radially staged MLDI by Goodrich Corporation [88].
Fig. 39. Flat and 5-recess MLDI by Woodward FST [94].
Fig. 37. The 3-Zone MLDI by Parker Hanniﬁn Corporation and spray testing (Bottom
right) [90].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
33


--- Page 23 ---

minimises the quench effect between adjacent injectors, leading to
reduced CO and UHC emissions; furthermore, the increased staging
points as in Goodrich MLDI (i.e. main 1, main 2 and 3) also enhance the
engine full range of operability. The second is the simpliﬁcation of the
injector conﬁguration that is achieved by either reducing the number of
injectors or enlarging the pilot. The resulting beneﬁts include: the ease of
manufacturing such that dimension discrepancy tolerance for each
injector can be minimised, and effective control for fuel coking: because
the ﬂame recirculation zone is increased due to the enlarged pilot, and
the distance of the ﬂame is further from the injector tip. Finally, the
larger pilot ﬂame recirculation zone improves the ignition capability as
well as enhances the low power operability.
The reduced number of small injectors could compromise the fuel-air
mixing quality. In order to achieve identical or better fuel-air mixedness
for lower emissions combustion, signiﬁcant efforts in the study were put
into investigating the dynamics of mixing and combustion processes.
However, these cannot be completely described through experimental
investigation. NASA has developed the National Combustion Code (NCC)
that helps to investigate both non-reacting ﬂow and reacting ﬂow. NCC
has been used to analyse both single [146,147] and multiple injector LDI
conﬁgurations [148,149]. Comprehensive CFD studies [96–98] were
performed to evaluate combustion characteristics of multi-Lean Direct
Injection combustion systems (LDI-1) so as to prepare a tool to provide
guidance for deﬁning and reﬁning the next-generation LDI-2 and LDI-3.
Non-reacting computations were performed to enable extensive com-
parison of axial-velocity, radial-velocity, tangential-velocity, and turbu-
lent kinetic-energy with experimental data [92]. Fig. 40 shows the axial
velocity contour along two planes for a single component. Predictions of
emissions (EInox, EIco and UHC) were also performed to compare with the
two sets of experimental data representing respectively the low-pressure
and high-pressure engine cycle condition [93]. Fig. 41 shows a
comprehensive summary of the NCC EInox predictions. Seventeen
different ﬂow conditions with varying pressure drops, fuel-air ratios and
fuel-staging between the Pilot stage and the three Main stages were
computed with the NCC. The NCC predictions for EInox were within 30%
of the Woodward FST experimental data.
New generation: NASA continues to develop a 3rd generation MLDI
conﬁguration based on the 2nd generation Woodward FST design. The
new conﬁguration comprises a central pilot injector and four surrounding
main injection elements. The developed CFD code NCC was used to
perform parametric studies on effective area and ﬂow characteristics for
various conﬁgurations in order to derive an optimal conﬁguration to
further improve the fuel-air mixing [144].
By the end of NASA ERA Phase I that ended in 2015, the 2nd gen-
eration of MLDI has demonstrated the ignition, ﬂame propagation, lean
blowout capabilities and NOx reduction through experimental testing.
Assessment of NOx reduction for the intermediate pressure rig would be
the next progress for Phase II [90].
2.5.2.3. Technology application. NASA multi-point injection concepts
aim to meet Environmentally Responsible Aviation (ERA) goals of 75%
NOx reduction for advanced 55:1 pressure ratio and 70,000 lb thrust
engine applications [95].
2.5.2.4. Emissions
status
and
characteristics. The
Parker
Hanniﬁn
conﬁguration was tested in a ﬂame tube test facility at NASA Glenn
Research Centre. The inlet pressure varies from 0.69 to 1.72MPa and
inlet temperature from 590 K to 830 K. Based on the correlations ob-
tained from the tests, a 66% NOx reduction relative to the CAEP/6 is
estimated at a high pressure ratio of 55 [99]. The Goodrich concept was
also tested at the NASA Glenn Research Centre. The inlet pressure is at
55psia and temperature at 496 K. Based on the extrapolation of the rig
test data, the calculated EINOx at take –off is 26.8 g/kg at FAR of 0.035
and at a 55:1 pressure ratio. This is believed to attain and exceed the ERA
goals of 75% NOx reduction (also NASA Nþ2 goal) [88]. The Woodward
concept is tested at NASA Glenn Research Centre and the testing has been
completed at an inlet pressure of 1790 kPa and inlet temperature up to
855 K. Results show that the recess conﬁguration generally has lower
EINOx than that of the ﬂat conﬁguration. Correlations have been devel-
oped, and demonstrating around 88% in NOx reduction relative to the
CAEP/6 standard, which exceeds the ERA goals [91]. Idle HC and CO
testing were performed for the Goodrich concept with three sets of
testing conducted at pressures of 72,81,82 psi, temperatures of 534,537,
538 K and turbine cooling and leakage air (TCLA) of 0%,10% and 15%
respectively. Results are listed in Table 4 and comparisons of results were
made against GE90 data. Overall, the MLDI yields lower idle HC and CO
than the DAC version [95].
2.5.2.5. Summary of advantages and design challenges. Technology
advantages
1. Local uniform fuel-air mixture with rapid mixing can be achieved
through the distributed small recirculation of ﬂame. The resulting
beneﬁt is the reduction of the combustor length and hence low NOx.
Little soot is formed as well.
2. Temperature distribution can be actively controlled by regulating the
local fuel air ratio in each small injector.
Fig. 40. Non-reacting CFD computations for NASA MLDI with single component simu-
lation showing the axial ﬂow velocity in 2-D plane [92].
Table 4
Second generation of NASA MLDI conﬁgurations by Woodward FST [94].
Conﬁguration
Pilot
Pilot
Main 1
Main 1
Main 2
Main 2
Main 3
Main 3
Injector
Swirler
Injector
Swirler
Injector
Swirler
Injector
Swirler
Flat Dome
Simplex
55ccw
Simplex
45ccw
Airblast
IAS: 45cw
Airblast
IAS: 45cw
OAS: 45cw
OAS: 45cw
5-Recess
Airblast
IAS: 57cw
Simplex
45 cw
Airblast
IAS: 45cw
Airblast
IAS: 45cw
OAS: 57ccw
OAS: 45ccw
OAS: 45ccw
OAS: Outer air swirler IAS: Inner air swirler CW ¼ clockwise CCW ¼ counter clockwise.
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
34


--- Page 24 ---

3. The recess and outward canted conﬁgurations alleviate the local
dilution of the ﬂow at the boundaries of fuelled and unfuelled sectors,
thus suppressing excessive formation of CO and UHC.
Technology design challenge
1. Densely packed structure demands high manufacturing technology to
minimise the dimension discrepancy tolerance for each injector.
2. Good thermal management is required due to small ﬂame recircula-
tion that close to injector, coking is an issue.
3. With allowable pressure losses, the mixing quality from this concept
cannot achieve a completely homogeneous fuel-air mixture.
4. The shorter residence time imposes the design challenge for altitude
relight.
2.6. Lean Premixed Prevaporised combustors (LPP)
2.6.1. Working principle
For liquid fuels, the Lean Premixed Prevaporised (LPP) combustor
appears to be most promising for ultra-low NOx combustion. The concept
is schematically depicted in Fig. 42. Fuel is ﬁrst vaporised and then mixed
with the air ﬂow to create a homogeneous mixture before entering the
combustion zone and burning at a low equivalence ratio that is close to
the lean blowout limit. NOx emissions are drastically decreased because
of the low ﬂame temperature and the elimination of hot spots from the
combustion zone. A typical LPP combustor is divided into 3 regions: the
ﬁrst is for fuel injection, vaporisation, and fuel-air mixing such that
completed fuel evaporation and fuel-air mixing can be achieved; the
second is for combustion where the ﬂame is stabilised in the recirculation
zones and the third may comprise a conventional dilution zone. The long
time required for full fuel evaporation and fuel-air mixing at lower power
conditions could result in auto-ignition or ﬂashback in the fuel prepa-
ration duct at higher inlet air temperatures and pressures associated with
high power settings.
2.6.2. Key technology review
Uniform Mixing: With a homogeneous mixture of low equivalence
Fig. 41. The NCC CFD predictions for EINOx were within of 30% the Woodward FST experimental data for with varying pressure drops, fuel-air ratios and fuel-staging between the Pilot
stage and the three Main stages [93].
Fig. 42. Schematic concept of lean premix-prevaporise showing the fuel and air are
premixed before entering into combustor zone [9].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
35


--- Page 25 ---

ratio by LPP, NOx is decreased to a minimum level due to low ﬂame
temperature and uniform mixing. In addition, soot formation can be
effectively eliminated because of the elimination of the local hot rich-
burn; consequently, the liner durability is greatly improved. Another
important advantage is that for a well premixed LPP combustor, the
ﬂame temperature does not exceed 1900K and NOx is not increased with
increase in residence time. Therefore, lean premixed combustors can be
designed to have a longer residence time to minimise CO and UHC while
maintaining low NOx [101]. This is important for industrial applications
where size plays a less important role. A typical example is the GE's lean
premixed LM6000 aero-derivative engine; the combustors being shown
in Fig. 43. From the ﬁgure, one can observe that the new premixed sys-
tem is about twice the conventional LM6000 in size, which supports the
previously stated advantage of reducing CO and UHC by increasing the
combustor residence time.
Also, for a well premixed LPP system with operating ﬂame tempera-
ture below 1900K, the NOx formation is less dependent on combustor
inlet pressure and temperature; this is unlike the traditional diffusion
ﬂame system where NOx is a function of both combustor inlet pressure P3
and temperature T3. This ﬁnding is based on data taken from a gas-ﬁred
LM6000 Lean premixed test by Leonard and Stegmaier. The test operates
at P3 from 1 to 30 bar, T3 from 300 to 800 K and residence time varied
from 2 to 100 ms [101].
Auto-ignition and ﬂashback: One of the most crucial design chal-
lenges for the LPP system is preventing the occurrence of auto-ignition
(spontaneous ignition) or ﬂashback inside the LPP injection system
when combustor P3, T3 and residence time in the premixing passages are
high. The injection system could be damaged if a ﬂame is stabilised in the
premixing passage. The primary design criterion for a premixer is the
determination of ignition delay time, which is deﬁned as the time in-
terval between the creation of a combustible mixture and onset of ﬂame.
Flashback occurs when the ﬂame speed exceeds the gas velocity along
some streamline and propagates upstream of the combustion zone and
into the premixing passage. Lean burn often decreases ﬂame speed,
however with high temperature, pressure and turbulence intensity,
which cause increased ﬂame speed. It often occurs through the ﬂow
boundary layer along the premixing passage walls because the ﬂow ve-
locity there is lowest [102]. Also, ﬂashback can be driven by combustion
oscillation during which high amplitude of pressure oscillation can be
formed with positive pressure gradient; the local ﬂow velocity is
decreased below the ﬂame speed [67]. Flashback is also driven by
combustion induced vortex breakdown and hence if the mixture inside
the vortex bubble moving upstream is within the ﬂammability limits,
ﬂashback could occur [102].
Therefore, in order to prevent premixing or ﬂashback, the design of
the premixing passage has to be made with its residence time less than
the ignition delay time with a sufﬁcient margin. This imposes a challenge
for achieving full premixing and prevaporisation with a shorter premix-
ing length. As previously discussed, no full premixing and prevaporisa-
tion within the premixing channels have been achieved so far for modern
aircraft engines.
Since the LPP is burning fuel lean, close to lean blowout, the stability
issues need to be addressed through the use of the pilot stage, which
increases the complexity and cost. The very lean burn necessitates the
efﬁcient cooling schemes such as double-skin impingement and effusion
cooling because more air is used for burn hence less is available for
cooling. Also, high altitude relight is difﬁcult to achieve even with the
presence of the pilot stage [103]. A variable geometry scheme needs to be
employed to address the issue, which leads to the introduction of the
concept in the following section.
2.6.3. Technology application
The concept of LPP has been developed under the NASA Experimental
Clean Combustor Program (ECCP) programme in the early 1970s. Under
this programme, one of the GE concepts for replacing the baseline
combustor of the engine powering large subsonic turbofans GE CF6-50 is
a radial/axial staged combustor with a premixing main stage. The
baseline engine has PR of 30 and max SLS thrust of 218kN [104]. The
pilot in the concept has a conventional design, the main comprising a
premixing channel with bluff body ﬂame holders placed downstream.
Each main fuel injection consists of a fuel bar with two circumferentially
directed holes of 1.03 mm diameter.
Later, the concept of LPP has been developed by GE and P&W under
NASA Critical Propulsion Components CPC, as a part of the HSCT pro-
gramme in the 1990s. The programme focuses on the NOx reductions at
supersonic cruise ﬂight conditions [105]. The goals of the programme are
to attain a cruise EINOx below 5 g/kg while reaching the combustion ef-
ﬁciency of 99.9%. P3 and T3 of the combustor are 9 bar and 938 K. In the
end, the propulsion cycle and combustor selected are the mixed ﬂow
turbofan (MFTF) and LPP for the ﬁnal development. The design has
demonstrated the emissions and operability that meet the requirements
of the programme. Detailed requirements can be found in Ref. [106].
Two LPP concepts have been conceived in the programme: LPP Stepped
Dome SD concept and LPP Multi-stage Radial/Axial MRA concept, as
shown in Fig. 44 and Fig. 45. Both concepts employ fuel staging archi-
tecture with cyclones pilots and premixing tubes named integrated mixer
ﬂame holder IMFH. The major difference is the layout of the staging
zones: stepped dome arrangement is such that at least one of the annular
sections of the dome is recessed relative to the others. This helps to
isolate the pilot from the other injectors to decrease CO and UHC emis-
sions that are of concern at low powers. LPP MRA was ﬁnally selected for
the ﬁnal development considering the advantages over SD with respect to
fuel nozzle manufacturability, reliability, cost and weight, etc. No
auto-ignition or ﬂashback occurred during the ﬂame tube and sector
tests [106].
More recently, the LPP concept has been developed by Turbomeca
under subproject (SP6) of the European New Aero Engine Core Concepts
NEWAC programme which started in 2006 and was due for completion in
2011 [107,108,110]. Fig. 46 illustrates a 3-D view of the design. The LPP
concept is adapted to a reverse ﬂow combustor that ﬁts into an inter-
cooled recuperative IRA engine of OPR <25. Similar to previous LPP, it
features a fuel staging with a pilot stage placed in the outboard position
to maintain the stability at low powers [109]. Fuel premixing and per-
vaporation process are achieved inside the fuel injection system duct, as
schematically shown on the bottom right of the ﬁgure. The airﬂow is split
into two: one devoted to fuel atomisation through the high swirled air
velocity, and the second for mixing and fuel evaporation in the duct.
The LPP is well adapted to the lower OPR engines (e.g. OPR <25)
because the lower inlet pressure and temperature minimise the risk of
auto-ignition inside the injection system. A NOx reduction of 57% versus
CAEP/2 limit is validated on a full annular combustor test at the LTO
cycles. Apart from light-up performance and operating life, a TRL of 5 has
Fig. 43. Comparison of LPP (top) and the conventional LM6000 (bottom) [100].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
36


--- Page 26 ---

been reached. The expected entry into service is 2018 [108].
2.6.4. Emissions status and characteristics
Limited information is in the public domain, for recent LPP
combustors developed in the NEWAC programme. A NOx reduction of
57% versus CAEP/2 limit is validated on a full annular combustor test at
LTO cycles [108]. The same results can be also seen in Fig. 35.
2.6.5. Summary of technology advantages and design challenges
Technology advantages
1. Lowest emission can be achieved in principle with soot effectively
eliminated.
2. Liner durability is greatly improved due to low ﬂame radiation.
Technology design challenges
1. Auto-ignition and ﬂashback risk become severe at higher OPR en-
gines; this limits the further application for future gas turbines.
2. Higher lean blowout risk due to ultra-lean burn and staged combus-
tion has to be employed with compromise in higher production for
NOx emission at engine part load.
2.7. Variable geometry combustors (VGC)
2.7.1. Working principle
The working principle is schematically shown in Fig. 47. The overall
Fig. 44. LPP MRA combustor [106].
Fig. 45. LPP stepped dome Concepts [106].
Fig. 46. LPP reverse ﬂow combustor by Turbomeca under NEWAC programme [108,109].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
37


--- Page 27 ---

approach is to control the combustion stoichiometry in the primary zone
by regulating the air ﬂow through a variable geometry control system. As
shown in the schematics, the air ﬂow splitter is driven by a hydraulic
system and is allowed translational movement (moves forward and
backwards) to vary the cross-sectional area and hence the air ﬂow ratio
into the primary zone. At lower power conditions, the degree of opening
of the splitter increases the quantity of air diverted backwards to create a
high primary FAR and a reducing ﬂow velocity for high combustion ef-
ﬁciency and improved stability, as well as good light-up capability. As
power is increased, the splitter opens, introducing more air into the
primary zone to achieve low FAR such that lean combustion is achieved
for the purpose of NOx and smoke reduction. Another form of controlling
the air ﬂowing into the combustor zone includes the use of variable-area
swirlers to control the swirling airﬂow which regulates the combustor
primary zone equivalence ratio according to the power changes [111].
2.7.2. Key technology review
Potential to achieve all performance goals: The variable geometry
combustor provides the most effective way of maintaining the primary
zone temperature within the low emission ‘window’, thus it has great
potential for reducing all the emissions without compromising its com-
bustion performance at all operating conditions. In addition to this, the
variable geometry system has proven to have an improved altitude
relight performance. A test has been conducted to evaluate altitude
relight capability for a ram-induction combustor for designed cruise
Mach number M ¼ 3.0. The altitude relight capability can be achieved
with an inlet pressure down to 0.238 atmospheres compared to 0.47
atmospheres with the conventional model by bypassing the primary zone
air ﬂow toward the outer transition liner thereby reducing the combustor
reference Mach number. The test was conducted at ambient air and fuel
temperature [112].
Control Schemes: In order to realise the control to achieve all per-
formance goals as well as low emissions, several schemes based on air
ﬂow control with variable geometry combustor and fuel ﬂow staging are
proposed by Yi-Guang Li [113]. The control schemes include an intro-
duction of ﬂame temperature predictor to control the primary zone ﬂame
temperature at a set point value. The prediction of ﬂame temperature is
achieved with several engine operating combustor geometric parame-
ters. The alternative simpliﬁed scheme was also implemented with ﬂame
temperature, essentially controlled through the relation between primary
zone air and an indirect control parameter that is the non-dimensional
fuel ﬂow rate. The combined fuel staging was also investigated as
another control scheme. The proposed schemes were applied to an aero
turbofan engine model and results indicate that signiﬁcant reduction of
emissions at ground level can be achieved with the control schemes
working effectively at cruising altitude. In addition, the dynamic per-
formance of the variable geometry combustor was also investigated by
Yi-Guang Li et al. The study observed that during engine transition
process; the maximum moving rate of the control system (i.e. the hy-
draulic driven system) may delay the air splitter (Fig. 47) movement.
However, this effect on engine combustor performance is not signiﬁcant.
Utilisation of variable geometries demonstrated the potential for
improving combustion stability, efﬁciency and speciﬁc fuel consumption
compared to conventional conﬁgurations [114].
However, the advantages achieved are at the expense of increased
cost and weight due to the introduction of the complex control schemes.
The increased weight signiﬁcantly compromises its application for small
and medium gas turbines, particularly for aircraft engines where low
weight is a primary design goal.
Flow distortion: the control scheme (i.e. sliding bands) has to move
to an extreme position to satisfy the control target over the wide range of
operating conditions; it causes ﬂow distortion at the combustor zone and
hence large pressure loss is encountered. The severe ﬂow distortion
causes challenge for liner durability because the cooling air ﬂow in the
combustor annulus passage is changed frequently and may move away
from the design point. This also leads to problems of achieving the
desired temperature pattern in the combustor efﬂux gases, especially if
the liner pressure drop is allowed to vary too much.
Therefore, to reduce the range of the movement of sliding bands, fuel
staging is often employed. The introduction of fuel staging again in-
creases the complexity and cost of the system and decreases its reliability.
Variable geometry should be used in conjunction with LPP to avoid local
hot spots and high NOx formation regions. Also, improved relight
capability can be realised with this scheme for lean burn system.
2.7.3. Technology application
The variable geometry concept has not been matured and therefore
has not been currently applied for aero engines. It however has been used
in large industrial applications. A typical example includes application on
to a 120MW gas turbine in the 1090-MW LNG combined cycle plant in
Japan [115]. However, the cost and weight of variable geometry systems
are inevitably high because of the complex control and feedback mech-
anisms, with low reliability. For these reasons, it has not been applied on
aircraft gas turbines. Reference [116] forecast the time scales for the
application of different low emissions technologies and predicted the
application of variable geometry on aero application only after the
year 2020.
A number of variable geometry concepts have been proposed by
several researchers, the typical low conﬁgurations can be found in Adkins
[117] and Hayashi et al. [118], Schultz [119,120], Cupta et al. [121],
Fletcher [122] and Saintsbury and Sampath [123], Furthermore, the
variable geometry combustor has been developed for automotive gas
turbines. Fig. 48 shows the geometry of an LPP combined with variable
geometry combustors used for a 100 horse-power engine by the Allison
Division of GE Motor [124]. The combustor comprises a prechamber, a
pilot and ignition chamber, and the main cylinder chamber of 127 mm
diameter. The prechamber contains a start injector located on the cen-
treline of the combustor and main fuel injector. Air is introduced into the
prechamber through both axial and radial swirlers. The premixed pre-
vaporised fuel-air mixture ﬂows into the main cylinder chamber through
a 46.6 mm diameter of the opening in the centre of the dome. Variable
geometry is employed to control the FAR in the primary zone by sliding
bands. The cross section areas of the radial swirlers of the prechamber
and dilution holes can be controlled so that the amount of air ﬂow can be
varied. At low power, most of the air is admitted into the dilution holes.
As power is increased the degree of the opening in radial swirlers is
increased. Air ﬂowing through the radial swirlers merges and mixes with
air ﬂowing through the axial swirlers before entering the main chamber.
At full power, additional air is admitted into the main chamber from the
inlet ports through the dome holes. Fig. 49 shows the air split as a
function of sliding location of the variable geometry system. The pilot
stage is employed to maintain the low power stability.
Fig. 47. The variable geometry concept schematics [113].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
38


--- Page 28 ---

2.7.4. Emissions characteristics
The emissions prediction of variable geometry for aero application
has been conducted by Pervier [103]. Fig. 50 shows the comparisons of
NOx emissions for LPP with and without variable geometry as a function
of power setting. The emission of NOx is predicted using stirred-reactor
models whose layout is the same as that of AGT100 [103]. The
combustor main chamber front end is divided into 2 regions: a ﬂame
front core for simulating the main chamber front end, and a ﬂame front
near wall for simulating the dome. The combustor inputs are adopted
from the performance simulation of CF6-80E1A1 which powers A330
with a thrust rating of 300–320kN. The OPR ¼ 32.4 and BPR ¼ 5.3.
Power is varied from 10% to 100% at sea level. The ﬂame front core
equivalence ratio is set to be 0.5. It can be noted that, at low power up to
around 55%, LPP with variable geometry actually produces higher
emissions than when compared with an application with ﬁxed geometry.
The reason for this is attributed to the air fraction to the near wall (i.e.
dome in Fig. 48) is close to stoichiometry, thereby leading to the increase
in lean stability, combustion efﬁciency, and hence higher NOx emissions.
As power is further increased, a large fraction of air is diverted to the
Fig. 48. AGT100 LPP with variable geometry combustor [155].
Fig. 49. Air split vs sliding band location [156].
Fig. 50. The predicted EINOx vs Power setting for LPP with and without variable geometry
using chemical reactor model [103].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
39


--- Page 29 ---

ﬂame front core as well as ﬂame front near wall such that the local
equivalence ratio is low, thus a reduction of one magnitude of NOx
emissions
is
produced
by
variable
geometry
compared
to
the
ﬁxed geometry.
2.7.5. Summary of technology advantages and design challenges
Technology advantages
1. Reduction in emissions (NOx, CO and UHC) for power conditions
throughout the entire the ﬂight envelope can be achieved by con-
trolling the combustion stoichiometry through regulating the airﬂow.
2. High altitude relight capability can be achieved by passing the pri-
mary zone air ﬂow towards the outer transition liner thereby reducing
the combustor reference Mach number.
3. The part load operability is improved via the ﬂexible controlling
scheme.
Technology design challenges
1. Complexity of control system and higher cost.
2. Increased weight due to the introduction of a control system is a
signiﬁcant challenge for aero applications.
3. System reliability needs to be demonstrated with more rig testing.
4. Liner durability challenge arises from the cooling ﬂow distortion in
combustor annulus passage.
3. Review of performance aspects
Although emissions could be a focus when designing a typical low
emissions combustor, the importance of other performance interacting
with the emissions should be explored thoroughly. Therefore the per-
formance should not be compromised when designing a low emission
combustor. Fig. 51 shows the interrelated combustor performance for
design considerations.
Safety is always the most important airworthiness criterion and there
is no exception for low emissions combustors design perspective. The
altitude-relight capability and avoidance of autoignition/ﬂashback
should be considered primarily during the early stage of the design.
Stable combustion is critical as combustion instability could damage the
hardware of the combustor and become a safety issue. Operability should
be also considered as a high priority to ensure the combustor is capable of
operating over a wide range of fuel-air ratios, (larger turndown ratio).
The performance criteria such as combustion efﬁciency and pressure loss
are always the key design considerations because the combustor design
has to satisfy the whole engine requirement as SFC and total fuel con-
sumption of the engine are proportional to the combustion efﬁciency.
Pressure loss, as an important engine cycle parameter also affects the
whole engine design, particularly for engine SFC. Size and weight are
important for aero applications, particularly for small/medium aircraft.
In order to meet the durability requirement, the component should be
designed to ensure they are capable of operating over thousands of hours
and ﬂight cycles. The satisfactory downstream turbine thermal and life
integrity should be achieved by improving the exit temperature
distribution.
In addition to emissions levels, a number of combustion performance
parameters are evaluated in a qualitative manner for the reviewed low
emissions combustion technology. A performance matrix is provided in
Table 5 that would be used for design considerations. Justiﬁcations for
each evaluation are provided in the following section.
3.1. Altitude relight capability
Rich burn combustors generally have a superior altitude relight
performance than lean burn combustors. The reasons are the easier
setup for richer fuel-air stoichiometry and less susceptibility to local
quenching because of staged conﬁguration. Some of the future lean-
burn combustor technologies may have greater difﬁculty in meeting
the commonly stipulated (by airline customers) relight capability of
9143 m (30,000 feet). Some manufacturers questioned the need for this
level of capability, and 7620 m (25,000 feet) is regarded as a satisfac-
tory safety margin [46]. Some lean burn technologies such as RR LDI
has achieved the relight capability of 30,000 feet from the E3E core
engine testing [133]. Amongst the lean-burn technologies, MLDI is
deemed to contain the least altitude relight capability. The shorter ﬂow
residence time by MLDI imposes a design challenge for altitude relight
because it depends on the volume of recirculating ﬂow downstream of
the injectors. This reduces in proportion (approximately) to the number
of injectors. VGC is believed to be most promising in maintaining a
satisfactory relight capability because the dome air mass ﬂow under
windmilling condition and the corresponding equivalence ratio can be
tailored to fall into the ignition stability loop with a sufﬁcient
safety margin.
Fig. 51. Interrelated combustor design considerations (combustor image adapted from Ref. [157]).
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
40


--- Page 30 ---

3.2. Autoignition/ﬂashback risk
Autoignition/ﬂashback is evaluated based on the type of ﬂame,
namely diffusion or pre-mixed ﬂames. RQL, DAC, ASC, LDI, MLDI and
VGC all employ the diffusion ﬂame system. LPP adopts the premix ﬂame
to minimise the emissions, the risk of autoignition and ﬂashback is
theoretically the highest. TAPS uses partially premixed system for the
main stage and risk is assessed to be moderate. However, since TAPS has
demonstrated safety and achieved the FAA certiﬁcation for this type of
technology, it is reasonable to believe such risk is effectively controlled.
3.3. Combustion stability
It has been a major issue in the design of aero combustors, and lean
burn combustors are more prone to combustion instability. It arises due
to the coupling between the unstable combustion process and acoustic
disturbances within the combustion chamber. These self-sustained in-
stabilities are more likely to occur in lean premixed combustion systems
[142]. The mechanism is described in Ref. [138]: acoustic noise is
generated during the combustion process with a broad frequency band-
width [139]. These acoustic waves propagate inside the combustion
chamber, interact with the boundaries and travel back to the combustion
zone. These pressure oscillations generate in turn perturbations of the
ﬂow ﬁeld by modifying the local ﬂow rate, reactant composition or
thermodynamic properties in the ﬂame region, producing heat release
rate disturbances [140,141]. When heat release disturbances and pres-
sure oscillations are in phase, the acoustic energy in the system is
ampliﬁed and a resonance is generally observed.
In order to control the combustion instability, the mechanism of
various acoustic dampers, such as perforated liners, Helmholtz resona-
tors, bafﬂes, half-and quarter-wave tube are applied. The status, chal-
lenges and progress of implementing such acoustic dampers on engine
system have been critically reviewed by D. Zhao and X. Y. Li [125]. Also,
J Chen, D. Zhao, N Han and J Li conducted an experimental investigation
on a cold-ﬂow pipe to study the effect of different shaped oriﬁce edges,
porosities and mean ﬂow Mach number on aeroacoustics damping per-
formance for perforated liner application. The study observed that the
edge shape of the perforated oriﬁce and thickness to diameter ratio of the
perforated plates do not signiﬁcantly impact its sound absorption and
damping performance. However, the mean ﬂow Mach number and
porosity of the perforated plate both play important roles in affecting
noise damping. Another ﬁnding is that the effective damping frequency
ranges of perforated plates are dependent on the length of the down-
stream duct. Other valuable information for perforated liner in-
vestigations can be found in Ref. [126,127].
Fluctuations could result from perturbations in ﬂow and fuel-air ratio
oscillations because of the fuel staging. Furthermore, the range for stable
rich combustion is wider than that for lean burn. (i.e. typical rich
extinction limit is around equivalence ratio of 3 whereas the corre-
sponding equivalence ratio for lean blowout limit is around 0.5 [128]) As
a consequence, RQL has higher combustion stability than the others. LPP
is believed to have the lowest combustion stability in the absence of the
fuel staging because it burns at a low equivalence ratio that is close to the
lean blowout limit.
3.4. Combustion efﬁciency
For modern aircraft engines, combustion efﬁciency is effectively
Fig. 52. The schematic representation for a conventional combustor [158].
Fig. 53. The end view of fuel distribution image by PLIF for the middle of array section of MLDI [150].
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
41


--- Page 31 ---

100% at take-off conditions. Relatively low levels of 98%–99.5% can be
seen at low power conditions. For take-off condition, the currently
reviewed technologies all demonstrate high efﬁciency and achieved the
design requirement (i.e.> 99.5%) with current RQL combustors having
an efﬁciency of 99.9% at all high power conditions [7]. Since limited
information explicitly quantiﬁes the efﬁciency for some advanced low
emission combustor, (e.g. LDI, TAPS, LPP) qualitative evaluation for the
efﬁciency is based on the quality of fuel preparation, mixing and rate of
reaction. The main reason that TAPS and MLDI have higher efﬁciency
stems from the partial premixing system for the main stage of the TAPS
and the higher degree of uniformity of fuel-air mixture due to multi-point
injection. The even higher efﬁciency for LPP is due to higher quality of
fuel preparation and mixing because of pre-vaporisation and premixing.
The low power efﬁciency for the modern combustor has to be greater
than 99.5%. Overall, the current reviewed low emissions combustors all
have satisfactory low power efﬁciency. RQL combustors have idle efﬁ-
ciencies ranging from 98.8% to 99.3% [25]. For lean-burn combustors,
the high idle efﬁciency is achieved through local rich burn due to fuel
staging. ASC and VGC are believed to have higher value. The local
quenching can be minimised due to axial staging compared to internally
staging such as RR LDI and TAPS. For ASC, higher residence time is
allowed for consumption of incomplete combustion compared to DAC.
For VGC, the high efﬁciency due to favourable local fuel-air stoichiom-
etry can be realised by regulating the right amount of air ﬂow via this
technology.
3.5. Pressure loss
It is challenging to obtain any signiﬁcant increase in pressure loss due
solely to the introduction of low emissions combustion technologies since
1% increase in pressure loss leads to approximately 1% increase in engine
SFC, depending on the cycle of the engine [129]. Therefore, the currently
reviewed technologies are designed to ensure the loss is in a reasonable
range, typically ranging from 4% to 6%. VGC presents more challenge in
maintaining such a desired range compared to the others since the con-
trol scheme (i.e. sliding bands) has to move to an extreme position to
satisfy the control target over the wide range of operating conditions.
Additionally, it causes ﬂow distortion at the combustor zone hence a
large pressure loss. For MLDI, since mixing has to be achieved within a
large number of small fuel-air mixers, the pressure loss could be
increased through a number of small injectors. The allowable pressure
loss, therefore, impacts the effectiveness on the fuel-air mixedness.
3.6. Combustor weight
The DAC has a very high surface to volume ratio; this presents cooling
challenges but also includes a penalty for extra weight. ASC also has a
weight penalty due to increase in axial length, and introduction of the
separate fuel feeding system. The heavy weight of VGC due to the
introduction of the complex control system is a key design challenge.
Despite the fact that MLDI has a relatively heavier injection system due to
increased number of fuel injectors and corresponding air swirling and
venturi assemblies, the liner length can be effectively reduced because
the mixing quality is signiﬁcantly enhanced due to the improved spatial
dispersion of fuel by MLDI. Therefore, MLDI is believed to have a mod-
erate weight as the other single annular combustor (SAC) versions.
3.7. Fuel coking
For the ASC, cooling of the main injectors imposes a design challenge
since the two stages require separated feed arms. The main fuel nozzles
are immersed in the hot incoming gases from the pilot stage and cannot
be cooled by the pilot fuel to reduce the coking. The ﬂame front is close to
the injector face due to small recirculation formed in MLDI. The fuel
coking formed in the external surface area of MLDI system is a design
issue. Furthermore, the internal fuel passage for the small size injector
Table 5
Summary of the reviewed low emissions combustion performance based on qualitative assessment.
No.
Criterion
RQL
DAC
ASC
TAPS
LDI
MLDI
LPP
VGC
Schematics [9,10,27,87,106,113,136,137]
1
TRL (9)
9
9
5
9
7
5
5
< 5 (for aeros)
2
Altitude relight capability
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Higher
3
Autoignition/ﬂashback risk
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Low
Low
High
Low
4
Combustion stability
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
5
Combustion efﬁciency (High power)
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
6
Combustion efﬁciency (Low power)
High
High
Higher
High
High
High
High
Higher
7
Pressure loss
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
High
Moderate
High
8
LTO NOx (high power)
Low
Lower
Lower
Even Lower
Even Lower
Even Lower
Lowest
Lower
9
LTO CO (low power)
Moderate
Higher
Moderate
High
High
High
High
Low
10
LTO UHC (low power)
Moderate
High
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
11
Smoke number
High
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
12
Weight
Moderate
Heavy
Heavy
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Heavy
13
Fuel coking risk
Moderate
Moderate
Higher
Moderate
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
14
Liner life
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Long
Long
Long
Long
Moderate
15
OTDF/RTDF quality
High
Moderate
High
Higher
Higher
Higher
Higher
Moderate
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
42


--- Page 32 ---

has been reduced in size, which increases the possibility of fuel coking,
especially at high power conditions. For RR LDI, the fuel injector in-
tegrates an increased number of axial swirlers into the lean direct in-
jection system, resulting in a larger wetted area. This promotes the heat
transfer process between the hot inlet combustor air and injector walls. A
higher risk for fuel coking could therefore be a design issue. However, as
discussed in 2.4.2, coking could be considered as ‘good coke’ sometimes
as it could be beneﬁcial for improved idle combustion efﬁciency from
TAPS development.
3.8. Liner life
The thermal creep and low cycle fatigue are the two main failure
modes that determine liner life. For thermal creep, the wall temperature
and temperature gradient are dominant factors. For low cycle fatigue,
the structural integrity plays a crucial rule. RQL combustor is generally
more susceptible to thermal creep than lean burn due to higher lumi-
nous radiation resulting from rich combustion. Furthermore, the dome
cooling ﬂow is admitted gradually, hence towards the high NOx for-
mation route, resulting in higher wall temperature. The DAC and ASC
contain relatively larger liner surface areas that enhance the heat
transfer process and hence wall temperature. The previously stated
cooling issues for VGC impose a challenge in maintaining a higher liner
life. Primary zone holes and dilution holes are eliminated in TAPS and
RR LDI. Since local stress concentration near liner holes can be effec-
tively eliminated, the cracking and therefore low cycle fatigue can be
effectively controlled.
3.9. Exit temperature distribution OTDF/RTDF
Exit temperature distribution is usually quantiﬁed by two terms, the
OTDF and RTDF. The OTDF (Overall Temperature Distribution Factor) is
the ratio of the different between the peak and mean temperature in the
outlet combustor plane, to the combustor mean temperature rise.
The RTDF is similar to the OTDF but uses circumferentially averaged
values and this determines the turbine blade life because the hub carries
the largest stress and is susceptible to creep, and the blade tip is usually
very thin and difﬁcult to cool. Therefore, a typical radial peak tempera-
ture must not occur at both locations. As previously discussed the RTDF
also impacts the turbine work extraction efﬁciency, unsatisfactory RTDF
will increase mission fuel burn.
The OTDF ideally should be controlled to less than 0.2 [130]. The
reviewed combustor technologies are believed to attain this goal except
the DAC which demonstrates the challenge. This is particularly during
low power conditions where the pilot ﬂame is lit and less dilution air
available downstream of the two stages as well as the shorter dilution
length before the turbine nozzle. Similarly, the DAC presents more
challenges in controlling the RTDF. Compared to the temperature dis-
tribution in the quench zone of an RQL combustor, premixed combustors
should have the advantage to achieve a lower pattern factor. TAPS ach-
ieves the lowest pattern factor amongst DAC and RQL versions of GE
engines [131]. LPP is believed to have the lowest pattern factor due to the
near homogeneous mixture created and elimination of hot spots from the
combustion zone. VGC presents a challenge of achieving the desired
temperature pattern if the liner pressure drop is allowed to vary too
much. (i.e. change in liner hole discharge coefﬁcient CD due to annulus
ﬂow distortion resulting from the frequent movement of the ﬂow control
slide
mechanism,
which
subsequently
results
in
dilution
air
ﬂow variation).
4. Conclusions
This article provides a comprehensive review of low emissions com-
bustion technologies for modern aero gas turbines. The review considers
current high Technologies Readiness Level (TRL) technologies including
Rich-Burn Quick-quench Lean-burn (RQL), Double Annular Combustor
(DAC), Twin Annular Premixing Swirler combustors (TAPS), Lean Direct
Injection (LDI). It further reviews some of the advanced technologies at
lower TRL. These include NASA multi-point LDI, Lean Premixed Pre-
vaporised (LPP), Axially Staged Combustors (ASC) and Variable Geom-
etry Combustors (VGC).
The focus of review is placed on working principles, key technologies
(includes the key technology features, methods of realising the technol-
ogy, associated technology advantages and design challenges, progress in
development), technology application and emissions mitigation poten-
tial. The article concludes the technology review by providing a tech-
nology evaluation matrix based on a number of combustion performance
criteria including altitude relight auto-ignition ﬂashback, combustion
stability, combustion efﬁciency, pressure loss, size and weight, liner life
and exit temperature distribution.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank the AECC Hunan Aviation Power-
plant Research Institute for funding the research. The technical advice
provided by Mr. Bryn Jones and Dr Pierre Gauthier are gratefully
appreciated. The authors are also very grateful to Miss Yingyi Liu, Dr. Eric
M Goodger, Prof. Max Platzer and Prof. Zhao Dan for providing support
with proof reading and editing the paper.
References
[1] International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), ICAO. Annex 16 to the
Convention on International Civil Aviation, Environmental Protection, Volume II,
Aircraft Engine Emissions, Technical report, third ed., ICAO, 2008.
[2] Environment Branch of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
ICAO Environmental Report 2013, Technical report, ICAO, 2013.
[3] N. Dickson, Local Air Quality and ICAO Engine Emissions Standards, 2014.
Available at: http://www.icao.int/Meetings/EnvironmentalWorkshops/
Documents/2014-Kenya/4-1_LAQTechnology_notes.pdf.
[4] Environment Branch of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
ICAO Environmental Report 2016, Technical report, ICAO, 2016.
[5] V. Sethi, Overview of Gas Turbine Generated Pollutants Combustor, MSc Gas
Turbine Combustion Lecture Notes, Cranﬁeld University, 2017.
[6] M. Prather, R. Sausen, A.S. Grossman, J.M. Haywood, D. Rind, B.H. Subbaraya,
Potential Climate Change from Aviation. Aviation and the Global Atmosphere, A
Special Report of IPCC Working Groups I and III, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 1999, pp. 185–215.
[7] T.C. Lieuwen, V. Yang, Gas Turbine Emissions. Cambridge Aerospace Series,
University Press, Cambridge, 2013.
[8] P. Glarborg, A.D. Jensen, J.E. Johnsson, Fuel nitrogen conversion in solid fuel
ﬁred systems, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 29 (2) (2003) 89–113.
[9] A.H. Lefebvre, D.R. Ballal, Gas Turbine Combustion: Alternative Fuels and
Emissions, third ed., Taylor & Francis, 2010.
[10] H.C. Mongia, TAPS: a fourth generation propulsion combustor technology for low
emissions, in: AIAA International Air and Space Symposium and Exposition: the
Next 100 Years, International Air and Space Symposium, 2003.
[11] R. Roberts, A. Peduzzi, G.E. Vitti, Experimental Clean Combustor Program Phase I
Final Report, NASA CR-134736, October 1975.
[12] T.W. Bruce, F.G. Davis, T.E. Kuhn, H.C. Mongia, Pollution Reduction Technology
Program Small Jet Engines Phase I Final Report, NASA CR-135214, 1977.
[13] D. W Bahr, C. C. Gleason, Experimental Clean Combustor Program Phase I Final
Report.
[14] R.D. Anderson, et al., Pollution Reduction Technology Program Turboprop
Engines Phase I Final Report, NASA CR-135040, March 1976.
[15] H.C. Mongia, W.G.A.E. Dodds, Low emissions propulsion engine combustor
technology evolution past, present and future, in: 24th Congress of International
Council of the Aeronautical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan, Aug. 2004.
[16] ICAO, Independent Experts NOx Review and the Establishment of Medium and
Long Term Technology Goals for NOx (Doc 9887), 2006.
[17] ACARE, Advisory Council for Aviation Research and Innovation in Europe Activity
Summary, 2014.
[18] https://www.nasa.gov/pdf/395949main_collier.pdf, 2014.
[19] PhD thesis, A Giusti Development of Numerical Tools for the Analysis of Advanced
Airblast Injection Systems for Lean Burn Aero-engine Combustors, University of
Florence., 2013.
[20] G.S. Samuelsen, et al., Experimental and modeling investigation of the effect of air
preheat on the formation of NOx in an RQL combustor, Heat Mass Transf. 49.2
(2013) 219–231.
[21] S.A. Mosier, R.M. Pierce, Advanced Combustor Systems for Stationary Gas Turbine
Engines, Phase I. Review and Preliminary Evaluation, Vol. I, Contract 68-02-2136,
FR-11405, Final Report, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1980. March.
[22] G.J. Sturgess, R. McKinney, S. Morford, Modiﬁcation of combustor stoichiometry
distribution for reduced NOx emission from aircraft engines, in: International Gas
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
43


--- Page 33 ---

Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exposition. American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, ASME, 1992.
[23] Schweitzer, K. Jeffrey, et al., Validation of propulsion technologies and new
engine concepts in a joint technology demonstrator program, in: XVII ISABE 1002,
2005.
[24] Frank Haselbach, Ric Parker, Hot End technology for advanced, low emission
large civil aircraft engines, in: 28th International Congress of the Aeronautical
Sciences, vol. 2, 2012.
[25] H.C. Mongia, Future Trends in Commercial Aviation Engines Combustion. In
Novel Combustion Concepts for Sustainable Energy Development, Springer, 2014,
pp. 113–176.
[26] M.J. Foust, D. Thomsen, R. Stickles, C. Cooper, W. Dodds, Development of the GE
aviation low emissions taps combustor for next generation aircraft engines, in:
AIAA Paper, 936:2012, 2012.
[27] G. Randal McKinney, D. Sepulveda, W. Sowa, A. Cheung, The pratt & whitney
Talon X low emissions combustor: revolutionary results with evolutionary
technology, in: 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, 2007, p. 386.
[28] J.M. Cohen, T.J. Rosfjord, Inﬂuences on the sprays formed by high-shear fuel
nozzle/swirler assemblies, J. Propuls. Power 9 (1) (January 1993).
[29] H. Mongia, Engineering aspects of complex gas turbine combustion mixers Part IV:
swirl cup, in: 9th Annual International Energy Conversion Engineering
Conference, 2011.
[30] H. Mongia, On continuous NOx reduction of aero-propulsion engines, in: 48th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Including the New Horizons Forum and
Aerospace Exposition, 2010.
[31] James D. Holdeman, James R. Clisset, Jeffrey P. Moder, Spreadsheet Calculations
for Jets in Crossﬂow: Opposed Rows of Inline and Staggered Holes and Single and
Opposed Rows with Alternating Hole Sizes, 2010.
[32] James D. Holdeman, James R. Clisset, Jeffrey P. Moder, Spreadsheet calculations
of jets in crossﬂow: opposed rows of inline and staggered round holes, Heat Mass
Transf. 48.2 (2012) 413–424.
[33] James D. Holdeman, et al., On the Mixing of Single and Opposed Rows of Jets with
a Conﬁned Crossﬂow, 2006.
[34] Richard J. Margason, Fifty years of jet in cross ﬂow research, in: AGARD,
Computational and Experimental Assessment of Jets in Cross Flow 41 p (SEE N94-
28003 07-34), vol. 1, 1993.
[35] James D. Holdeman, David S. Liscinsky, Daniel B. Bain, Mixing of multiple jets
with a conﬁned subsonic crossﬂow: Part II—opposed rows of oriﬁces in
rectangular ducts, in: ASME 1997 International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine
Congress and Exhibition, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 1997.
[36] James D. Holdeman, et al., Mixing of multiple jets with a conﬁned subsonic
crossﬂow in a cylindrical duct, in: ASME 1996 International Gas Turbine and
Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
1996.
[37] J.D. Holderman, et al., A Spreadsheet for the Mixing of a Row of Jets with a
Conﬁned Crossﬂow, 2005.
[38] K. SridharaGas Mixing in the Dilution Zone of a Combustion Chamber, College of
Aeronautics MSc thesis 20/187, Cranﬁeld, UK.
[39] Cooling Patches to Reduce Gas and Wall Temperature Levels and Gradients;
Source: US Patent Application 2008/0010991 A1 Jan. 17, 2008.
[40] FP7 Coordination Action – GA 605506, 2014.
[41] Robert E. Malecki, et al., Application of an advanced CFD-based analysis system to
the PW6000 combustor to optimize exit temperature distribution: Part
I—description and validation of the analysis tool, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2001:
Power for Land, Sea, and Air, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2001.
[42] Timothy S. Snyder, et al., Application of an advanced CFD-based analysis system
to the PW6000 combustor to optimize exit temperature distribution: Part
II—comparison of predictions to full annular rig test data, in: ASME Turbo Expo
2001: Power for Land, Sea, and Air, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
2001.
[43] Chi-Ming Lee, NASA project develops next generation low-emissions combustor
technologies, in: 51st AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Including the New
Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition, 2013.
[44] J. Moran, Engine Technology Development to Address Local Air Quality Concerns,
May 2007.
[45] G. Randal McKinney, D. Sepulveda, W. Sowa, A. Cheung, The pratt & whitney
Talon X low emissions combustor: revolutionary results with evolutionary
technology, in: 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, 2007, p. 386.
[46] M. Ralph, P. Kuentzmann, L. Maurice, J. Tilston, Report of the Independent
Experts to CAEP/8 on the Second Nox Review and the Establishment of Medium
and Long Term Technology Goals for Nox, Technical Report Doc 9953, ICAO,
2010.
[47] R. Smith, Advanced Low Emissions Subsonic Combustor Study (Final Report),
Lewis Research Centre, 1998. NASA/CR–;1998–207931.
[48] P. Glarborg, A.D. Jensen, J.E. Johnsson, Fuel nitrogen conversion in solid fuel
ﬁred systems, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 29 (2) (2003) 89–113.
[49] F.J. Martin, P.K. Dederick, No x from fuel nitrogen in two-stage combustion, in:
Symposium (International) on Combustion, vol. 16, Elsevier, 1977, pp. 191–198.
[50] H.C. Mongia, GE Aviation Low Emissions Combustion Technology Evolution,
Available at: http://www.iitk.ac.in/comb/Comb_15/Old%20Websites/backup/
PDF/Hukam%20C.%20Mongia.pdf. Accessed 03 February 2017).
[51] D.W. Bahr, C.C. Gleason, Experimental Clean Combustor Program, Phase I—ﬁnal
Report, NASA CR-134737, 1973.
[52] A. Klein, Characteristics of combustor diffusers, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 31 (1995)
171–271.
[53] P.E. Sabla, J.R. Taylor, D.J. Gaunter, Design and development of the combustor
diffuser for NASA/GE energy efﬁcient engine, J. Energy 6 (1982) 275–282.
[54] D.L. Burrus, et al., Energy Efﬁcient Engine Combustion System Component
Technology Performance Report, NASA CR-168274, July 1984.
[55] H. C Mongia, Nþ 3 and Nþ 4 Generation Aeropropulsion Engine Combustors: Part
3: Small Engine Emissions and Axial Staging Combustion Technology,
GT2013–94572, ibid, 2013.
[56] M. Daly, Janes Aero-engines: 2014-2015, Janes Information Group, March 2014.
[57] ICAO Aircraft Engine Emissions Databank, Aircraft Engine Emissions, vol. 22,
2016.
[58] Mongia, Nþ3 AND Nþ4 generation aeropropulsion engine combustors: PART 2:
medium size-rich dome engines and lean-domes, in: ASME TURBO EXPO, 2013.
[59] Zhuohui J. He, et al., Emission Characteristics of A P&W axially staged sector
combustor, in: 54th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, 2016.
[60] Zhuohui J. He, NOx Emissions Characteristics and Correlation Equations of Two P
and W% 27s Axially Staged Sector Combustors Developed under NASA
Environmentally Responsible Aviation% 28ERA% 29 Project, 2017.
[61] M.J. Foust, D. Thomsen, R. Stickles, C. Cooper, W. Dodds, Development of the ge
aviation low emissions taps combustor for next generation aircraft engines, in:
AIAA Paper, 936:2012, 2012.
[62] H.S. Hura, et al. Fuel Nozzle Assembly for Reduced Exhaust Emissions US Patent
6,389,815 May 21, 2002.
[63] Michael Foust, GE aviation low emissions combustion technologies, in:
Presentation Made at ASME IGTI Turbo Expo 2010 Glasgow, Scotland, June 15,
2010.
[64] L. Jinhu, W. Su, H. Honghao, Zh Shengtao, F. Bingcheng, C. Jiping, Shock tube
study of kerosene ignition delay at high pressures, Phys. Mech. Astron. 55 (6)
(2012) 947.
[65] V.P. Zhukov, V.A. Sechenov, A.Y. Starikovskiy, Autoignition of kerosene (Jet-A)/
air mixtures behind reﬂected shock waves, Fuel 126 (2014) 169.
[66] F.S. Shariatmadar, S. Ghanbari Pakdehi, M.A. Zarei, An empirical correlation to
predict the ignition delay time for some hydrocarbon fuels, Iran. J. Chem. Eng. 13
(1) (2016). IAChE.
[67] C. Guin, Characterisation of autoignition and ﬂashback in premixed injection
systems, in: RTO Meeting Proceedings, 1999.
[68] Hukam Mongia, Engineering aspects of complex gas turbine combustion mixers
Part V: 40 OPR, in: 49th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Including the New
Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition, 2011.
[69] Y. Huang, V. Yang, Bifurcation of Flame Structure in a Lean-premixed Swirl-
stabilized Combustor: Transition from Stable to Unstable Flame Combustion and
Flame, vol. 136, 2004, pp. 383–389.
[70] Sulabh K. Dhanuka, Jacob E. Temme, James Driscoll, Unsteady aspects of lean
premixed prevaporized gas turbine combustors: ﬂame-ﬂame interactions,
J. Propuls. Power 27.3 (2011) 631–641.
[71] Multi-swirler mixers with plasma generating nozzle US patent 6455660.
[72] http://www.geaviation.com/press/ge90/ge90_20141120.html Accessed 10
March 2017.
[73] Dhanireddy R. Reddy, Chi-Ming Lee, An overview of low-emission combustion
research at NASA Glenn, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2016: Turbomachinery Technical
Conference and Exposition, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2016.
[74] J. Shaw, C. Peddie, UEET NASA Ultra Efﬁcient Engine Technology Project
Overview, Enabling Technologies for 21st Century Turbine Engines, Sep 2003.
NASA/CP-2004–212963/VOL1.
[75] R. Stickles, TAPS II Combustor Final Report. Technical Report DTFAWA-10-C-
00046, General Electric, June 2013.
[76] J. Croft, Engine buzz: blisks, sabers and safran, Flight Int. 178 (5263) (2010) 22.
[77] D.A. Nickolaus, D.S. Crocker, D.L. Black, C.E. Smith, Development of a lean direct
fuel injector for low emission aero gas turbines, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2002:Power
for Land, Sea, and Air, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2002,
pp. 713–720.
[78] W. Lazik, T. Doerr, S. Bake, Low NOx Combustor Development for the Engine 3E
Core Engine Demonstrator, IASBE-2007-1190, 2007.
[79] R. Bank, S. Donnerhack, A. Rae, M. Cazalens, A Lundbladh,and M Dietz.
LEMCOTEC: improving the core-engine thermal efﬁciency, in: ASME Turbo Expo,
2014.
[80] C.E. Smith, D.A. Nickolaus, Piloted Airblast Lean Direct Fuel Injector with
Modiﬁed Air Splitter: U.S. Patent 6,986,255. 2006-1–17.
[81] D.S. Crocker, D.A. Nickolaus, C.E. Smith, Piloted Airblast Lean Direct Fuel Injector:
U.S. Patent 6,272,840. 2001-8–14.
[82] D.S. Crocker, D.L. Black, Single-circuit Fuel Injector for Gas Turbine Combustors:
U.S. Patent 6,543,235[P]. 2003-4–8.
[83] NEWAC, NEWAC Technologies Highly Innovative Technologies for Future Aero
Engines, 2011.
[84] Robert Tacina, Chien-Pei Mao, Changlie Wey, Experimental investigation of a
multiplex fuel injector module with discrete jet swirlers for low emission
combustors, in: AIAA Paper, 135, 2004.
[85] R. Tacina, C. Wey, P. Laing, A. Mansour, a low-NOx Lean-Direct Injection,
multiPoint integrated module combustor concept for advanced aircraft gas
turbines, NASA/TM-2002–211347, 2002.
[86] R. Tacina, C. P Mao, C. Wey, Experimental investigation of a multiplex fuel
injector module for low emissions combustors, AIAA-2003-0827, 2003.
[87] R. Tacina, P. Lee, C. Wey, A Lean-Direct-Injection combustor using a 9 point swirl-
venturi fuel injector, ISABE-2005-1106, 2005.
[88] M.K. Tacina, C. Wey, NASA Glenn High Pressure Low Nox Emissions Research,
NASA/TM—2008-214974, 2008.
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
44


--- Page 34 ---

[89] B. Jones, Attempts to Reduce NOx: Gas Turbine Short Course Lecture Series,
Cranﬁeld University, June 2016.
[90] C.T. Chang, C.M. Lee, J.T. Herbon, S.K. Kramer, NASA Environmentally
Responsible Aviation Project Develops Next- Generation Low-emissions
Combustor Technologies (Phase I), Aeronautics & Aerospace Engineering, 2013.
[91] K.M. Tacina, C.T. Chang, Z.J. He, P. Lee, B. Dam, H Mongia A Second Generation
Swirl-Venturi Lean Direct Injection Combustion Concept, AIAA Paper 2014–3434,
2014.
[92] K. Ajmani, H.C. Mongia, P. Lee, Evaluation of CFD Best Practices for Combustor
Design: Part I—Non-Reacting Flows, AIAA Paper 2013–1144, 2013.
[93] K. Ajmani, H. Mongia, P. Lee, CFD Computations of Emissions for LDI-2
Combustors with Simplex and air Blast Injectors, AIAA Paper 2014–3529, 2014.
[94] K.M. Tacina, C.T. Chang, Z.J. He, et al., A second generation swirl-venturi Lean
Direct Injection combustion concept, in: 50th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint
Propulsion Conference, 2014.
[95] J. Goeke, S. Pack, G. Zink, J. Ryon, NASA/CR—2014–218112: Multi-point
Combustion System Final Report, 2014.
[96] K. Ajmani, K. Breisacher, Simulations of NOx Emissions from Low Emissions
Discrete Jet Injector Combustor Tests, AIAA Paper 2014–3524, 2014.
[97] K. Ajmani, H.C. Mongia, P. Lee, CFD Best Practices to Predict NOx, CO and Lean
Blowout for Combustor Design, GT2013–9566, 2013.
[98] K. Ajmani, H.C. Mongia, P. Lee, Evaluation of a Time-Filtered Navier stokes
(TFNS) CFD Approach for LDI Combustor Analysis, AIAA Paper 2013–3688, 2013.
[99] Z.J. He, C.T. Chang, C.E. Follen, NOx Emissions Performance and Correlation
Equations for a Multipoint LDI Injector, NASA/TM—2014–218116, April 2014.
[100] G. Leonard, J. Stegmaier, Development of an aeroderivative gas turbine Dry low
emissions combustion system, J. Eng. Gas. Turbine Power 116 (3) (July 1994)
542.
[101] S.L. Plee, A.M. Mellor, Review of ﬂashback reported in prevaporizing/premixing
combustors, Comb. Flame 32 (1978) 193–203.
[102] Z.J. Fritz, M. Kr€oner, T. Sattelmayer, Flashback in a swirl burner with cylindrical
premixing zone, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 126 (2) (2004) 276–283.
[103] H. Pervier, Emissions Modelling for Engine Cycle and Aircraft Trajectory
Optimisation, PhD thesis, Cranﬁeld University, 2013.
[104] C.C. Gleason, D.W. Bahr, Experimental Clean Combustor Program, Phase I Final
Report -GE. Technical Report NASA-CR-134737, General Electirc Company.
[105] S.C. Greenﬁeld, P.V. Heberling, J. Kastl, J. Matulaitis, C. Huff, HSCT Sector
Combustor Evaluations for Demonstration Engine, NASA/CR-2004–213132, 2004.
[106] P&W and GE, Critical Propulsion Components, NASA/CR—2005–213584.
[107] S. Colantuoni, Sub-project 6 Innovative Combustor, June 2009. Available at:
http://www.newac.eu/uploads/media/NEWAC_Warsaw_Workshop_SP6_
presentation_01.pdf.
[108] ARTTIC, NEWAC Publishable Final Activity Report, NEWAC - FP6–030876, 2011.
[109] G. Wilfert, J. Sieber, A. Rolt, N. Baker, A. Touyeras, S. Colantuoni, New
Environment Friendly Aero Engine Core Concepts, ISABE-2007-1120, 2007.
[110] S. Colantuoni, Bake, J.P. Badet, Low emissions combustors development for new
aero-engines core applications, in: 5th European Congress on Computational
Methods in Applied Sciences and Engineering, ECCOMAS, 2008.
[111] G.J. Micklow, S. Roychoudhury, H.L. Nguyen, M.C. Cline, Emissions reduction by
varying the swirler airﬂow split in advanced gas turbine combustors, J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power 115 (July 1993).
[112] Donald F. Schultz, Variable Combustor Geometry for Improving the Altitude
Relight Capability of a Double Annular Combustor, NASA TM X-3163, 1975.
[113] Y.G. Li, R.L. Hales, Gas Turbine Emissions Control Using Variable Geometry
Combustor and Fuel Staging, AIAA, 2002-0079.
[114] Y.G. Li, R.L. Hales, Steady and dynamic performance and emissions of a variable
geometry combustor in a gas turbine engine, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2002: Power
for Land, Sea, and Air, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2002.
[115] K. Aoyama, S. Mandai, Development of a Dry low NOx combustor for a120 MW
gas turbine, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 106 (1984) 795–800.
[116] A. Wulff, J. Hourmouziadis, Technology Review of Aeroengine Pollutant
Emissions, Aerospace Science and Technology.
[117] R.S. Fletcher, R.C. Adkins, The Variable Geometry Combustor, AGARD Conference
(48 PEP Meeting), Paris, September.
[118] S. Hayashi, H. Yamada, K. Shimodaira, Engine testing of a natural gas-ﬁred, low-
NOx, variable geometry gas turbine combustor for a small gas turbine, in: ASME
96-GT-455, International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress & Exhibition,
Birmingham, UK, June 10-13, 1996.
[119] D.F. Schultz, Ground Idle Performance Improvement of a Double-annular
Combustor by Using Simulated Variable Combustor Geometry, NASA TM X-3176.
[120] D.F. Schultz, Variable combustor geometry for improving the altitude relight
capability of a double annular combustor, NASA TM X-3163.
[121] A.K. Cupta, M.S. Ramavajjala, J. Chomiak, Burner geometry effects on combustion
and NOx emission characteristics of variable geometry swirl combustor, in: AIAA-
89–0488, 1988.
[122] R.S. Fletcher, The automotive gas turbine, Conference on Developments in
Automotive Power Plants to Reduce Fuel Consumption, Air Pollution and Noise.
[123] I J, J.A. Saintsbury, P. Sampath, Atmospheric tests of a variable combustor
geometry for reducing gas turbine emissions, in: ASME/CSME Conference,
Monteria, Canada, May 1974.
[124] N.K. Rizk, H.C. Mongia, NOx model for lean combustion concept, J. Propuls.
Power 11 (1) (1995) 161–169.
[125] Zhao Dan, X.Y. Li, A review of acoustic dampers applied to combustion chambers
in aerospace industry, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 74 (2015) 114–130.
[126] J. Chenzhen, Dan Zhao, et al., Parametric measurements of the effect of in-duct
oriﬁce edge shape on its noise damping performance, J. Sound Vib. 384 (2016)
130–145.
[127] Zhao Dan, L. Ang, C.Z. Ji, Numerical and experimental investigation of the
acoustic damping effect of single-layer perforated liners with joint bias-grazing
ﬂow, J. Sound Vib. 342 (2015) 152–167.
[128] V. Sethi, Lecture Notes in Gas Turbine Combustors, vol. 3, Cranﬁeld University,
2015.
[129] A.M. Mellor, Design of Modern Turbine Combustors, Academic Press, 1990.
[130] P.P. Walsh, P. Fletcher, Gas turbine Performance, John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[131] H.C. Mongia, GE Aviation Low Emissions Combustion Technology Evolution,
2014. Available at: http://www.iitk.ac.in/comb/Comb_15/Old%20Websites/
backup/PDF/Hukam%20C.%20Mongia.pdf.
[132] SULPHUR - Reduction of Sulphur Limits in Aviation Fuel Standards EASA Report,
2010.
[133] Combustor Fundamentals and Key Issues in Future Combustor Technology – the
Rolls-royce Perspective– Paris – FORUM-AE - Combustor Technology Workshop,
June 2014.
[134] Paul Madden, in: CAEP Combustion Technology Review Process and CAEP NOx
Goals, FORUM-AE, June 2014.
[135] Kenneth Yong, in: Lean Burn Technology at Rolls-royce Paris – FORUM-AE -
Combustor Technology Workshop, June 2014.
[136] S.K. Dhanuka, J.E. Temme, J. F Driscoll, H. C Mongia, Vortexshedding and mixing
layer effects on periodic ﬂashback in a lean premixed prevaporized gas turbine
combustor, Proc. Combust. Inst. 32 (2) (2009) 2901–2908.
[137] H. Klinger, W. Lazik, T. Wunderlich, The engine 3E core engine, in: ASME Turbo
Expo 2008: Power for Land, Sea, and Air, American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, 2008, pp. 93–102.
[138] Jingxuan Li, Dong Yang, Charles Luzzato, S. Aimee, Morgans Open Source
Combustion Instability Low Order Simulator (OSCILOS{Long) Technical Report,
2015.
[139] J.R. Mahan, A. Karchemer, Aeroacoustics of ﬂight vehicles: theory and practice, in:
Volume 1: Noise Sources, Volume 1, Chapter Combustion and Core Noise, 1991,
pp. 483–517. WRDC Technical Report 90–3052.
[140] S. Candel, Combustion dynamics and control: progress and challenges, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 29 (1) (2002) 1–28.
[141] S. Ducruix, T. Schuller, D. Durox, S. Candel, Combustion dynamics and
instabilities: elementary coupling and driving mechanisms, J. Propuls. Power 19
(5) (2003) 722–734.
[142] S.M. Correa, Power generation and aeropropulsion gas turbines: from combustion
science to combustion technology, Proc. Combust. Inst. 27 (2) (1998) 1793–1807.
[143] Method and Apparatus to Decrease Combustor Emissions, US 6,865,889, May 19,
2005.
[144] Kumud Ajmani, Hukam C. Mongia, Phil Lee, Parametric design of injectors for LDI-
3 combustors, in: 51st AIAA/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, 2015.
[145] Rich Wahls Nþ3 Technologies and Concepts Green Aviation Summit Integrated
Solutions for Fuel, Noise, and Emission Reduction, NASA Ames Research Center,
September 8-9, 2010.
[146] N.-S. Liu, C.T. Wey, T.-H. Shih, Time-Filtered navier-stokes approach and
emulation of turbulence-chemistry interaction, in: 51st AIAA Aerospace Sciences
Meeting, Dallas TX, AIAA Paper, 2013.
[147] N.-S. Liu, T.-H. Shih, C.T. Wey, Numerical Simulations of Two-phase Reacting
Flow in a Single-element Lean Direct Injection (LDI) Combustor Using NCC,
NASA/TM, 2011.
[148] A.C. Iannetti, N.-S. Liu, The Effect of spray initial conditions on heat release and
emissions in LDI CFD calculations, in: 46th AIAA Aerospace Science Meeting and
Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, AIAA Paper, 2008.
[149] F. Davoudzadeh, N.-S. Liu, J.P. Moder, Investigation of swirling air ﬂows
generated by axial swirlers in a ﬂame tube, Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo
2006, GT2006-91300, Barcelona, Spain (Also NASA TM 2006).
[150] Robert Tacina, Chien-Pei Mao, Changlie Wey, Experimental investigation of a
multiplex fuel injector module for low emission combustors, in: 41st Aerospace
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, 2003.
[151] Y.R. Hicks, R.J. Locke, R.C. Anderson, Optical Measurement and Visualization in
High-pressure, High-temperature, Aviation Gas Turbine Combustors, NASA/TM-
2000-2103, 2000.
[152] Introduction: Aviation Outlook ICAO Environmental Report, 2010.
[153] B.L. Koff, Aircraft gas turbine emissions challenge, in: ASME 1993 International
Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exposition, Pages
V03CT17A083–V03CT17A083, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 1993.
[154] http://www.lemcotec.eu/. (Accessed 30 December 2016).
[155] Hukam C. Mongia, Nþ 3 and Nþ 4 generation aeropropulsion engine combustors:
Part 6: operating conditions, target goals and lifted jets, in: 49th AIAA/ASME/
SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, 2013, p. 3654.
[156] Hukam C. Mongia, Engineering Aspects of Complex Gas Turbine Combustion
Mixers Part II: High T3, AIAA Paper 2011–0106, ibid, 2011.
[157] Snecma & Onera FORUM-AE Non-CO2 Mitigation Solutions Workshop
Proceddings, FP7–605506.
[158] David Abbott, Dynamics in Gas Turbine Combustors, Cranﬁeld University, 2017.
Y. Liu et al.
Progress in Aerospace Sciences 94 (2017) 12–45
45
