
--- Page 1 ---

Tongxun Yi1
e-mail: tzy1@psu.edu
Domenic A. Santavicca
Department of Mechanical and Nuclear
Engineering,
Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802
Flame Transfer Functions for
Liquid-Fueled Swirl-Stabilized
Turbulent Lean Direct Fuel
Injection Combustion
Heat release rate responses to inlet fuel modulations, i.e., the ﬂame transfer function
(FTF), are measured for a turbulent, liquid-fueled, swirl-stabilized lean direct fuel injec-
tion combustor. Fuel modulations are achieved using a motor-driven rotary fuel valve
designed specially for this purpose, which is capable of fuel modulations of up to 1 kHz.
Small-amplitude fuel modulations, typically below 2.0% of the mean fuel, are applied in
this study. There is almost no change in FTFs at different fuel-modulation amplitudes,
implying that the derived FTFs are linear and that the induced heat release rate oscil-
lations mainly respond to variations in the instantaneous fuel ﬂow rate rather than in the
droplet size and distribution. The gain and phases of the FTFs at different air ﬂow rates
and preheat temperatures are examined. The instantaneous fuel ﬂow rate is determined
from pressure measurements upstream of a fuel nozzle. Applications of the FTF to mod-
eling and control of combustion instability and lean blowout are discussed.
DOI: 10.1115/1.3157101
1
Introduction
Combustion instability and lean blowout are major technical
challenges for both gas-fueled and liquid-fueled dry-low-emission
DLE combustion 1–3. Combustion instability refers to the self-
excited, large-amplitude, limit-cycle thermoacoustic oscillations
caused by positive feedback between pressure and heat release
rate. Strong pressure pulsations shorten an engine’s life due to
enhanced heat transfer, lower combustion efﬁciency, exacerbate
NOx emissions, generate noise pollutions, and may even cause
instrumentation failures. Lean blowout LBO refers to partial or
global ﬂame quenching when the equivalence ratio is decreased
below certain thresholds. As the equivalence ratio approaches the
lean ﬂammability limits, a combustor’s resistance to external dis-
turbances or small deviations from the equilibrium points is con-
siderably weakened 4. Thus, a small external disturbance in the
inlet turbulence, the fuel composition, the fuel ﬂow rate, and/or
the air ﬂow rate may quench the ﬂame. LBO necessitates expen-
sive shutdown and restarting procedures for land-based gas tur-
bines, and represents a major safety hazard for aircraft engines.
The underlying mechanisms for combustion instability and
LBO are fundamentally different, but they both make engines un-
able to operate in an efﬁcient, safe, and environment-friendly
manner at lean conditions. Model-based control design is a stan-
dard approach for control engineers and theorists. First-principle
low-order models provide valuable insight into the underlying
mechanisms, but their accuracy critically depends on the assump-
tions and simpliﬁcations 5. The measured ﬂame transfer func-
tions FTFs, i.e., heat release responses to inlet air and/or fuel
modulations, provide an accurate description of combustion dy-
namics around the working conditions where they are derived.
The FTF is determined by both the intrinsic dynamics of a
speciﬁc combustor and the manner in which dynamic fuel is in-
troduced into and dispersed inside the reacting ﬂow ﬁeld. To mini-
mize the amount of fuel modulations required, it is desirable for
the FTF to have as large a gain as possible. This can only be
achieved by maximizing the conversion of modulated fuel ﬂow
rate to modulated heat release rate. In gas turbine combustors, the
heat release zone lies along the swirling shear layer outside the
recirculating vortex breakdown. Because of ﬂow ﬁeld inhomoge-
neities and the convective time delay, the spatially and temporally
coherent fuel modulations exiting the fuel nozzle become spatially
dispersed and temporally less coherent as they are transported
downstream, which lowers the FTF gain. The situation becomes
even worse for longer ﬂames. Droplet size also plays a role in the
resulting FTFs. Yu and Wilson 6 noticed that the critical fuel
ﬂux, i.e., the minimum fuel modulations required to attenuate
combustion instability, depends on the droplet size. Smaller drop-
let size reduces the heating and evaporation time, and enhances
the control effectiveness. This observation is consistent with the
proposition that the dynamic evaporation process may play an
important role in liquid-fueled combustion instability 7. Droplet
size and distribution can be measured using phase Doppler par-
ticle analyzer PDPA, Malvern sizers, combined Mie-scattering/
planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence PLIF, and other means. How-
ever, this is out of the scope of the present study.
This paper is organized as follows. First, the experimental
setup, including the combustion rig, optical setup, and the high-
frequency rotary valve, is described. Second, a method for deter-
mining the instantaneous fuel ﬂow rate out of a fuel nozzle is
presented. This method is based on acoustic wave theory and pres-
sure measurements upstream of the fuel nozzle. Third, the FTFs at
different air ﬂow rates and preheat temperatures are reported. At
last, we discuss potential applications of FTFs to combustion
analysis and control, including combustion instability and lean
blowout.
2
Experiment Setup
Figure 1 shows the combustion rig, optical setup, and the rotary
fuel valve. Preheated air enters a quartz combustion chamber,
which is 0.10 m in diameter and 0.30 m in length, through a
30 deg radial-entry swirler. The exit diameter of the swirler is
3.56 cm. Pressure drop across the air swirler varies with the air
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received
March 20, 2009; ﬁnal manuscript received March 22, 2009; published online
November 11, 2009. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the
ASME Gas Turbine Technical Congress and Exposition, Orlando, FL, June 8–12,
2009.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 021506-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

ﬂow rate and preheat temperature, but it is within 5% for all
results reported here. 1-Decene or Jet-A is injected into the swirl-
ing air ﬂow 0.02 m upstream of the dump plane using a single-
point macrolaminated fuel nozzle 2.5 GPH from Parker Hanni-
ﬁn. The dump plane refers to the solid surface between the swirler
exit and the quartz combustion chamber. With a pressure drop of
689 kPa across the fuel nozzle, the droplet Saunter mean diameter
SMD is less than 10 m 8. The air ﬂow rate is measured using
a vortex ﬂowmeter from Omega, Stamford, CT, and the measure-
ment uncertainty is within 1% of reading. A photomultiplier tube
PMT H7732-10 from Hamamatsu Photonics, Bridgewater, NJ
featured with an interference bandpass ﬁlter 430 nm or
307 nm with full width half minimum FWHM of 10 nm is
used for global chemiluminescence measurements. Generally
speaking, chemiluminescence should not be assumed proportional
to the instantaneous heat release rate. Probably the proportionality
only exists in the weakly turbulent or the wrinkled ﬂamelet region
and in the absence of equivalence ratio variations and strong
acoustic oscillations 9. However, the instantaneous chemilumi-
nescence intensity reﬂects the dynamics of the air consumption
rate, the equivalence ratio, the ﬂame temperature, and acoustic
motions, thus it can be used as a valuable indicator of heat release
dynamics. The PMT is placed 0.06 m downstream of the dump
plane and 0.56 m away from and perpendicular to the quartz
chamber. The PMT viewing area is within 0.13 m downstream of
the dump plane. Time scale analysis shows that the droplets
evaporation time is smaller than the convection time. Thus before
the droplets are transported to the ﬂame front, they may have been
fully evaporated. In addition, from Fig. 1 one can see that high-
speed air enters the diverging swirler through eight radial-entry
slots, mixes with ﬁne droplets, recombines into one stream, and
suddenly expands at the dump plane. Expectedly, droplet/air en-
trainment and fuel/air mixing are extremely fast, and a rather ho-
mogeneous mixture of fuel vapor and air may form upstream of
the major heat release zone. Thus combustion in the present rig
mainly occurs in the lean premixed mode 9.
Fuel modulations are achieved using a motor-driven rotary fuel
valve designed specially for this purpose. The fuel-modulation
frequency is determined by the number of rotor teeth and the
motor rotating speed. Liquid fuel is stored in a 19-l stainless steel
tank and pressurized with N2 at 1378 kPa. The mean fuel ﬂow rate
is measured using a linear ﬂow meter, and the measurement un-
certainty is within 5% of reading. The mean fuel ﬂow rate is
controlled using a needle valve. The rotary valve is located 0.46 m
upstream of the fuel nozzle. A 0.8-l accumulator is located 0.2 m
upstream of the rotary valve. Two Sensotec pressure transducers
sensitivity 172 kPa/V and uncertainty 0.25% of reading capable
of working up to 2 kHz are installed 0.29 m and 0.45 m upstream
of the fuel nozzle, respectively. A bypass ﬂow passage is installed
parallel to the rotary fuel valve, and fuel-modulation amplitude is
controlled by varying fuel splits between the rotary fuel valve and
the bypass passage. The fuel-modulation ratio, which is deﬁned as
the ratio of the root-mean-square rms to mean fuel line pressure,
can be greater than 30% up to 750 Hz and greater than 15% up to
1 kHz.
3
Determination of the Instantaneous Fuel Flow Rate
The instantaneous fuel ﬂow rate out of a fuel injector is an
important parameter for combustion instability analysis and con-
trol. Unsteady fuel ﬂow rates introduced into a combustor can be
caused by both self-excited pressure pulsations and fuel modula-
tions. Because of the harsh environments and limited space inside
the plenum, pressure immediately upstream of the fuel nozzle
cannot be measured. Pressure measurements at some points up-
stream of the fuel nozzle may differ considerably in both ampli-
tude and phases from those immediately upstream of the fuel
nozzle. A literature survey shows that accurate determination of
the instantaneous fuel ﬂow rate has not been well addressed. In
this study, we determine fuel modulations based on acoustic wave
theory and pressure measurements at two locations upstream of
the fuel nozzle. This method is an extension of a method for
determining fuel ﬂow rate modulations out of a gaseous fuel
nozzle 10. Although the mathematical formulations are essen-
tially the same for the two methods, two major differences exist.
First, the speed of sound for liquid fuel is typically above
1000 m/s 11, which is much higher than that of gaseous fuel. In
addition, in order to improve atomization quality, pressure drop
across a liquid-fueled pressure-swirl nozzle is typically much
higher than that across a gaseous fuel injector. Thus a liquid-
fueled pressure-swirl can be accurately modeled as a purely resis-
tive element, but a gaseous fuel nozzle may not be. In the case of
small-amplitude fuel modulations, the ﬂow pattern across the fuel
Fig. 1
The combustion rig, optical setup, and the rotary fuel actuator
021506-2 / Vol. 132, FEBRUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

nozzle can be assumed invariant, thus perturbations in the instan-
taneous fuel ﬂow rate can be determined as
m˙ f
m˙¯ f
= p0t
2P = ReP˜0,t
2P
1
In the case of large-amplitude fuel modulations, in particular, at
high frequency, the 1D nonlinear wave equation accounting for
nonlinear acoustics and viscous shear stress should be used. So-
lutions to nonlinear wave equations are less straightforward than
those to linear waves. A simple method for validating the linear
acoustic assumption is to install a pressure transducer at another
location in the fuel line and to compare the measured pressure
with the linear prediction. It is found that, even without account-
ing for nonlinear acoustics and viscous shear stress, the developed
method can well predict large-amplitude pressure oscillations of
up to 20% below 300 Hz, and the prediction error is within 6% in
amplitude and within 6 deg in phases 10.
4
Flame Transfer Functions
The FTF can be deﬁned in multiple forms, such as,
Wms = i = CHs/Pms
2
W0s = i = CHs/P0s
3
where CH*s, Pms, and P0s refer to the Laplace transform of
the overall CH chemiluminescence intensity, pressure measure-
ments 0.29 m upstream of the fuel nozzle, and fuel pressure im-
mediately upstream of the fuel nozzle, respectively. The relation-
ship between Pms and P0s can be determined from the acoustic
wave equations as follows 11:
WN = Pms
P0s = A˜e−isxm/c¯ + B˜eisxm/c¯
A˜ + B˜
= A˜/B˜e−isxm/c¯ + esxm/c¯
A˜/B˜ + 1
4
At a fuel ﬂow rate of 1.4 g/s, A˜ /B˜ is determined as 1.80. The
magnitude of WN consistently decreases with frequency from
unity at 0 Hz to 0.65 at 600 Hz, and the phase lead consistently
increases with frequency from zero at zero frequency to 20.5 deg
at 600 Hz. During fuel modulations, the mean fuel ﬂow rate is
maintained constant by adjusting the opening of a needle valve
and the forcing frequency is varied from 10 Hz to 1 kHz in about
10 Hz increments. During these measurements the variations in
the mean fuel pressure and the CH chemiluminescence intensity
are found to be within 1.5%. The sampling frequency is 5 kHz,
and the data length is 8 s. The data are decomposed into eight
segments, and fast Fourier transform FFT analysis is performed
for each second. Without explicit denotation, FTFs are the average
of the results for the eight data segments.
Figure 2 shows the amplitude and phase of the measured ﬂame
transfer function W0s of up to 1 kHz. The FTF amplitude con-
sistently increases up to 600 Hz, peaks around 750 Hz, and then
drops. However, different trends are observed between 600 Hz
and 660 Hz. This is caused by relatively strong acoustic responses
to fuel modulations within this frequency range. The blocking
ratio for the inlet and exit of the combustion chamber is 88% and
95%, respectively. Thus the combustion chamber can be consid-
ered as acoustically closed at both ends. Note that the blocking
ratio is deﬁned as the ratio of the solid surface area that air cannot
ﬂow through to the total sectional area normal to the air-ﬂowing
direction. The blocking ratio is zero downstream of the quartz
tube except at the exit of the combustion chamber where a chok-
ing plate is installed. The one-wave-mode acoustic frequency of
the combustion chamber is around 630 Hz. Without the bafﬂe
plates, self-excited combustion instability occurs around 630 Hz,
with an amplitude of up to 12 kPa. Although the bafﬂe plates
signiﬁcantly enhance acoustic damping, relatively large-amplitude
acoustic oscillations still occur with fuel modulations around this
resonant frequency. This, in fact, implies that the measured FTFs
between 600 Hz and 660 Hz are no longer open-loop transfer
functions. The present paper’s focus is on open-loop transfer func-
tions below 600 Hz. Within this frequency range, forcing-induced
acoustic oscillation intensities are small. For these experiments,
the ratio of the complex amplitude A˜ /B˜ is determined as 1.80. The
gain of WN consistently decreases with frequency of up to 0.65 at
600 Hz, while the phase lead consistently increases with fre-
quency of up to 20.5 deg at 600 Hz.
4.1
Signal-to-Noise Ratio. The measured fuel pressure and
CH chemiluminescence intensity are inevitably contaminated by
electrical noises, external disturbances, and quantization errors.
CH chemiluminescence intensity is intrinsically of broadband or
stochastic nature, because of the wide range of spatial and tempo-
ral scales in ﬂame/turbulence interactions. For reliable FTFs to be
developed, fuel-modulation-induced chemiluminescence oscilla-
tions must be stronger than the background noise, i.e., the signal-
to-noise ratio SNR must be sufﬁciently high. In our experiments,
a SNR above 20 dB can be achieved with a fuel-modulation ratio
larger than 0.5%.
4.2
Repeatability and Nonlinearity. The measured FTF is
repeatable not only within the same sequence of experiments lim-
ited by the requirements on paper length, results are not shown
but also among experiments conducted at different days see Fig.
3. Even in the presence of self-excited large-amplitude combus-
tion oscillations up to 12 kPa in amplitude around 640 Hz, the
FTF at frequencies below 600 Hz is almost the same as those
shown in Fig. 3. Strong repeatability in the FTF implies that a
meaningful and reliable FTF has been obtained. One can see that
below 600 Hz, the gain of the FTF for Jet-A is almost the same as
that for 1-Decene, while above 320 Hz the phase difference
slightly increases with frequency of up to 15 deg at 600 Hz. Since
the droplets evaporation is not the limiting process, differences in
FFTs between Jet-A and 1-Decene are associated with chemical
kinetics. Jet-A has a considerable amount of hydrocarbons, which
Fig. 2
Flame transfer function W0„s…. The mean fuel pressure
is 453 kPa, the air ﬂow rate is 66.7 g/s, the equivalence ratio is
0.34, and the preheat temperature is 473 K. The fuel-modulation
ratio is typically below 2.0%. The combustor is fueled with
1-Decene.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 021506-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

are longer than 1-Decene. A larger hydrocarbon molecule has a
larger molecular weight, so its diffusion toward the reaction zone
is smaller, and the chain-initiation will require more energy. Both
slow down the chemical reaction rates and the heat release re-
sponses to fuel modulations.
Possible nonlinearity in the forced ﬂame responses is checked
by examining FTFs measured at different fuel-modulation ampli-
tudes. It is believed that the saturation thresholds, above which
nonlinearity starts to appear, depend on the forcing frequency and
working conditions, such as the equivalence ratio, the preheat
temperature, and the air ﬂow rates. It is found that linearity in the
forced ﬂame response is well kept, since the measured FTFs are
not sensitive to the fuel-modulation ratio see Fig. 3b.
4.3
Low-Order Modeling. The gain and phases of the mea-
sured FTF shown in Fig. 3 can be modeled by a low-order rational
transfer function. Such low-order models are very convenient for
combustion analysis and control. However, before the low-order
models are developed, it is worthwhile to further explore system
dynamics from the measured FTF.
A plateau appears in phases of the FTF between 50 Hz and
200 Hz. This is mainly because within this frequency range, forc-
ing cycles are much longer than the time scales of fuel convection,
evaporation, and chemical kinetics, as shown in Ref. 9. The
ﬂatness in phases below 200 Hz implies the smallness of time
delay in the forced ﬂame responses. Phase lag associated with a
pure time-delay unit is proportional to frequency, and the gain is
unity. Since the time delay is small, the phase lag should be asso-
ciated with nontime-delay units, such as a rational transfer func-
tion. Rational transfer functions allow both the gain and phases to
vary continuously with frequency, which are very convenient for
stability analysis and control. A low-order model is developed
from the measured W0s from 240 Hz to 600 Hz,
Wz−1 = CHz−1
P0z−1 = −0.4213z−2 + 1.604z−3 −1.147z−4
1 −1.952z−1 + 1.525z−2 −0.5222z−3 5
As shown in Fig. 4, the low-order model 5 closely matches the
measured FTF in both amplitude and phases. The differences are
less than 0.5% in amplitude and within 0.5 deg in phases. The
FTF measured on September 12, 2008 are used for model devel-
opment here. The measured FTF is decomposed into two data
segments. One segment is used for model development, and the
other one is used for validation. The time delay is identiﬁed as
only one tap, i.e., 0.2 ms. The sampling frequency is 5 kHz. Small
time delay greatly facilitates combustion analysis and control.
4.4
FTFs at Different Air Flow Rates (the Same Fuel Flow
Rate). Figure 5 shows the ﬂame transfer function W0s at three
air ﬂow rates, 58.4 g/s =0.39, 66.7 g/s =0.34, and 75.1 g/s
=0.30, respectively. The fuel ﬂow rate is the same, 1.4 g/s.
The air ﬂow rate affects the FTF in two ways. First, it modiﬁes the
velocity ﬁeld, the ﬂame structure, droplets dispersion, fuel/air
mixing, and the residence time  and second, at the same fuel
ﬂow rate, the equivalence ratio is lower at a higher air ﬂow rate,
which slows down chemical kinetics, fuel evaporation, and so on.
The increase in phase lag at lower ﬂame temperature can be ex-
plained by larger time scales of evaporation V and chemical
kinetics c. At an air ﬂow rate of 75.1 g/s, there is no plateau in
phases below 200 Hz, which is different from that at 66.7 g/s and
58.4 g/s. This is because, at an air ﬂow rate of 75.1 g/s 
Fig. 3
„a… Flame transfer function Wm„s… measured at different
days and „b… the fuel-modulation ratio. The mean fuel pressure
is 453 kPa, the air ﬂow rate is 66.7 g/s, the equivalence ratio is
0.34, and the preheat temperature is 473 K. The fuel-modulation
ratio is typically below 2.0%.
Fig. 4
Flame transfer function W0„s… versus Bode plots of the
low-order model
021506-4 / Vol. 132, FEBRUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

=0.30, the time scales of evaporation and chemical kinetics have
considerably increased, and become comparable with the forcing
cycle. Different from the phases, root-cause analysis of the gain
decrease at lower ﬂame temperature is less straightforward. For
spray ﬂames, the Damköhler number Da can be deﬁned as Da
=/c+V. The residence time decreases almost linearly with
the air ﬂow rate, but the time scales of evaporation and chemical
kinetics increase almost exponentially. With a small Da or a large
strain rate, the spray may not have enough time to evaporate, and
chemical kinetics is slower at lower ﬂame temperature. This is
equivalent to a larger inertia in system dynamics. At lower ﬂame
temperature, the ﬂame just cannot respond to fuel modulations as
fast as at higher ﬂame temperature, which inevitably results in
smaller gain in the FTF. In the present experiments, the frequency
responses are linear in terms of the fuel-modulation ratio but non-
linear to the ﬂame temperature. This can be seen from the increas-
ing differences in the FTF above 350 Hz among different air ﬂow
rates. The nonlinearity of the FTF to the ﬂame temperature is not
surprising, since both evaporation and chemical kinetics are
highly nonlinear functions of the ﬂame temperature.
4.5
FTFs at Different Preheat Temperature. The effects of
preheat temperature and the equivalence ratio on forced ﬂame
responses are essentially similar, since they affect the ﬂame tem-
perature in the same direction. Note that at higher preheat tem-
perature, the air velocity at the swirler exit is higher, which en-
hances droplet evaporation and fuel/air mixing. Figure 6 shows
the ﬂame transfer function Wms at the preheat temperature of
473 K, 423 K, and 373 K, respectively. The air ﬂow rate is
66.7 g/s, and the equivalence ratio is 0.31. At the same air ﬂow
rate, the air velocity is larger at higher preheat temperature, thus
the residence time decreases, but the time scales of evaporation
and chemical kinetics decreases even further. Then the ﬂame be-
comes more responsive to fuel modulations, resulting in larger
gain and a smaller phase lag in the FTF. The FTF is nonlinear in
terms of the preheat temperature, which is most obvious for fuel
modulations above 400 Hz. From Figs. 5 and 6, one can see that
the effects of the equivalence ratio and preheat temperatures on
the forced ﬂame responses are essentially similar.
5
Applications of FTFs
The FTF can be directly used for analysis and control of com-
bustion instability and LBO. Active control of both phenomena
can be achieved using small-amplitude fuel modulations, employ-
ing the same control hardware and fuel actuators. However, sev-
eral major differences exist between combustion instability con-
trol and LBO control. First, combustion instability is linearly
unstable. But near-LBO combustion dynamics is linearly stable.
Stable combustion cannot be maintained at all if the equivalence
ratio drops below certain thresholds. Second, because combustion
instability is linearly unstable, the fuel actuator should keep work-
ing to prevent acoustic pressure from regaining energy, even after
the initial strong pressure pulsations have been suppressed. How-
ever, for LBO control, no further fuel actuations are required after
the initial deviations from the equilibrium points have been dimin-
ished. Third, combustion instability is temporally and spatially
coherent and occurs around the acoustic resonant frequency. But
near-LBO combustion dynamics are typically much less coherent
and usually occur below 200 Hz. This implies that for LBO con-
trol, the actuator bandwidth and time delay associated with fuel
convection, evaporation, and chemical kinetics may not be major
technical challenges.
Stability enhancement of near-LBO combustion using a simple
linear-quadratic-Gaussian LQG feedback controller has been nu-
merically demonstrated in Ref. 4. Such feedback controllers can
also be designed based on the measured FTFs. Since an aero-
engine has to operate within a large range of working conditions,
stable adaptive controllers, which have superior robust stability
and control performance, are promising. The measured near-LBO
ﬂame transfer functions have no unstable zeros, no unstable poles,
and even negligibly small time delay, thus adaptive robust con-
troller can be easily worked. Besides the liquid-fueled lean direct
fuel injection LDI combustors, the developed control strategy
can also be used for gas-fueled combustion, such as syngas- and
natural-gas-fueled combustion. Because of variations in feed-
stocks, the ratio of H2/CO in syngas can change from 0.33 to 40,
and the concentration of water vapor can vary from 0% to 40%
12. This will impose signiﬁcant challenges to stable combustion
in particular at very lean conditions. Near-LBO combustion dy-
namics may exhibit persistent low-frequency oscillations 13,14
Fig. 5
Flame transfer function W0„s… at different air ﬂow rates.
The fuel-modulation ratio is typically below 2.0%, the preheat
temperature is 473 K, and the fuel ﬂow rate is 1.4 g/s.
Fig. 6
Flame transfer function Wm„s… at different preheat tem-
perature. The air ﬂow rate is 66.7 g/s, and the equivalence ratio
is 0.31.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
FEBRUARY 2010, Vol. 132 / 021506-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

or undergo partial or global quenching without showing much
oscillatory behavior. Both situations can be handled by the pro-
posed feedback controllers.
6
Conclusions
A method for determining the instantaneous fuel ﬂow rate out
of a liquid fuel nozzle is developed, which is based on acoustic
wave theory and pressure measurements upstream of the fuel
nozzle. Repeatability and linearity in the measured FTF are dem-
onstrated. The derived FTF is not sensitive to variations in the
fuel-modulation amplitude. Low-order models in the form of a
rational transfer function are developed from the measured gain
and phases, which can be conveniently used for combustion
analysis and control. Effects of the equivalence ratio and preheat
temperature on the FTF are examined. The phase lag decreases
with ﬂame temperature and the gain increases. Heat release rate
responses are linear in terms of the fuel-modulation amplitude, but
nonlinear in terms of the ﬂame temperature. Applications of the
FTF to combustion control, including combustion instability and
lean blowout, are discussed.
Acknowledgment
Support from NASA Glenn under Grant No. NNX07C98A,
“Active Combustion Control for Low-Emission Combustors,” is
gratefully acknowledged. Dr. Clarence Chang is the project man-
ager. This project is also supported by the Air Force under Grant
No. FA9550-07-1-0451, “Advanced Thermally Stable Coal-Based
Jet Fuels.”
Nomenclature
A˜ and B˜  complex amplitude of acoustic waves
c¯  mean speed of sound, m/s
Da  the Damköhler number
i  complex symbol
k=/c¯  wave number
m˙ t  fuel modulations, kg/s
m˙¯ f  the mean fuel ﬂow rate out of a fuel injector,
kg/s
P˜0,t  the estimated complex dynamic pressure im-
mediately upstream of the fuel nozzle, Pa
p0t  the estimated dynamic pressure immediately
upstream of the fuel injector, Pa
pmt  dynamic pressure measured at 0.29 m up-
stream of the fuel injector, Pa
s=i  symbol of the Laplace transform
WNs  the transfer function between pressure mea-
surements and pressure immediately upstream
of a fuel nozzle
xm  a pressure measurement location, 0.29 m up-
stream of the fuel nozzle, m
z  symbol of Z transform
  equivalence ratio
Re...  the real part of a complex quantity
P  mean pressure drop across a fuel nozzle, Pa
  angular frequency, radians/s
  the residence time, s
c  the time scale of chemical kinetics, s
V  the evaporation time of droplets, s
Abbreviation
ICCD  intensiﬁed charge-coupled device
References
1 DeLaat, J. C., and Chang, C. T., 2003, “Active Control of High Frequency
Combustion Instability in Aircraft Gas-Turbine Engines,” NASA Report No.
TM-2003-212611.
2 Kiel, B. V., 2001, “Review of Advances in Combustion Control, Actuation,
Sensing, Modeling, and Related Technologies for Air Breathing Gas Tur-
bines,” AIAA Paper No. 2001-481.
3 Richards, G. A., Straub, D. L., and Robey, E. H., 2003, “Passive Control of
Combustion Dynamics in Stationary Gas Turbines,” J. Propul. Power, 195,
pp. 795–810.
4 Yi, T., and Gutmark, E. J., 2009, “Stability and Control of Lean Blowout in
Chemical Kinetics—Controlled Combustion Systems,” Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol., 1812, pp. 226–244.
5 Yang, V., 1995, Liquid Rocket Engine Combustion Instability Progress in
Aeronautics and Astronautics, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
nautics, Inc., Washington, DC, Vol. 169, Chap. 1.
6 Yu, K. H., and Wilson, K. J., 2002, “Scale-Up Experiments on Liquid-Fueled
Active Combustion Control,” J. Propul. Power, 181, pp. 53–60.
7 Duvvur, A., Chiang, C. H., and Sirignano, W. A., 1996, “Oscillatory Fuel
Droplet Vaporization: Driving Mechanism for Combustion Instability,” J. Pro-
pul. Power, 122, pp. 358–365.
8 Engineers at Parker Hanniﬁn Corp, 2008, private communication.
9 Yi, T., and Santavicca, D. A., 2009, “Flame Spectra of a Liquid-Fueled Swirl-
Stabilized LDI Combustor,” AIAA Paper No. 2009-0985.
10 Yi, T., and Santavicca, D. A., 2009, “Determination of the Instantaneous Fuel
Flow Rate Out of a Fuel Injector,” AIAA Paper No. 2009-0987.
11 SAE, 2004, Handbook of Aviation Fuel Properties, 3rd ed., SAE World Head-
quarters, Warrendale, PA.
12 Moliere, M., 2002, “Beneﬁting From the Wide Fuel Capability of Gas Tur-
bines: A Review of Application Opportunities,” ASME Paper No. 2002-GT-
30017.
13 Muruganandam, T. M., Nair, S., Scarborough, D., Neumeier, Y., Jagoda, J.,
Lieuwen, T., Seitzman, J., and Zinn, B., 2005, “Active Control of Lean Blow-
out for Turbine Engine Combustors,” J. Propul. Power., 215, pp. 807–812.
14 Yi, T., and Gutmark, E. J., 2007, “Real-Time Prediction of Incipient Lean
Blowout in Gas Turbine Combustors,” AIAA J., 457, pp. 1734–1739.
021506-6 / Vol. 132, FEBRUARY 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
