
--- Page 1 ---

Ulrich Stopper
e-mail: ulrich.stopper@dlr.de
Manfred Aigner
Wolfgang Meier
Rajesh Sadanandan
Michael Stöhr
German Aerospace Center,
Institute of Combustion Technology,
Pfaffenwaldring 38-40,
D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany
Ik Soo Kim
Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery Ltd.,
P.O. Box 1,
Waterside South,
Lincoln LN5 7FD, UK
Flow Field and Combustion
Characterization of Premixed Gas
Turbine Flames by Planar Laser
Techniques
Lean premixed natural gas/air ﬂames produced by an industrial gas turbine burner were
analyzed using laser diagnostic methods. For this purpose, the burner was equipped with
an optical combustion chamber and operated with preheated air at various thermal
powers P, equivalence ratios , and pressures up to p6 bars. For the visualization of
the ﬂame emissions OH chemiluminescence imaging was applied. Absolute ﬂow veloci-
ties were measured using particle image velocimetry (PIV), and the reaction zones as
well as regions of burnt gas were characterized by planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence
(PLIF) of OH. Using these techniques, the combustion behavior was characterized in
detail. The mean ﬂow ﬁeld could be divided into different regimes: the inﬂow, a central
and an outer recirculation zone, and the outgoing exhaust ﬂow. Single-shot PIV images
demonstrated that the instantaneous ﬂow ﬁeld was composed of small and medium sized
vortices, mainly located along the shear layers. The chemiluminescence images reﬂected
the regions of heat release. From the PLIF images it was seen that the primary reactions
are located in the shear layers between the inﬂow and the recirculation zones and that the
appearance of the reaction zones changed with ﬂame parameters.
DOI: 10.1115/1.2969093
Keywords: lean premixed combustion, swirl ﬂow, gas turbine combustor, high pressure,
NOx reduction, OH chemiluminescence, laser diagnostics, OH PLIF, PIV, reaction zone,
heat release, turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld, vortex core, validation data
1
Introduction
The concept of lean premixed combustion is nowadays most
often applied in stationary gas turbines GTs in order to achieve
very low NOx levels. However, the full potential of this concept
for NOx reduction can often not be exploited because effects of
unmixedness, coherent ﬂow structures, or combustion instabilities
limit its applicability. In order to gain a better understanding of the
complex interactions between the turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld and chemi-
cal reactions in GT-ﬂames, detailed measurements under GT-
relevant conditions are necessary. Here, the best available mea-
surement techniques are nonintrusive laser-based methods. The
results of such measurements play also an important role for the
veriﬁcation of numerical simulations. Especially in the ﬁeld of
turbulent combustion under high-pressure conditions there is a
need of numerical tools, which are capable of correctly determin-
ing the ﬂame behavior by taking into account phenomena such as
the local extinction and re-ignition. To be able to validate existing
models and to develop new numerical approaches, diverse com-
prehensive sets of measurement data are required. The ideal vali-
dation database would contain information about all basic ﬂame
properties such as the distributions of species concentrations, tem-
perature, and ﬂow velocity. Furthermore, the simulation of insta-
tionary combustion needs highly time-resolved measurements or
discrete single-shot data, allowing statements about statistical and
coherent deviations from the average ﬂame behavior.
Laser-based measurements in high-pressure GT model combus-
tors are expensive and difﬁcult to perform 1,2. Due to the lim-
ited optical access and the high thermal loads, robust laser tech-
niques are preferably applied. For temperature measurements,
coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering CARS 3 and a two-line
OH laser-induced ﬂuorescence LIF 4 have been used. For the
visualization of hot and reacting gases, the planar LIF of OH was
frequently applied 5–9; the LIF was also used for the detection
of NO 10,11. Flow ﬁeld measurements were mostly performed
by laser Doppler velocimetry LDV 12–14. The addition of
seeding particles to the ﬂow and their contamination of the win-
dows present an additional challenge in high-pressure GT model
combustors. This is even more serious for the application of par-
ticle image velocimetry PIV and is a main reason for the rela-
tively few publications describing PIV measurements at high-
pressure GT conditions 15–17. However, 2D images of the
instantaneous ﬂow ﬁeld enable new insights into the dynamics of
turbulent swirl ﬂames, which are important for the understanding
of combustion instabilities.
In the experiments described in this paper, an industrial GT
burner was equipped with an optical combustion chamber and was
installed in the high-pressure test rig of the German Aerospace
Center in Stuttgart. The following diagnostic methods were ap-
plied in this project: Chemiluminescence imaging provided infor-
mation about the distribution of electronically excited OH radicals
OH, which is a marker for the reaction zones. OH radicals in
the electronic ground state were mapped using PLIF, and the ﬂow
ﬁeld was measured by PIV. In addition to the optical techniques,
CO, CO2, NO, NO2, and SO2 were determined by probe tech-
niques in the exhaust, and pressure variations in the combustion
chamber were registered by dynamic pressure sensors. By these
measurements, the behavior of lean premixed ﬂames was charac-
terized in detail for different pressures, thermal powers, and
equivalence ratios. This paper focuses on the implementation and
the results of the optical measurements. Parameter studies are pre-
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received April
10, 2008; ﬁnal manuscript received April 14, 2008; published online December 30,
2008. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal. Paper presented at the ASME Turbo
Expo 2008: Land, Sea and Air GT2008, Berlin, Germany, June 9–13, 2008.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2009, Vol. 131 / 021504-1
Copyright © 2009 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

sented in extracts, whereas probe measurements are not published.
One main goal of this complete study was a better understanding
of this combustor and the ﬂame characteristics, e.g., the region of
ﬂame stabilization, the turbulent structures, the mixing character-
istics, and pollutant emissions.
The work presented here is part of an ongoing research project,
which will be continued by laser Raman measurements of the
joint probability density functions PDFs of the temperature and
major species concentrations. The ﬁnal goal is the establishment
of an experimental database, which allows also the identiﬁcation
and quantiﬁcation of effects of unmixedness and ﬁnite-rate chem-
istry. Such “complete” data sets are currently available only for
ﬂames at atmospheric pressure, e.g., for turbulent nonpremixed
ﬂames 18 or partially premixed swirling ﬂames 19,20.
2
Combustor and Test Rig
One aim of this project is to perform the experiments under
conditions as close to the industrial case as possible. To meet this
objective, an unscaled industrial swirl burner 21 was equipped
with a specially designed optical combustion chamber Fig. 1. It
is capable of operation at a thermal power of 1 MW and provides
extensive optical access for laser diagnostics. The inner dimen-
sions of the square combustor are based on the size of a commer-
cial gas turbine combustor. Inside, natural gas with preheated air
is burnt in a lean premixed combustion. The air preheating tem-
perature was 400°C for all operating points. To reduce the ther-
mal load of the quartz glass, double-glazed windows with cooling
air ﬂowing between the glass plates have been installed. The rest
of the combustion chamber sidewalls are cooled by impingement
cooling. A water-cooled transition duct guides the exhaust gas into
the rig’s exhaust channel. For the ﬂow ﬁeld measurements, the gas
in the combustion chamber had to be seeded with particles with a
diameter of 1 m. Therefore, a perforated ring tube was installed
in the plenum upstream of the radial swirler. During the particle
imaging it was used to add a constant ﬂow of seeded air at a mass
ﬂow of up to 4 g/s to the preheated air. All measurements were
performed at pressures p between 1.5 bars and 6 bars and burner
pressure drops p between 1% and 3%, where the percentage
refers to the absolute pressure upstream of the burner.
This combustor was installed at the high-pressure test rig facil-
ity HBK-S of the Institute for Combustion Technology in Stut-
tgart. The pressure vessel of the rig was equipped with glass win-
dows for optical access and several probes for the measurement of
temperature, absolute pressure, differential pressure, and acous-
tics. The concentrations of several species in the exhaust gas were
monitored and recorded during every operation.
3
Experimental Implementation
All activities at the test rig facility are organized in measure-
ment phases of several weeks. In the ﬁrst phase of the project, the
imaging of chemiluminescence and PLIF was accomplished,
whereas the ﬂow ﬁeld studies took place during a second phase.
3.1
OH
Chemiluminescence
and
OH
PLIF Imaging
Setup. Figure 2 shows a schematic of the diagnostic system,
which was used in the ﬁrst measurement phase. The laser system
consisted of a dye laser pumped by a Nd:YAG laser. The output of
the dye laser was frequency doubled and tuned to a wavelength of
283.55 nm, which is resonant with the Q18 line of the A-X 1–0
band of the OH radical. In order to facilitate the adjustment of the
laser wavelength and to control its stability, a small portion of the
beam was coupled out by a beam splitter and irradiated into a ﬂat
laminar methane-air ﬂame stabilized on a matrix burner. The OH
LIF signal from this ﬂame was detected by a photomultiplier tube
equipped with a spectral bandpass ﬁlter that is transparent for
wavelengths between 300 nm and 325 nm. The majority of the
laser light passes the beam splitter and reaches two lenses, which
are set up with a distance of about 64 mm from each other. The
ﬁrst lens f =−50 mm is shaped cylindrically, whereas the second
one f =750 mm is a spherical lens. This optics produces a laser
light sheet, which is guided vertically through the center of the
combustion chamber. The focus of the sheet is located in the sym-
metry axis of the chamber. The LIF of OH radicals is imaged with
an intensiﬁed charge-coupled device ICCD camera equipped
with a bandpass ﬁlter identical to the one in front of the photo-
multiplier tube. To correct the PLIF images for the intensity dis-
tribution within the laser light sheet, a beam splitter redirects a
small portion of the laser sheet into a dye cell. The ﬂuorescence
from this cell was recorded by a second ICCD and used for the
correction. As the width of the laser sheet is about two or three
times smaller than the size of the ﬁeld of view, it was shifted in
the axial direction in order to perform measurements at two dif-
ferent sheet positions. This is done by simultaneously moving all
optical elements and detectors except the ﬁrst beam splitter and
the matrix burner with the photomultiplier. The processing of the
raw images includes background correction, camera sensitivity
correction, and laser intensity proﬁle correction. After these pro-
cesses the two OH concentration maps from the two correspond-
ing measurements with different sheet positions were merged into
one mapping of the whole region of interest.
The imaging of the OH chemiluminescence was performed
with the same detection system as used for PLIF. Details of the
measuring technique are listed in Table 1.
3.2
PIV Setup. The PIV method calculates the vectors of the
local streaming velocity by analyzing the displacement of very
small seeding particles during a short time span. For measuring
this displacement, the particles are illuminated with a double-
pulsed laser sheet. A schematic of the PIV setup is shown in Fig.
3. The ﬂashlamp-pumped Nd:YAG laser used in this setup emits
Fig. 1
Cut-away drawing of the combustor. The preheated air
is seeded with TiO2 particles for PIV measurements. A swirl
burner mixes the air with natural gas. Each window consists of
two quartz plates with a cooling air ﬂowing in between.
Fig. 2
Experimental setup for the imaging of the OH PLIF and
the OH chemiluminescence. One ICCD camera images the
ﬂuorescence, while the other one records the laser intensity
proﬁle.
021504-2 / Vol. 131, MARCH 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

short double-pulses at =532 nm that are triggered synchro-
nously with the exposure gates of the PIV camera Table 2. A
combination
of
two
cylindrical
lenses
f1=−12.7 mm, f2
=200 mm converts the shape of these pulses into a laser sheet
wide enough to cover the whole ﬁeld of view. 418 mm behind the
cylindrical lenses a spherical lens f =1000 mm focuses the sheet
and reduces its planar divergence. Similar to the PLIF setup, a
large bending mirror guides the laser light vertically through the
central plane of the combustor. The objective of the PIV camera is
covered with a narrow band ﬁlter 532 nm, reducing the inﬂuence
of disturbing light sources. The accuracy of the measured veloci-
ties depends on the seeding particle density, the degree of window
contamination, and the turbulence of the ﬂow. On the opposite
side of the test rig an ICCD camera with an adequate ﬁlter for
OH chemiluminescence is mounted, providing images that can be
compared with the results of the previous measurement phase, in
order to check whether the ﬂame behavior is identical.
At good PIV measurement conditions, an interrogation window
size of 1212 pixels could be achieved. The accuracy of the
single-shot velocity estimates can reach 0.7 m/s assuming a
subpixel accuracy of particle displacement of 0.1 pixel and ne-
glecting the inﬂuence of unrecognized erroneous vectors.
3.3
Experimental Challenges. As temperatures in the com-
bustion chamber increase above 1600°C, the windows of the
chamber have to sustain very high heat loads. Although the cool-
ing system reduces the temperature of the glass, the surface of the
interior window is still heated up to 1000°C. At this temperature
the glass begins to soften and its surface becomes rough and in-
creasingly opaque. Impurities on the window surface glow red and
orange. This thermal radiation does not affect the measured
chemiluminescence, which is in the UV regime and can be iso-
lated using a spectral ﬁlter. More interfering is the effect the high
temperature has on the opacity of the glass. The temperature dis-
tribution over the glass window is asymmetric as the swirled ﬂow
rotates through a noncylindrical combustion chamber. This in turn
leads to an asymmetry in the opacity of the windows as the afore-
mentioned roughness increases. The majority of the asymmetry in
the chemiluminescence data can be ascribed to this asymmetric
window transparency. Additionally, single particles on the window
surface are reproduced as small spots in the chemiluminescence
images.
During the PIV measurements the window staining was signiﬁ-
cantly increased by seeding particles adhering to the quartz glass.
As a consequence, the visibility of the particles ﬂowing through
the central plane of the combustor decreased, while impurities
accumulated on the window, producing more and more stationary
spots in the image. Although stationary background signals in the
series of single shots could be mostly eliminated by applying spe-
cial ﬁlter routines, the described process caused a rapid degrada-
tion of the image quality. Below a certain signal-to-noise ratio the
cross correlations calculated by the analyzing software were too
falsiﬁed to enable the detection of the correct ﬂow vector, result-
ing in an erroneous vector ﬁeld. Depending on the window opac-
ity this caused the single-shot analysis either to produce single
blank regions or to completely fail. The former case might still be
usable for calculating the temporal average of the ﬂow ﬁeld. How-
ever, if an averaged ﬂow ﬁeld is composed out of many low-
quality single shots, it can contain artiﬁcially lowered absolute
values of the velocity due to erroneous vectors that statistically do
not favor any direction. This problem often can be bypassed by
applying a method called “ensemble correlation” or “sum of cor-
relation” SOC. This method ﬁrst sums up the cross correlations
of all single shots and calculates the vector ﬁeld afterward 22.
The result is the ﬂow ﬁeld with the maximum likelihood, which
for the very most cases is practically identical with the temporal
average of the ﬂow ﬁeld. The section of this paper about the
analysis of the temporally averaged data does not differentiate
between the temporal average and the results produced by the use
of the SOC.
4
Experimental Results
The following four remarks should be kept in mind while in-
terpreting the experimental results.
•Chemiluminescence imaging is a line-of-sight technique. This
means that the detected signal intensity is not emitted from a
certain excitation plane as with PLIF or PIV. The emission is
rather integrated along the whole line-of-sight. However, for the
central parts of the ﬂame we can assume a cylinder symmetry
of the averaged OH distribution, which allows us to apply the
Table 1
Technical details of the PLIF and chemiluminescence
diagnostics
OH chemiluminescence measurement
Exposure time
40 m
Frame rate
3 Hz
Effective image size
512446 pixels
Bandpass ﬁlter
300–325 nm
OH PLIF measurement
Exposure time
400 ns
Laser pulse duration
8 ns
Laser pulse energy
4.6–5.5 mJ
Laser wavelength
283.55 nm
Effective image size
359446 pixels
Bandpass ﬁlter
300–325 nm
ICCD camera speciﬁcations both cameras
Dynamic range
16 bits
CCD chip size
512512 pixels
Objective ﬂame
UV Halle, 100 mm, f /2
Objective dye cell
UV Nikkor, 105 mm, f /4.5
Fig. 3
Experimental setup for the PIV. An additional ICCD cam-
era observes the OH chemiluminescence. The video camera is
used for control purposes only.
Table 2
Technical details of the PIV setup
PIV measurement
Laser pulse duration
5 ns
Laser pulse energy
120 mJ
Laser sheet width
1 mm
Double-pulse delay
10–15 s
PIV repetition rate
5 Hz
Seeding material
TiO21 m
PIV camera objective
Nikkor, 50 mm, f /5.6
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2009, Vol. 131 / 021504-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

Abel inversion. This algorithm deconvolutes the image data in
order to calculate the distribution of the signal intensity on a
radial section plane.
•The color scale of all ﬁgures showing chemiluminescence or
PLIF in this paper is scaled from zero intensity black to the
maximum intensity of the particular image white.
•The averaged data in this article that are described as tempo-
rally averaged are, in fact, ensemble averaged over a set of
single-shot measurements that were performed in succession
under constant operating conditions. Since each averaged image
is composed out of 200 single shots, which were recorded at a
frame rate of about 3–5 Hz, we can assume the ensemble-
average to be identical with the temporal average. For clarity
reasons the latter expression will be used here.
•All images are background corrected by subtracting an image
with background intensity. The background images for chemi-
luminescence were obtained by using a shutter in front of the
camera. The background measurements for the PLIF diagnostic
were done by shifting the laser wavelength to a nonresonant
value. Each background image is an average of 200 shots. Ad-
ditionally, a detector sensitivity correction was performed by
dividing all raw images by a ﬂatﬁeld image of the particular
camera.
4.1
Instantaneous Flow Field. The results of three typical
single-shot PIV measurements at p=3 bars, p=1%, and 
=0.59 are visualized in Fig. 4. The ﬂow ﬁeld is depicted in the
form of a streamline plot, making the absolute planar velocity of
the ﬂow color coded and its orientation visible. The ﬁrst feature
that catches one’s eye is the inﬂow region. Its shape changes
signiﬁcantly from one laser pulse to the next. This instationary
behavior matches well with the occurrence of vortices distributed
statistically in the shear layers. The size of these vortices approxi-
mately ranges from 1 cm to 5 cm, and they appear more often in
the inner shear layer. The generation of these structures is caused
by the different velocities of the injected fuel-air mixture and the
hot gas between the inﬂow regions. The latter moves much slower
and its mean ﬂow is directed toward the burner mouth, which in
turn is caused by the swirl of the ﬂow and the corresponding
conical orientation of the inﬂow. The backﬂow rate of reaction
products into the burner nozzle is remarkably varying, for ex-
ample, between Figs. 4a and 4c. Fewer statements can be done
about the outer recirculation zone because only about two-thirds
of it are visible due to vignetting by elements of the combustor.
The vortices that are involved with the outer recirculation are
rarely seen in the PIV single shots. Therefore, it may be presumed
that they are generally located very close to the walls of the com-
bustor. Further downstream, in the exhaust gas region on the right-
hand side of the analyzed ﬁeld of view, the planar ﬂow velocity
sometimes reaches relatively high values. This ﬂow structure
mostly appears with an axially stretched shape. Its radial location
as well as its intensity strongly varies. At about half of the single-
shot measurements it does not exist at all, whereas other images of
the same series come up with a global maximum of velocity in
this region. First interpretations of the effect assume this accelera-
tion to be correlated with a fast rotating axial tornadolike vortex
core that dominates the transportation of the exhaust gas to the
exhaust nozzle of the combustor.
4.2
Instantaneous OH and OH Distributions. The pres-
ence of a high OH concentration is an indicator of an intensive
heat release and therefore usually can be found close to the ﬂame
front. The aim of imaging the chemiluminescence of electroni-
cally excited radicals is to get an impression of the location and
the shape of the zone of the primary reactions. Figure 5 shows a
typical instantaneous image of the OH chemiluminescence at p
=4 bars, p=1%, and =0.55. The burner exit is marked by a
white ellipse. The inhomogeneous intensity distribution gives an
impression of a turbulent ﬂame zone, leading to the assumption of
a combustion that is affected by events of local ignition and ex-
tinction. Measurements using laser Raman scattering will show
whether variations in the mixture fraction might also be a source
for the observed inhomogeneities. A good portion of the heat re-
lease seems to happen in a region located between 5 cm and 8 cm
downstream of the burner exit.
These ﬁndings are supplemented by the mappings of the laser-
induced OH ﬂuorescence. Detectable concentrations of OH radi-
Fig. 4
Streamline plots of three successive instantaneous PIV measurements at p=3 bars, p
=1%, and =0.59. The size of the burner nozzle is indicated by two marks on the left side of each
image. The PIV repetition rate was 5 Hz. Arrows indicate the local ﬂow direction.
Fig. 5
Instantaneous distribution of the OH chemilumines-
cence „line-of-sight… at p=4 bars. The white ellipse represents
the burner nozzle.
021504-4 / Vol. 131, MARCH 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

cals are present not only in the reaction zones but also in the hot
exhaust gas when the local temperature is approximately above
1400 K. Since OH is formed in superequilibrium concentrations in
the reaction zone, its highest concentrations are found in the ﬂame
front. The relaxation toward the equilibrium concentration pro-
ceeds via slow three-body reactions and takes a few milliseconds
at p=1 bar. At a higher pressure it is signiﬁcantly faster. An ex-
tract of a set of single-shot PLIF images is shown in Fig. 6a. The
interval between the successive images was about 0.33 s. Only the
images from the ﬁrst laser sheet position are displayed. The pres-
sure drop over the burner was p=1.1% at p=1.5 bars and 
=0.53. The black areas near the nozzle exit reﬂect the region of
the inﬂowing gas of relatively low temperatures. In the inner and
outer recirculation zones, medium OH concentrations blue and
red areas, b&w print: dark gray prevail representing hot gas,
probably close to chemical equilibrium. The highest OH concen-
trations yellow areas, b&w print: light gray occur in the shear
layers between the inﬂow and the recirculation zones. These are
indicative of the superequilibrium OH and reﬂect the presence of
reaction zones. The “snapshots” clearly show a fragmented ﬂame
front.
An example for the inﬂuence of the operating parameters on the
ﬂame properties can be seen by comparing this set of single shots
with the set shown in Fig. 6b. The latter is an extract of a series
of PLIF images recorded at p=4 bars, p=3%, and =0.50. The
turbulence-related characteristics are much more pronounced as
with the operating point from Fig. 6a. The regions that are di-
rectly involved in the shear ﬂow are clearly extended, and the
superequilibrium OH appears as numerous small spots, each the
size of a few pixels. Moreover, excessive OH concentrations oc-
cur more frequently in the inner shear layer than in the outer. This
indicates a pressure-dependent displacement of the mean distribu-
tion of the reaction zones. The distribution of the equilibrium OH
in the inner recirculation zone close to the burner changed too.
This region has become smaller in diameter. Similar pressure-
dependent phenomena were discovered in the temporally aver-
aged OH chemiluminescence data, which are treated in Sec. 4.3.
A clearer impression of the instationary shape of the reaction zone
can be obtained by calculating the gradient of the PLIF intensity.
This image processing technique is very sensitive to the rapid
growth of the OH concentration between the unburnt mixture and
the superequilibrium zone 23. Such a visualization of a ﬂame at
p=4, p=1%, and =0.53 is given in Fig. 7. Here, again, one
can see the strongly wrinkled nature of the fragmented ﬂame
fronts.
4.3
Mean Flow Field. The averaged ﬂow ﬁeld in Fig. 8 illus-
trates how the hot exhaust gas in the inner recirculation zone
IRZ is transported backward until it remixes with the inﬂow
outside or inside of the burner nozzle. A clear distinction between
IRZ, outer recirculation zone ORZ, and inﬂow region can be
obtained by regarding the planar ﬂow direction only Fig. 9. The
sharp contrast in this visualization allows a precise deﬁnition of
these zones. Remarkably, the complete appearance of the ﬂow
ﬁeld is neither dependent on the pressure inside the combustion
chamber nor on the equivalence ratio. The same applies to the
variation of the pressure drop over the burner, apart from the
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6
Single-shot OH PLIF mappings at „a… p=1.5 bars, p
=1.1%, and =0.53 and „b… p=4 bars, p=3%, and =0.50
Fig. 7
The absolute gradient of the OH PLIF intensity gives an
impression of the instantaneous shape of the ﬂame front. Col-
lage of two measurements with shifted laser sheet positions at
different points in time „p=4 bars….
Fig. 8
Mean ﬂow ﬁeld „sum of correlation… at p=4 bars, p
=1%, and =0.56. Background: contour plot of the corre-
sponding mean OH density.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2009, Vol. 131 / 021504-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

mass-ﬂow-dependent scaling of the absolute ﬂow speed. In Fig.
10 this scaling is illustrated by plotting the radial proﬁle of the
axial ﬂow velocity component averaged over a range of 7–16 mm
downstream of the burner.
Explicit ﬁndings concerning the turbulence of the ﬂow are ob-
tained by calculating the standard deviation from the mean ﬂow
velocity. An appropriate mapping together with the averaged ﬂow
vectors is shown in Fig. 11. As expected, strong variations of the
velocity can be found within the shear layers. The highest absolute
rms values do not coincide exactly with the boundary layer be-
tween the IRZ and the inﬂow standing out in Fig. 9. The maxima
are rather located further outside. Another highly turbulent zone is
detected further downstream along the central axis of the combus-
tor, although there is no notable shear ﬂow in the temporal aver-
age. This can be explained with the existence of a ﬂuctuating axial
vortex core, which already was considered at the interpretation of
the PIV single-shot results.
4.4
Mean OH Distribution. In Fig. 12 the temporally aver-
aged chemiluminescence images of three operating points with
different mass ﬂows at p=4 bars and 0.50 are shown. The
asymmetry between the upper and the lower half of the spatial
intensity distribution is caused by the inhomogeneous opacity of
the optical access. The images reveal the mean ﬂame to stabilize
some centimeters downstream of the burner mouth in a ring-
shaped region. The position and size of this region are dependent
on the mass ﬂow. All of the examined test conditions showed an
expansion of the mean ﬂame zone in both the axial and the radial
directions when the burner pressure drops, and thus the thermal
load is increased. At p=3% the region of maximum heat release
is located very close to the sidewalls Fig. 12c, which may
result in a strong thermal load for the combustion chamber. The
increase in the ﬂow velocity of the unburnt fuel-air mixture causes
a clearly visible downstream shift of the region with maximum
heat release and a narrowing of the mean OH distribution in the
IRZ. The latter effect is particularly visible at high pressures.
To be able to quantitatively analyze the spatial information of
the chemiluminescence images, the Abel inversion has to be ap-
plied ﬁrst. In order to bypass difﬁculties with the vignetted ﬂame
periphery, it is possible to perform the deconvolution only in an
axial range where the radial extension of the ﬂame is small
enough for the application of this image processing method. Here,
the pressure inﬂuence on the radial distribution of the OH con-
centration at a distance of 22 mm from the burner was studied.
The plots in Fig. 13 were attained by deconvolving the corre-
sponding
chemiluminescence
images
and
applying
a
9
9 pixel2 smoothing ﬁlter. Additionally, an integration over an
axial range of 3 mm was done for further noise reduction. Due
to the spatial symmetry, this results in two curves of which the
arithmetical mean is plotted in the ﬁgure. In this case, the window
opacity is negligible since the radial extent of the ﬂame is rela-
tively small. The curves of this parameter study measured at
p=2%, =0.53 clearly reﬂect a pressure-induced displacement
of the OH concentration from the outer to the inner shear layer.
The raw data of the 6 bar measurement had a low signal-to-noise
ratio and a considerable inconsistency between the two curves
from the opposite sides of the symmetry axis. Therefore, the slight
deviation of the 6 bar case from the general tendency must not be
overrated. However, a distinct bimodal distribution is only exis-
tent at pressures below 4 bars and close to the burner. Further
downstream, both peaks merge into a distribution with a single
maximum, which coincides with the maximum of the radial dis-
tribution of the planar ﬂow velocity. Figure 8 shows a mapping of
the mean OH density in the form of a contour plot together with
an overlaid vector ﬁeld of the mean planar ﬂow velocity. It can be
seen from the superimposition that the allocation of the reaction
zones is directed by the ﬂow ﬁeld.
Fig. 9
The inﬂow region can be clearly distinguished from the
recirculation zones by mapping the averaged ﬂow direction
Fig. 10
Radial distribution of the axial component of the ﬂow
velocity averaged over an axial range of 7–16 mm downstream
of the burner exit
Fig. 11
Mapping of the standard deviation of the ﬂow velocity
at p=3 bars, p=1%, and =0.59
Fig. 12
Line-of-sight mappings of the mean OH chemilumi-
nescence distribution for different pressure drops over the
burner at p=4 bars and É0.50. The burner nozzle is marked
with a white ellipse.
021504-6 / Vol. 131, MARCH 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

5
Summary
An industrial gas turbine burner for lean premixed natural gas
ﬂames was equipped with an optical combustion chamber and
operated in a high-pressure test rig. The general ﬂame behavior,
the structures, and the ﬂow ﬁeld have been measured using OH
chemiluminescence imaging, planar LIF of OH, and particle im-
age velocimetry. Systematic variations of the mass ﬂow, equiva-
lence ratio, and pressure have been performed. The main goals of
this project were a better understanding of the physical and chemi-
cal processes dominating the ﬂame behavior and the establishment
of an experimental database for the validation of numerical ﬂame
simulations.
From the averaged PIV measurement results it was known that
the inﬂow of fresh gases was conically shaped and that the mean
ﬂow ﬁeld had a small ORZ and a large IRZ transporting the hot
reaction products back toward the inﬂow region. Instantaneous
PIV measurements exposed the ﬂow in the shear layers to be
dominated by small vortices. The PLIF images also showed the
unburnt reactants mixing with the combustion products in these
regions. By analyzing the distributions of electronically excited
OH and superequilibrium concentrations of OH, it could be seen
that the ignition happens within the shear layers. Further down-
stream the primary reactions also took place throughout the com-
plete ring-shaped region with a positive axial ﬂow component.
The axial and radial extensions of the averaged ﬂame zone are
strongly dependent on the total mass ﬂow. The instantaneous
shape of the ﬂame front is disturbed and fragmented by the tur-
bulent ﬂow, especially for conditions with high pressures and high
ﬂow velocities. Deconvoluted chemiluminescence images showed
a pressure-dependent displacement of the heat release zone from
the outer to the inner shear layer. The IRZ of the averaged ﬂow
ﬁeld reaches into the burner nozzle occupying about a quarter of
its cross-sectional area. Furthermore, the mean structure of the
ﬂow ﬁeld, e.g., its partition into inﬂow and recirculation, is inde-
pendent of the operating conditions. The standard deviation of the
ﬂow velocity exposed a relatively strong ﬂuctuating ﬂow within
an axially expanded region downstream of the actual ﬂame. This
can be interpreted as an effect of a fast rotating exhaust gas swirl.
Altogether, these ﬁndings contribute to the understanding of the
interaction between the turbulent ﬂow and the chemical reactions
in gas turbine combustors.
6
Outlook
In the third measurement phase of this project, laser Raman
spectroscopy will be applied to determine the temperature and the
concentrations of N2, O2, CH4, H2, CO2, CO, and H2O simulta-
neously by single-shot measurements with a one-dimensional spa-
tial resolution. For this purpose, a specially designed diagnostic
system has already been set up and tested at the German Aero-
space Center 24. Finally, the results of all three measurement
phases will be incorporated into a comprehensive database, which
will be available for the veriﬁcation of numerical simulations.
Acknowledgment
The presented work was conducted at the German Aerospace
Center DLR in cooperation with SIEMENS Industrial Turboma-
chinery. We gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from the
State of Baden-Württemberg within the KW21 research program.
We would like to thank Richard Noden, Khawar Syed, Lorin
Wehr, and Jan Withag for their fruitful collaboration in this
project.
References
1 Löfström, C., Engström, J., Richter, M., Kaminski, C., Johansson, P., Nyholm,
K., Nygren, J., and Aldén, M., 2000, “Feasibility Studies and Application of
Laser/Optical Diagnostics for Characterisation of a Practical Low-Emission
Gas Turbine Combustor,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-0124.
2 Gord, J., Brown, M., and Meyer, T., 2002, “Optical Diagnostics for Charac-
terizing Advanced Combustors and Pulsed-Detonation Engines,” Proceedings
of the 22nd AIAA Aerodynamic Measurement Technology and Ground Testing
Conference, St. Louis, MO, June 24–26, Paper No. AIAA2002-3030.
3 Zarzalis, N., Ripplinger, T., Hohmann, S., Hettel, M., Merkle, K., Leuckel, W.,
Klose, G., Koch, R., Wittig, S., Carl, M., Berendt, T., Hassa, C., Meier, U.,
Lückerath, R., and Stricker, W., 2002, “Low-NO2 Combustor Development
Pursued With the Scope of the Engine 3E German National Research Program
in a Cooperative Effort Among Engine Manufacturer MTU, University of
Karlsruhe and DLR German Aerospace Center,” Aerosp. Sci. Technol., 6, pp.
531–544.
4 Meier, U., Wolff-Gaßmann, D., and Sticker, W., 2000, “LIF Imaging and 2D
Temperature Mapping in a Model Combustor at Elevated Pressure,” Aerosp.
Sci. Technol., 4, pp. 403–414.
5 Hicks, Y., Locke, R., Anderson, R., Zaller, M., and Schock, H., 1997, “Imag-
ing Fluorescent Combustion Species in Gas Turbine Flame Tubes: On Com-
plexities in Real Systems,” Proceedings of the 33rd Joint Propulsion Confer-
ence, Seattle, WA, July 6–9, Paper No. AIAA-97-2837.
6 Frank, J., Miller, M., and Allen, M., 1999, “Imaging of Laser-Induced Fluo-
rescence in a High-Pressure Combustor,” Proceedings of the 37th AIAA Aero-
space Science Meeting and Exhibition, Reno, NV, Jan. 11–14, Paper No. AIAA
99-0773.
7 Griebel, P., Siewert, P., and Jansohn, P., 2007, “Flame Characteristics of Tur-
bulent Lean Premixed Methane/Air Flames at High Pressure: Turbulent Flame
Speed and Flame Brush Thickness,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 3083–3090.
8 Lee, S.-Y., Seo, S., Broda, J., Pal, S., and Santoro, R., 2000, “An Experimental
Estimation of Mean Reaction Rate and Flame Structure During Combustion
Instability in a Lean Premixed Gas Turbine Combustor,” Proc. Combust. Inst.,
28, pp. 775–782.
9 Janus, B., Dreizler, A., and Janicka, J., 2007, “Experiments on Swirl-Stabilized
Non-Premixed Natural Gas Flames in a Model Gasturbine Combustor,” Proc.
Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 3091–3098.
10 Cooper, C., and Laurendau, N., 2000, “Comparison of Laser-Induced and Pla-
nar Laser-Induced Fluorescence Measurements of Nitiric Oxide in a High-
Pressure, Swirl-Stabilized, Spray Flame,” Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 79, pp.
903–910.
11 Fink, R., Hupfer, A., and Rist, D., 2002. “Non Intrusive Measurements of a
LPP Combustor Under Elevated Pressure Conditions,” ASME Paper No. GT-
2002-30078.
12 Carl, M., Behrendt, T., Fleing, C., Frodermann, M., Heinze, J., Hassa, C.,
Meier, U., Wolff-Gaßmann, D., Hohmann, S., and Zarzalis, N., 2001, “Experi-
mental and Numerical Investigation of a Planar Combustor Sector at Realistic
Operating Conditions,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 123, pp. 810–
816.
13 Soika, A., Dinkelacker, F., and Leipertz, A., 2003, “Pressure Inﬂuence on the
Flame Front Curvature of Turbulent Premixed Flames: Comparison Between
Experiment and Theory,” Combust. Flame, 132, pp. 451–462.
14 Janus, B., Dreizler, A., and Janicka, J., 2005, “Experimental Study on Stabi-
lization of Lifted Swirl Flames in a Model GT Combustor,” Flow, Turbul.
Combust., 75, pp. 293–315.
15 Geigle, K.-P., Meier, W., Aigner, M., Willert, C., Jarius, M., Schmitt, P., and
Schürmans, B., 2006, “Phase Resolved Laser Diagnostic Measurements of a
Downscaled, Fuel Staged Gas Turbine Combustor at Elevated Pressure and
Comparison With LES Predictions,” ASME Paper No. GT2006-90875.
16 Hassa, C., Willert, C., Fischer, M., Stockhausen, G., Röhle, I., Meier, W.,
Fig. 13
The radial OH distribution is inﬂuenced by the pres-
sure. The shaded range cannot be analyzed due to deconvolu-
tion artifacts. R is the burner nozzle radius. Inset: Abel-inverted
OH chemiluminescence. The marked zones were analyzed for
the graphs.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MARCH 2009, Vol. 131 / 021504-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

Wehr, L., and Kutne, P., 2006, “Nonintrusive Flowﬁeld, Temperature and Spe-
cies Measurements on a Generic Aeroengine Combustor at Elevated Pres-
sures,” ASME Paper No. GT2006-90213.
17 Willert, C., Hassa, C., Stockhausen, G., Jarius, M., Voges, M., and Klinner, J.,
2006, “Combines PIV and DGV Applied to a Pressurized Gas Turbine Com-
bustor Facility,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 17, pp. 1670–1679.
18 Barlow, R., 2007, Library of the TNF workshop, http://public.ca.sandia.gov/
TNF
19 Weigand, P., Meier, W., Duan, X., Stricker, W., and Aigner, M., 2006, “Inves-
tigations of Swirl Flames in a Gas Turbine Model Combustor: I. Flow Field,
Structures, Temperature, and Species Distribution,” Combust. Flame, 144, pp.
205–224.
20 Meier, W., Weigand, P., Duan, X., and Giezendaner-Thoben, R., 2007, “De-
tailed Characterization of the Dynamics of Thermoacoustic Pulsations in a
Lean Premixed Swirl Flame,” Combust. Flame, 150, pp. 2–26.
21 Ng, W., Syed, K., and Zhang, Y., 2004, “The Study of Flame Dynamics and
Structures in an Industrial-Scale Gas Turbine Combustor Using Digital Data
Processing and Computer Vision Techniques,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 15, pp.
2303–2309.
22 Meinhart, C., Wereley, S., and Santiago, J., 2000, “A PIV Algorithm for Esti-
mating Time-Averaged Velocity Fields,” ASME J. Fluids Eng., 122, pp. 285–
289.
23 Sadanandan, R., Stöhr, M., and Meier, W., 2008, “Simultaneous OH-PLIF and
PIV Measurements in a Gas Turbine Model Combustor,” Appl. Phys. B: La-
sers Opt., 90, pp. 609–618.
24 Wehr, L., Meier, W., Kutne, P., and Hassa, C., 2007, “Single-Pulse 1D Laser
Raman Scattering Applied in a Gas Turbine Model Combustor at Elevated
Pressure,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 3099–3106.
021504-8 / Vol. 131, MARCH 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
