
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
www.elsevier.com/locate/jnlabr/cnf
Large eddy simulation of a model gas turbine combustor
F. di Mare,a W.P. Jones,a,∗and K.R. Menzies b
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AX, UK
b Combustion Systems Engineering, Rolls-Royce plc., PO Box 3, Filton, Bristol BS34 7QE, UK
Received 22 July 2002; received in revised form 10 August 2003; accepted 30 January 2004
Abstract
Large eddy simulation (LES) has been used to predict temperature and species concentrations in a model can-
type gas turbine combustor operating in a non-premixed combustion regime. The subgrid scale stresses have been
modelled adopting the standard Smagorinsky–Lilly model, whilst combustion has been accounted for using a
conserved scalar approach. The dependence of the thermodynamical status of the mixture on the conserved scalar
has been described invoking a ﬂamelet assumption, and the shape of the scalar probability density function (pdf)
assigned to be a β function. The subgrid scalar variance, needed to parameterise the scalar pdf, has been modelled
according to local equilibrium arguments. The complex ﬂow pattern developing from the interaction of a strongly
swirling ﬂow in the primary zone with the impinging primary jets has been captured by the present simulations in
great detail. In particular, it has been observed that an accurate description of the inlet section of the combustor
plays a fundamental role in the prediction of the fuel placement and, hence, of the temperature distribution in the
primary region.
2004 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Combustion; Turbulence; Large eddy simulation; Gas turbines
1. Introduction and motivation
The majority of current methods for calculat-
ing the properties of turbulent ﬂames and practical
combustion systems are based on Reynolds or Favre
averaging of the Navier–Stokes equations (RANS).
Whilst the approach has often proved useful in the
past it has met with variable success in reproduc-
ing many of the important effects present in prac-
tical combustion systems, particularly in situations
where large-scale organised and nonstationary tur-
bulence structures, strong streamline curvature, or
nongradient transport is present. Large eddy simu-
lation (LES) represents a potentially powerful and
promising method for overcoming many of the lim-
itations of RANS approaches. LES involves a direct
* Corresponding author. Fax: +44(0) 207 581 54 95.
E-mail address: w.jones@imperial.ac.uk (W.P. Jones).
three-dimensional time-dependent computation of the
large-scale turbulent motions responsible for turbu-
lent mixing whilst those with scales smaller than the
computational grid (the subgrid stresses) are mod-
elled. Recently, more emphasis has been placed on
applications of LES to combusting ﬂows, the major
issue being the fact that reactive phenomena occur on
scales that fall well below the resolution limit of the
computational mesh and as a consequence modelling
is required. This difﬁculty has been addressed by sev-
eral workers with limited success, for example, see
[1–4]; in these approaches direct closure of the chem-
ical source term in the species transport equations is
attempted. More sophisticated techniques have been
also proposed, including, for example, the application
of the linear eddy model [5] to LES by Menon et al.
[6], the extension of the conditional moment closure,
devised originally in the context of RANS [7], to LES
by Bushe and Steiner [8], and the solution of mod-
elled scalar pdf transport equations, introduced by
0010-2180/$ – see front matter 2004 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2004.01.008


--- Page 2 ---

F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
279
Fig. 1. Dependence of species mole fraction, temperature,
and density on the mixture fraction: laminar ﬂamelet calcu-
lation (as = 15 s−1).
Givi and co-workers [9,10] and then successively de-
veloped in [11–14]. The potentially greater degree of
accuracy offered by these models is limited by the ex-
tremely high computational cost of implementation.
So far this has restricted their use to very simple and
idealised problems; they do not currently represent a
solution to practical problems.
An alternative to the above is a simple laminar
ﬂamelet conserved scalar approach, which provides
a reasonable compromise between implementation
costs and accuracy (Fig. 1). Here it is presumed that
a single strictly conserved scalar, the mixture frac-
tion ξ, is sufﬁcient to describe the thermochemical
state of the ﬂow and this serves to de facto decou-
ple the modelling of turbulence from that of reactive
phenomena. The methodology originally developed
in the context of RANS approaches (e.g., [15]) has
then been applied to LES in a slightly modiﬁed form
(see [16–18]). The functional dependence of com-
position, temperature, and density on ξ can be ob-
tained either from chemical equilibrium assumptions
or from laminar ﬂamelet calculations. Although the
conditions for ﬂamelet combustion may not always be
satisﬁed, the method yields more realistic predictions
of species concentrations (particularly in the case
of CO) for hydrocarbon fuels than the equilibrium
method and it is therefore to be preferred. The mean
(ﬁltered) concentrations, temperature, and density can
be calculated by convolution of these known func-
tions with the subgrid pdf of the resolved conserved
scalar. The functional form of the probability density
function can be conveniently chosen as a β function,
which is deﬁned in the interval [0,1], as is the mixture
fraction itself. Other pdf forms have also been used
(see [19]) such as clipped gaussian and double delta
functions. Although relying on assumptions that may
not be always strictly valid, the conserved scalar ap-
proach is computationally inexpensive, particularly in
the context of full three-dimensional time-dependent
computations.
The application of LES to gas turbine combustors
is being regarded with increased interest due to its
potential in capturing features of the ﬂow ﬁeld that
are currently out of reach of other modelling tech-
niques. However, the complex geometrical aspects
of common industrial devices, which drastically in-
creases the cost of performing good-quality LES, to-
gether with the issues related to incorporating sufﬁ-
ciently accurate combustion models still pose a lim-
itation on the application of LES to practical gas
turbine combustion chambers. Several authors have
attempted LESs of gas turbine combustors in simpli-
ﬁed geometries. Kim et al. [20] calculated the velocity
and composition ﬁeld in a GE lean premixed dry-low
NOx LM6000 combustion chamber using a ﬂamelet
approach to describe the premixed combustion occur-
ring in the combustor. Although the device retained
some of the complex characteristics of practical gas
turbine combustors, ﬁlm cooling was not accounted
for, nor were additional complications related to the
presence of dilution jets or changes in the shape of
the chamber considered. Also, the computed species
concentration and temperature were not reported, pre-
sumably because no measurements were available for
comparison purposes. Mahesh et al. [21] also car-
ried out LES of a simpliﬁed Pratt & Whitney coax-
ial combustor, mainly for code validation purposes,
and Angelberger et al. [22] investigated the effects of
acoustic instabilities in a premixed dump combustor.
Although a premixed combustion regime is be-
coming increasingly popular for industrial gas tur-
bines, because of their potential for very low NOx
emissions, combustion in conventional aircraft gas
turbines occurs predominantly in the non-premixed
diffusion ﬂame regime. In such devices turbulent mix-
ing exerts a dominant inﬂuence and better understand-


--- Page 3 ---

280
F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
ing necessarily requires an accurate prediction of
the turbulent velocity ﬁeld, including any “unsteady”
aspects associated, for example, with jet-on-jet im-
pingement. The present study represents an attempt
to predict the concentration, temperature, and velocity
ﬁeld in a practical conﬁguration where the combus-
tion process develops in the non-premixed regime.
The conﬁguration selected in the present work is a
model can-type combustor closely representative of
that found in the Rolls–Royce Tay engine. The com-
bustor, described in [23–25], comprises rows of pri-
mary and dilution ports, a circular to rectangular noz-
zle, as well as of porous walls, and the resulting ﬂow
pattern is extremely complex and is well suited to an
investigation of the capabilities of LES. In the present
work, the conserved scalar approach has been adopted
to model the combustion process, both in view of
the advantages offered by the method over more ex-
pensive, although more rigorous alternatives, and be-
cause of its success in previous works [16,17,26].
The Smagorinsky–Lilly model [27,28] has been used
to represent the subgrid stresses and ﬂuxes and thus
close the ﬁltered momentum and conserved scalar
transport equations. In the following sections the de-
tails of the mathematical model are described, along
with the numerical method used to solve the govern-
ing equations, and results of the computation are then
compared with measurements.
1.1. Flow conﬁguration
The device here investigated is a roughly three-
fourths-scale model can-type combustion chamber
representative of the Rolls–Royce Tay gas turbine.
The model combustor comprises a hemispherical
head, a cylindrical barrel, and a circular to rectangular
nozzle. The combustor walls are made of Transply, a
laminated porous material engineered at Rolls–Royce
plc. A relatively small swirler with 18 aerodynami-
cally shaped vanes sits in the head of the combustor,
and fuel (high-purity propane) is injected into the
combustion chamber through ten 1.7-mm-diameter
jets arranged around a 90◦cone located at the cen-
tre of the swirler. Two rows of primary and dilution
ports are located in the combustor barrel, with the
latter staggered by half a pitch with respect to the for-
mer. The diameter of the dilution jets is twice that
of the primary ones. The combustor is located in a
large duct and is effectively “plenum fed” so that the
primary and dilution jets enter the combustor at ap-
proximately 90◦to its axis. The combustor geometry
is described in greater detail in [23,29]. A schematic
representation of the combustor is shown in Fig. 2.
In an isothermal experimental study conducted at
Imperial College, two different swirler conﬁgurations
were investigated, one featuring 30◦vanes, the other
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the model Tay combus-
tor.
45◦vanes. The inﬂuence of swirler characteristics on
the ﬂow ﬁeld inside the combustor was assessed by
Bicen and Palma [30]. They found that the swirler
ﬂow characteristics are unaffected by the Reynolds
number in the range at which the combustor was oper-
ated. There was also evidence of a stronger stabilising
effect of the near-solid body rotation to which the
ﬂuid is subjected in proximity of the combustor axis
on turbulence when the 45◦swirl was used. The lower
discharge coefﬁcient Cd found in this case seemed
to suggest that separation occurred in the vane pas-
sage, which was also the cause of difference between
the ﬂow split with the two swirler conﬁgurations. De-
tailed combusting ﬂow measurements within the com-
bustor have been taken for a number of different simu-
lated operating conditions, encompassing take off and
ground-idle regimes, at nearly atmospheric pressure.
Temperature was measured by digitally compensated
small-diameter bare-wire thermocouples while con-
centrations of UHC, CO2, CO, O2, and H2 were ob-
tained by sampling through water-cooled probes and
analysing the samples with a ﬂame ionisation detec-
tor, a gas chromatograph, and infrared and paramag-
netic analysers [23].
In the present study computations were carried out
for the conﬁguration featuring a 45◦swirler operat-
ing under the takeoff conditions, for which the initial
air temperature was 315 K and the air-to-fuel-ratio
(AFR) 57. This corresponds to volumetric ﬂow rates
of 0.08 and 0.001 m3 s−1 for air and fuel, respec-
tively, yielding a bulk velocity equal to 182.2 ms−1
for the former and 44.1 ms−1 for the latter, based on
cold ﬂow properties. The Reynolds number based on
the characteristic dimensions of the swirler is 79,900
for air. The Reynolds number based on the bulk air
ﬂow rate and barrel diameter is 79,000. The mass ﬂow
rates through the Transply walls and dilution and pri-
mary ports were distributed so that 6.6% of the air
intake went through the head of the combustor, 13.8%


--- Page 4 ---

F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
281
through the barrel’s wall, 5.8% through the nozzle,
and 13.6 and 53.3% through the primary and dilution
ports, respectively. A characteristic residence time for
the combustor can also be deﬁned as the ratio of the
volume of the combustor to the bulk volumetric ﬂow
rate of air, resulting in τr = 0.01012 s.
2. Mathematical model
In LES a spatial ﬁlter is applied to the equations
of motion so that motions with scales less than the
ﬁlter “width” do not have to be resolved by the com-
putational mesh. The spatial ﬁlter of a function f =
f (x,t) is deﬁned as its convolution with a ﬁlter func-
tion, G, according to
(1)
¯f (x,t) =

Ω
G

x −x′;∆(x)

f (x′,t)d3x′,
where the integration is carried out over the entire
ﬂow domain, Ω. The ﬁlter function has a width ∆
which may vary with position. While a number of
different ﬁlter kernels have been proposed and used,
e.g., “sharp spectral cutoff” and gaussian and box (or
top-hat) ﬁlters, in combustion the ﬁlter function must
satisfy
(2)
G(x −x′,∆) > 0.
Also, in turbulent reacting ﬂows large density vari-
ations occur that must be properly accounted for
and this is achieved by the introduction of density-
weighted ﬁltered quantities, denoted by a tilde and
deﬁned by ˜f (x,t) ≡ρf/ ¯ρ.
Application of the density-weighted ﬁlter to the
equations of motion gives
(3)
∂¯ρ
∂t + ∂¯ρ ˜ui
∂xi
= 0,
∂¯ρ ˜ui
∂t
+ ∂¯ρ ˜ui ˜uj
∂xj
(4)
= −∂¯p
∂xi
+
∂
∂xj

µ
 ∂¯ui
∂xj
+ ∂¯uj
∂xi

−∂τij
∂xj
,
where τij is the unknown residual or subgrid scale
stress, deﬁned as
(5)
τij = ¯ρ(
uiuj −˜ui ˜uj).
To evaluate the viscous terms in Eq. (4) subgrid ﬂuc-
tuations in the density and the viscosity µ are ne-
glected. Direct viscous stresses are negligible in the
high-Reynolds-number ﬂow presently to be consid-
ered. To close Eq. (4) the standard Smagorinsky–Lilly
model [27,28] has been adopted:
(6)
τij −1
3τkkδij = 2ρCs∆2∥˜Sij ∥˜Sij .
Here ∥˜Sij ∥represents the Frobenius norm of the
Favre ﬁltered rate of strain tensor, ˜Sij . The ﬁlter width
∆is equated here to the cube root of the local grid
cell volume. The isotropic part of the viscous and sub-
grid stresses is adsorbed into the pressure. In writing
Eq. (4) it is has been assumed that the ﬁlter width
is invariant in space. However, this is not the case
in practical applications, where the need for different
levels of spatial resolution across the solution domain
requires the use of variable grid spacings and this re-
sults in a commutation error. This commutation error
can be shown to be almost entirely dissipative in na-
ture [31], and in the present work estimates of this
“dissipation” have been demonstrated [32] to be neg-
ligible compared with dissipation of the SGS model
itself.
2.1. Combustion model
In principle, the system of governing equations
could include the transport equations for chemical
species, according to the assigned reaction mecha-
nism, and energy. However, this is a difﬁcult and com-
putationally expensive task not only because of the
dramatic increase in the number of equations to be
solved, but also due to the presence of nonlinear ﬁl-
tered chemical source terms that must be modelled
(e.g., [26]).
In situations such as the present, however, the
fuel and air streams enter the combustion chamber
in separate streams and heat-releasing reactions may
be presumed “fast.” With a number of fairly benign
assumptions—the main ones being that the ﬂow is
adiabatic, the Prandtl and Schmidt numbers are equal,
and the pressure is thermodynamically constant—the
instantaneous major species composition, tempera-
ture, and density can be related to a strictly con-
served scalar quantity, the mixture fraction ξ [15,33,
34]. The mixture fraction can be viewed as a nor-
malised chemical element mass fraction or enthalpy
deﬁned so that it takes the value of unity in the fuel
stream and zero in the air stream. The equation for
ξ contains no reaction source terms, is affected only
indirectly by reaction through its inﬂuence on ﬂuid
density, and is hence strictly conserved. In gas tur-
bine combustors the Mach number is low, the pres-
sure is approximately constant, and heat losses to the
walls are negligible [35], and as a consequence the
conserved scalar approach is appropriate. The conser-
vation equation for the Favre ﬁltered mixture fraction
can then be written [17] as
∂¯ρ ˜ξ
∂t
+ ∂¯ρ ˜ui ˜ξ
∂xi
(7)
= ∂
∂xi
µ
σ
∂˜ξ
∂xi

−∂¯ρ(
uiξ −˜ui ˜ξ)
∂xi
,


--- Page 5 ---

282
F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
where σ is the Prandtl/Schmidt number. Eq. (7) con-
tains the unknown subgrid scalar ﬂux,
(8)
J sgs
i
= ¯ρ(
uiξ −˜ui ˜ξ),
which is modelled using a gradient transport model:
(9)
J sgs
i
= −µsgs
σsgs
∂˜ξ
∂xi
.
There is some uncertainty in the choice of the value of
the subgrid Prandtl/Schmidt number. If a convective-
inertial (Obukhov–Corrsin) spectrum is assumed for
the SGS scalar variance ˜ξ′′2
sgs, deﬁned as ˜ξ2 −˜ξ2, the
value for the subgrid Prandtl/Schmidt number can be
determined by invoking an equilibrium assumption.
On this basis Schmidt and Schumann [36] proposed
a value σsgs = 0.42, whereas other authors ([37] for
instance) used a value of 0.36. In view of this un-
certainty some workers [38,39] have used a dynamic
calibration procedure for σsgs similar to that devised
by Germano et al. [40] for the Smagorinsky model
parameter. In the present case, however, based on the
results of [16,17,41], a ﬁxed value equal to 0.7 has
been adopted.
The functional dependence of the thermochemical
variables on the mixture fraction has been obtained
from a ﬂamelet assumption. In “steady” ﬂamelet ap-
proaches it has been usual in the past for this func-
tional dependence to be made dependent also on some
measure of ﬂame stretch, usually taken to be the
“scalar” dissipation rate [42,43]. However, even in
RANS-based methods it appears that the advantage to
be gained from such an approach is small; away from
extinction the effects of ﬂame stretch are relatively
small and the local stretch rate provides insufﬁcient
information to characterise local extinction phenom-
ena. Even if this were not the case, the extension of
the approach to LES is likely to lead to unphysical
results as the distribution of subgrid “scalar” dissipa-
tion rate in space is “spotty.” Since in the present case
there is no experimental evidence of signiﬁcant local
extinction (from measurements or visual observation)
a single ﬂamelet at a low strain rate of 15 s−1 has been
used. This laminar ﬂamelet was constructed through
computations of laminar counterﬂow ﬂames using the
following global mechanism [44]:
(10)
C3H8 + 3
2O2 ⇀3CO + 4H2
(i)
C3H8 + 3H2O ⇀3CO + 7H2
(ii)
H2 + 1
2O2 ⇌H2O
(iii)
CO + H2O ⇌CO2 + H2
(iv)
While there are more detailed and realistic reaction
mechanisms available, the scheme (10) is found to
yield acceptable results in both premixed and non-
premixed laminar ﬂames, at least under conditions far
from extinction, and is deemed sufﬁcient for present
purposes.
The relationship between each thermochemical
variable and the mixture fraction can be expressed as
a polynomial of degree m in the conserved scalar and
can be summarised as
(11)
ρ = ˇρ(ξ),
T = ˇT (ξ),
Yα = ˇYα(ξ).
In the context of LES, the concept of “ﬁltered den-
sity function” is introduced (see also [11]), which is
essentially the probability density function of the ran-
dom scalar variable ξ. This is deﬁned as
(12)
¯P (Ψ ;x,t) =
+∞

−∞
P

Ψ, ˇξ(x′,t)

G(x −x′,∆)dx′,
where Ψ is the sample space of ξ, ˇξ represents
the deterministic value of the conserved scalar, and
P(Ψ, ˇξ(x′,t)) is a “ﬁne-grained” density function
[14], deﬁned as
(13)
P

Ψ, ˇξ(x,t)

= δ
	
Ψ −ˇξ(x,t)

.
¯P(Ψ ;x,t) exhibits all of the properties of a probabil-
ity density function provided that the ﬁlter kernel G is
positive deﬁnite [12,14]. The ﬁltered density function
is related to the density-weighted probability function
˜P (Ψ ;x,t) in the following way:
(14)
˜P (Ψ ;x,t) = ˇρ ¯P(Ψ ;x,t)
¯ρ(x,t)
.
From this the resolved density and the resolved
density-weighted thermochemical variables (temper-
ature and species mass fractions) can be obtained:
(15)
¯ρ(x,t) =
 1

0
ˇρ−1(Ψ ) ˜P(Ψ ;x,t)dΨ
−1
,
(16)
˜Yα(x,t) =
 1

0
ˇYα(Ψ ) ˜P(Ψ ;x,t)dΨ

.
From Eqs. (15) and (16) it is easy to obtain the re-
solved unweighted variables, for example,
(17)
¯Yα(x,t) = ¯ρ(x,t)
 1

0
ˇYα(Ψ ) ˜P(Ψ ;x,t)
ˇρ(Ψ )
dΨ

.
The functional form of
˜P (Ψ ;x,t) can be conve-
niently chosen as a β function [16], which is deﬁned
in the interval [0,1], as is the mixture fraction itself. If
the thermochemical variables are expressed as poly-
nomial functions of ξ then the required integrals can


--- Page 6 ---

F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
283
be obtained quasi-analytically,
(18)
˜P(Ψ ;x,t) =
ξr−1(1 −ξ)s−1
 1
0 ξr−1(1 −ξ)s−1dξ
,
where r = ˜ξ{˜ξ(1 −˜ξ)/˜ξ′′2
sgs −1} and s = [(1 −˜ξ)/˜ξ]r.
In the present work the subgrid scalar variance is
described by the gradient model
(19)
˜ξ′′2
sgs = Cξ∆2
 ∂˜ξ
∂xi
∂˜ξ
∂xi

,
where the constant Cξ is assigned the value 0.1 [17].
Although the effect of strain on the laminar
ﬂamelet has been ignored during this study, the re-
solved conserved scalar ﬁeld has been employed to
obtain an estimate for the subgrid “scalar” dissipation
rate χsgs. Following dimensional arguments [32] χsgs
can be assumed to be
(20)
χsgs ∼∥˜Sij ∥˜ξ′′2
sgs.
With use of Eq. (20) the following expression for χsgs
can be obtained:
(21)
χsgs = 2Cs∆2∥˜Sij ∥∂˜ξ
∂xi
∂˜ξ
∂xi
.
To complete the formulation molecular viscosities
have been computed as a function of temperature and
composition using the empirical relationship [45]
(22)
µ(T ) =
 αiµi(T )
αjφi,j
,
where αi is the mole fraction of species i and µi(T )
its viscosity at temperature T . The term φi,j depends
on species molar mass and viscosity.
3. Solution method
3.1. Numerical method
The in-house LES code BOFFIN (Boundary Fit-
ted Flow Integrator) is used to solve the equations
presented in the preceding sections. The code em-
ploys cartesian velocity components and a bound-
ary conforming general curvilinear coordinate sys-
tem with a colocated variable storage arrangement.
It is based on a fully implicit low-Mach-number for-
mulation and is second order accurate in space and
time. For the momentum equation convection terms
an energy-conserving discretisation scheme is used.
All other spatial derivatives are approximated by stan-
dard second-order central differences, except for the
convective terms in the ﬁltered mixture fraction equa-
tion. A centred discretisation of these terms may re-
sult in overshoots and undershoots in the mixture
fraction for cell Peclet numbers greater than 2. How-
ever, the mixture fraction must remain bounded if
unphysical values of the density, temperature, and
species concentrations are to be avoided. To avoid
this a TVD scheme [46] is used to discretise the con-
vection terms in the mixture fraction transport equa-
tion. Whilst it is well known that such schemes may
result in the smearing out of small-scale ﬂow fea-
tures the approach has been adopted in practically
all previous applications of LES to combustion (e.g.,
[17,39]); the use of such a method seems essential
if bound violations are to be avoided. Time deriva-
tives are approximated by a three-point backward dif-
ference scheme with variable time step. A four-step
second-order time-accurate approximate factorisation
method is applied to determine the pressure and en-
sure mass conservation in conjunction with a Rhie and
Chow [47] pressure smoothing technique to prevent
even–odd node uncoupling of the pressure and veloc-
ity ﬁelds. Matrix preconditioned conjugate gradient
methods are used to solve the systems of algebraic
equations resulting from the discretisation. A domain
decomposition technique has been adopted to paral-
lelise the code and the MPI message passing pro-
tocol implemented; the levels of parallel efﬁciency
achieved are in excess of 90%. The code has been
applied previously to the LES of a wide range of
ﬂows including plane and round jets in a cross-ﬂow
[48,49], fully developed channel [31], and pipe [50]
ﬂows, ﬂow over a swept fence [51], and nonswirling
and swirling jet ﬂames [17,41]. Further details of the
method may be found in [31,32,52].
3.2. Computational parameters
A curvilinear body-ﬁtted grid [53] has been con-
structed for the present calculations featuring 1.024×
106 cells, a section of which is represented in Fig. 3.
The dilution and primary jets are also shown, indi-
cated by zero mean mixture fraction isosurfaces. The
computational mesh generator is based on a Laplace
equation method and the mesh spacings and the cor-
responding ﬁlter width thus vary smoothly throughout
the domain. The minimum and maximum cell expan-
sion ratios are 0.6 and 1.6 though these extreme values
correspond to a small number of locations—visible in
Fig. 3—close to the combustor walls where the mesh
is also highly skewed. Any inﬂuences that these exert
have a negligible effect on the main ﬂow ﬁeld.
The inﬂow boundary conditions at the head of the
combustor and the treatment of the fuel injector re-
quire care. Experimental and computational studies
show that the prediction of the spreading angle of
the fuel cone and, therefore, of the mixing pattern in
the primary zone is strongly affected by the assigned
ﬂow conditions at the swirler exit. In general, the as-


--- Page 7 ---

284
F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
Fig. 3. Computational mesh. (Bottom) Particular of the ﬁtted
fuel injector.
sumption of a uniform velocity distribution across the
swirler exit is inaccurate [29,54], and ideally account
should be taken of the ﬂow through individual blade
passages and their interaction on entering the com-
bustor. In the present case computation of the ﬂow
ﬁeld upstream of and inside the swirler was not feasi-
ble and approximate boundary conditions were thus
applied at the swirler exit. Two computations were
carried out to investigate the inﬂuence of the swirler
inlet conditions. In initial calculations (Case I) the
conical section of the fuel injector was removed from
the computation and replaced with a plain wall, where
the fuel jets were located and uniform velocities (con-
sistent with mass ﬂow rates and swirl angle) were
applied at the swirler exit. In a subsequent calculation
(Case II) the fuel injector and fuel jets were resolved
and a more detailed representation of the swirler ﬂow
was adopted [55]. An effective area at the swirler exit
plane was computed and the radial velocity compo-
nent was determined from the datum swirler exit area
and mass ﬂow rate. The tangential velocity was ob-
tained taking into account the turning efﬁciency of the
vanes and blockage effects:
(23)
w = η
Wsw
AseρCd(1 −b) tanα.
In the present case the vanes are thin and a value of the
blockage factor equal to 0.1 has been chosen. Based
on industrial experience, values of 0.92 and 0.75 have
been assigned to the turning efﬁciency and the dis-
charge coefﬁcient, Cd. The value of the tangential ve-
locity obtained from Eq. (23) yields an increased swirl
angle, consistent with experimental observations [54].
The proper choice of turbulent conditions at an
inﬂow may, in certain circumstances, exert crucial in-
ﬂuence in LES, since the inﬂuence of upstream con-
ditions can persist downstream [56]. Several meth-
ods have been adopted in the context of LES to de-
rive instantaneous boundary values for the velocity
ﬁeld, amongst which are gaussian forcing [17,32],
stochastic methods [39], and inverse Fourier trans-
form [31,57]. The merits and defects of these tech-
niques are still a subject of debate and it has been
recognised, especially in free spatially developing
ﬂows, that the behaviour of higher-order velocity
correlations is strongly affected by the inner struc-
ture of the turbulence entering the computational do-
main [58,59]. However, application of these meth-
ods to the swirler is not practicable and so an alter-
nate albeit crude approach is adopted. Turbulence was
mimicked by adding white noise perturbations, cor-
responding to a turbulence intensity of 20%, to all
three mean velocity components. This random signal
was presumed constant over regions of size compa-
rable to the integral length and applied at discrete
time intervals corresponding to the integral time scale.
The integral length scale was estimated to be half
of the gap between the swirler vanes, and the time
scale was evaluated using the rms of the velocity ﬂuc-
tuations. The procedure thus generates a turbulence
ﬁeld crudely correlated in space and time. As will
be shown later this brought some improvements to
the solution due to the resulting increased transfer
of momentum in the radial direction. For the dilu-
tion jets, which are effectively plenum fed, turbulence
ﬂuctuations were neglected and uniform mean veloc-
ities were imposed at the jet inlets. Fixed mass ﬂow
rate inﬂow boundaries were assigned at the lateral
boundaries to mimic the presence of porous walls,
and convective outﬂow conditions were applied at the
exit plane. The wall shear stresses have been calcu-
lated using approximated boundary conditions based
on the logarithmic law of the wall to be satisﬁed in the
mean [48,49,60]. The time step was chosen on the ba-
sis of accuracy considerations so that the maximum
Courant number, based on the mean velocity, never
exceeded 0.1 throughout the computations.


--- Page 8 ---

F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
285
The computations corresponding to Cases I and II
were carried out on a Cray T3E at the University of
Manchester using 64 processing elements and on a lo-
cal Beowulf cluster featuring 16 processors. With the
former of these, a total wall-clock time of 26,432 h
was necessary to compute approximately two resi-
dence times, corresponding to 88,944 time steps over
which statistics have been accumulated; nearly twice
as much time was required on the Beowulf cluster.
The simulations were started from an interpolated so-
lution obtained from a preliminary calculation on a
coarse mesh, and collection of running averages [17]
was commenced after the initial ﬁeld had been re-
moved from the domain (≈are residence time).
4. Results and discussion
In this section the results of the computation are
discussed and compared with the measurements pre-
sented in [23,29]. Because of the limited optical as-
sessment, only measurements of mean temperature
and mean species concentrations are available for val-
idation purposes. Velocity measurements are avail-
able only for a water model of the Tay combus-
tor though this implies a different inﬂow distribution
through the combustor for the obvious reason that the
porous walls could not be taken into account. There-
fore only a qualitative analysis of the velocity ﬁeld is
presented based on the computed Reynolds averaged
velocity components and visual observation of the ex-
perimental conﬁguration.
Reynolds averages and density-weighted averages
(Favre averages) have been accumulated over 88,944
time steps with the former being deﬁned as
(24)

φ(x)

≈1
N
N

n=1
˜φ(x,tn),
where φ(x,tn) is the nth sample of the ﬁeld out of a
total of N samples. A ﬂuctuation about this mean is
deﬁned as φ′ = ˜φ −⟨φ⟩so that the root mean square
(rms) of turbulence ﬂuctuations in φ is given by
(25)
⟨φ′⟩rms =

1
N
N

n=1
φ′(x,tn)2
1/2
.
The difference between Favre averaged and Reynolds
averaged quantities amounts to ⟨ρ′φ′⟩/⟨ρ⟩. Results
from the present computations show that this dif-
ference is negligible; however, since there is evi-
dence [23] that probe measurements correspond to
density-weighted averages it seems more appropriate
to compare Favre averaged concentrations with the
measured ones. From both the Reynolds and Favre av-
eraged temperature and concentration ﬁelds, distribu-
tion at selected locations in the computational domain
Fig. 4. Reynolds averaged ﬂow ﬁeld: streamlines in the hor-
izontal midplane. (Top) Case I. (Bottom) Case II.
have been obtained as follows. For the generic vari-
able φ the distributions of ensemble (Favre) averaged
values, Ps( ¯φ;x), have been calculated according to a
sampling procedure with no replacement [61], and the
range of possible values was divided in 50 intervals.
The standard deﬁnition of variance (or more precisely
standard deviation) of a discrete distribution was then
employed to compute conditional rms.
4.1. Velocity ﬁeld
The isothermal ﬂow ﬁeld in the Tay combustor
has been characterised by means of LDA in [29,30]
and measurements have been also taken in a sim-
ilar though not identical conﬁguration [62,63]. The
isothermal ﬂow was investigated in a water model of
the combustor and the presence of porous wall con-
sequently could not be represented. The study carried
out in [63] also showed that differences in the com-
bustor’s conﬁguration (mainly in the primary zone)
produced qualitatively different ﬂow patterns.
Though a computation of the isothermal case was
beyond the scope of the present study, it is still use-
ful to consider the qualitative features displayed by
the velocity ﬁeld in the burning case, as shown by
the ensemble averaged streamlines in the midhori-
zontal and vertical planes. In Figs. 4 and 5 the dif-
ferences between the ﬂow topologies predicted in
Cases I and II are particularly noticeable. In both in-
stances it can be observed that the central core vortex
interacts with previous impinging primary jets, which
drive the backﬂow in the primary region. A substan-
tial amount of ﬂuid is then pushed towards the wall,
feeding a secondary recirculation region. These fea-
tures are consistent with previous experimental ob-
servations [23,29]. However, in Case I a smaller vor-


--- Page 9 ---

286
F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
Fig. 5. Reynolds averaged ﬂow ﬁeld: streamlines in the ver-
tical midplane. (Top) Case I. (Bottom) Case II.
tical structure is established above the fuel/air inlet
which was absent from the experiments. Its formation
is believed to be associated with the approximate rep-
resentation of the geometry whereby the 90◦conical
fuelling device was replaced by a plain wall, thus ap-
proaching a bluff-body conﬁguration. The presence of
this additional toroidal vortex sensibly alters the ﬂow
conﬁguration in the primary zone and, consequently,
the predicted species and temperature distributions.
The ﬂow ﬁeld downstream of the primary jets,
however, is not inﬂuenced by the changes in the
geometrical description of the fuel injector and the
swirler exit conditions. In particular in Fig. 6 the im-
pingement region of the primary jets at the centre of
the combustor is clearly shown. As observed in the
experiments of Bicen et al. [29], this determines the
strength of the backﬂow in the combustor head. The
rotating core at the centre of the combustor is an arti-
fact of the averaging process as the location of jet im-
pingement point varies with time (“ﬂapping jets”). On
the other hand, the behaviour of the dilution jets is of
a different nature. In fact, these maintain their individ-
uality, as Fig. 4 shows, and the ﬂow in the discharge
region is better described as that of jets in a cross-ﬂow.
In Fig. 6 it is possible to identify a slight asymmetry
in the penetration of the jets and this may be associ-
ated with the circular to rectangular discharge nozzle
immediately downstream of the dilution ports. Details
of mixing in the proximity of the nozzle are discussed
further in the following sections.
Consideration of the ﬂow visualisation results of
Bicen et al. [29] and Bicen and Palma [30] sug-
gests that the computations correctly reproduce the
main features of the ﬂow ﬁeld. Also, and perhaps
as expected, the predicted ﬂow ﬁeld obtained from a
preliminary computation on a coarse mesh (125,000
cells) did not differ from that produced with the re-
ﬁned mesh. This suggests that even on the coarse
mesh most of the turbulent energy has been accounted
Fig. 6. Reynolds averaged ﬂow ﬁeld, Case I. (Top) Primary
port cross section. (Bottom) Dilution port cross section.
for and that a different choice of the SGS model
would not sensibly affect the predictions. These con-
siderations are clearly valid only as long as near-wall
dynamics (e.g., heat transfer at the walls) are not of
interest.
4.2. Species concentrations and temperature
The ﬂow pattern described in the previous section
can be immediately recognised in the time evolution
of the temperature ﬁeld (Case I) as shown in the se-
quence of six images presented in Fig. 7. The hot
regions in the primary zone and along the sides of the
combustor, between the primary and dilution jets, re-
produce faithfully the experimental ﬁndings. In fact,
no combustion occurs beyond the dilution ports, and
the ﬂame is clearly stabilised in the recirculation re-
gion in the head of the combustor and in the wake of
the primary jets. No reaction processes reach the liner


--- Page 10 ---

F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
287
Fig. 7. Instantaneous temperature ﬁeld: horizontal midplane.
walls, which is isolated by the cooling ﬁlm of air pass-
ing through the Transply layer that is clearly visible
in all the pictures. Also evident is the occasional re-
lease of packets of hot gases that manage to escape
the primary region and reach the discharge nozzle.
Flow visualisation studies suggest that these events
are related to the unsteadiness around the primary
jets impingement point and that they exert important
inﬂuence on the temperature distribution at the exit
plane. This can be qualitatively characterised by the
pattern (OTDF) and proﬁle (RTDF) factors [64] ex-
pressed as
(26)
OTDF = (Tmax −Tmean)
(Tmean −Tinlet),
(27)
RTDF = (Tmean,radius −Tmean)
(Tmean −Tinlet)
.
The computed pattern factor for Case I is 0.53, a value
somewhat larger than the measured value of 0.46. The
computed RTDF was 0.15 at 65% of turbine blade
height compared with 0.2 at 75% observed in [23].
The results obtained in Cases I and II were practically
identical.
The discrepancy between the computed and mea-
sured OTDF and RTDF can be explained by an un-
derprediction of the penetration of the dilution jets in
the lower part of the barrel. It appears that the large
acceleration experienced by the ﬂow in the longitu-
dinal direction excessively inhibits the mixing of the
hot gases coming from the primary and intermedi-
ate regions with the cold dilution jets. It is unlikely
that this can be attributed to the hydrodynamic clo-
sure and it seems more likely that this is a result of
the oversimpliﬁed “top hat” speciﬁcation of the veloc-
ity ﬁeld at the dilution jet inlet. It is probable that the
pressure distribution within the combustor distorts the
incoming velocity proﬁle at the dilution ports. A sim-
ilar effect has been observed in simulations of round
jets in a cross-ﬂow [31,49].
Although the instantaneous temperature patterns
are qualitatively similar in both Cases I and II, com-
parisons of the density-weighted temperature con-
tours in the horizontal midplane (Fig. 8) clearly il-
lustrate the inﬂuence of the swirler inﬂow conditions
and the fuel injector geometry on the predicted large-
scale mixing in the primary zone. In Case I, as can be
inferred from the measured temperature and compo-
sition proﬁles in the primary zone, insufﬁcient mixing
of the fuel and swirler air is predicted so that the fuel
cone closes on itself and the stoichiometric mixture


--- Page 11 ---

288
F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
Fig. 8. Density-weighted temperature in the primary zone: horizontal midplane. (Left) Case I. (Right) Case II. Colour scale: ﬁve
levels between pink = 2200 K and blue = 315 K.
Fig. 9. Locus of stoichiometric density-weighted mixture fraction in the primary zone: horizontal midplane. (Left) Case I. (Right)
Case II.
fraction contour lies too close to the fuel injector. The
situation changes considerably with the more realis-
tic inﬂow and geometry of Case II where much more
plausible results are obtained, as is illustrated in Fig. 9
where the loci of the stoichiometric mixture fraction
are shown.
The inﬂuence of the swirler inlet conditions is also
evident in the mean temperature proﬁle at z = 20 mm
shown in Fig. 10; and while the results of Case II
are appreciably closer to the measured proﬁle some
discrepancies remain. It, however, appears that the
proﬁles downstream of the primary zone are largely
unaffected by the conditions at the head of the com-
bustor. The proﬁles at z = 50, 80, and 130 mm are
in reasonably good agreement with measured values
and show that the temperatures in the proximity of the
wall are kept below 700 K by the presence of the re-
solved cooling ﬁlm.
To investigate further the effect of inlet conditions
a computation was completed with no turbulence ﬂuc-
tuations imposed on the incoming swirler ﬂow. An
example of the effects can be seen in Fig. 11, where
proﬁles of the Reynolds averaged mixture fraction
(though no data are available for comparisons) are
shown in the primary zone at z = 20 mm and down-
stream of the primary dilution jets at z = 50 mm. It
appears the that the choice of random noise, albeit
crudely correlated, is not adequate and that a more


--- Page 12 ---

F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
289
Fig. 10. Proﬁles of Reynolds and density-weighted averaged temperature in the horizontal midplane. Solid line: Case I, den-
sity-weighted average; dashed line: Case I, Reynolds average; double-dashed dotted line: Case II, density-weighted average;
double-dotted dashed line: Case II, Reynolds average. 2: [23].
Fig. 11. Proﬁles of Reynolds averaged mixture fraction in
the horizontal midplane. Solid line: Case I; dot-dashed line:
Case II; dotted line: same as Case II, with zero turbulence
intensity.
realistic representation at the swirler exit of turbu-
lent ﬂuctuations and probably the mean proﬁle also
is needed.
A trend consistent with that displayed by the mix-
ture fraction and temperature can be observed in the
concentrations of C3H8, CO2, and O2 (Figs. 12–
15). Although predictions generally improve at z =
80 mm, it is clear that CO levels are not well rep-
resented by the current ﬂamelet assumption. On the
other hand, the temperature and the other species
seem to be less sensitive to this and are more strongly
inﬂuenced by transport effects. It seems likely that the
poor prediction of the mixture fraction ﬁeld magniﬁes
the shortcoming embedded in the ﬂamelet formalism,
and that the use of a more detailed reaction mecha-
nism would have little effect on the prediction of CO
Fig. 12. Proﬁles of Reynolds and density-weighted aver-
aged C3H8 mole fraction in the horizontal midplane. Solid
line: Case I, density-weighted average; dashed line: Case I,
Reynolds average; double-dashed dotted line: Case II, den-
sity-weighted average; double-dotted dashed line: Case II,
Reynolds average. 2: [23].
concentrations if used in the context of a conserved
scalar approach. This is likely to be the case even if
strain effects were to be included in the formalism as
the values of “scalar” dissipation are low throughout
much of the combustor.
If ﬂame stretch effects were to be included then
this would require the joint pdf of mixture fraction
and the “scalar” dissipation rate. Such an approach
was adopted in [39], where an unsteady ﬂamelet for-
mulation was incorporated into LES of a turbulent dif-
fusion jet ﬂame (Sandia Flame D), with the “scalar”
dissipation rate being used to provide a measure of
ﬂame stretch effects. Although such a model has
not been applied in this work, an estimate of ⟨χ⟩=
⟨χsgs⟩+⟨˜χ⟩has been obtained according to the model


--- Page 13 ---

290
F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
Fig. 13. Proﬁles of Reynolds and density-weighted aver-
aged CO mole fraction in the horizontal midplane. Solid
line: Case I, density-weighted average; dashed line: Case I,
Reynolds average; double-dashed dotted line: Case II, den-
sity-weighted average; double-dotted dashed line: Case II,
Reynolds average. 2: [23].
Fig. 14. Proﬁles of Reynolds and density-weighted aver-
aged CO2 mole fraction in the horizontal midplane. Solid
line: Case I, density-weighted average; dashed line: Case I,
Reynolds average; double-dashed dotted line: Case II, den-
sity-weighted average; double-dotted dashed line: Case II,
Reynolds average. 2: [23].
presented in the previous sections. In Figs. 16 and 17
contours and scatterplots of ⟨χ⟩in mixture fraction
space are shown over cross sections of the combustor
at relevant locations along the axis. It is interesting to
note that very low values of “scalar” dissipation rate
prevail throughout the computational domain, becom-
ing negligible as the secondary region, downstream
of the primary dilution jets, is approached and that
values of the mixture fraction span an even narrower
range around the lean limit. The contours of ⟨χ⟩also
serve as indicators of the relevant structures present
in the ﬂow ﬁeld and of the large differences in the
mixing pattern in the primary zone arising in Cases I
Fig. 15. Proﬁles of Reynolds and density-weighted aver-
aged O2 mole fraction in the horizontal midplane. Solid
line: Case I, density-weighted average; dashed line: Case I,
Reynolds average; double-dashed dotted line: Case II, den-
sity-weighted average; double-dotted dashed line: Case II,
Reynolds average. 2: [23].
and II. The low levels of “scalar” dissipation evident
from the computations are consistent with the exper-
imental observation that negligible local extinction
phenomena occur in the combustor.
5. Conclusions
Results of the large eddy simulation of a model
can-type gas turbine combustor have been presented.
The chosen geometry retained all of the features of
can-type combustion chambers commonly encoun-
tered in commercial aeroengines, and offered an ex-
cellent test case to prove the potential of LES to ac-
curately predict complex, three-dimensional unsteady
ﬂows. While no velocity measurements are available
for comparison purposes the computed ﬂow pattern
is in reasonable agreement with that observed ex-
perimentally. However, mixing rates in the primary
zone are shown to be strongly dependent on the in-
let conditions at the swirler exit. When a uniform
proﬁle with no turbulence ﬂuctuations was imposed
with the fuel injector being represented by an annular
slot, primary zone mixing rates were substantially un-
derrepresented. As a consequence large discrepancies
between the calculated and measured proﬁles of tem-
perature and C3H8 are evident in the primary zone.
The situation was much improved when more realistic
inlet conditions were applied though some disagree-
ment, particularly with respect to the levels of C3H8,
remains. It is likely that the estimated mean proﬁles
and simple method of estimating turbulent ﬂuctua-
tions are not entirely satisfactory and what is probably
required is for the solution domain to be extended


--- Page 14 ---

F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
291
(a)
(b)
Fig. 16. Contours and scatterplots of total (⟨χsgs⟩+ ⟨˜χ⟩) scalar dissipation rate: Case I. (a) z = 20 mm, (b) z = 50 mm.
back through the swirler and upstream of the com-
bustor.
The extent of the inﬂuence of the inlet conditions
in the head of the combustor is limited by the primary
dilution jets, which impinge on the combustor centre-
line. Consequently it is likely that the conditions at the
primary jet, swirler, and fuel inﬂows play little major
role in the development of the turbulence structure in
the region downstream of the primary jets. Consistent
with this, but with the exception of CO, the agreement
between measured and computed mean temperature
and composition proﬁles is reasonable downstream
of the primary zone. Also, the magnitude of the SGS
stresses seems to suggest that very little sensitivity to
the SGS closure is displayed by the resolved scales.
This result is encouraging and suggests that the spa-
tial resolution is adequate. Evaluation of the compu-
tational mesh and ﬁlter width variation also suggests
that commutation- and cell anisotropy-related errors
are small and have little effect on the predicted veloc-
ity and scalar ﬁelds.
Only CO concentrations seem to be particularly
affected by the description of the combustion process
described via the ﬂamelet model, whilst temperature
and other species appear more sensitive to the large-
scale transport processes. The measured levels of CO
are substantially higher than those predicted by the
current ﬂamelet model in the region downstream of
the primary jets. While the effect of ﬂame stretch is
to increase CO levels these effects are almost cer-
tainly negligible in this downstream region. It thus is
appears unlikely that any steady ﬂamelet/conserved
scalar model is capable of reproducing these observed
CO levels. The measured levels of CO are more likely
to arise because of the reaction quenching effect of the
cold dilution jets. If this is the case then the “fast” re-
action assumption inherent in the ﬂamelet/conserved
scalar model must be relaxed.


--- Page 15 ---

292
F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
(a)
(b)
Fig. 17. Contours and scatterplots of total (⟨χsgs⟩+ ⟨˜χ⟩) scalar dissipation rate: Case II. (a) z = 20 mm, (d) z = 50 mm.
It could be argued that a single laminar ﬂamelet
(corresponding to a very low strain rate) is not suf-
ﬁcient to describe combustion throughout the entire
domain. However, the distribution of the estimated
scalar dissipation rate seems to suggest that this pa-
rameter would play a very limited role and the com-
puted levels are consistent with the experimental ob-
servation that no signiﬁcant local extinction occurs in
the present case. Of course, in general the possibil-
ity of local extinction/reignition phenomena should
be taken into account. However, the possibility of
utilising a “resolved” scalar dissipation rate to de-
scribe the effects of stretch on laminar ﬂamelets is
somewhat debatable, since this is likely to yield an
unphysical intermittent behaviour of the ﬂame, de-
coupled from transport and reaction processes respon-
sible for extinction/reignition. The magnitude of the
estimated SGS stresses and scalar ﬂuxes also seems
to suggest that the majority of velocity and scalar
ﬂuctuations have been explicitly accounted for, and
that the closure adopted for the SGS contributions
is likely to exert but a little inﬂuence on the predic-
tions.
Acknowledgment
The authors gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial sup-
port from EPSRC under Grant GR/L98527.
References
[1] U. Schumann, Atmos. Environ. 23 (8) (1989) 1713–
1727.
[2] P.A. McMurtry, S. Menon, Proc. Combust. Inst. 24
(1992) 271–278.
[3] R.I. Sykes, S.F. Parker, D.S. Henn, W.S. Lewellen,
J. Appl. Meteorol. 33 (1994) 825–834.
[4] A.W. Cook, J.J. Riley, Phys. Fluids 6 (8) (1994) 2868–
2870.


--- Page 16 ---

F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
293
[5] A.R. Kerstein, Combust. Sci. Technol. 60 (1988) 391–
421.
[6] S. Menon, W.H. Calhoon Jr., Proc. Combust. Inst. 26
(1996) 59–66.
[7] R.W. Bilger, Phys. Fluids A 5 (1993) 436–444.
[8] W.K. Bushe, H. Steiner, Phys. Fluids 11 (7) (1999)
1896–1906.
[9] P. Givi, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 15 (1989) 1–107.
[10] C.K. Madnia, P. Givi, in: B. Galperin, S. Orszag (Eds.),
Large Eddy Simulation of Complex Engineering and
Geophysical Flows, Cambridge Univ. Press, New York,
1993.
[11] S.B. Pope, Proc. Combust. Inst. 23 (1990) 591–612.
[12] P.J. Colucci, F.A. Jaberi, P. Givi, S.B. Pope, Phys. Flu-
ids 10 (2) (1998) 499–515.
[13] F. Gao, E.E. O’Brien, Phys. Fluids A 5 (6) (1993)
1282–1284.
[14] E.E. O’Brien, in: P. Libby, F. Williams (Eds.), Tur-
bulent Reacting Flows, Topics in Applied Physics,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1980, pp. 185–218, Chapter 5.
[15] W.P. Jones, J.H. Whitelaw, Combust. Flame 48 (1982)
1–26.
[16] N. Branley, W.P. Jones, in: 11th Symposium on Turbu-
lent Shear Flows, Grenoble, France, 1997.
[17] N. Branley, W.P. Jones, Combust. Flame 127 (1/2)
(2001) 1914–1934.
[18] F. di Mare, W.P. Jones, in: ECCOMAS 2001 CFD Con-
ference, Swansea, Wales, 2001.
[19] W.P. Jones, in: W. Kollmann (Ed.), Prediction Meth-
ods for Turbulent Flows, Hemisphere, London, 1980,
pp. 380–421, VKI Lecture Series 79-2.
[20] W.-W. Kim, S. Menon, H.C. Mongia, Combust. Sci.
Technol. 143 (1999) 25–62.
[21] K. Mahesh, G. Constantinescu, P. Moin, in: Annual Re-
search Briefs 2000, Centre for Turbulence Research,
Stanford CA, 2000.
[22] C. Angelberger, D. Veynante, F. Egolfopoulos, Flow
Turbulence Combust. 65 (2) (2001) 205–222.
[23] A.F. Bicen, D.G.N. Tse, J.H. Whitelaw, Combustion
characteristics of a model can-type combustor, Tech.
Rep. FS/87/28, Imperial College, London, 1987.
[24] A.F. Bicen, D.G.N. Tse, J.H. Whitelaw, Combust.
Flame 80 (1990) 111.
[25] A.F. Bicen, D.G.N. Tse, J.H. Whitelaw, J. Propulsion
Power.
[26] N.
Branley,
W.P.
Jones,
in:
ECCOMAS
2000,
Barcelona, 2000.
[27] J. Smagorinsky, Monthly Weather Rev. 91 (1963) 99–
165.
[28] D.K. Lilly, in: IBM Sci. Comput. Symp. on Environ-
mental Sci., Thomas J. Watson Research Center, York-
town Heights, NY, 1967.
[29] A.F. Bicen, J.J. McGuirk, J.M.L.M. Palma, Primary-
zone ﬂow characteristics of an isothermal model com-
bustor, Tech. Rep. FS/87/27, Imperial College, London,
1987.
[30] A.F. Bicen, J.M.L.M. Palma, Flow characteristics
of swirlers of a model Tay Combustor, Tech. Rep.
FS/86/36, Imperial College, London, 1986.
[31] M. Wille, Large eddy simulation of a plane jet in a cross
ﬂow, PhD thesis, Imperial College, University of Lon-
don, London, 1997.
[32] F. di Mare, Large eddy simulation of reacting and non-
reacting ﬂows in complex geometries, PhD thesis, Im-
perial College, University of London, London, 2002.
[33] R.W. Bilger, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 1 (1976) 87–
109.
[34] R.W. Bilger, in: P. Libby, F. Williams (Eds.), Turbulent
Reacting Flows, Topics in Applied Physics, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1980, pp. 65–110, Chapter 3.
[35] C.H. Priddin, in: A.V. Johansson, P.H. Alfredsson
(Eds.), Advances in Turbulence 3, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin/Heidelberg, 1991, pp. 279–299.
[36] H. Schmidt, U. Schumann, J. Fluid Mech. 200 (1989)
511–562.
[37] J.P. Meeder, F.T.M. Nieuwstadt, in: J.P. Chollet,
P.R. Voke, L. Kleiser (Eds.), Direct and Large Eddy
Simulation II, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1997,
pp. 301–310.
[38] P. Moin, K. Squires, W. Cabot, S. Lee, Phys. Flu-
ids A 3 (11) (1991) 2746–2757.
[39] H. Pitsch, H. Steiner, Phys. Fluids 12 (10) (2000) 2541–
2554.
[40] M. Germano, U. Piomelli, W.H. Cabot, Phys. Fluids 23
(1991) 1760–1765.
[41] N. Branley, W.P. Jones, in: D. Lawrence, W. Rodi
(Eds.), Engineering Turbulence Modelling and Mea-
surements 4, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1999.
[42] W.P. Jones, M. Kakhi, in: M.H.F. Culick, J.H. Whitelaw
(Eds.), Unsteady Combustion,
Kluwer Academic,
1996, pp. 411–491.
[43] N. Peters, Turbulent Combustion, Cambridge Univ.
Press, London/New York, 2000.
[44] W.P. Jones, R.P. Lindstedt, Combust. Flame 73 (1988)
233–249.
[45] R.H. Perry, D.W. Green, Chemical Engineers’ Hand-
book, McGraw–Hill, New York, 1993.
[46] P. Sweby, SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 21 (5) (1984) 995–
1011.
[47] C.M. Rhie, W.L. Chow, AIAA J. 31 (1983) 1525–1533.
[48] W.P. Jones, M. Wille, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 37 (1996)
296–306.
[49] W.P. Jones, M. Wille, in: G. Bergeles, W. Rodi (Eds.),
Engineering Turbulence Modelling and Measurements,
Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1996.
[50] D. Steinstrasser, Large eddy simulation of fully devel-
oped pipe ﬂow, Master’s thesis, Diplomarbeit, Imperial
College, London, 1994.
[51] L. di Mare, W.P. Jones, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 24
(2003) 606–615.
[52] N.T. Branley, Large eddy simulation of non-premixed
turbulent ﬂames, PhD thesis, Imperial College, Univer-
sity of London, London, 1999.
[53] K.R. Menzies, Grid adaption for gas turbine combustor
calculations, PhD thesis, Imperial College, University
of London, London, 2001.
[54] D.-H. Sheen, Swirl-stabilised spray ﬂames in an ax-
isymmetric model combustor, PhD thesis, Imperial
College, University of London, London, 1993.
[55] D.S. Crocker, E.J. Fuller, C.E. Smith, J. Eng. Gas Tur-
bines Power 119 (1997) 527–534.
[56] T.J. Poinsot, S.K. Lele, J. Comput. Phys. 101 (1992)
104–129.


--- Page 17 ---

294
F. di Mare et al. / Combustion and Flame 137 (2004) 278–294
[57] L. di Mare, W.P. Jones, in: ECCOMAS 2001 CFD Con-
ference, Swansea, Wales, 2001.
[58] B.J. Boersma, G. Brethouwer, F.T.M. Nieuwstadt,
Phys. Fluids 10 (4) (1998) 899–909.
[59] K. Kondo, S. Murakami, A. Mochida, J. Wind Eng. Ind.
Aerodyn. 67–68 (1997) 51–64.
[60] F. di Mare, W.P. Jones, in: Proceedings of HPCI Con-
ference, Plenum, London, 1998.
[61] E. Kreyszig, Introductory Mathematical Statistics:
Principles and Methods, Wiley, New York, 1970.
[62] M.V. Heitor, J.H. Whitelaw, Combust. Flame 64 (1986)
1–32.
[63] A.F. Bicen, W.P. Jones, Combust. Sci. Technol. 49
(1986) 1–15.
[64] A.H. Lefebvre, Gas Turbine Combustion, McGraw–
Hill, New York, 1983.
