
--- Page 1 ---

R. K. Cheng
D. Littlejohn
Environmental Energy Technologies Division,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720
Laboratory Study of Premixed
H2-Air and H2ŌĆōN2-Air Flames in a
Low-Swirl Injector for Ultralow
Emissions Gas Turbines
The objective of this study is to conduct laboratory experiments on low-swirl injectors
(LSIs) to obtain the basic information for adapting LSI to burn H2 and diluted H2 fuels
that will be utilized in the gas turbines of the integrated gasi’¼ücation combined cycle coal
power plants. The LSI is a novel ultralow emission dry-low NOx combustion method that
has been developed for gas turbines operating on natural gas. It is being developed for
fuel-’¼éexible turbines burning a variety of hydrocarbon fuels, biomass gases, and re’¼ünery
gases. The adaptation of the LSI to accept H2 ’¼éames is guided by an analytical expres-
sion derived from the ’¼éow ’¼üeld characteristics and the turbulent ’¼éame speed correlation.
The evaluation of the operating regimes of nine LSI con’¼ügurations for H2 shows an
optimum swirl number of 0.51, which is slightly lower than the swirl number of 0.54 for
the hydrocarbon LSI. Using particle image velocimetry (PIV), the ’¼éow ’¼üelds of 32 pre-
mixed H2-air and H2ŌĆōN2-air ’¼éames were measured. The turbulent ’¼éame speeds deduced
from PIV show a linear correlation with turbulence intensity. The correlation constant for
H2 is 3.1 and is higher than the 2.14 value for hydrocarbons. The analysis of velocity
pro’¼üles con’¼ürms that the near ’¼üeld ’¼éow features of the H2 ’¼éames are self-similar. These
results demonstrate that the basic LSI mechanism is not affected by the differences in the
properties of H2 and hydrocarbon ’¼éames and support the feasibility of the LSI concept
for hydrogen fueled gas turbines. DOI: 10.1115/1.2836480
Introduction
The motivation of our research is to develop a robust ultralow
emission combustor for the gas turbines in FutureGen power
plants that burn syngases derived from the gasi’¼ücation of coal.
The objective is to adapt a novel low-swirl combustion LSC
method to these utility size gas turbines that operate on fuels with
very high H2 constituency. LSC is a dry-low-NOx DLN lean
premixed combustion method conceived at the Lawrence Berke-
ley National Laboratory. This technology has been commercial-
ized for industrial heaters by Maxon Corporation of Muncie, IN
and is being developed for natural gas and fuel-’¼éexible industrial
turbines 5ŌĆō7 MW in partnership with Solar Turbines of San
Diego, CA. It is also being adapted to 100 kW microturbines in
partnership with Elliott Energy Systems of Stuart, FL for integra-
tion into a large boiler for combined heat and power generation.
FutureGen power plants utilize the integrated gasi’¼ücation com-
bined cycle IGCC approach to produce hydrogen, which is sepa-
rated from a concentrated CO2 stream that is then captured for
subsequent sequestration. One of its key components is a cost-
competitive all-hydrogen fueled turbine with ultralow NOx emis-
sion and high ef’¼üciency. To lower NOx to the FutureGen near zero
emission goal of 2 ppm at 15% O2, the current approach is to
operate the H2 turbine at lower ’¼üring temperatures in combination
with selective catalytic reduction. This approach sacri’¼üces ef’¼ü-
ciency and impacts costs of electricity via capital cost, ef’¼üciency,
and capacity output. Therefore, a cost-effective combustion tech-
nology that meets the FurtureGen emissions and ef’¼üciency targets
is critical to achieving its ultimate goal of no more than a 10%
increase in the cost of electricity for mature FutureGen-type plants
that include CO2 capture and sequestration.
The purpose of this paper is to conduct laboratory studies of
low-swirl injectors LSIs burning pure hydrogen and nitrogen-
diluted hydrogen fuels to characterize the overall ’¼éame behavior,
stabilization limits, turbulent ’¼éame speeds, and ’¼éow ’¼üeld charac-
teristics. The analysis of these data and comparison with those
obtained previously for hydrocarbon ’¼éames is a necessary ’¼ürst
step toward building the scienti’¼üc and technical foundation for the
adaptation of LSI to accept pure and diluted H2 fuels.
Background
LSC combustion was originally conceived as a research burner
for fundamental premixed turbulent ’¼éame experiments e.g., Refs.
1ŌĆō3. Through laboratory studies and analyses, its basic operat-
ing principle is relatively well understood. LSC supports pre-
mixed turbulent ’¼éames under a very broad range of operating
conditions. Its capability to support robust and stable ’¼éames at
very fuel lean conditions can be exploited as an ultralow emission
combustion technology. LSC operates on the principle of ’¼éame
propagation. It is therefore not applicable to nonpremixed com-
bustion because the diffusion ’¼éames do not propagate.
LSC is an aerodynamic ’¼éame stabilization method that utilizes
a divergent ’¼éow to sustain a freely propagating premixed turbu-
lent ’¼éame. The divergent ’¼éow is formed only when the swirl
intensities are well below the critical vortex breakdown threshold.
The linear axial velocity decay region within the divergent ’¼éow
allows the ’¼éame to settle where the local velocity is equal and
opposite to the turbulent ’¼éame speed. Matching the ’¼éow ’¼üeld
velocities to the turbulent ’¼éame speed is the critical design pro-
cess. The main advantage of the LSC concept is its very large
turndown capacity demonstrated as 90:1 in laboratory and its
capability to support very lean premixed turbulent ’¼éames in a
turbulent ’¼éow ’¼üeld that allows the ’¼éame to withstand swings in
operational and mixture conditions without high risk of ’¼éame in-
stability, ’¼éashback, or blowoff. The ’¼éame propagation principle of
LSC is fundamentally different from the ’¼éame attachment concept
Manuscript received May 9, 2007; ’¼ünal manuscript received September 17, 2007;
published online April 2, 2008. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2008, Vol. 130 / 031503-1
Copyright ┬® 2008 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

of the high-swirl concept utilized in current gas turbine DLN com-
bustors e.g., GE, Siemens, and Solar where toroidal vortices
with strong recirculation and intense shear turbulence are gener-
ated to hold and continuously ignite the turbulent premixed
’¼éames.
The key component for a practical implementation of LSC is a
patented swirler. This swirler is simpler and easier to operate and
control than the ’¼ürst embodiment of LSC using air jets to impart
swirl 2,4ŌĆō6. Figure 1 shows the ’¼ürst prototype LSI con’¼ügured
for Solar TurbineŌĆÖs 7 MW Taurus 70 T70 engine 7. The ’¼éow of
the premixed reactants through this LSI, as well as all other LSC
devices, is separated into two passages: An outer annular with
swirl vanes and an open center channel that allows a portion of the
reactants to remain unswirled. The unswirled reactants ’¼éowing
through the center channel is a critical requirement of LSC whose
presence retards the recirculation and promotes the formation of
’¼éow divergence. The ’¼éame is detached from the LSI. Its liftoff
position is controlled by the divergence rate that is adjustable by
the ’¼éow split between the swirled and the unswirled ’¼éows. The
most convenient means to vary this ’¼éow split is by changing the
blockage ratio of the perforated screen covering the center chan-
nel.
The LSI prototype utilizes a swirler engineered for the T70
SoLoNOx engines. To con’¼ügure this swirler into a LSI, the center
body was removed and replaced by a perforated plate selected
according to the engineering rules developed for industrial low-
swirl burners LSBs. The rules are speci’¼üed in terms of accept-
able ranges of swirl number 0.4S0.55 and swirler recess
2Li/Ri3. The swirl number is de’¼üned as
S = 2
3 tan 
1 ŌłÆR3
1 ŌłÆR2 + m21/R2 ŌłÆ12R2
1
where  is the vane angle, R=Rc/Ri, and m=mc/ms where mc
and ms are, respectively, the mass ’¼éuxes of the unswirled and the
swirled ’¼éows. The SoLoNOx swirler has an internal radius of
3.175 cm with 16 curved vanes with a discharge angle 
=40 deg. The ratio of the center channel to injector radii R is 0.63.
To meet the design criteria, a 58% blockage perforated plate with
circular holes in a hexagonal arrangement was chosen. This LSI
has a swirl number S=0.54 and generates a ’¼éame that has an
optimum liftoff height, xf, of approximately 0.5Ri from the nozzle
exit. Another key parameter is the swirler recess distance Li. It
controls the residence time for the interaction between the swirled
and unswirled ’¼éows and has a direct effect on the LSI perfor-
mance. As in the industrial burners, Li was set at Li/Ri=3.
Rig tests of the ’¼ürst LSI at elevated temperatures and pressures
7 showed that the LSI ’¼éame remained stable and oscillation free
throughout the test matrix covering full load 800┬░F,15 atm and
partial load 450┬░F,6 atm conditions. The NOx emissions are
60% lower than those of the SoLoNOx high-swirl injector. The
results demonstrated that the LSI can attain ultralow emissions at
conditions farther away from the lean-blowoff LBO limit to
avoid inciting combustion oscillations. The lowest levels of NOx
2 ppm and CO 10 ppm at a ’¼üring temperature of 2670┬░F
are comparable with those from much more costly and less du-
rable catalytic options. The LSI achieves the performance targets
with only a few design iterations because the knowledge gained
from the laboratory experiments is directly useful to guide the
turbine hardware design. As the bulk of the optimization can be
accomplished in the laboratory, this brings about signi’¼ücant cost
savings in the development process.
A fully functional engine-ready LSI prototype has also been
developed. It employs a simple fuel spoke injection scheme simi-
lar to the one for the current SoLoNOx injector. For load follow-
ing, a pilot is imbedded into the center plate. Again, laboratory
experiments played a key role in optimizing the fuel injector
placement position and the size of the pilot. Single injector tests at
simulated gas turbine conditions and multiinjector tests at atmo-
spheric conditions in the T70 annulus combustor liner show that
the performance of the engine-ready LSI prototype is similar to
the ’¼ürst prototype 8. A set of the engine-ready LSI prototypes
was fabricated and tested successfully in a T70 in June 2006.
The scienti’¼üc foundation obtained for LSC plays a critical role
for its adaptation to gas turbines. In a continuing effort to expand
the knowledge base, a recent study focused on gaining better un-
derstanding of how the LSI ’¼éow ’¼üeld structures and ’¼éame prop-
erties evolve with Reynolds numbers 9. These experiments were
performed in open ’¼éames to circumvent the dif’¼üculties and uncer-
tainties associated with laser studies of ’¼éames within a quartz
enclosure. The conveniences offered by open ’¼éame studies facili-
tate the collection of a large amount of data to examine the overall
’¼éame behaviors and ’¼éow ’¼üeld evolution that is of signi’¼ücant
value to gas turbine development. Moreover, previous studies
e.g., Ref. 10 showed that the enclosure effects are minimal
when the enclosure radius is about three times larger than the
injector or burner radius. The 3:1 enclosure ratio has been
adopted as the guideline for sizing the enclosures for industrial
burners and for optimizing the LSI radius for the T70 combustor.
Field experiences and rig-test results con’¼ürmed that the knowl-
edge gained open ’¼éames are directly relevant to the enclosed
’¼éames in gas turbines.
Analyses of the velocity measurements obtained from particle
image velocimetry PIV of these open CH4 ’¼éames show that the
’¼éow ’¼üeld generated by the LSI exhibits a self-similarity behavior.
Two parameters derived from the centerline velocity pro’¼üles of
the LSI ’¼éow ’¼üelds are invoked to characterize self-similarity.
They are the virtual origin of the divergent ’¼éow x0 and the non-
dimensional axial aerodynamic stretch rate ax. To characterize the
’¼éame, the turbulent ’¼éame speeds ST and the position of the lead-
ing edge of the ’¼éame brush, xf, are used. These parameters can be
deduced by using the velocity pro’¼üles obtained along the center-
line see Fig. 9 of Ref. 9.
The analysis of ST shows a linear dependency on turbulence
intensity u. An analytical equation Eq. 2 for the velocity bal-
ance at xf shows that a coupling of the self-similar ’¼éow ’¼üeld and
linear turbulent ’¼éame speed correlations with u is the reason why
the LSI ’¼éame remains stationary through a wide range of veloci-
ties and fuel air equivalence ratios .
1 ŌłÆdU
dx
xf ŌłÆx0
U0
= ST
U0
= SL
U0
+ Ku
U0
2
The two terms on the far right hand side simply state that ST for
hydrocarbon ’¼éames increases linearly with u above the base line
value of the laminar ’¼éame speed SL at a slope of K. This slope is
an empirical correlation constant derived from the experimental
measurements1 and is 2.16 for hydrocarbon ’¼éames. The ’¼ürst term
1The linear dependency of ST on u is not universal as ST in other burners tends to
be nonlinear and shows ŌĆ£bending.ŌĆØ
Fig. 1
The ’¼ürst prototype LSI for Taurus 70 engine
031503-2 / Vol. 130, MAY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

on the right hand side tends to a small value at large bulk ’¼éow
velocity U0 because the laminar ’¼éame speeds of typical hydrocar-
bon fuels are on the order of 0.2ŌĆō0.7 m/s. The second term on the
right hand side is a constant because turbulence in the central
region of the LSI is controlled by the perforated plate and scales
with U0. On the left hand side, self-similar means that ax
=dU/dx/U0 in the second term is constant. The main conse-
quence is that the ’¼éame position xf-x0 has an asymptotic value at
large U0. Therefore, when SL is held constant at a given , ’¼éame
shift, i.e., changes in xf, occurs only at low velocities where U0 is
in the same order as SL. When U0SL, changing stoichiometry
and/or U0 do not result in a signi’¼ücant ’¼éame shift. These ’¼éame
behaviors have been con’¼ürmed by laboratory experiments and
testing of industrial burners and gas turbine injectors.
Equation 2 provides an analytical expression that describes
the relationship between the LSI ’¼éow ’¼üeld and the turbulent ’¼éame
properties. Because the aerodynamic stretch rate is proportional to
the swirl number, this expression gives a ’¼ürst order estimate on
how the LSI can be adjusted to accept different fuels. For ex-
ample, it shows that a signi’¼ücant adjustment may not be necessary
for burning different hydrocarbon fuels. This is due to the fact that
the SL and heat release rates are close to those of natural gas. As
long as the turbulent ’¼éame speeds have a linear correlation with
u at a rate of increase close to that of natural gas ’¼éames, the axial
aerodynamic stretch rate, i.e., swirler design, does not need to be
adjusted to accommodate these other hydrocarbon fuels. Recent
laboratory studies of CH4, C3H8, C2H4, and CH4/H2 ’¼éames
9,11 have produced the data to support this conjecture.
To develop the LSI for H2 fuels, the key question concerns the
correlation of the turbulent ’¼éame speeds for these ’¼éames with
signi’¼ücantly higher SL and preferential diffusion than those of
hydrocarbons. Determining the correlation of the ST for H2 ’¼éames
with u is therefore the critical information needed to adapt LSI
for burning H2. Additionally, characterizing the effects of the H2
’¼éames on the ’¼éow ’¼üeld, particularly how they alter the axial aero-
dynamic stretch rate in the near ’¼üeld region, is important in gain-
ing insight on predicting the H2 ’¼éame behavior at higher veloci-
ties, temperatures, and pressures. The purpose of this investigation
is to obtain the experimental data on H2 ’¼éames to begin building
a body of knowledge needed for guiding the development of LSI
for FutureGen turbines.
Approach
The LSI con’¼üguration for the T70 engine is a logical starting
point for the evaluation of LSC operation with H2. Following the
same approach for natural gas development, the ’¼ürst step is to
explore the operating regime and characterize the performance
through laboratory open H2 ’¼éame experiments. The operating re-
gime is de’¼üned by the ’¼éame stability and LBO limits as a function
of U0. The performance criteria are ’¼éame uniformity, ’¼éame posi-
tion, and any other ’¼éame behaviors that may affect the operation
of the LSI. The discussion on Eq. 2 shows that the LSI can be
adapted to accommodate differences in ’¼éame properties by adjust-
ing the axial aerodynamic stretch rate. The most convenient way
is by changing the blockage ratio of the center-channel plate to
vary its swirl number S i.e., varying m in Eq. 1. The optimum
LSI con’¼üguration for H2 fuels can be then determined by compar-
ing the operating regimes and the performance criteria for a range
of S.
Next, the ’¼éow ’¼üeld and ’¼éame properties of these LSIs are char-
acterized by PIV measurements. The velocity results can be ana-
lyzed the same way as those from the hydrocarbon ’¼éames to ob-
tain a set of empirical constants for H2 fuels. In addition, the swirl
number effects and the ’¼éow ’¼üeld responses to H2 ’¼éames can also
be examined.
Experimental Apparatus and Diagnostics
The physical dimensions of the LSI are given above. For the
LBO and PIV investigations, the LSIs were mounted vertically on
top of a cylindrical settling chamber Fig. 2. Air supplied by a fan
blower enters at the side of a 25.4 cm diameter chamber and ’¼éows
into the LSI via a centrally placed 30 cm long straight tube. To
produce a uniform ’¼éow into the LSI, a perforated screen is placed
5 cm upstream. Air ’¼éow from a blower is adjusted by a PC con-
trolled valve and monitored by a turbine meter. Fuel is injected in
a commercial venturi premixer to ensure a homogeneous mixture
for the injector. Both the fuel and the PIV seeder ’¼éows are con-
trolled by electronic mass ’¼éow controllers and set according to a
predetermined value of mixture compositions and . The fuel and
air supply system for this study has a larger capacity than the one
used previously 7,9,11 to enable experiments up to U0
=22 m/s 65 g/s air. Increasing the bulk ’¼éow velocity is neces-
sary for the H2-air ’¼éame studies as these ’¼éames ’¼éash back at a
high U0 than their hydrocarbon counterparts 9. The experiments
utilize research grade H2 with and without N2 dilution. Because
premixed H2 ’¼éames are invisible to the naked eye, a webcam is
used as a safety monitor and to examine the overall ’¼éame features.
To detect the near-infrared emissions from the H2 ’¼éame, the IR
’¼ülter of the webcam was removed. The PIV experimental condi-
tions are summarized in Table 1 with the combustion properties
calculated using an algorithm by Zhang et al. 12. Due to the very
low adiabatic temperatures of all these H2 ’¼éames, their NOx emis-
sions are expected to be well below detectable limits and therefore
not sampled.
Flow ’¼üeld information for the nonreacting ’¼éows and ’¼éames
was obtained using PIV. To facilitate data collection, the ’¼éows and
the ’¼éames were nonenclosed. The PIV system consists of a New
Wave Solo PIV laser with double 120 mJ pulses at 532 nm and a
Kodak/Red Lake ES 4.0 digital camera with a 20482048 pixel
resolution. The optics were con’¼ügured to capture a ’¼üeld of view
of approximately 1313 cm2 covering the near ’¼üeld as well as
the far ’¼üeld of the ’¼éames with a 0.065 mm/pixel resolution. A
Fig. 2
Schematics of the LSI setup
Table 1
Mixtures for PIV measurements
Fuel

Tad K
SL m/s
H2
0.3
1189
0.12
H2
0.35
1312
0.18
H2
0.38
1383
0.22
0.75 H2/0.25 N2
0.31
1182
0.09
0.75 H2/0.25 N2
0.37
1317
0.14
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2008, Vol. 130 / 031503-3
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

cyclone-type particle seeder seeds the air ’¼éow with 0.6ŌĆō0.8 m
Al2O3 particles, which should track velocity ’¼éuctuations up to
10 kHz 13.
Data acquisition and analysis were performed using a software
developed by Wernet 14. Because of the complex and 3D nature
of the swirling ’¼éow ’¼üeld, care had to be taken to optimize inter-
frame timing, camera aperture setting, light-sheet thickness, and
seed density to ensure high data ’¼üdelity. Using a portion of the
light sheet with approximately 1.1 mm thickness away from the
0.3 mm waist produced by the 450 mm spherical lens and a short
interframe time 30 s helped to freeze the out-of-plane motion
of seed particles. Sets of 224 image pairs were recorded for each
experiment corresponding to a minimum criterion required to pro-
duce stable mean and rms velocities. The PIV data were processed
using 6464 pixel cross-correlation interrogation regions with
50% overlap. This rendered a spatial resolution of approximately
2 mm. The velocity statistics were checked to ensure that a sig-
ni’¼ücant spatial bias or ŌĆ£peak lockingŌĆØ was not taking place.
Results
The ’¼ürst experiments involved the use of the LSI from previous
studies 7,9,11 to obtain base line information on H2 operation.
This LSI has a swirl number S=0.54 and is referred to here as
LSI-R. Shown in Fig. 3 is the operating regime of LSI-R for 10
U022 m/s. Here, the LBO limit is nearly constant at 
0.17 and is consistent with the result reported previously for
U010 m/s 11. This shows again that the LBO of LSI is rela-
tively insensitive to the Reynolds number.
The LSI-R H2 ’¼éames propagate closer to the exit than the hy-
drocarbon ’¼éames. In addition, there is an upper limit shown by the
broken line at 0.32. Above this boundary, the trailing edges of
the ’¼éames curl back upstream and attach to the burner rim. This
phenomenon indicates burning within the mixing layer formed
between the reactants and the ambient air. It is a consequence of
the high diffusivity and ’¼éammability of H2.
Higher H2 concentrations in these richer mixtures promote H2
diffusion into the outer region of the mixing layer. The outer low
velocity region becomes ’¼éammable, allowing the trailing edge of
the ’¼éame to burn back upstream toward the rim. Flame attachment
also occurs in CH4/H2 ’¼éames when the concentration of H2 is
high 50 but does not occur in pure hydrocarbon ’¼éames. The
slight upward trend of the ’¼éame attachment limit, as shown in Fig.
3, suggests that the phenomenon may not occur at high velocities.
When the ’¼éame attaches to the burner rim, it forms an envelope
over the reactants. Consequently, the ’¼éow ’¼üeld and the ’¼éame/’¼éow
dynamics will be different from those of lifted ’¼éames. The close
proximity of the H2 ’¼éames in LSI-R to the exit also restricts laser
access to the near ’¼üeld regions where information is needed to
characterize the ’¼éame and ’¼éow properties. Therefore, LSI-R is not
ideally suited for the current study and the swirl number needs to
be lowered to relax the axial aerodynamic stretch rate so that the
H2 ’¼éames lift off farther from the exit.
To lower the swirl number, a series of perforated plates with
decreasing blockage ratios was ’¼ütted to the center channel of the
LSI swirler. These plates were made by enlarging the holes of the
perforated plate for LSI-R. LSI-R uses a standard perforated plate
with holes in a hexagonal arrangement. The hole diameter is
3.05 mm with a center-to-center spacing of 4.8 mm to give a
blockage ratio of 40%. Table 2 shows the different plates used to
produce a set of LSIs designated as UH for uniform holes with
0.53S0.41.
Tests performed on the four LSI-UHs with H2 air mixtures
con’¼ürm that the ’¼éame liftoff distance increases with decreasing S
as indicated by Eq. 2. Figure 4 compares their operating maps
with that of LSI-R. The results show that a reduction of S from
0.54 to 0.50 has little effect on the LBO limits. Further reduction
in S 0.5 shifts LBO to higher  and degrades the performance.
The corresponding ’¼éame attachment limits show some changes
but do not suggest a consistent upward trend with decreasing S.
As indicated by the lengths of the vertical lines marking the extent
of the effective operating regimes, decreasing S using these per-
forated plates tends to reduce the range of lifted H2 ’¼éame opera-
tions.
In an effort to mitigate the H2 ’¼éame attachment phenomenon,
we applied a ’¼éame shaping method to elongate the H2 ’¼éames so
that their trailing edges are slightly swept back to reduce its pro-
pensity to ignite the mixing layer. This is accomplished by pro-
gressively increasing the size of holes on the center-channel per-
forated plate from small in the middle to large at the edge. These
plates generate a slightly nonuniform axial velocity pro’¼üle that is
faster at the edges of the center channel, thus producing a slightly
curved ’¼éame front at the center instead of a relatively ’¼éat ’¼éame
when a UH plate is used.
Fig. 3
Operating regime of LSI-R for H2
Table 2
Perforated plates to vary the swirl number of LSI
Hole diameter mm
S
LSI-R
3.05
0.54
LSI-UH1
3.18
0.53
LSI-UH2
3.45
0.50
LSI-UH3
3.66
0.47
LSI-UH4
3.86
0.41
Fig. 4
Operating maps of LSIs with UH center plates
031503-4 / Vol. 130, MAY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

Table 3 shows the four LSIs con’¼ügured by varying hole VH
diameter plates. These plates were made from the reference plate
of LSI-R. The holes on these plates have three different diameters:
one for the center hole, one for the second and third rings of holes
from the center, and one for the fourth and ’¼üfth rings. The range
of center-channel hole sizes for the LSI-VH is the same as that for
LSI-UHs. Their swirl numbers 0.51S0.43 are also similar.
Figure 5 shows the operating regimes of the LSI-VHs com-
pared to that for LSI-R. It can be seen that the VH perforated
Table 3
Hexagonal perforated plates with variable hole sizes
to vary the swirl number of LSI
Hole diameter mm
S
Center
Second and third
Fourth and ’¼üfth
LSI-VH1
3.05
3.26
3.45
0.51
LSI-VH2
3.26
3.45
3.57
0.50
LSI-VH3
3.05
3.45
3.66
0.48
LSI-VH4
3.05
3.7
3.8
0.43
Fig. 5
Operating maps of LSIs with UH center plates
Fig. 6
Normalized 2D velocity vectors and normalized shear stresses measured in nonreact-
ing ’¼éows of U0=18 m/s in ŌĆ×aŌĆ” LSI-R and ŌĆ×bŌĆ” LSI-VH1 and in H2/air ’¼éames of =0.35 and U0
=18 m/s in ŌĆ×cŌĆ” LSI-R and ŌĆ×dŌĆ” LSI-VH. Dashed lines mark the leading edges of the ’¼éame brushes.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2008, Vol. 130 / 031503-5
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

plates improve the ranges of operation. Except for LSI-VH4, all
the LBO limits are the same as LSI-R. More signi’¼ücantly, the
’¼éame attachment limits of some of the LSI-VHs are higher than
that of the LSI-R. Therefore, ’¼éame shaping enables the study of
lifted H2 ’¼éame at higher stoichiometries. Consequently, the PIV
measurements were made in the LSI-VHs and compared with
those made in LSI-R.
The PIV measurements consist of 32 ’¼éames with 10U0
20 m/s using the mixtures of Table 1. Figure 6 compares the
’¼éow ’¼üelds of LSI-R and LSI-VH1. From Fig. 5, LSI-VH1 with
S=0.51 offers the largest range of operation among the LSI evalu-
ated in this study and is considered the optimum con’¼üguration.
The normalized 2D velocity vectors obtained in the nonreacting
’¼éows produced by LSI-R and LSIVH1 at U0=18 m/s are shown,
respectively, in Figs. 6a and 6b. In the near ’¼üeld region of
LSI-VH1 0.3x/Di, a slight retardation in the ’¼éow velocities
near the centerline is a direct consequence of the VH size plate. As
outlined by the white line showing the zero velocity contour, both
LSI-R and LSI-VH1 generate very weak recirculation zones in the
far ’¼üeld. However, the one produced by LSI-VH1 is larger and
elongated. Otherwise, there are no signi’¼ücant differences between
the overall features of the nonreacting ’¼éow ’¼üelds of the two LSIs.
The ’¼éow ’¼üelds of H2 ’¼éames at =0.35 m/s and 18 m/s in
LSI-R and LSI-VH1 are shown, respectively, in Figs. 6c and
6d. At this stoichiometry, the leading edge of the ’¼éame brush of
LSI-R is very close to the LSI exit at x/Di=0.2. Therefore, the
velocity data in Fig. 6c cannot show the details of the near ’¼üeld
reactant region. However, in the far ’¼üeld, ’¼éow features such as
combustion induced ’¼éow acceleration and an enlarged recircula-
tion zone are similar to the features found in hydrocarbon ’¼éames.
Hence, the overall changes in the ’¼éow ’¼üelds induced by H2 and
hydrocarbon ’¼éames are not signi’¼ücantly different. The reacting
’¼éow ’¼üeld of LSI-VH1 is shown in Fig. 6d. This ’¼éame has a
larger liftoff x/Di=0.3 but is asymmetric. The velocity vectors
below the ’¼éame show noticeable nonuniform distributions be-
cause of the varying perforated plate hole sizes. Though the ’¼éow
’¼üeld is slightly off center, all other features of the velocity vectors,
i.e., combustion heat release, ’¼éow discharge angle, and far ’¼üeld
recirculation zone, are not signi’¼ücantly different from those
shown in Fig. 6c for LSI-R.
According to Eq. 2, the ’¼éow ’¼üelds of the LSI can be charac-
terized by the parameters ST, ax, and x0 deducible from the cen-
terline velocity pro’¼üles. The correlation of the turbulent ’¼éame
speed ST is of particular importance because it quanti’¼ües the gov-
erning process of the LSI method. Turbulent ’¼éame speed data for
H2 are very rare and those reported in the literature show a non-
linear correlation with turbulence intensity u commonly known
as the bending effect. This so-called bending is also reported for
ST of hydrocarbon ’¼éames 15,16. In contrast, ST for hydrocarbon
’¼éames deduced from LSBs and LSI show a clear linear increasing
trend with u 11. According to Eq. 2, the linear correlation is
the signi’¼ücant ’¼éame property that enables the LSI to operate
within a very wide range of ’¼éame and ’¼éow conditions. If the ST
correlation is nonlinear or bends, it implies that the ’¼éame drifts
downstream with increasing U0 and blows off.
Figure 7 compares the ST data deduced from the 32 H2 and
H2/N2 ’¼éames with those reported previously for CH4, C3H8,
C2H4, and CH4/H2 11. The H2 ’¼éame results show that their
turbulent ’¼éame speeds are higher than those of the hydrocarbon
’¼éames. They are also more scattered, especially at the high u/SL
conditions. The increase in scatter may be due to the uncertainties
in the values of the laminar ’¼éame speed SL for lean H2 mixtures.
Nevertheless, the H2 turbulent ’¼éame speed data indicate a linear
trend with increasing u. The linear correlation constant K is 3.15
and is higher than the 2.1 value for hydrocarbon ’¼éames. The sig-
ni’¼ücant implication of the linear H2 ’¼éame speed correlation is that
the LSI concept should also be valid for hydrogen.
In addition to the linear ’¼éame speed correlation, the self-
similarity of the near ’¼üeld region is the other important feature for
the LSI operation. The two parameters in Eq. 2 that characterize
the near ’¼üeld are the nondimensionalized axial aerodynamic
stretch rate ax and the virtual origin of the linear divergent region,
x0. The values of ax deduced from the nonreacting and reacting
’¼éow ’¼üelds are shown in Fig. 8 as functions of the ’¼éow Reynolds
number, Re. The pro’¼üles in Fig. 8a show that the values of ax
Fig. 7
Comparison of the turbulent ’¼éame speed ST of H2 and
hydrocarbon ’¼éames
Fig. 8
Nondimensionalized axial aerodynamic stretch rate ax
measured in the nonreacting ŌĆ×aŌĆ” and reacting ŌĆ×bŌĆ” ’¼éow ’¼üelds of
the LSIs
031503-6 / Vol. 130, MAY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

for each LSI remain relatively constant within the range of Re
investigated. This seems to indicate that the basic ’¼éow structures
of these nonreacting ’¼éows are fully developed at Re40,000.
There is also a dependency of the divergence rate represented by
the absolute value of ax on the increasing swirl number. The trend
does not seem to be linear because a change from S=0.43 LSI-
VH4 to S=0.51 LSI-VH1 reduces ax from ŌłÆ0.003 l/mm to
ŌłÆ0.01 l/mm. The corresponding ax measured in H2 ’¼éames are
shown in Fig. 8b. These values are generally lower than those of
the nonreacting ’¼éows and indicate a systematic increase in the
aerodynamic stretch rate induced by combustion heat release. This
notion is supported by the fact that the more signi’¼ücant changes
are found in ’¼éames with higher Tad e.g., 0.35.
The behaviors of the nonreacting and reacting ax are generally
consistent with those observed in the hydrocarbon ’¼éames. In
addition, the data in Fig. 8b show a convergence to ax
ŌłÆ0.015 l/mm at high Re. This is the same level as those mea-
sured in CH4 and other hydrocarbon ’¼éames 11. The convergence
trend seems to suggest that the ’¼éow structures in the near ’¼üeld
regions of the reacting ’¼éows are still evolving but may become
more similar at higher ’¼éow velocities.
The values of the virtual origins x0 for the nonreacting and
reacting ’¼éows are compared in Fig. 9. The nonreacting ’¼éow data
of Fig. 9a show some scatter at Re50,000, with x0 decreasing
with S. At the higher Re range, the x0 pro’¼üles tend to converge to
about ŌłÆ60 mm. Together with the ax data of Fig. 8a, these re-
sults imply a systematic shift of the position of the divergent ’¼éow
structure with increasing Re without a signi’¼ücant change in the
divergence rate.
The results in Fig. 9b for the reacting ’¼éows show that the
effects of H2 ’¼éames on the LSI near ’¼üelds are not very different
from the effects of hydrocarbon ’¼éames. At Re70,000, the values
of x0 for all H2 ’¼éames fall within a ŌłÆ30x0ŌłÆ50 mm. These
values are consistent with those reported in previous studies. Col-
lectively, the present and previous data imply that with increasing
U0, the ’¼éow structures and the divergence rates of the near ’¼üeld
produced by a LSI tend toward a self-similar structure that is
independent of the ’¼éame property.
The self-similar behavior of the H2 ’¼éame ’¼éow ’¼üeld is illus-
trated by the centerline velocity pro’¼üles Fig. 10 and the trans-
verse velocity pro’¼üles at x=12 mm Fig. 11 of LSI-VH1. In Fig.
10a, the features of the U/U0 pro’¼üles are similar to those re-
ported for hydrocarbon ’¼éames. All show linear velocity decays
near the LSI exit whose slopes correspond to ax. The positions
where the pro’¼üles deviate from the linear decays correspond to the
leading edges of the ’¼éame brushes. Further downstream, the in-
creases in U/U0 indicate combustion induced ’¼éow acceleration. A
subsequent drop in U/U0 in the far ’¼üeld is associated with the
formation of the weak recirculation zone. In comparison, ’¼éow
acceleration through the ’¼éame is not very pronounced on the ve-
locity data obtained for a very lean ’¼éame 0.3 burning a fuel
mixture consisting of 50% CO2 and 50% H2 11. This shows that
the effects of combustion heat release are manifested mainly in
the far ’¼üeld.
The corresponding centerline pro’¼üles of the normalized turbu-
lent kinetic energy q show that they all show relatively ’¼éat dis-
tributions throughout the near ’¼üeld and the far ’¼üeld. The lack of
increases in the far ’¼üeld near where the recirculations are formed
is the only signi’¼ücant difference between the ’¼éow ’¼üelds of the H2
and the hydrocarbon ’¼éames.
The radial pro’¼üles at x=12 mm are shown in Fig. 11. This axial
position is below the leading edge of the turbulent ’¼éame brushes,
and the pro’¼üles are characteristic of the reactants entering the
’¼éame brushes. Within the central region, ŌłÆ20r20 mm, a
Fig. 9
Virtual origin x0 deduced for the nonreacting ŌĆ×aŌĆ” and
reacting ŌĆ×bŌĆ” ’¼éow ’¼üelds of the LSIs
Fig. 10
Centerline velocity pro’¼üles of H2 ’¼éames by LSI-VH1
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2008, Vol. 130 / 031503-7
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

slight velocity de’¼ücit is clearly shown. This is a feature of the ’¼éow
generated by these LSIs with VH plates. The slight asymmetries
of the ’¼éow ’¼üelds of three ’¼éames are also noticeable, but the dif-
ferences in the U/U0 levels within the central region are not any
higher than those reported for hydrocarbon ’¼éames. In Fig. 11b,
all of the V/U0 pro’¼üles collapse into a consistent distribution. The
corresponding pro’¼üles of the turbulent kinetic energy q/U0 in
Fig. 11c shows some scatter within the central region. However,
all other features remain the same as those observed in hydrocar-
bon ’¼éames. The axial and radial velocity pro’¼üles of Figs. 10 and
11 show the self-similar nature of the near ’¼üeld regions of the H2
’¼éame ’¼éow ’¼üelds.
It is very encouraging that the H2 ’¼éames have near ’¼üelds that
are self-similar and turbulent ’¼éame speeds that correlate linearly
with u. These results show that the LSI concept will be amenable
to burning of H2 fuels. However, due to the complication caused
by ’¼éame attachment, our investigation is limited to relatively lean
H2 mixtures of 	0.38. A more extensive investigation at higher
stoichiometries and bulk ’¼éow velocities is necessary to obtain
additional data to support the development of the analytical model
for guiding the design of a LSI prototype suitable for evaluation at
high temperature and pressure with H2.
Conclusions
Laboratory experiments have been conducted to obtain the ba-
sic information needed to guide the adaptation of the LSI to burn
pure H2 and N2 diluted H2 fuels that will be utilized in the gas
Fig. 11
Radial pro’¼üles at x=12 mm of H2 ’¼éames by LSI-VH1
031503-8 / Vol. 130, MAY 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

turbines of the IGCC coal power plants. Starting with the LSI-R
S=0.54 developed for natural gas as a reference, the LBO limits
for H2 and H2 diluted with N2 were determined. The results show
that LSI-R supports very lean ’¼éames 0.17 and the blowoff
limits are independent of velocity within the range investigated
10U020 m/s. However, the LSI-R is less than optimum for
the open H2 ’¼éame experiments because of ’¼éame reattachment to
the LSI-R rim at 0.3. The attached ’¼éame phenomenon is an
impediment for the investigation of near ’¼üeld ’¼éow features of
lifted ’¼éames. This problem was addressed by a ’¼éame shaping
method that involved the use of center channel plates with VH
sizes. Four LSI con’¼ügurations with the VH plates of 0.41S
0.51 were evaluated. The best performance was provided by
LSI-VH1 with S=0.51 that produced a lifted H2 ’¼éame at =0.4.
Extensive PIV measurements were made in 32 H2 ’¼éames gen-
erated by LSI-R and four LSI-VHs. The experimental conditions
consist of U0 from 10 m/s to 20 m/s and  from 0.3 to 0.38. The
adiabatic ’¼éame temperatures of these H2 ’¼éames are below
1400 K, and the NOx formation is expected to be below the de-
tectable limit. Consequently, emission measurements were not
made in these ’¼éames.
The PIV results showed that the overall ’¼éow ’¼üeld features of
the H2 ’¼éames are not signi’¼ücantly different from those of the
hydrocarbon ’¼éames. The turbulent ’¼éame speeds of the H2 ’¼éames
deduced from the centerline velocity pro’¼üles show a linear corre-
lation with turbulence intensity u. The value of the correlation
constant of 3.1 is 50% higher than the value determined for hy-
drocarbon ’¼éames. A comparison of the near ’¼üeld features below
the lifted H2 ’¼éames was based on examining the changes in the
normalized axial aerodynamic stretch rate ax and the virtual origin
x0 with ’¼éow Reynolds numbers. The results show that the near
’¼üeld of the H2 ’¼éames is self-similar. The values of ax and x0 for
H2 ’¼éames are similar to those found in hydrocarbon ’¼éames.
Therefore, the basic LSI mechanism is not affected by the differ-
ences in the basic ’¼éame properties of hydrocarbons and H2. The
results of our laboratory studies show that the LSI concept is
amenable to burning of H2 fuels.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy,
Of’¼üce
of
Fossil
Energy
under
Contract
No.
DE-AC02-
05CH11231.
Nomenclature
ax 
 normalized axial aerodynamic stretch rate
l/mm
Di 
 injector diameter mm
Li 
 swirler recess distance
m=mc/ms 
 mass ’¼éux ratio
mc 
 mass ’¼éux through the center channel
ms 
 mass ’¼éux through the swirl annulus
q 
 2D turbulent kinetic energy=1/2u2+v21/2
Re 
 Reynolds number 2RiU0/
R=Rc/Ri 
 ratio of the center-channel radius Rc to the in-
jector radius Ri
r 
 radial distance
S 
 swirl number
SL 
 laminar ’¼éame speed
ST 
 turbulent ’¼éame speed
Tad 
 adiabatic ’¼éame temperature
U0 
 bulk ’¼éow velocity
U 
 axial velocity
u 
 axial rms velocity
v 
 radial rms velocity
uv 
 shear stress
x 
 axial distance from the injector exit
xf 
 leading edge position of the ’¼éame brush
x0 
 virtual origin of the divergent ’¼éow
References
1 Bell, J. B., Cheng, R. K., Day, M. S., and Shepherd, I. G., 2006, ŌĆ£Numerical
Simulation of Lewis Number Effects on Lean Premixed Turbulent Flames,ŌĆØ
Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 1309ŌĆō1317.
2 Cheng, R. K., Shepherd, I. G., Bedat, B., and Talbot, L., 2002, ŌĆ£Premixed
Turbulent Flame Structures in Moderate and Intense Isotropic Turbulence,ŌĆØ
Combust. Sci. Technol., 1741, pp. 29ŌĆō59.
3 Shepherd, I. G., Cheng, R. K., Plessing, T., Kortschik, C., and Peters, N., 2002,
ŌĆ£Premixed Flame Front Structure in Intense Turbulence,ŌĆØ Proc. Combust. Inst.,
29, pp. 1833ŌĆō1840.
4 Chan, C. K., Lau, K. S., Chin, W. K., and Cheng, R. K., 1992, ŌĆ£Freely Propa-
gating Open Premixed Turbulent Flames Stabilized by Swirl,ŌĆØ Proc. Combust.
Inst., 24, pp. 511ŌĆō518 1992.
5 Cheng, R. K., 1995, ŌĆ£Velocity and Scalar Characteristics of Premixed Turbu-
lent Flames Stabilized By Weak Swirl,ŌĆØ Combust. Flame, 1011ŌĆō2, pp. 1ŌĆō14
1995.
6 Shepherd, I. G., and Cheng, R. K., 2001, ŌĆ£The Burning Rate of Premixed
Flames in Moderate and Intense Turbulence,ŌĆØ Combust. Flame, 1273, pp.
2066ŌĆō2075.
7 Johnson, M. R., Littlejohn, D., Nazeer, W. A., Smith, K. O., and Cheng, R. K.,
2005, ŌĆ£A Comparison of the Flow’¼üelds and Emissions of High-Swirl Injectors
and Low-Swirl Injectors for Lean Premixed Gas Turbines,ŌĆØ Proc. Combust.
Inst., 30, pp. 2867ŌĆō2874.
8 Nazeer, W. A., Smith, K. O., Sheppard, P., Cheng, R. K., and Littlejohn, D.
2006, ŌĆ£Full Scale Testing of a Low Swirl Fuel Injector Concept for Ultra-Low
NOx Gas Turbine Combustion Systems,ŌĆØ ASME Turbo Expo 2006: Power for
Land, Sea and Air, Barcelona, Spain.
9 Cheng, R. K., Littlejohn, D., Nazeer, W. A., and Smith, K. O. 2006, ŌĆ£Labora-
tory Studies of the FLow’¼üeld Characteristics of Low-Swirl Injectors for Ad-
aptation to Fuel-Flexible Turbines,ŌĆØ ASME Turbo Expo 2006: Power for Land,
Sea and Air, Barcelona, Spain.
10 Yegian, D. T., and Cheng, R. K., 1998, ŌĆ£Development of a Lean Premixed
Low-Swirl Burner for Low NOx Practical Applications,ŌĆØ Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol., 1391ŌĆō6, pp. 207ŌĆō227.
11 Littlejohn, D., and Cheng, R. K., 2006, ŌĆ£Fuel Effects on a Low-Swirl Injector
for Lean Premixed Gas Turbines,ŌĆØ Proc. Combust. Inst., 312, pp. 3155ŌĆō
3162.
12 Zhang, Q., Noble, D. R., Meyers, A., Xu, K., and Lieuwen, T., 2005, ŌĆ£Char-
acterization of Fuel Composition Effects in H2/CO/CH4 Mixtures Upon Lean
Blowout,ŌĆØ ASME Turbo Expo 2005: Power for Land, Sea and Air, Reno, NV.
13 Mellings, A., 1997, ŌĆ£Tracer Particles and Seeding for Particle Image Veloci-
metry,ŌĆØ Meas. Sci. Technol., 8, pp. 1406ŌĆō1416.
14 Wernet, M. P. 1999, ŌĆ£Fuzzy Logic Enhanced Digital PIV Processing Soft-
ware,ŌĆØ 18th International Congress on Instrumentation for Aerospace Simula-
tion Facilities, Toulouse, France.
15 Lipatnikov, A. N., and Chomiak, J., 2002, ŌĆ£Turbulent Flame Speed and Thick-
ness: Phenomenology, Evaluation, and Application in Multi-Dimensional
Simulations,ŌĆØ Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 281,: pp. 1ŌĆō74.
16 Kido, H., Nakahara, M., Hashimoto, J., and Barat, D., 2002, ŌĆ£Turbulent Burn-
ing Velocities of Two-component Fuel, Mixtures of Methane, Propane and
Hydrogen,ŌĆØ JSME Int. J., Ser. B, 452, pp. 355ŌĆō362.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2008, Vol. 130 / 031503-9
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
