
--- Page 1 ---

Copyright ©1996, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
AIAA Meeting Papers on Disc, January 1996
A9618664, AIAA Paper 96-0705
The role of transverse air jets in the formation of gas turbine emissions
D. Shouse
USAF, Aero Propulsion and Power Directorate, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH
C. Frayne
USAF, Aero Propulsion and Power Directorate, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH
J. Stutrud
USAF, Aero Propulsion and Power Directorate, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH
S. Gogineni
Systems Research Labs., Dayton, OH
G. J. Sturgess
Innovative Scientific Solutions, Inc., Beavercreek, OH
AIAA 34th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV Jan 15-18, 1996
Results are presented of emissions and lean blowout measurements in a generic combustor primary zone for the effects
of opposed circular-combustion air jets of a range of sizes, positioned half a dome height downstream from the dome.
The primary zone was operated at simulated engine high-power conditions and representative dome and liner pressure
drops. It is shown that most of the NO(x) is generated in the jets. Although an optimum jet size is identified, the lowest
overall emissions resulted from a no-combustion air-jet configuration; air jets are necessary, however, to confer lean
blowout stability and short flame length. (Author)
Page 1


--- Page 2 ---

AIAA-96-0705
THE ROLE OF TRANSVERSE AIR JETS
IN THE
FORMATION OF GAS TURBINE EMISSIONS
D. Shouse, C. Frayne, J. Stutrud
Aero Propulsion and Power Directorate
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio
S. Gogineni
Systems Research Laboratories
2800 Indian Ripple Road
Dayton, Ohio
G.J. 
Sturgess
Innovative Scientific Solutions Inc.
3845, Woodhurst Court,
Beavercreek, Ohio
Abstract
Results are presented of emissions and lean
blowout measurements in a generic combustor
primary zone for the effects of opposed, circular
combustion air jets of a range of sizes, positioned
half a dome height downstream from the dome. The
primary zone was operated at simulated engine high
power conditions, and representative dome and liner
pressure drops. It is shown that most of the NOx is
generated in the jets. Although an optimum jet size is
identified, the lowest overall emissions resulted from
a no combustion air jet configuration; air jets are
necessary however, to confer lean blowout stability
and short flame length.
Introduction
In 1987 the U.S. 
Air Force Wright
Laboratory, Aero Propulsion and Power Directorate
(WL/PO), Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio,
established the Combustor Design Model Evaluation
(CDME) Program. This effort is a comprehensive
joint Government, Industry and University research
program aimed at improving the design and analysis
capabilities for the combustors of aircraft gas turbine
engines. The CDME program is addressing many
important aspects of combustor design.
One study that is currently in pTogressris~arr
investigation into the minimization of engine exhaust
emissions, and the relationships between generation
of these emissions 
and combustor operability
characteristics. As part of this study a broad-ranging
investigation of combustor primary zone behavior is
being conducted.
Program 
Objectives
The overall intent of this part of the CDME
program is to understand the detailed behavior of the
major flame holding of a modem generic combustor
for aircraft gas turbine engines, and to establish an
appropriate database suitable for design purposes.
Test 
Vehicle
A relatively simple combustor developed
under an earlier program1 has been adapted for the
experimental study of the influence of simulated
engine primary zone flow structures on the emissions
generation and lean stability characteristics.
The combustor 
consists 
of a 
single
representative fuel injector and its associated dome
interface, mounted in a plain bulkhead. The injector is
a high-swirl airblast atomizer2, and the dome interface
consists of a small, discrete-jet swirler co-annular
with the injector, together with a dome heat shield fed
with cooling air that is discharged radially across the
bulkhead face. The cross-section of the combustor is
square for optical access by laser diagnostics, but
generous fillets are provided in the corners to suppress
vortieily generationthat might result-in-spurious
flameholding. The hydraulic diameter is 153 mm and
the length is 490 mm. The combustor outlet is
restricted by a 45 percent geometric blockage orifice
plate to provide representative back pressure of the
unsimulated portion of a real combustor.


--- Page 3 ---

The combustor is mounted horizontally, and
the top and bottom walls are removable, uncooled
metal plates that accommodate appropriate arrays of
combustion air jets. One combustor side-plate (at 90
degrees to the liner plates containing the air jets)
contains a fitting for application of a torch ignitor;
the other side contains a full-length quartz window far
visual access.
Figure 1 shows the combustor with its air
entrance conditioning unit. Air supplies to the dome
and the combustion air jets are separately metered, and
may be electrically preheated to a maximum
temperature of about 500F (533K).
1. Air entrance 2. Diffuser 3. Fuel injector
4. Liner air-jets 5. Quartz window
Figure la): Laboratory-Scale Gas Turbine
Combustor
Figure Ib): Combustor Fuel Injector and Dome
Engine Power Simulation
The efficacy of the combustor for its
intended purpose is discussed in detail in Reference 2.
The combustor represents a "single-cup" planar
segment of an annular combustor, and simulates the
primary zone only.
It is operated at atmospheric pressure for
convenience and cost reasons. Engine high power
conditions are simulated by closely 
matching
Spalding's partial modeling flow criterion Kf,
reasonably approximating the temperature rise term
Ar/7^, and by substituting gaseous propane for
liquid JP/Jet fuel. Together, these ensure that engine
flow patterns are closely approximated and that liquid
evaporation is not a problem. It was concluded that
the combustor can reproduce reasonably well and to
an acceptable degree the flow patterns of an engine
combustor.
Description of the Rig
The test combustor is installed horizontally
in a test cell at Wright Patterson Air Force Base,
Ohio. Reference 2 gives a detailed description of the
rig and facility in which the combustor is installed.
Of relevance here is the fact that inlet air was dried to
very low dew points prior to entering the
compressors.
Experimental 
Variables
The array of combustion air ports presently
to be described is confined to an opposed pair of
circular flush holes (in upper and lower liners) placed
inline with the fuel injector centerline. Diameters of
0.25 in. (6.35 mm), 0.375 in. (9.53 mm), 0.50 in.
(12.70 mm) and 0.75 in. (19.05 mm) ate reported .
Although these pairs of jets could be situated 1,0,
0.75 and 0.5 dome heights (Hd ) downstream from
the dome, only the latter position is used in the
results to be presented.
The inlet air temperature was held constant
at a nominal 500F (533K). This value was selected in
order to first, satisfy the simulation criteria, and
second, to ensure the generation of sufficient NOx
without a large burnup of CO; thus, trends and effects
in these two pollutants could be detected easily and
measured accurately.
Pressure drop across a combustor is in
practice, not a free variable but is set by engine
performance considerations. Generally, the allowable
pressure drop across a dome is a little higher than that
across liners due to the recovery of some dynamic
head from the compressor. For the majority of the
work to be presented the dome pressure drop was held
fixed at a nominal value of 4.3 percent of the
upstream pressure, and the liner pressure drop was 3.0
percent. These values ate representative of typical
engine conditions. Under these conditions all of the
transverse jets with different 
initial diameters
penetrated to the combustor centerline.


--- Page 4 ---

To extend the generality of the results the
normal range of liner air pressure drops for each hole
size was 1-5 percent of the upstream pressure. To
explore the effects of jet turbulence this range was
extended to as high as 12 percent for the 0.5 in.
(12.70 mm) hole.
Emissions Measurements
The emissions sampling probe is a water-
cooled, quick-quench, single-point type, and is made
of stainless steel with an Inconel tip. The sample
enters a converging nozzle of orifice diameter 0.059
in. (1.5 mm), which then diverges to the 0.180 in.
(4.6 mm) I.D. of the stainless tube. This arrangement
results in a supersonic expansion which reduces the
gas stream temperature. Together with the water
cooling of the probe, this achieves quenching of
chemical reactions.
The sample is transferred from the probe by
heated lines that avoid condensation, to the emissions
measuring equipment, which is fairly standard. Again,
detailed descriptions are given in Reference 2.
The axial measurement plane for gaseous
emissions was 14 in. (356 mm) downstream from the
face of the dome. Kinetics calculations indicated that
at this position the bulk NOx was not changing too
rapidly, and CO consumption rates were reasonably
slow. Furthermore, at this axial station the profiles of
measured emissions were flat enough over the entire
range of equivalence ratios (for all jet sizes at the
Hdl2 position) for centerpoint and area-weighted
mean values to be in exceptionally close agreement,
thus permitting centerpoint values to be used for
economy, (errors less than ±10 percent). Since the
emissions probe was introduced into the combustor
from the rear through the exit orifice plate, the extent
of the radial traverses was determined by the size of
this orifice plate. The extent of the radial profile
traverses was ± 1.75 in. (± 44 mm) from the
combustor centerline. Traverses were made both
horizontally and vertically.
Comparisons were made of the metered
fuel/air ratios to the measured exhaust fuel/air ratios
based on the carbon balance. The agreements were
better than 10 percent for metered equivalence ratios
of 1.0 and less.
As the inlet air was dried in the facility prior
to entering the rig the NOx levels to be quoted are all
dry values.
Test Procedure
For each air-port size, axial position and
pressure drop, the fuel flow rate was varied to cover a
range of overall equivalence ratios such that the
anticipated minimum in the CO-curve and the
maximum in the NOx-curve could be 
fully
established.
It 
is 
usual 
to 
present 
emissions
measurements as a function of an appropriate
equivalence ratio. The presumption is that the flow
patterns in the combustor are established by the
geometry and remain unchanged with this method
(varying fuel flow rate) of operating, thus making
equivalence ratio a good single descriptor of the
emissions. Since the combustion air jets established
by the different liner hole sizes all penetrated to the
combustor 
centerline, 
this 
is 
a 
reasonable
supposition. However, the high engine power
simulation assumed that flow patterns were not
affected to first order by the fuel flow. With a gaseous
fuel having flow rate as a prime operational variable,
this assumption must be verified due to fuel
momentum considerations.
It is difficult to establish a true uniqueness
test of the data due to the large number of variables
involved. However, at fixed dome and liner pressure
drops turbulence generated will be fixed, and
variations in NOx with overall equivalence ratio for
fixed jet size can be compared against variations in
NOx with overall equivalence ratio for fixed fuel flow
rate but with a range of combustion air jet initial
diameters, i.e. variable airflow.
Such a comparison is complicated by the
postulated mechanism for jet NOx formation2 (see
below also), which is proportional to jet size.
However, provided that jet NOx is not a large
proportion of the total NOx (small jets and/or low
equivalence ratios), and, provided that the comparison
is restricted to jet sizes equal to or less than the fixed
jet size of the comparison, and that the range of
constant fuel flows examined is selected to be within
the range of flows for the fixed jet data, such
comparisons may be made.


--- Page 5 ---

Figure 2 compares NOx emission indices
(El's in gm NOx as NO2/kg fuel burned) data for the
0.5 in. (12.7 mm) jet case over a range of equivalence
ratios obtained by varying fuel flow, with NOx data
for 0.5 in. (12.7 mm), 0.375 in. (9.5 mm) and 0.25
in. (6.35 mm) at fixed fuel flow rates of 0.075,
0.100, 0.125 and 0.150 Ibm/min. (0.034, 0.045,
0.057 and 0.068 kg/min. respectively). Rich and lean
points are included.
The plotted data in Figure 2 on both lean and
rich sides correlate within the measurement accuracy
and repeatability of the single-test data scatter2.
8
T3i
3
"5
"to
§
OJ
x"
2
LU
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
.' • ' I • • • 1 • • • ! • • • I • • ' I • • • 1
• 
0.1 00 Ibm/min fuel
• 
0.1 50 Ibm/min fuel
• 
0.1 25 Ibm/min fuel
V 
1/2 in. circular jet
A 
0.075 Ibm/min fuel
mm
• *
„****
"
v 
Wm
V
V
v
_
-
_
-
-
:
•
-
1 
—
•
—
_
~
1 1 l"
0 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 
1 
1.2 1.4
Overall Equivalence Ratio
Figure 2: Uniqueness Plot Based on NOx, to Evaluate
Fuel Momentum Effects
The conclusion can therefore be drawn that fuel
momentum does not affect the flow field, and as a
consequence, that for fixed pressure drop, equivalence
ratio is a unique parameter describing NOx.
Dome Characteristics
The combustor can be operated with zero
combustion air jets to obtain the characteristics of the
dome alone.
Figure 3 is a plot of the emission index (FJ)
of NOx for the dome alone, as a function of dome
equivalence ratio (metered). As expected, the measured
NOx reaches a peak of about 3.6 at a dome
equivalence ratio of 0.82. As the dome equivalence
ratio exceeds unity NOx falls due to decreasing bulk
flame temperatures, but unburned fuel leaves the
combustor.
Also shown on Figure 3 are calculated NOx
curves using two approaches. First, assuming
"experimentally-perfect premixing" of fuel and air,
and second, representing the dome flow field as a
reactor network having a degree of partial stirring..
For the "experimentally-perfect premixing" case the
empirical correlation of Roffe & Venkataramani3 for
lean propane and air systems was used. In this
correlation the residence times were estimated for
volumes based on observed flame dimensions. The
reactor network was based on computational fluid
dynamic calculations for this injector and hole
pattern1, with reactor dimensions based on observed
flame dimensions and having fuel heating value
reduced to account for estimated heat losses from the
combustor. The network consisted of a well-stirred
reactor with a parallel plug-flow reactor that processed
13 percent of the total flow that was recirculated back
into the dome.
100
•o
<D
r$ "5
ia 10
T——I 
I | 
I 
I—I 
I 
^ 
I 
1 
1 
I—] 
I 
1 
I—
DOME AS PERFECTLY
STIRRED REACTOR
(Roffe & Venkataramani)
/ DOME AS WELL-STIRREB!:
I 
REACTOR NETWORK :
1 
1.5
Dome Equivalence Ratio
Dome Equivalence Ratio
Figure 3: Assessment of Dome NOx Characteristics
The effect of unproved mixing as represented
hi the two calculations, is to increase the peak NOx
and to narrow the NOx curve across equivalence ratio;
furthermore, the peak NOx occurs at dome
equivalence ratios around unity.


--- Page 6 ---

Comparing the measured dome NOx against
the two calculations demonstrates that despite the use
of a gaseous fuel and the intimate association of fuel
and air in the fuel injector, the fuel is burned in the
dome in far from premixed form, and consequently,
exhibits some degree of diffusion flame burning.
Overall Burning Characteristics
In Reference 2 the NOx data were analyzed in
terms of a rich/lean burning system, where excess
fuel from a fuel-rich dome was assumed to burn fuel-
lean in the combustion air jet system, as was
described in Reference 4. If this is so, the question
concerning the nature of the flame in these two
burning zones arises. It was assumed in Reference 2
that it was the same in both zones, i.e. based on the
previous section, flames exhibiting some degree of
diffusion burning.
Figure 4 is a plot of overall NOx El's for
several jet systems at Hd/2 
from the dome,
including the dome alone, plotted against dome
equivalence ratio, at fixed pressure drops.
T3
O
3
X -Q
O -53
Z 3
o £
"O tl
II
E o
UJ Q.
1 0)
CO
.
." • • i' • • ' i " " r •" i
0.75 in. JETS
0.375 in. JETS
0.5 1 
1.5 2 
2.5 3 
3.5 4
Dome Equivalence Ratio
Figure 4: Overall Burning Characteristics for NOx
The characteristic of the dome-alone NOx is
that from Figure 3. The characteristics for the
individual combustion air jet cases collapse onto a
common curve for dome equivalence ratios up to
about 1.15. For dome equivalence ratios of 0.55 and
less, this collapsed data is co-incident with the dome
alone data. This behavior indicates that basic flame
characteristics in the dome are unaffected by the
presence of the jets.
The NOx peak for jets being present is
shifted to higher dome equivalence ratios, in the range
1.3 - 1.55, from the nominal 0.82 equivalence ratio
for the dome alone. The levels of NOx at the peak,
and the subsequent behavior on the dome rich-side of
the peak, are dependent on the individual jet size.
The shifted NOx peak from 0.82 with no
jets to 1.3 - 1.55 dome equivalence ratio with jets,
indicates that in addition to peak temperatures being
reached at lower equivalence ratios (0.82 rather than
about 0.92-1.0)) due to unmixedness effects, some of
the combustion jet air is actually active in the dome.
The co-incidence of the data for individual jets at
equivalence ratios less than 1.15 suggests that the
dome aerodynamics are not strongly influenced, or
least modified, by the details of the air jets, i.e. that
any additional air introduced into the dome takes part
in chemical reactions in a region somewhat separate
from the jets themselves, and, that this region is not
far upstream in the dome itself. Flame photographs
identify a small luminous region on the injector
centerline, just upstream of the confluence of the
transverse combustion air jets. CFD analysis of this
type of combustion system1, identifies a well-mixed
recirculation bubble in this position. This bubble
could be where the small quantity of jet air is utilized
in the dome. The centerline penetration of all jets at 3
percent liner pressure drop ensures that this bubble is
present whenever the jets are present.
It will be noted that for the 0.75 in. (19.05
mm) jets, where, as was shown in Reference 2, most
of the total NOx produced originates in the jets, high
levels of NOx are eventually produced after the initial
NOx-peak that denotes a stoichiometric dome. This is
mainly due to jet NOx as the equivalence ratio
increases. These high levels of NOx fall onto the
same general curve as for the other jets, and for the
dome alone at dome equivalence ratios less than 0.55.
The existence of this "common curve" indicates that
that there is no substantial difference in the flame
characteristics of dome and jets, and, that the NOx
produced in both regions is produced by the same
kinetic mechanism.
Jet System Behavior
In Reference 2 the adopted analysis
strategy for emissions data reduction was one of


--- Page 7 ---

treating the generic primary zone as being a quasi-
staging4, rich/lean burning combustor. The dome
region was generally fuel-rich, and the importance of
NOx generation in the "lean burning" combustion air
jet system itself was highlighted.
This aspect is illustrated here in Figure 5
where the percentage of total NOx that is generated in
the jets for each initial jet size is plotted in terms of
overall equivalence ratio. The jet NOx was obtained
from the total NOx at given overall equivalence ratio
by subtracting from it the dome-alone NOx at an
appropriate dome equivalence ratio. Such a procedure
is only valid if the predominant mechanism for NOx
generation is the same in both regions of the
combustor. As was demonstrated above, this appears
to be the case. The percent NOx was obtained by
multiplying the calculated emission indices for the
jets by the mass flow rate of fuel burned in the jets,
and dividing by the measured overall emission index
for the primary zone at the same equivalence ratio,
multiplied by the total fuel flow rate.
<n
"S
—3c
TJ
.22
<D
CD
O
X
Oz
Percent T
1 \S\S
80
60
40
20
0
1 • ' i • • ' i • • ' i • • ' i ' • ' i • ' '
^K_^h_^fe^^ft
A-^fe 
^^p~^p^WV^k
••^* 
.A**
: f 
*fj ^^ :
/ 
A T 
V 
-
- 
f 
/ 
0.25in.JETS-
r / 
A 
^ 
~
. • 
0.375 in. JETS • ^
- 
^^ 
^
- 0.75 in. JETS 
JF
" 
/ ^ 
0.50 in. JETS 
'_
, , , I , , Pi , , , I , , , I , , , I , , ,
0.2
1.4
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
1.2
Overall Equivalence Ratio
Figure 5: Contribution of Jet-Generated NOx
Figure 5 shows that for the 0.75 in. (19.05
mm) initial jet size more than half of the NOx
originates in the jets for all operating equivalence
ratios; for the 0.50 in. (12J7_mm)-jet_the-jet-NQx-
only reaches 50 percent of the total for a
stoichiometric primary zone. The general behavior is
for the percent jet NOx to increase with overall
equivalence ratio, and to do so rather steeply initially
until a plateau level is reached. This behavior is
repeated for each jet system, and the plateau level is
lower for smaller jets than for the larger jets. For the
0.75 in. (19.05 mm) jets the plateau is for about 95
percent jet NOx; for the 0.375 in. (9.53 mm) jets it
is about 85 percent, and for the 0.25 in. (6.35 mm)
jets it is about 75 percent The 0.5 in. (12.70 mm)
jet system has not yet reached its plateau level in the
range of overall equivalence ratios covered. This jet
system is the exception to the general behavior. If
overall equivalence ratio is increased above unity,
percent combustion air jet NOx contribution to
overall NOx would eventually start to fall as the jet
system became over-rich. This is clearly evident for
the two smaller jets.
The 50 percent jet NOx condition is reached
at overall equivalence ratios that increase with
decreasing jet size, and that corresponds to the
condition where the dome equivalence ratio exceeds
unity in each case. For the 0.50 in. (12.70 mm) jet
system the 50 percent jet NOx condition is reached at
an overall equivalence ratio of 0.96. 
From
stoichiometry plots this corresponds to a dome
equivalence ratio of 1.7. This jet system generates
lower jet NOx levels at all overall equivalence ratios
than either larger or smaller jets. Clearly, the 0.5 in.
(12.70 mm) jet system behaves differently to all of
the others.
Figure 6 is a plot from Reference 2 with
additional information added for the smaller jets. The
plot shows the El's of jet NOx for each jet as a
function of jet equivalence ratio.
For jet equivalence ratios less than 0.8-0.9
(where a NOx peak is expected) the NOx for the
0.375 (9.53 mm), 0.50 in. (12.7 mm) and 0.75 in.
(19.05 mm) jets is essentially independent of jet
equivalence ratio. This suggests that the fuel burned
in the jets at these lower equivalence ratios is reacted
in stoichiometric interfaces associated with the fresh
air entering through the jets. The jet NOx FJ's
consistently begin to decrease at higher jet
equivalence ratios. This is because unburned fuel is
now exiting the combustor. The jet NOx El plateau
levels for the lower jet equivalence ratios decrease
with increasing jet initial diameter, with the
exception of the 0.50 in. (12.7 mm) jet system,
which again has the lowest values. For the 0.25 in.
(6.35 mm) jets the jet NOx El's continuously
decrease with increasing jet equivalence ratio over the
entire range covered. This suggests that there is
something different about this jet system.


--- Page 8 ---

40
35
z a
CO .£,
r Jet Diameters, ins.
0.25
'~ 
25
o ^ 20
x —
<D 
CD
I~ 15
^
CO»
LU
10
0.375
0.75
: 0.50
0.5 
1
Jet Equivalence Ratio,
Based on Fuel Burned in Jets
1.5
Figure 6: Demonstration of Stoichiometric Burning
in Jet Systems
When the absolute jet NOx, in gm/min., is
plotted against jet equivalence ratio, Figure 7, the
behavior exhibits the characteristic equivalence ratio
dependency, with NOx peaks occurring in the jet
equivalence ratio range of 0.8-1.0. The absolute NOx
levels decrease with decreasing jet size, which is the
opposite behavior to that of the El's. This is
accounted for by the different amounts of the total
fuel actually burned in the jets, where the 0.75 in.
(19.05 mm) jet burns the most fuel and the 0.25 in.
(6.36 mm) the least, and where, for a given jet size,
the amount of jet fuel decreases with decreasing
overall equivalence ratio. Once again, the 0.50 in.
(12.7 mm) jet system shows as the optimum, having
the lowest absolute jet NOx.
The optimum behavior of the 0.50 in. (12.7
mm) jet system is demonstrated in Figure 8 where the
El's of jet NOx are plotted against jet diameter for
three primary zone (overall) equivalence ratios in the
range of peak bulk-flame temperatures. Note that for
all jet sizes, the jet NOx El's decrease with increasing
primary zone equivalence ratio, and the sensitivity to
jet size decreases also.
Behavior in Relation to Primary Zones
From individual plots of overall NOx
emissions against overall equivalence ratio for each
jet size, values of NOx El's at specific primary zone
equivalence ratios can be extracted. From such values
plots of overall NOx emissions as a function of jet
size can be produced.
£
co
0.8
I 0.6
co-2-
O 0.4
0.2
4
3.75 in. Jets -
0.375 in. Jets
:><*
Jet Equivalence Ratio,
Based on Fuel Burned in Jets
Figure 7: Absolute Values of Jet NOx
60
"§50
." " i " " i ' ' ' ' i " '' i " '' i " " i " " i " ".
Primary Zone
I Equivalence^atio
0.8
z
"5 40
30
JO p
8 §>
LUO
co
.5,10
0
0 
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Jet Diameter, in.
Figure 8: Indication of Optimum Jet Diameter
Figare-9-show3 sueh-a plot for'primary zone
equivalence ratios of 0.5, 0.8, 1.0 and 1.1. Since a
particular primary zone equivalence ratio represents a
specific bulk temperature, thermal NOx should be
independent of jet size. That it is not, implies that the
different jet sizes do result in some changes to flame


--- Page 9 ---

structure in the jets, (since most of the NOx is
generally generated in the jets) as was suggested, and
that these changes are responsible for the observed
increase in NOx.
Remembering that the overall NOx consists
of NOx produced in the dome and NOx produced in
the jets, the NOx El for total fuel burned
characteristics with jet diameter are similar at each
primary zone equivalence ratio. NOx El increases
from the dome-alone value with the addition of
combustion air jets. This is due to participation of
some jet air in dome burning, as discussed above, and
this increases with jet size for the 0.25 in. (6.35 mm)
and 0.375 in. (9.53 mm) jets, together with a
growing, and eventually dominating, contribution of
jet NOx. At unity primary zone equivalence ratio and
above, there appears to be an optimum jet size at
0.50 in (12.7 mm) diameter. There is a sharp increase
in overall NOx El at all primary zone equivalence
ratios, that is associated with the use of 0.75 in.
(19.05 mm) diameter jets. The lowest NOx at each of
the primary zone equivalence ratios is achieved by the
dome alone configuration.
Primary Zone
Equivalence Ratio
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8
Jet Diameter, in.
Figure 9: Optimum Jet Size for Overall Primary
Zone
Figure 10 is a similar plot, but where the
overall NOx is expressed as an absolute value, in
gm/min., and is plotted against the mass flow rate
ratio of jet air to dome air. In this plot at given
primary zone equivalence ratio, the mass flow ratio
varies as the jets are changed, and fuel flow rate
increases with air mass flow ratio. Thus, as air mass
flow rate ratio increases the dome gets progressively
richer since its air flow is fixed.
The stoichiometry breakdowns for the
combustoi^show that for all but the highest air mass
flow ratio shown on Figure 10, the dome is fuel-lean
at 0.5 primary zone equivalence ratio, and is around
stoichiometric or less at 0.8 primary zone equivalence
ratio; the jet systems are always fuel-lean. Thus,
primary zone equivalence ratios less than 0.8
generally represent overall lean burning hi this
combustor. For higher primary zone equivalence
ratios, the dome is always very fuel-rich, and jet
equivalence ratio becomes stoichiometric at unity
primary zone equivalence ratio. Thus, primary zone
equivalence ratios of unity or greater generally
represent overall rich burning.
1.2
I ' ' ' ' I ' ' ' ' I ' '
Primary Zone
Equivalence Ratio
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
2.5
Mass Ratio, Jet Air to Dome Air
FigurelO: Dependence of Absolute NOx Emissions
on Jet to Dome Mass Flow Ratio
Figure 10 shows a clear difference in NOx
characteristics between these two primary zone
equivalence ratio regimes. For 0.5 and 0.8 primary
zone equivalence ratios the absolute NOx level
increases essentially linearly with increasing air mass
flow rate ratio. As the primary zone equivalence ratio
is increased the NOx levels increase due to the
increased bulk temperature, and the sensitivity to air
mass flow rate ratio is increased. At any primary zone
equivalence ratio the increase in overall NOx with


--- Page 10 ---

increase in air mass flow rate ratio is due to the
growing contribution of jet NOx.
It is not sufficient to confine consideration
to NOx alone as the indicator of low emissions; the
inefficiency emissions must also taken into account.
Figure 11 is a plot of overall NOx
emissions indices against overall CO emissions
indices for each of the jet sizes, including the dome
alone; the data for each jet size is limited on the left-
hand-side by 0.5 primary zone equivalence ratio and
on the right-hand-side by 
1.1 
primary zone
equivalence ratio. Such a plot represents the
emissions trades between NOx and CO that might be
made. If a box is placed around the data for any
particular jet size in the plot, bounded on one side by
the maximum CO, on the top by maximum NOx,
and, on the remaining side and the bottom by the
respective axes, then that box is a qualitative measure
of the total emissions production of the particular
configuration. Data for any other configuration over
the same equivalence ratio range that falls
wholly inside the box, represents a truly lower
emissions configuration.
0.1 
1 
10 
100 
1000
Emission Index of Overall CO, gm/kg
Figure 11: Overall Emissions Assessment for Range
of Jet Sizes
Review of the 
figure reveals several
interesting facts. First, the dome-alone configuration
does 
truly 
represent 
the 
lowest 
emissions
configuration, since it has the smallest box. Second,
the 0.50 in. (12.70 mm) jet does indeed represent
some kind of optimum jet configuration for this
primary zone since its box is smaller than the boxes
for the other jets, i.e. it does not achieve its low NOx
by producing large amounts of CO. Third, the 0.75
in. (19.05 mm) jet is the worst emissions producer,
and this is through its jet NOx generation.
The levels of CO over the equivalence ratio
range in Figure 11 are all at or very close to, the
appropriate equilibrium levels for the test conditions.
For lower equivalence levels outside the range there is
an upwards departure from equilibrium CO as a lean
blowout condition is approached; similarly, at higher
equivalence ratios there is also an upwards departure
from equilibrium CO due to a lack of oxygen.
Combustion efficiencies for the dome alone and for
the 0.5 in. (12.70 mm) jet, for example, are
essentially 100 percent to an overall equivalence ratio
of about 0.8, and then fall off more or less together.
The 
finding 
that 
the 
dome 
alone
configuration, i.e. no traverse air jets whatsoever,
gives the lowest emissions, raises the valid question
as to the need for the separate combustion air jets.
The combustion air jets are needed to reduce
flame length and to enhance lean stability. Figure 12
shows some limited stability data for the dome alone
and for the dome with the 0.50 in. (12.70 mm) jets,
in the form of blowout overall equivalence ratio
against the air loading parameter, ALP. The ALP is
as defined in Reference 5. The blowouts were
conducted at atmospheric pressure, with variation of
dome pressure drop for the dome alone, and liner
pressure drop at fixed dome pressure drop for the with-
jet case. In addition for the dome alone case, two inlet
air temperatures were used - ambient and 500F
(533K). The plot shows that for given ALP the with-
jets case blows out at lower equivalence ratio than
does the dome alone. For the dome alone situation
there were several flame modes observed1. Blowouts
for the range of ALP's in Figure 12 were governed by
lifted and attached flame conditions6; the presence of
the combustion air jets exerts a back-pressure on the
flame that modifies the flame behavior.
Figure 13 presents the dependency of overall
equivaleneexatio at blowout^>njet size-at fixed dome
and liner pressure drops. It can be seen that the 0.50
in. jet size again represents an optimum for this
dome.


--- Page 11 ---

0.5
0.4
£ 
0.3
§
CO
13
_o
15a:
<o
£1
UJ1!
0.2
0.1
-
-
1 1 1 1 i 1 i 1 1 1 1 1 a 1 1 1 i 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
B — 
H
/ 
>• 
Rame
' 
No Rame
P
Flame
a 
*m*
° 1**-^
^"•Vb 
No Rame
— • —— 0.5 in. jets
D 
Dome only (attached flame)
• 
Dome only (lifted flame)
... i .... i .... i .... i .... i ..
-
i
0 
0.05 0.1 0.15 
0.2 0.25 0.3
Air Loading Parameter, ALP (Ibm/sec. ft3, atrn")
Figure 12: Stability Plot for Dome Alone and Dome
with 0.5 in. Jets
0.3
CO
ts
o 0.2
I
§ 0.15
CD
UJ
0 1
to>0.05
I
I
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1
Diameter of Liner Jets (inches)
Figure 13: Blowout Equivalence Ratio as a Function
of Jet Size
Discussion
Initial results, consisting of emissions
measurements and lean blowout data, have been
presented for a number of circular, single hole,
opposed, combustion air jet sizes at a fixed liner
position close to the dome, and at fixed dome and
combustor liner pressure drops that are representative
of engine design values. The absolute levels of
emissions are dependent on the way that the
simulations were conducted, and therefore the present
results ideally should not be used for predictive
purposes by scaling. However, the trends that arc
produced are valid, and will eventually (when
complete) be useful for design purposes.
The series of emissions measurements
gathered over wide ranges of test conditions for the
different geometric configurations investigated, could
form a useful data-set for evaluating the response of
CFD modeling to realistic combustor geometries.
It was established that equivalence ratio was
a suitable and unique parameter with which to
consider the emissions measurements in this
combustor and with the manner in which it was
operated. The data have been analyzed in terms of a
rich dome/lean jet burning behavior. This approach
appeared to account nicely for the effects observed.
The combustor dome behaves as a partially
stirred reactor, and shows significant unmixedness
effects in its NOx characteristic. The partial set of
results demonstrates that the jets play a significant
role in generating the total NOx measured over
equivalence ratio ranges that are typical of many
primary zones. The jet contribution appears to arise
from stoichiometric burning in the jets system. This
stoichiometric jet burning is clearly identifiable for
all but the smallest of the jets (0.125 in. dia.). As a
consequence of the jet contributions to total NOx, the
dome alone configuration emerges as the lowest
producer of NOx and CO emissions. The jets are
needed to shorten flame length, and to enhance lean
blowout stability of the primary zone. Of the jet
systems examined, that for the 0.5 in. (12.70 mm)
diameter jet shows distinct optimum behavior in
terms of minimum NOx emissions and maximum
lean blowout stability.
The results to date indicate the need to use
advanced optical diagnostic techniques to determine
the exact flame structures existing hi the jet systems,
and how these are affected by the flow interactions
between the dome and the jets. Detailed flow
visualization is clearly most desirable. In particular,
quantitative information on recirculation zone mass
flow rates is essential. The parametric variations in
liner pressure drop and combustion air jet axial
10


--- Page 12 ---

position will also be of assistance in this respect. An
explanation for the optimum behavior of the 0.50 in.
(12.70 mm) jet must be obtained.
Although there was no attempt in the this
combustor to achieve a true rich burn/quick
quench/lean bum low emissions design, the present
primary zone does function somewhat in this fashion.
The findings here indicate how difficult it will be in
such low emissions designs to achieve the quick
quench portion and hence, to get a true lean burn.
The limited stability characteristics presented
demonstrate that low emissions characteristics in a
combustor cannot be pursued without regard to the
other design criteria that must be satisfied for
successful practical combustor designs.
Conclusions
1. Most of the NOx generated in the generic primary
zone appears to originate from stoichiometric burning
in the combustion air jet system.
2. Minimum total emissions ate produced when all
of the reactants are introduced through the combustor
dome.
3. Combustion air jets ate necessary to reduce flame
length and confer lean blowout stability.
4. For at present undefined reasons, the 0.50 in.
(12.70 mm) dia. opposed circular jets exhibit a clear
optimum for the dome when the jets are positioned
half a dome height downstream. This optimum is for
minimum Nox, and lean blowout stability.
2. Gogeneni, S., Shouse, D., Frayne, C., Stutrud,
J., and Sturgess, G., "Influence of Combustion Air
Jets on Primary Zone Characteristics for Gas Turbine
Combustors," proc. ISABE 12.th. Intl. Symp. on Air
Breathing Engines, editor F. Billig, Vol. 1,
Melbourne, Australia, Sept. 10-15, 1995, pp. 475-
487.
3. Roffe, G. and Venkataramani, K.S., "Emissions
Measurements 
for Lean 
Premixed 
Propane/Air
Systems at Pressures up to 30 Atmospheres," NASA
Kept CR-159421, 1978.
4. Sturgess, G.J., McKinney, R.G. and Morford,
5.A., "Modifications of Combustor Stoichiometry
for Reduced Nox Emissions from Aircraft Engines,"
Trans. ASME, J.Engrg. Gas Turbines an Power,
Vol. 115, No. 3, 1993, pp. 570-580.
5. Sturgess, GJ. and Shouse, D., "Lean Blowout in
a Generic Gas Turbine Combustor with High Optical
Access," ASME Paper No. 93-GT-332, May 1993, to
appear in ASME Trans. J. Engrg. for Gas Turbines
and Power.
6. 
Hedman, P.O., Sturgess, G.J., Warren, D.L.,
Goss, L.P. and Shouse, D.T., "Observations of
Flame Behavior From a Practical Fuel Injector Using
Gaseous Fuel in a Technology Combustor," Trans.
ASME, /. Engrg. for Gas Turbines and Power, Vol.
117, 
No. 
3, 
July 1995, 
pp. 
441-452.
Acknowledgments
The enthusiasm, motivation, support and
contributions of Dr. W.M. Roquemore are greatly
appreciated. The authors wish to thank Ron Britton,
Mike Burns and Melvin Russell for their help in
operating the test facility and in making the
emissions measurements. This on-going research was
sponsored by the U.S. Air Force, Wright Laboratory,
Aero Propulsion and Power Directorate.
References
1. Sturgess, G.J., Combustor LBO Design Model
Evaluation, Final Report, (Draft) Pratt & Whitney
Doc. No. FR-23400, 1 May, 1995
11
