
--- Page 1 ---

R E V I E W P A P E R
Fuel atomization in gas turbines: A review of novel
technology
Amer Eid Salem Eid Thafnan Alajmi1
| Nor Mariah Adam1 | Abdul Aziz Hairuddin1 |
Luqman Chuah Abdullah2
1Department of Mechanical and
Manufacturing Engineering, Universiti
Putra Malaysia, Seri Kembangan,
Malaysia
2Department of Chemical and
Environmental Engineering, Universiti
Putra Malaysia, Seri Kembangan,
Malaysia
Correspondence
Amer Eid Salem Eid Thafnan Alajmi,
Department of Mechanical and
Manufacturing Engineering, Universiti
Putra Malaysia, Seri Kembangan,
Malaysia.
Email: amerq880@gmail.com
Summary
The atomization of fuel is crucial in the combustion and emission of a gas tur-
bine, and the fuel atomization is continuous without any cycles or strokes.
However, to achieve a desired amount of combustion during this continuous
process, fuel must be added and mixed with the high‐pressure air exiting the
compressor in proper proportions. To make the engine as small and light-
weight as possible is a constraint and requires the fuel injection, mixing, and
combustion to occur within the smallest volume possible. In most cases, this
is inefficient and less practicable. A major drawback is the requirement of high
injection pressure with relatively small increase in flow rate. In recent years,
research was conducted to improve fuel atomization in a gas turbine by using
different novel approaches that were simpler, more adaptable, and efficient to
enhance the atomization. However, most of these studies were in isolation
without any comprehensive literature on recent trends. Therefore, this review
attempts to give an insight on recent development of fuel atomization in a
gas turbine. Particular emphasis was given to air‐, plasma‐, ultrasound‐, and
supercritical fluid–assisted atomization techniques.
KEYWORDS
air‐assisted atomization, combustion, fuel atomization, gas turbines, novel technology, plasma‐
assisted atomization, supercritical fluid–assisted atomization, ultrasound‐assisted atomization
1 |
INTRODUCTION
Gas turbines are internal combustion engines that are
used to generate electricity. A gas turbine consists of an
upstream revolving compressor coupled with a down-
stream turbine and a combustion chamber.1 All gas
turbines generate thrust by providing a change in
momentum to the air that enters and leaves the gas tur-
bine.2-4 The higher the difference in momentum, the
greater the thrust that the gas turbine produces.5
Liquid fuel in the combustor is burnt in large gas tur-
bine engines, and it is usually pressure‐atomized with a
high‐pressure fuel pump.6 It is essential to know here
that due to reduction in engine dimensions, the high‐
pressure fuel pump does not level with the engine in
terms of size or weight; hence, pressure atomization is
considered to be detrimental and damaging in small gas
turbines that are usually applied in cruise missiles, smart
miniature munition systems, business jets, unmanned
aerial vehicles, and a number of other turbine engine
applications.6-8 Simultaneously, small turbine engines
can function appropriately at higher rotation rates that
might approach 100 000 rpm, and this permits the utiliza-
tion of rotary centrifugal atomizers so as to work as the
fuel spray, substituting the high‐pressure fuel pump. In
a way, this technique is beneficial and cost‐effective,
Received: 10 August 2018
Revised: 10 December 2018
Accepted: 20 December 2018
DOI: 10.1002/er.4415
3166
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Int J Energy Res. 2019;43:3166–3181.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/er


--- Page 2 ---

simple to use, and lightweight in terms of getting the liq-
uid fuel atomization required for the combustion process.
The gas turbine requires a combustor for combustion
to occur; hence, the combustor is a vital component of the
gas turbine. Unlike automobiles, gas turbines have a con-
tinuous flame inside the combustor, which is lit for as
long as the engine is running.9 Once ignited, the flame
is maintained by a constant mixture of fuel to the high‐
pressure compressed air from the compressor, by using
a fuel nozzle. The primary purpose of every fuel nozzle
is to atomize the fuel into small droplets to speed up the
mixing process of fuel and air.10 The differences between
various fuel nozzle technologies lie in how the droplets
are exactly produced. Therefore, the droplet size will
affect the fuel atomization effectiveness and efficiency in
a gas turbine.
Specifically, the characteristics of an ideal fuel atom-
izer are listed below.11-15 Ideally, the atomizer would per-
form well over the full variety of engine operating
conditions and would be cheap, lightweight, simple,
robust, and easy to maintain.
These characteristics are including good atomization
for an extensive range and quick response to adjustments
in fuel flow rates, the absence of flow instabilities, low
pumping power requirements, low cost, simple design,
lightweight, high accessibility for servicing, and low
maintenance. Also, the capability of scaling for design
flexibility, little susceptibility to harm throughout manu-
facture; installation; maintenance; and to gum creation
because of heat soakage, design for prevention of carbon
deposition at the nozzle face; and internal passage block-
age by fuel contaminants. More so, uniform fuel distribu-
tion, resistance to oxidation and erosion and to whole
equipment vibration and fatigue, thermal insulation for
extended part life and fuel protection, and long time
between overhauls. Good atomization for an extensive
range of fuel flow rates.
Generally, an efficient combustion has gradually
become essential due to the rapid increase in commercial
gas turbines as well as the consequent rise in atmospheric
pollution, which is mostly realized by most general public
as exhaust smoke.
There is an increase in the utilization of cost‐effective
gas turbine engines because industries are pushing
towards higher specific fuel consumption and lighter
packaging. In addition, this has led to the enhancement
in engine operating pressures and temperatures, along
with major efforts to decrease gas path losses and
enhance component efficiencies. As a result, this trend
will continue to exist, and more research and develop-
ment are required in terms of thermal management of
the hot engine unit, comprising the fuel nozzle, combus-
tor, and turbine. Nozzle thermal management, turndown
ratio ability, and atomization performance while han-
dling and regulating the correct combustor aerodynamics
and low pollutant emissions for the fuel injection system
are considered to be the most significant performance fea-
tures that require optimization. The nozzle wetted‐wall
temperatures can be reduced, and carbonaceous deposit
formation in the fuel delivery passages can be prevented
by
using
multifaceted
and
expensive
heat‐shielded
designs. Optimization of designs by using current compu-
tational methodologies is restricted to competence and its
increase in cost. This increased demand of combustor can
be fulfilled by using important developments in fuel
injection concepts, physical understanding, and computa-
tional methods.
1.1 | The need for novel atomization
methods
Atomization is the fragmentation of bulk liquid, so it gets
into small droplets by using a spray or atomizer.16 Atom-
izers are generally categorized into pressure atomizer,
pressure swirl atomizer, air‐blast atomizer, air‐assist
atomizers, twin‐fluid atomizer, rotary atomizer, ultra-
sonic atomizers, whistle atomizers, and electrostatic
atomizer.17,18 Different types of atomizers will determine
the efficacy of the atomization process, which adversely
affects the combustion efficiency in a gas turbine engine.
The atomization of fuel is important in the combus-
tion and emission of a gas turbine. For this system, the
combustion is continuous operation19; consequently, the
fuel atomization in gas turbine is continuous without
any strokes or cycles. Nevertheless, to accomplishing the
desired amount of combustion during this continuous
process, fuel must be added and mixed with the high‐
pressure air exiting the compressor in proper proportions.
The constraint to design the turbine engine as lightweight
and small as possible will require the different parts of
the engine, such as injection, mixing, and combustion of
the fuel place to be within the smallest volume possible.
This is inefficient and, in most cases, less practicable. Fur-
thermore, in the case of pressure atomizers, a major
drawback is the requirement of high injection pressure
with relatively small increase in the flow rate; for exam-
ple, for simplex nozzle, the flow rate varies as the square
root of the injection pressure differential ΔPF. Therefore,
there is a need for a nonpressurize alternative means of
atomization.
Generally, acceptable atomization improves the com-
plete combustion and mixing in a direct injection engine,
and consequently, it is an important factor in efficiency
and engine emission. In the case of biodiesel, which
exhibits
difficulty
during
a
cold
start
due
to
its
ALAJMI ET AL.
3167
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 3 ---

crystallizing property at low temperatures, the need for
atomization as an option to overcome some of these chal-
lenges cannot be overemphasized. The probability of bio-
diesel to be a renewable fossil fuel standby for gas turbine
operations is currently being researched on due to earlier
reports on some oxides of sulfur (SOx), carbon monoxide
(CO), and oxides of nitrogen (NOx) emission levels. From
the environmental point of view, other fuels like biodiesel
are much preferred to be used in combustion systems.
However, they have yet to be fully optimized for emis-
sions; consequently, the probability of biodiesel to be a
low emission alternative fuel option is still at the begin-
ning and being evaluated. With improved atomization,
gas turbine operations can realize improved emissions
as compared with those that use conventional diesel.20
Most atomization techniques, though with many
merits, have shown inadequacies in fuel atomization in
gas turbines.21-23 This is due to relative increase in
dynamic viscosity and surface tension. The fluid proper-
ties are heavily tied to atomization behaviour, whereby
the increased viscosity and surface tension limit droplet
breakup will lead to larger average droplet sizes, thus
increase residence time and NOx formation.
Although there are other modes of improving emis-
sions, improved fuel injector design and mixing were
shown to reduce NOx, CO, and HC outputs.24-26 Among
the noted efforts to achieve improved atomization is the
use of fuel additive.27,28 Javed et al29 demonstrated that
emissions from a direct injection diesel engine can be
decreased by adding metallic fuel‐borne additives (zinc
oxide). However, the use of additive for atomization
increased hydrocarbon (HC) emission with larger particle
size and also increased smoke opacity as compared with
conventional method.
Other researchers have tried to improve the atomiza-
tion of fuel using different designs of atomizers. Mlkvik
et al30 designed four different types of internal‐mixing
twin‐fluid atomizers and compared their performance
with two well‐known designs, namely, the Y‐jet and
OIG “Gutside in Gas” effervescent atomizers. In their
study, they focused on spray stability, primary breakup,
internal liquid‐gas flow, and droplet size. The results of
their studies showed that depending on the gas‐to‐liquid
ratios, the flow rate was enhanced, leading to improved
combustion. However, this method is far from efficient
because it depends on complex designs and cannot be
used in most engines.
Moreover, any variation in the pressure to produce
the supply liquid or area of the nozzle outlet will result
in the influence of all reported modes of atomization
enhancement, either through pressure burners or spray
heads. Nevertheless, the technique that was previously
mentioned can result in poor liquid atomization at a
low flow rate (under low pressure). It can serve as a cure
where air or steam can also be utilized on medium‐ or
large‐sized turbines so as to facilitate the liquid atomiza-
tion, requiring more complex and expanded apparatus.
Conversely,
if
the
latter
method
was
focused,
an
extremely complicated construction of the nozzle is
needed, which is unmanageable and hard to control. To
overcome the drawbacks of the above prior art, a more
simple, adaptable, and efficient way of enhancing atomi-
zation will become imperative. Attempts were made to
impart novel technologies, such as ultrasonic waves to
liquid material, by injecting the jet through the injection
nozzle under pressure. However, most of these studies
were carried out in isolation with no comprehensive
reports on novel advances approach made for fuel atomi-
zation
in
gas
turbine
operations.
Therefore,
more
research is required in order to develop novel atomization
designs to accommodate and optimize the of gas turbine
performance. Therefore, the main objective of this review
is to give an insight on recent fuel atomization develop-
ments in gas turbines. Therefore, to accomplish this, par-
ticular emphasis is given to air‐assisted atomization,
plasma‐assisted atomization, ultrasound‐assisted atomi-
zation, and supercritical fluid–assisted atomization.
2 |
APPLICATION OF
ATOMIZATION IN GAS TURBINE
OPERATIONS
Rachner et al31 concentrated on the utilization of gas tur-
bine atomization in jet condition. In their review, they
explored the infiltration and atomization of a plain lamp
oil fuel jet in air crossflow and contrasted the trial at test
conditions
that
were
significant
to
lean
premixed
prevapourized burning in gas turbines. Distinctive proce-
dures were connected, incorporating time‐settled shad-
owgraphs, Mie‐dispersing laser light sheets, and phase‐
Doppler‐anemometry; thus, subjective data on jet break-
ing down and also quantitative information with respect
to jet infiltration, fuel situation, and drop size conveyance
were acquired. According to Hashimoto et al,32 the
important combustion features of palm methyl ester
(PME) can serve as substitute fuel for gas turbines. Their
study conducted the chemical equilibrium calculations
and studies of fuel atomizing characteristics by utilizing
a laser diffraction spray analyser. The study observed a
similarity between PME combustion characteristics and
that of diesel fuel. Also, it was directed that the utilization
of PME instead of diesel fuel for gas turbines can result in
the NOx emissions reduction. Lasheras and Hopfinger33
analysed the liquid jet instability and atomization in a
coaxial gas stream. The mentioned procedure included
3168
ALAJMI ET AL.
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 4 ---

periodic stripping of liquid sheets or ligaments, which
then disintegrated into smaller lumps or drops. Models
to forecast the liquid shedding frequency, along with the
global factors of the spray like spray spreading angle
and the liquid core length, were explained in detail. Jiang
et al34 concentrated on jet streams in atomization and
showers of gas turbine. They inspected the physical
displaying of atomization and showers with regard to
computational fluid dynamics, with demonstrated suspi-
cions and confinements examined. Likewise, they talked
about the numerical techniques in cutting‐edge computa-
tional fluid dynamics of atomization and showers, includ-
ing high‐arrange numerical plans. More details are
shown in Table 1.
3 |
AIR‐ASSISTED ATOMIZATION
The air‐supported spray density, ethanol atomization
characterization, and a variety of biodiesels were studied
by Kourmatzis et al.39 They specified that an air‐assisted
spray was treated with phase Doppler anemometry or
laser Doppler anemometry as well as high‐speed micro-
scopic imaging by utilizing different biodiesels: ethanol,
medium length, and long chain length, fatty acid methyl
esters of short as depicted in Figure 1. The droplet size
and momentum decay features of the four fuels were
matched as a task of mass loading, Reynolds number,
and radial position for several downstream settings. It
was recommended by the phase Doppler anemometry
or laser Doppler anemometry findings that the sprig char-
acteristics were very comparable past x/D = 5, depicting
that a greater number of disintegration occurred in the
near exit plane region, with insignificant secondary atom-
ization happening downstream.
The twin‐fluid or two‐phase or pneumatic atomiza-
tion is basically the atomization of a liquid produced
through a compressible fluid, such as gas, steam, or air.
Eventually, the techniques and atomized droplets to pro-
duce finely atomized sprays are required in a number of
industrial procedures. This is the reason for the develop-
ment of new types of atomizer the recent times. To
achieve repeatable results, sophisticated process methods
have enhanced the requirement for a precise and single
definition in regard to the features of a given spray. As
a matter of fact, parameters that describe a given spray
are well defined in Table 2 and design engineers can
use them at any moment.
The influence of atomization gas properties was
analysed by Aftel40 on droplet atomization in an air‐
assisted atomizer. To define the impact of these gases
based on number density, mean droplet size, distributions
in kerosene fuel sprays, velocity, and spray flames,
nitrogen, air, carbon dioxide (CO2), and argon were used
as the atomizing gas in an air‐assisted spray nozzle by
simply utilizing a 2D‐phase Doppler interferometer. The
atomizer with different gases determined the essential
differences in atomization characteristics. In addition,
this determination was done under circumstances of
momentum flux and constant gas mass. The results also
illustrated that the presence of oxygen in the air atomized
spray facilitated in the combustion process due to the fact
that the atomized spay was small and quick in pace drop-
lets, particularly at locations that were close enough to
nozzle exit.
A fuel atomizer (liquid siphon type) facilitated by air
was developed by Watanawanyoo et al10 for a continuous
combustor. Refined palm oil and automotive diesel oil
that were used as fuels for the atomization scheme in
the experiment were used. Likewise, the atomizer was
designed by keeping in view the air flow so that the air
could flow over the small nozzle. Moreover, stainless steel
was used for manufacturing a combustor chamber so as
to prevent oxidation at high combustion temperature.
As for the outcomes, practical combustion performance
by using refined palm oil as a fuel with ultralow CO
and HC, emissions were less than 206 and 7 ppm, respec-
tively. Table 3 demonstrates the characteristics of the air‐
assisted atomization.
According to previous studies, the potential feasibility
of utilizing the air‐assisted atomization was highlighted
in operating gas turbines. This method was shown to be
more superior to the conventional methods. The air‐
assisted atomization was found to improve droplet size
and momentum decay to produce finely atomized sprays.
This improvement resulted in the droplet size to range
from 17 to 200 μm by using a twin‐fluid atomizer.
4 |
PLASMA‐ASSISTED
ATOMIZATION
Worldwide,
many
initiatives
were
taken
with
the
intention of enhancing the combustion procedures of
fossil fuels in heat engines and propulsion systems. If
the trending attitudes are focused in this regard, several
electrical discharges and plasma were employed in
research
to
accelerate
and
enhance
ignition
and
combustion processes.37 Matveev et al44 examined the
plasma fuel nozzle (PFN) concept and stated that it is
the most potential tool to understand plasma‐assisted
combustion
that
occurs
in
different
heat
engines
(Figure 2). The outcomes of plasma source choice and
optimization, fuel atomizer options deliberation and
comparison, and impact on the combustion process
parameters were stated. The aforementioned conclusions
ALAJMI ET AL.
3169
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 5 ---

TABLE 1
Different applications of atomization in gas turbine operations
Type
Atomization Conditions
Measurement Techniques
Fuel Type
Advantages
Disadvantages
Reference
Plain liquid
fuel jet
Air velocity: 100 and 75 m/s,
Air pressure: 6 and 9 bar,
Nozzle diameter: 0.45 mm,
and
Liquid‐to‐air momentum flux
ratio: 2 and 18
Mie‐scattering laser light
sheet, time‐resolved
shadowgraphs, acceleration
wave modes, and phase‐
Doppler‐anemometry
Kerosene fuel
The atomization computing
time in this type is 1 min on
a usual 400‐MHz PC.
It is not applicable for coaxial
injection or injection with
very high liquid delivery or
injection into still air
pressure.
Rachner et al31
Liquid jet in
gas stream
Dynamic pressure: 180 lb/ft2
Capillary and
—
This type provides high
atomization gas velocity
It is complex technique
Adelberg35
Liquid jets
Velocity: 3.5 to 11 m/s
Nozzle diameter: 1.4 mm
Nozzle length: 150 mm
All experiments were
conducted under
atmospheric pressure.
Liquid sheet flow test
—
This type predicted the
formation conditions and
shape of an upwash through
theoretical analysis.
More studies ought to conduct
in order to provide
experimental results.
Inamura36
Gas turbine
The temperatures of palm
methyl ester fuel is 51.85°C.
The temperatures of diesel
fuel is 29.85°C.
Kinematic viscosity is
3.29 mm2/s.
The measurement plane of the
LDSA is 25 mm below the
nozzle.
The atomizing nozzle is
0.4 mm.
Swirl chamber is 1.37 mm.
The atomizer constant is 0.33.
Fuel atomizing pressure is
0.69 MPa.
Excess air ratio: 2.53
Fuel flow rate is 1.16 g/s for
PME fuel.
Fuel flow rate is 1.13 g/s for
diesel fuel.
Laser diffraction spray
analyser
Palm methyl
ester and
diesel fuel
The equilibrium calculations
of the atomizing
characteristics found better
results by utilization palm
methyl ester as an
alternative fuel as compared
with diesel fuel in operation
gas turbines.
Many parameters and
considerations have to be set
for operating this technique
Hashimoto et al32
Turbulent
liquid jet
Liquid to gas density ratio: 10
Momentum flux ratio 6.6,
Nozzle diameter: 1.3 mm
Jet velocity: 97.84 m/s
Refined level set grid method
Gaseous fuel
Provide significant results of
atomization drop size and
velocity distributions in
operating gas turbines
It is a highly complex process
Herrmann37
(Continues)
3170
ALAJMI ET AL.
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 6 ---

illustrated that PFN was the most progressive and useful
solution for lean burn and low Btu fuel combustors, STIG
cycle turbines, liquid and gaseous feedstock gasification
unit, and flexi‐fuel systems (Figure 3).
FIGURE 1
Diagram of phase Doppler anemometry or laser
Doppler anemometry and high‐speed microscopic imaging system
experimental measurement techniques, where E is the emitter and
D is the detector of the phase Doppler anemometry or laser Doppler
anemometry system (the two techniques were not conducted
concurrently). Source: Kourmatzis et al39 [Colour figure can be
viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
TABLE 2
The parameters of spray
Arithmetic Mean
Diameter AMD (D10)
AMD measured the total
number diameters of the
drops in the sample spray.
Volume mean diameter
VMD (D30)
VMD is the drop diameter, which has
the mean arithmetic from the total
number of drops in sample spray.
Sauter mean diameter
SMD (D32)
SMD is the drop diameter, which has
volume/surface ratio arithmetic mean
from the total number of the drops in
the sample spray.
TABLE 1
(Continued)
Type
Atomization Conditions
Measurement Techniques
Fuel Type
Advantages
Disadvantages
Reference
Turbulent jet
The annular flow with a 150‐
mm diameter
A short tapered contour
nozzle of 10‐mm inner
diameter
The fuel was a mixture of
hydrogen with nitrogen
with a volumetric ratio
of 3.5.
Flow velocities for the
fuel is 3.55 m/s.
Flow velocities for the air
jets is 37.9 cm/s.
Frequency of 14.8 Hz
Two‐phase reacting flows and
laser sheet
Mixture
hydrogen
with
nitrogen
fuel
Provided better predictions
from the simulations
Improved the findings of
experimental and
theoretical
Required to define many
parameters in order to apply
this technique
Grisch et al38
Abbreviation: LDSA, laser diffraction spray analyser.
ALAJMI ET AL.
3171
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 7 ---

TABLE 3
The characteristics of air assist atomization
Atomizer
Type
Gas Type
Atomization
Conditions
Measurement
Techniques
Significant Results
Reference
Multiple stage
atomizer
Ethanol and range of
biodiesels (medium and
long chain length, fatty
acid methyl esters of short)
Density (kg/m3) 877 to 789,
Viscosity (Pas) 0.00199 to 0.0013,
Surface tension (N/m) 0.025 to
0.024
PDA/LDA and high‐speed
microscopic imaging
Droplet size characteristics as well
as momentum decay produce
similar results of three biodiesels
and ethanol past x/D = 5.
Kourmatzis et al39
Coaxial gas
stream
Hydrogen gas
Velocity: 0.42 m/s,
Weber number: 38, 58, 118,
Density ratio; 1 to 10–3
Reynolds‐Weber number
parameter space
The current tests of radial variation
for droplet size found that more
swirl can affect significantly on
the drop size at the periphery of
the spray, however, it reduces the
mean drop size at the centre.
Lasheras and Hopfinger33
Twin‐fluid
atomizer
—
Air flow rate: 0.2 to 2.7,
Air pressure: 68.9 to 689 kPa,
Air mass flow rate: 0.0004 kg/s to
0.0086 kg/s.
Shadowgraph technique
Characteristics of near nozzle
flow.
Various sizes ranging from 17–
200 μm where found from a twin‐
fluid atomizer for droplet size.
Watanawanyoo et al10
Solid cone sprays
and flat sprays
Crude glycerine,
Natural gas,
Hydrogen
Pressure: 22 mbar,
Flow rate: 40 m3/h,
Dynamic viscosity (N s/m2) at
80°C 22.2.
Scanning electron microscope
X‐ray detector (energy‐
dispersive X‐ray
spectrometer)
The atomizing air can make the
spray fineness of the two
atomizers increases to glycerine
mass ratio up to 1.
Queirós et al41
Twin‐fluid
Ethanol
Liquid orifice areas: 0.40, 1.82
and 5.07,
Liquid flow rates (cc/s)
equivalent to 30‐ and 50‐kW
energy input,
Viscosity: 1.074 cP,
Density: 789 kg/m3.
The camera resolution and
focus determined the
velocities and droplet size
measurements.
Bio‐oil/ethanol mixtures containing
can reach up to 40% bio‐oil if it
has low water content (12.60%).
Lujaji et al42
Twin fluid
Air diameter: 15 mm,
Droplets with Sauter mean
diameter in the 15‐ to 85‐μm
range,
The dynamic range: 2 to 800 μm.
Malvern particle size analyser
include photo optic detector
and laser source
Spray characteristics separated from
each other through
simultaneously altering the
supply pressure of the atomizing
air as well as the liquid.
Lal et al43
Abbreviation: PDA/LDA, phase Doppler anemometry or laser Doppler anemometry.
3172
ALAJMI ET AL.
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 8 ---

The on‐board plasma‐assisted conversion of heavy
HCs in the form of synthesis gas was studied by Gallagher
et al.45 They employed n‐tetradecane (C14H30) fuel,
which was improved with plasma under partial oxidation
circumstances in the absence of metal catalysts and steam.
Hydrogen yield and energy conversion efficiency were the
two factors used to compare the performance of all
involved components. It was evident from the results that
gliding arc systems had the potential to reform heavy HC
fuels with high conversion efficiency. The gliding arcs
are significant tools of technology for on‐board vehicular
reforming systems that need more developments.
A new life was offered to the PFN concept by the cur-
rent developments in microelectronics and growth of
nonthermal plasma torch with non–steady‐state gas dis-
charge.46 Nonthermal plasma has a number of benefits
like higher stability, longer lifetime, lower arc tempera-
ture, and lower averaged power consumption owing to
the nature of the non–steady‐state discharge, chances of
direct fuel injection into the arc chamber, wider opera-
tion pressure, and flow range and unique portable design.
These benefits are considered responsible for the new
efforts made in terms of PFN development for power gen-
eration and propulsion. Similarly, a small‐scale modelling
of the suspension plasma spraying mechanism was
explained by Girard et al.47 The heat transfer that
occurred between a droplet of pure water and an Ar/H2
plasma jet was taken into account and investigated. In
the flow, low settling time of droplet before affecting the
substrate resulted in consideration of radiation as the
minor mechanism instead of the major one, whereas con-
vection and conduction were developed further as the
droplet lost its shape.
Leblanc et al48 investigated the transmission electron
microscopy
of
lithiation
of
spherical
silicon
(Si)
nanopowder produced by induced plasma atomization.
The properties of nanopowder were characterized by
physical and electrochemical methods. The result found
that the primary particles were crystalline with spherical
shape, and the diameter measurement ranged from 50
to 200 nm (Figure 4A). Figure 4B shows the transmission
electron microscopy micrograph of the crystalline lattice
FIGURE 2
Direct fuel feeding into the arc chamber (A) fuel was
fed through the 0.3‐mm orifice, and (B) fuel was fed through the
Hago 609‐11 standard nozzle. Source: Matveev et al44 [Colour figure
can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 3
Plasma
fuel
nozzle
designs
with
conventional
centrifugal Hago atomizer (A) and porous element (B). Source:
Matveev et al44 [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.
com]
ALAJMI ET AL.
3173
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 9 ---

in the Si nanoparticles, which have a contamination‐free
atomic surface. In addition, Figure 4C demonstrates the
X‐ray diffraction diffractogram of the nanopowder, along
with the clear identification of Si with the diamond cubic
lattice without any impurity phase. Moreover, Figure 4D
shows the particle size distribution and validates that the
c‐Si primary particles formed by plasma procedure have
a particle size between 50 and 200 nm with a few greater
agglomerates. Furthermore, the Si nanopowder demon-
strated a high gravimetric capacity (4900 mAh/g) at first
discharge and about 12% irreversible loss of lithium.
On the basis of literature review, plasma‐assisted
atomization was found to be very important in gas tur-
bines. This technique was superior over conventional
techniques in terms of having a controlled injection of
much finer particles than in the conventional thermal
spraying. Therefore, plasma‐assisted atomization allows
to achieve thin and finely droplet in fuels between a few
tens of micrometres and a few hundreds of micrometres.
As a result, operating gas turbines with plasma atomiza-
tion have improved in combustion efficiency as compared
with those of conventional thermal spraying.
5 |
ULTRASOUND‐ASSISTED
ATOMIZATION
In a number of industrial procedures like spray drying,
film coating, preparation of fine powders, making emul-
sion spray cooling, incineration and liquid fuel, and waste
combustion. Liquid atomization is of significant impor-
tance.49 Most of these applications require droplets of
required size distribution. If several kinds of atomization
processes were focused, many of such processes would
have been practiced, which can be categorized by keeping
in view the mode of energy transfer to reach the liquid
sheet surface. Mechanical energy is utilized by mechani-
cal or conventional atomization processes, for instance,
two‐fluid atomization, pressure atomization, and spin-
ning disk atomization, so as to put pressure on the liquid
sheet and enhance its kinetic energy for potential break-
down in the form of droplets. If the energy required by
such disintegration processes was compared with the
actual energy required in terms of theoretical framework,
the amount or value in the processes will be higher. In
these processes, there is no control on the final droplet
FIGURE 4
(A) Scanning electron microscope micrograph, (B) transmission electron microscopy micrograph, (C) X‐ray diffraction
diffractogram, and (D) particle size distribution of the silicon nanopowder. Source: Leblanc et al48
3174
ALAJMI ET AL.
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 10 ---

size and the velocity with which the droplet was expelled.
Therefore, newer processes must be developed so that a
desired droplet size distribution is achieved with effi-
ciency. Ultrasonic irradiation for inducing atomization
is one of the major techniques to get a narrow droplet size
distribution. This is different from the conventional atom-
ization in a way that it can be more energy efficient and
only requires electrical energy to be transferred to a pie-
zoelectric vibrating disk. The supplied electric energy
results in mechanical vibrations and is used for the gener-
ation of droplets. In addition, the ejection of fine droplets
from a liquid film made on an ultrasonically vibrating
surface is known as ultrasonic atomization. The following
two hypotheses fully explain the ejection of the droplets
from a vibrating surface:
• Capillary wave hypothesis: This hypothesis can be
visually observed, and it takes into account the crea-
tion of capillary waves made up of crests and troughs
on the vibrating surface.
• Cavitation hypothesis: This hypothesis signifies that
cavitation handles and regulates the droplet forma-
tion. Cavitation is a process in which cavity formation
takes place in the liquid film on the vibrating surface
of
an
atomizer.
Bubbles
are
formed
and
then
disintegrated, which leads to the direct ejection of
the droplets, and thus, the velocity of ejection will be
considerably higher, owing to the kinetic energy.
To understand the impact of several equipment
parameters, such as operating frequency, power dissipa-
tion, and the operating parameters like the flow rate
and liquid features on the droplet size distribution,
Ramisetty et al49 investigated the measurements of drop-
let size distribution in an ultrasonic atomizer by utilizing
the photographic analysis. By employing photographic
analysis, based on the capture of the growth of instability
and sudden ejection of droplets with high velocity, mech-
anistic information in regard to the atomization phenom-
ena was achieved.
• It was evident from the conclusion of the study that
an increase in the frequency of atomizer resulted in
the decrease of droplet size.
• An increase in the intensity of ultrasound also caused
the droplet size distribution to change from a narrow
to wider range.
• An increase in the fluid viscosity decreases the drop
size.
The findings made the entire process of operating
parameters selection for getting an anticipated droplet size
distribution by utilizing ultrasonic atomization. Also, this
can be helpful to determine the controlling mechanisms
for the creation of droplet. An empirical relationship was
also formed on the basis of the liquid and equipment oper-
ating features for the droplet size prediction.
A relationship determined on the basis of dimension-
less numbers like the Weber number and the Ohnesorge
number was suggested by Rajan and Pandit50 to explain
the influence of different physicochemical characteristics
like the surface tension, viscosity, and density of the liq-
uid on the concluding droplet size. Weber number is basi-
cally the ratio between the aerodynamic forces and the
surface tension forces, while Ohnesorge number is the
ratio between the internal liquid viscosity to surface force
and vibrational amplitude. The dimensionless numbers
were also altered by introducing the ultrasonic vibra-
tional conditional variables to explain the influence of
ultrasound‐induced cavitation.
If we focus on the structure of an ultrasonic atomizer,
it has a vibrating plate with a concentric hole so as to
facilitate the spread of the introduced liquid (Figure 5).
This vibrating plate is linked to the transducer, which
gets energy from an electric generator. This generator
varies the amount of power offered to the atomizer tip
by changing and adjusting the percentage amplitude of
the output power from the generator. A peristaltic pump
is utilized to deliver the liquid on the atomizer tip
through the concentric hole. The droplet size and velocity
of ultrasonically atomized liquid were measured by using
the imaging technique.
Ultrasonic atomizers function on a very refined pro-
cess, which has the following two steps:
• In the first step, tiny water jets are inserted into a
high‐speed air flow, which further offers a first disin-
tegration and atomization of the fluid.
• If we focus on the second step, it further has two func-
tions in the form of two phase flow. In this step, the
air entering liquid droplets experiences a field of
sound waves, which further results in disintegration
and a lower droplet measurement. This is experienced
through the impact between the two phase flow and a
resonator placed in front of the nozzle orifice.
The only way to produce ultrasonic atomizers is
through high‐precision machining operations. This offers
amazing benefits, such as the droplets in the atomized jet
demonstrate low values for the SMD along with a narrow
range of individual droplet diameter. It can be stated that
the drops are quite small and there existed a little differ-
ence between the smallest and biggest droplet diameters.
This showed that the spray was made up of very small
and similar in size droplets, which were significant fac-
tors that were realized in all evaporative processes, for
ALAJMI ET AL.
3175
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 11 ---

example, air humidification. The obvious variations in
local air pressure were linked with the sound waves that
occurred all around the resonator and remove the threat
of dust and foreign particles accumulation in the locality
of the nozzle orifice, therefore eliminating any decay in
the atomizer performance. Such a system is dependable,
and almost no maintenance is needed in such a case.51
Tanyerİ52 also investigated ultrasound‐assisted fuel
atomization for internal combustion engine. The ultra-
sonic sound generation by using field and properties,
especially by cavitation effect on liquids, was used. Ultra-
sonic
atomization
method was
compared
with
the
existing experimental injector atomization data. Scaled
droplets occurred as a result of atomization. Image pro-
cessing method was used to determine the droplet size.
The study results showed that ultrasound‐assisted atomi-
zation enhanced the entire atomization process as com-
pared with the conventional method.
In case of industrial use, ultrasonic atomizers are
known to be the finest sprays as they come with a narrow
angle full cone jet. These are the best, in a way, as the
mixing of water and air is avoided in a confined volume
before the particles leave the nozzle, and thus, their feed
pressures can be regulated independently without affect-
ing each other. Such a setting permits a wide regulation
range on the liquid volume and facilitates the flow of
desired operating circumstances.53 Figure 6 shows an
atomizing head gathered onto one A‐type adapter, while
the B1 AISI 303 stainless steel is used for making material
atomizing heads and is also used to make the adapter.
According to previous studies, ultrasonic‐assisted
atomization showed the feasibility of the application in
gas turbines. This technique produces the finest atomized
liquid sprays as a full cone spray with a narrow spray
angle. Ultrasonic‐assisted atomization produced better
results compared with the other atomization methods
and led to satisfactory operating conditions along a very
wide range of fluid capacities.
6 |
SUPERCRITICAL FLUID–
ASSISTED ATOMIZATION
At supercritical conditions fluid (SCF) can take benefit of
certain
properties
of
gases:
a
constant
adaptable
solvent/selectivity acquired varying pressure and temper-
ature; diffusivities of two orders of magnitude larger, as
compared with those of liquids, are also available. Resul-
tantly, SCF can exhibit quick mass transfer and perfor-
mances. It is important to note here that this result
cannot be obtained from conventional solvents. CO2 is
mostly used if we focus on all potential SCF. Here are
the top reasons for this54:
FIGURE 5
(A) Schematic representation of the experimental
setup (B) a representative image of the conical pattern of the
atomized droplets. Source: Ramisetty et al49 [Colour figure can be
viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 6
Atomizing head assembled onto one A‐type adapt
[Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
3176
ALAJMI ET AL.
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 12 ---

• It functions as a lipophilic solvent.
• It is nontoxic, nonflammable, and quite cost‐effective.
• Its critical parameters are freely accessible on the
industrial scale (Tc = 37.1°C; pc = 73.8 bar).
The most studied supercritical‐based micronization
techniques include (1) rapid expansion of supercritical
solutions,55,56 (2) particle generation from gas saturated
solutions,57 (3) supercritical antisolvent precipitation,58
and (4) supercritical CO2–assisted atomization.59
Therefore, in recent times, SCF is being utilized to
develop enhanced and adaptable micronization pro-
cesses. Supercritical dissolved‐gas atomization is basically
an atomization process in which CO2 at temperature and
pressure ranging above its critical point is utilized as the
atomizing gas. Caputo et al60 analysed the spray charac-
teristics while keeping in view the droplet size and distri-
bution by using a laser diffraction method that is based
on the Malvern apparatus (Figure 7). The droplet size is
the gas‐to‐liquid mass ratio, which is the major character-
istic affected by the injection pressure in the range of 7.4
to 13 MPa, has a negligible effect. The droplet mean
diameter changes from about 8.0 to 2.0 μm when the
value of gas‐to‐liquid mass ratio ranges from 0.5 to 3; very
thin droplet size distributions are also created. The mean
droplet diameter is majorly affected by the unexpected
release of the gas dissolved in the liquid if the viewpoint
of atomization mechanism is taken into account. It is
approved from the experimental data that dissolved gas
atomization permits the production of micrometric drop-
lets that can result into precipitates with measured sizes
and distributions that are beneficial in several fine‐
particle production methods.
The following four different supercritical gas‐assisted
atomizer systems were investigated by Gunther et al,61
and they further compared the atomization performance
for water and polymer solution feeds: external mixing,
effervescent atomization, superheated atomization, and
CO2‐assisted atomization. An external mixing twin‐fluid
atomizer was used as standard atomization configuration
and is compared with three rather unusual atomization
techniques. An effervescent atomizer is basically utilized
to represent internal mixing atomization system, and it
can function at lower air‐to‐liquid ratio as compared with
the conventional gas atomizers. To improve the atomiza-
tion of liquids by a phase change in the developing spray,
superheated atomization is an advanced technique. CO2‐
assisted atomization follows the same path by releasing
a liquid fully filled with CO2 into a lower pressure setting.
The model fluid water was broken down, and more com-
plex polymer solution with higher viscosities was evalu-
ated
with
the
help
of
atomization
configurations.
Resulting spray configurations and drop size distributions
were also matched and compared. The following were
research results:
• The droplet sizes formed with CO2‐assisted spraying
were larger due to a freezing effect.
• The droplet size distributions of the sprays produced
with external, effervescent, or superheated spraying
depict that smaller droplet when applied atomization
processes in ambient conditions can be achieved.
• Conversely, for higher liquid viscosity, the droplet
sizes produced with external and effervescent atomi-
zation increased, whereas the droplet sizes measured
for superheated atomization remained more or less
the same. Additionally, more amounts can be received
by using the latter methodology.
Although this novel atomization approach was applied
in different gases and compounds, it was not fully applied
in gas turbines. In addition, supercritical method of atom-
ization has been shown to produce well‐atomized sprays
with only a small amount of aerating gas at relatively
low injection pressure. Despite the advantages associated
with the application of supercritical fluid technique in
atomization, there is little or no report on its application
in atomizing fuel during gas turbine operations. Therefore,
this gap is a baseline for future studies with interest in the
use of novel techniques to atomize fuels in gas turbines.
7 |
CHALLENGES AND FUTURE
DIRECTION
All studies reviewed in the literature support the notion
that fuel atomization techniques in gas turbines can be
used to enhance more combustion. These techniques
increase the fuel combustion efficiency and then decrease
the smoke inside the chambers, enhancing the turbine
FIGURE 7
Typical spray during droplet analysis by laser
diffraction with a laser beam that intersects the spray 7.5‐cm
downstream of the exit orifice. Source: Caputo et al60 [Colour figure
can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
ALAJMI ET AL.
3177
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 13 ---

TABLE 4
Comparison of atomization techniques
Key Characteristics/
Requirements to Achieve
High Efficiency
Advantages
Disadvantages
Limitations
Other
Aspect
Air‐assisted
atomization
The optimization of the droplets
resulted from this method
depends on the atomized
sprays.
✓Low volume
✓High pressure
✓Provide good atomization of fuels
✓Create high particle velocity
✓Produce fine droplet
✓Utilizes more
compressed air for the
atomization process
✓High‐cost pressure
pumps
✓The air should be filtered at system
inlet due to the narrow inside passages.
✓Air‐assisted atomization possible to
obtain jets with limited spray angles
due to the high speed of the spray.
✓The efficiency can be
reached up to 65%.
✓Spray pattern often
present problems.
✓Wide range of atomized
droplet distribution in
spray pattern.
✓Droplet size ranging from
17 to 200 μm
Plasma‐
assisted
atomization
The optimization of this
technique depends on the
electrical discharges on
complicated chemical and
kinetic processes within the
combustors.
✓Produce high temperature, which
results in high atomization
efficiency
✓Less chemical interference
✓Atomization in the inter (argon)
atmosphere
It is complicated
Having controllable and repeatable spray
flow for a wide range of operating
conditions and various particle
concentrations of spray systems
✓The droplet size ranges
from 1 to 200 μm.
✓Can approach
temperature up to
9726.85°C
Ultrasonic‐
assisted
atomization
For optimum atomization,
factors such as viscosity,
miscibility, and solid content
should be considered. For
example, the viscosity should
be under 500 cps and the solid
concentration kept below 30%
✓Produce very fine sprays
✓Low‐velocity spray
✓Smaller drop sizes, which can be
accurately controlled
✓More uniform size distribution
✓High sphericity of droplet
✓Prevent dust and lime particles
from building up at the orifice
and impairing atomizer
performance.
The sound waves generate a
typical noise
Noise restricts their use to such systems
where personnel is not exposed to noise
levels exceeding the limit values
specified by local safety regulations
✓The vibrations with a
frequency in excess of
20 kHz.
✓Droplet sizes are ranging
from 1 to 100 μm.
Supercritical
fluid–
assisted
atomization
The optimum of the SCF method
depends on the optimum
values set of temperature and
pressure.
✓Speed
✓Selectivity
✓Environmental improvement
✓Reduced product contamination
High cost due to the high
pressures needed
CO2 itself is non‐polar, and limited
dissolving power, so cannot always be
used as a solvent on its own,
particularly for polar solutes
The droplet sizes are
arranging from 2.0 to
8.0 μm.
Abbreviation: SCF, supercritical conditions fluid.
3178
ALAJMI ET AL.
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 14 ---

efficiency. However, there are several limitations on the
wide acceptance and commercialization of fuel atomiza-
tion techniques in gas turbines, for example, air‐assisted
atomization. One of the challenges included the have
proper filtration at system inlet and obtain jets with lim-
ited spray angles. These challenges happened because of
the narrow internal passages and the high‐speed spray.
Therefore, there is a need to identify suitable approaches
to overcome these challenges. One of the ways that can
be applied to overcome is to design and have multiple ori-
fice air nozzles. Sound waves play a very important role
by using ultrasound‐assisted atomization technique in
gas turbines. This is important because the sound waves
will identify the required droplet size. In addition, the
principle of ultrasound‐assisted atomization operation
demands sound waves to be produced and the conse-
quent operational noise restricts their use to such systems
where personnel is not exposed to noise levels exceeding
the limit values specified by local safety regulations. Al‐
Jumaily and Meshkinzar62 stated that the issues lying
behind ultrasound generation in gases are attributed to
low specific acoustic impedance and high absorption of
the medium. Consequently, this limitation is overcome
by having good impedance matching between the trans-
ducer and gas medium, large amplitudes of vibration,
and highly directional radiation were needed.
Another major challenge for fuel atomization tech-
niques in gas turbines is associated with plasma method.
In this technique, the spray systems are highly concerned
to have a controllable and repeatable spray flow for a
wide range of operating conditions and various particle
concentrations. However, this challenge can be overcome
by creating innovative designs for the plasma atomiza-
tion in the gas turbines. For this, the spray atomization
can be improved by having a coannular flow inside the
discharge passage.
More so, the process of CO2 in the supercritical
method is another challenge for atomization techniques.
CO2 itself is a nonpolar and has limited dissolving power,
so it cannot be used as always a solvent on its own, par-
ticularly for polar solutes. This can affect the efficiency
of using this technique in gas turbines. Therefore, to over-
come this limitation, it is feasible to study and use
another solvent than CO2, which can be used as a solvent
on its own. Therefore, more study in this regard is
required. The overall comparisons of four major tech-
niques are summarized in Table 4.
8 |
CONCLUSION
The main goal of the current paper is to review and sum-
marize the application of a novel technology in fuel
atomization. With respect to gas turbines, the four major
categories investigated were the (1) air‐assisted, (2)
plasma‐assisted, (3) ultrasonic‐assisted, and (4) supercrit-
ical fluid–assisted. This study found that the different
novel techniques discussed have potentials in effective
fuel atomization.
The scientific literatures reviewed have shown that
the application of atomization techniques depend on the
optimization results, such as the droplet size. If all tech-
niques were taken into account, apart from the equip-
ment
operating
parameters,
droplet
size
was
also
thought to be dependent on the liquid phase physico-
chemical properties like surface tension and viscosity or
on the rheological behaviour. In addition, the droplet size
distribution was reliant on the flow rate of the liquid, and
it is important to note here that the distribution increases
as the liquid flow rate increases and two peaks were
recorded linked to the formation of secondary droplets.
The air‐assisted atomization produced droplet size that
ranged between 17 and 200 μm, and the plasma‐assisted
atomization had produced droplet size of 1 to 200 μm.
Meanwhile, the droplet size produced ultrasound‐assisted
atomization was from 1 to 100 μm and the droplet size
produced by supercritical fluid–assisted atomization was
from 2 to 8 μm. Therefore, plasma‐ and ultrasound‐
assisted techniques were found to be the best as com-
pared with the others due to their production of the finest
droplet size. In terms of cost in adopting these technolo-
gies, the ultrasound‐assisted and supercritical fluid–
assisted techniques were the least expensive to set up
and easy to adapt as compared with other techniques
(air‐ and plasma‐assisted techniques).
In conclusion, this review suggests that the desired
droplet size distribution with the required mean size
can be attained if the equipment operating characteristics
(power dissipation, frequency, and flow rate) was fully
controlled along with the liquid physicochemical posses-
sions (viscosity, sort of the liquid, and surface tension).
Although they are generally limited by (1) the proper fil-
tration at system inlet and obtained jets with limited
spray angles, (2) noise, (3) controllable and repeatable
spray flow for a wide range of operating conditions and
various particle concentrations, and (4) the limitation of
CO2 cannot be used always as a solvent on its own.
Therefore, more studies should focus on enhancing their
acceptability and efficiency.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors thank the Department of Mechanical and
Manufacturing Engineering UPM for the facility provided
during this study.
ALAJMI ET AL.
3179
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 15 ---

ORCID
Amer Eid Salem Eid Thafnan Alajmi
https://orcid.org/
0000-0002-7401-2552
REFERENCES
1. Máša V, Bobák P, Vondra M. Potential of gas microturbines
for
integration
in
commercial
laundries.
Oper
Res.
2016;17(3):849‐866.
2. Langston L, Opdyke G, Dykewood E. Introduction to gas tur-
bines for non‐engineers. Glob Gas Turbine News. 1997;37(2):9.
3. Badeer GH. GE aeroderivative gas turbines—design and operat-
ing features. GE Power Syst. 2000;GER‐3695E:1‐20.
4. Habib Z, Parthasarathy R, Gollahalli S. Performance and emis-
sion characteristics of biofuel in a small‐scale gas turbine
engine. Appl Energy. 2010;87(5):1701‐1709.
5. Tanbay T, Durmayaz A. Exergy‐based ecological optimisation of
a turbofan engine. Int J Exergy. 2015;16(3):358‐381.
6. Dahm WJA, Patel PR, Lerg BH. Visualization and fundamental
analysis of liquid atomization by fuel slingers in small gas tur-
bine engines. AIAAFluid Dyn Conf. 2002;0:2002‐3183.
7. Kulshreshtha DB, Dikshit S, Channiwala SA. Experimental
investigations of air assisted pressure swirl atomizer. Indian J
Sci Technol. 2011;4(2):126‐130.
8. Durdina L, Jedelsky J, Jicha M. PIV investigation of a pressure‐
swirl atomizer spray. Eng Mech. 2013;20(6):459‐469.
9. Domen S, Gotoda H, Kuriyama T, Okuno Y, Tachibana S. Detec-
tion and prevention of blowout in a lean premixed gas‐turbine
model combustor using the concept of dynamical system theory.
Proc Combust Inst the Combustion Institute. 2015;35(3):3245‐3253.
10. Watanawanyoo P, Chaitep S, Hirahara H. Development of an air
assisted fuel atomizer (liquid siphon type) for a continuous com-
bustor. Am J Appl Sci. 2009;6(3):380‐386.
11. Lefebvre a H, Wang XF, C a M. Spray characteristics of aerated‐
liquid pressure atomizers. J Propuls Power. 1988;4(4):293‐298.
12. Lee CS, Park SW. An experimental and numerical study on fuel
atomization characteristics of high‐pressure diesel injection
sprays. Fuel. 2002;81(18):2417‐2423.
13. Kalam MA, Masjuki HH. Emissions and deposit characteristics
of a small diesel engine when operated on preheated crude palm
oil. Biomass Bioenergy. 2004;27(3):289‐297.
14. Suh HK, Lee CS. Effect of cavitation in nozzle orifice on the die-
sel fuel atomization characteristics. Int J Heat Fluid Flow.
2008;29(4):1001‐1009.
15. Park SH, Suh HK, Lee CS. Nozzle flow and atomization charac-
teristics of ethanol blended biodiesel fuel. Renew Energy Elsevier
Ltd. 2010;35(1):144‐150.
16. Qian L, Lin J, Xiong H. A fitting formula for predicting droplet
mean diameter for various liquid in effervescent atomization
spray. J Therm Spray Technol Springer. 2010;19(3):586‐601.
17. Ma R, Dong B, Yu Z, Zhang T, Wang Y, Li W. An experimental
study on the spray characteristics of the air‐blast atomizer. Appl
Therm Eng. 2014;88:149‐156.
18. Gemci T, Chigier N. Production, handling and characterization of
particulate materials. In: Merkus HG, Meesters GMH, eds. Atomiza-
tion, Spraying, and Nebulization; Springer: Germany 2016:257‐289.
19. Chong CT, Hochgreb S. Flame structure, spectroscopy and
emissions quantification of rapeseed biodiesel under model
gas
turbine
conditions.
Appl
Energy
Elsevier
Ltd.
2017;185:1383‐1392.
20. Senda J, Wada Y, Kawano D, Fujimoto H. Improvement of com-
bustion and emissions in diesel engines by means of enhanced
mixture formation based on flash boiling of mixed fuel. Int J
Engine Res. 2008;9(1):15‐27.
21. Ferreira RW., Guerra DRS, Nogueira MFM, Lacava P. Experi-
mental evaluation
of gas turbine
emissions fuelled with
biodiesel and biodiesel‐diesel blends. 8th International Confer-
ence on Heat Transfer, FluidMechanics and Thermodynamics.
Pointe Aux Piments, Mauritius; 2011. p. 272–7.
22. Anwar ZM, Tan ES, Adnan R, Idris MA, Iop. Study on atomiza-
tion characteristics for power generation application. 4th Int
Conf Energy Environ 2013. 2013;16(1):012016.
23. Tan E, Idris M, Anwar M, Adnan R. Biodiesel for gas turbine
application—an atomization characteristics study. In: Advances
in
Internal
Combustion
Engines
and
Fuel
Technologies;
2013:213‐242.
24. Arghode VK, Gupta AK, Bryden KM. High intensity colorless
distributed combustion for ultra low emissions and enhanced
performance. Appl Energy. Elsevier Ltd. 2012;92:822‐830.
25. Khalil AEE, Gupta AK, Bryden KM, Lee SC. Mixture prepara-
tion
effects
on
distributed
combustion
for
gas
turbine
applications.
J
Energy
Resour
Technol
ASME.
2012
May;134(3):277‐296.
26. Nieman DE, Dempsey AB, Reitz RD. Heavy‐duty RCCI opera-
tion using natural gas and diesel. SAE Pap 2012‐01‐0379.
2012;5(2):270‐285.
27. Imtenan S, Masjuki HH, Varman M, et al. Emission and perfor-
mance improvement analysis of biodiesel‐diesel blends with
additives. Procedia Eng Elsevier BV. 2014;90:472‐477.
28. Imdadul HK, Masjuki HH, Kalam MA, et al. A comprehensive
review on the assessment of fuel additive effects on combustion
behavior in CI engine fuelled with diesel biodiesel blends. RSC
Adv. 2015;5(83):67541‐67567.
29. Javed S, Satyanarayana Murthy YVV, Satyanarayana MRS,
Rajeswara Reddy R, Rajagopal K. Effect of a zinc oxide nanopar-
ticle fuel additive on the emission reduction of a hydrogen dual‐
fuelled engine with jatropha methyl ester biodiesel blends. J
Clean Prod Elsevier Ltd. 2016;137:490‐506.
30. Mlkvik M, Stähle P, Schuchmann HP, Gaukel V, Jedelsky J,
Jicha M. Twin‐fluid atomization of viscous liquids: the effect of
atomizer construction on breakup process, spray stability and
droplet size. Int J Multiph Flow. 2015;77:19‐31.
31. Rachner M, Becker J, Hassa C, Doerr T. Modelling of the atom-
ization of a plain liquid fuel jet in crossflow at gas turbine
conditions. Aerosp Sci Technol Elsevier. 2002;6(7):495‐506.
32. Hashimoto N, Ozawa Y, Mori N, Yuri I, Hisamatsu T. Funda-
mental combustion characteristics of palm methyl ester (PME)
as alternative fuel for gas turbines. Fuel. Elsevier. 2008;87(15–
16):3373‐3378.
33. Lasheras JC, Hopfinger EJ. Liquid jet instability and atomiza-
tion in a coaxial gas stream. Annu Rev Fluid Mech Annual
Reviews 4139 El Camino Way, PO Box 10139, Palo Alto, CA
94303–0139, USA. 2000;32(1):275‐308.
3180
ALAJMI ET AL.
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


--- Page 16 ---

34. Jiang X, Siamas GA, Jagus K, Karayiannis TG. Physical model-
ling and advanced simulations of gas‐liquid two‐phase jet
flows in atomization and sprays. Prog Energy Combust Sci
Elsevier. 2010;36(2):131‐167.
35. Adelberg M. Breakup rate and penetration of a liquid jet in a gas
stream. AIAA J. 1967;5(8):1408‐1415.
36. Inamura T. Upwash formation on splash plate atomization. Int J
Multiph Flow Elsevier. 2016;85:67‐75.
37. Herrmann M. The influence of density ratio on the primary
atomization of a turbulent liquid jet in crossflow. Proc Combust
Inst. Elsevier. 2011;33(2):2079‐2088.
38. Grisch F, Bresson A, Bouchardy P, Attal‐Tretout B. Advanced
optical diagnostics applied to dynamic flames and turbulent jets.
Aerosp Sci Technol. Elsevier. 2002;6(7):465‐479.
39. Kourmatzis A, Pham PX, Masri AR. Air assisted atomization
and spray density characterization of ethanol and a range of
biodiesels. Fuel Elsevier. 2013;108:758‐770.
40. Aftel R. Effect of atomization gas properties on droplet atomiza-
tion in an “air‐assist” atomizer. Virginia Tech; 1996.
41. Queirós P, Costa M, Carvalho RH. Co‐combustion of crude glyc-
erin with natural gas and hydrogen. Proc Combust Inst Elsevier.
2013;34(2):2759‐2767.
42. Lujaji FC, Boateng AA, Schaffer M, Mtui PL, Mkilaha ISN.
Spray atomization of bio‐oil/ethanol blends with externally
mixed nozzles. Exp Therm Fluid Sci Elsevier. 2016;71:146‐153.
43. Lal S, Kushari A, Gupta M, Kapoor JC, Maji S. Experimental
study of an air assisted mist generator. Exp Therm Fluid Sci.
Elsevier. 2010;34(8):1029‐1035.
44. Matveev IB, Matveeva SA, Kirchuk EY, Serbin SI, Bazarov VG.
Plasma fuel nozzle as a prospective way to plasma‐assisted com-
bustion. IEEE Trans Plasma Sci. 2010;38(12):3313‐3318.
45. Gallagher MJ, Geiger R, Polevich A, Rabinovich A, Gutsol A,
Fridman A. On‐board plasma‐assisted conversion of heavy
hydrocarbons
into
synthesis
gas.
Fuel
Elsevier.
2010;89(6):1187‐1192.
46. Sagás JC, Maciel HS, Lacava PT. Effects of non‐steady state dis-
charge plasma on natural gas combustion: flammability limits,
flame
behavior
and
hydrogen
production.
Fuel
Elsevier.
2016;182:118‐123.
47. Girard F, Meillot E, Vincent S, Bianchi L, Caltagirone JP. Mech-
anisms of heat transfer between a droplet and a plasma jet in
suspension plasma spraying. J Phys Conf Ser. 2014;550:012022.
48. Leblanc D, Wang C, He Y, Bélanger D, Zaghib K. In situ trans-
mission
electron
microscopy
observations
of
lithiation
of
spherical silicon nanopowder produced by induced plasma
atomization. J Power Sources Elsevier. 2015;279:522‐527.
49. Ramisetty KA, Pandit AB, Gogate PR. Investigations into ultra-
sound induced atomization. Ultrason Sonochem Elsevier BV.
2013;20(1):254‐264.
50. Rajan R, Pandit AB. Correlations to predict droplet size in ultra-
sonic atomisation. Ultrasonics. 2001;39(4):235‐255.
51. Capote FP, De Castro MDL. Ultrasound in analytical chemistry.
Anal Bioanal Chem Springer. 2007;387(1):249‐257.
52. Tanyerİ B. The investigation of using for gasoline atomization of
ultrasonic sound generated by piezoelectric ceramic. Period Eng
Nat Sci. 2014;2(1):13‐16.
53. de Castro MDL, Priego‐Capote F. Lesser known ultrasound‐
assisted heterogeneous sample‐preparation procedures. TrAC
Trends Anal Chem Elsevier. 2007;26(2):154‐162.
54. Joshi JT. A review on micronization techniques. J Pharm Sci
Technol. 2011;3:651‐681.
55. Reverchon E, Adami R. Nanomaterials and supercritical fluids. J
Supercrit Fluids. 2006;37(1):1‐22.
56. Yeo S‐D, Kiran E. Formation of polymer particles with super-
critical fluids: a review. J Supercrit Fluids. 2005;34(3):287‐308.
57. Woods HM, Silva MMCG, Shakesheff M, Howdle SM, Woods H.
Materials processing in supercritical carbon dioxide: surfactants,
polymers and biomaterials. J Mater Chem. 2004;14:1663‐1678.
58. Reverchon E, De Marco I, Torino E. Nanoparticles production
by supercritical antisolvent precipitation: a general interpreta-
tion. J Supercrit Fluids. 2007;43(1):126‐138.
59. Bahrami M, Ranjbarian S. Production of micro‐ and nano‐
composite particles by supercritical carbon dioxide. J Supercrit
Fluids. 2007;40(2):263‐283.
60. Caputo G, Adami R, Reverchon E. Analysis of dissolved‐gas
atomization: supercritical CO2 dissolved in water. Ind Eng Chem
Res. 2010;49(19):9454‐9461.
61. Gunther A, Lampa A, Fritsching U, et al. Benchmarking of gas‐
assisted atomization systems for liquid disintegration. Chem Eng
Technol. 2016;39(4):699‐707.
62. Al‐Jumaily AM, Meshkinzar A. On the development of focused
ultrasound
liquid
atomizers.
Adv
Acoust
Vib
Hindawi.
2017;2017:1‐10.
How to cite this article: Alajmi AESET, Adam
NM, Hairuddin AA, Abdullah LC. Fuel
atomization in gas turbines: A review of novel
technology. Int J Energy Res. 2019;43:3166–3181.
https://doi.org/10.1002/er.4415
ALAJMI ET AL.
3181
 1099114x, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.4415 by UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, Wiley Online Library on [31/12/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
