
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Combustion and Flame
www.elsevier.com/locate/combustﬂame
Flame–vortex interaction driven combustion dynamics in a backward-facing
step combustor
H. Murat Altay, Raymond L. Speth, Duane E. Hudgins, Ahmed F. Ghoniem ∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
a r t i c l e
i n f o
a b s t r a c t
Article history:
Received 30 August 2008
Received in revised form 6 February 2009
Accepted 7 February 2009
Available online 27 February 2009
Keywords:
Thermoacoustic instability
Combustion dynamics
Flame–vortex interactions
The combustion dynamics of propane–hydrogen mixtures are investigated in an atmospheric pressure,
lean, premixed backward-facing step combustor. We systematically vary the equivalence ratio, inlet
temperature and fuel composition to determine the stability map of the combustor. Simultaneous
pressure, velocity, heat release rate and equivalence ratio measurements and high-speed video from
the experiments are used to identify and characterize several distinct operating modes. When fuel is
injected far upstream from the step, the equivalence ratio entering the ﬂame is temporally and spatially
uniform, and the combustion dynamics are governed only by ﬂame–vortex interactions. Four distinct
dynamic regimes are observed depending on the operating parameters. At high but lean equivalence
ratios, the ﬂame is unstable and oscillates strongly as it is wrapped around the large unsteady wake
vortex. At intermediate equivalence ratios, weakly oscillating quasi-stable ﬂames are observed. Near the
lean blowout limit, long stable ﬂames extending from the corner of the step are formed. At atmospheric
inlet temperature, the unstable mode resonates at the 1/4 wavemode of the combustor. As the inlet
temperature is increased, the 5/4 wavemode of the combustor is excited at high but lean equivalence
ratios, forming the high-frequency unstable ﬂames. Higher hydrogen concentration in the fuel and higher
inlet temperatures reduce the equivalence ratios at which the transitions between regimes are observed.
We plot combustion dynamics maps or the response curves, that is the overall sound pressure level
as a function of the equivalence ratio, for different operating conditions. We demonstrate that numerical
results of strained premixed ﬂames can be used to collapse the response curves describing the transitions
among the dynamic modes onto a function of the heat release rate parameter alone, rather than a
function dependent on the equivalence ratio, inlet temperature and fuel composition separately. We
formulate a theory for predicting the critical values of the heat release parameter at which quasi-stable
to unstable and unstable to high-frequency unstable modes take place.
© 2009 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Continuous combustion systems common in propulsion and en-
ergy applications are susceptible to thermoacoustic instability. The
instability may occur under lean burn conditions, where most
emissions and eﬃciency beneﬁts are achieved, or near stoichiom-
etry, where high power density is the objective. As a result of
the resonant feedback interactions between the driving heat re-
lease mechanisms and the acoustic modes, these combustors are
known to exhibit signiﬁcant pressure and ﬂow oscillations, which
may cause ﬂame extinction, structural vibration, ﬂame ﬂashback
and even structural damage [1,2]. Several mechanisms are known
to promote such interactions: ﬂame–acoustic wave interactions,
ﬂame–vortex interactions, equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations, ﬂame–
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ghoniem@mit.edu (A.F. Ghoniem).
wall interactions and the effect of unsteady stretch rate, all of
which may be present individually or simultaneously [3–5].
In this paper we explore the mechanism of ﬂame–vortex in-
teractions, which is one of the most signiﬁcant instability mech-
anisms in large-scale gas turbine combustors [6,7]. As a result of
the unsteady interaction between the ﬂame and the vortex (vor-
tices) formed in the wake of the recirculation zone(s), the heat
release rate oscillates signiﬁcantly. When the periodic heat release
supported by the ﬂame–vortex interaction couples positively with
the acoustic ﬁeld, self-sustained acoustic oscillations are formed
[8–16].
Recently, in order to broaden the operating range of combus-
tors, hydrogen enriched hydrocarbons have been used as fuels in
LPP combustors [17–20]. Hydrogen enrichment allows operation at
lower ﬂame temperature, which helps reduce NOx emissions and
the equivalence ratio at the lean blowout. Observed combustion
dynamics and ﬂame structures are also impacted by hydrogen en-
richment as a result of its impact on the reaction kinetics. Previous
0010-2180/$ – see front matter © 2009 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2009.02.003


--- Page 2 ---

1112
H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the backward-facing step combustor.
research has shown that in the case of unstrained methane–air
ﬂames, hydrogen addition has a relatively small impact on the
laminar burning velocity and the lean blowout limit. For methane–
hydrogen mixtures with 10% fuel volume of H2, the increase in
burning velocity is typically 5%, over a range of equivalence ratios
[21]. In contrast, hydrogen enrichment has been shown to substan-
tially increase the burning velocity and to inhibit extinction in tur-
bulent and strained ﬂame environments [22–24]. Analytical studies
have described the impact of stretch on premixed ﬂames, typically
using asymptotic analysis and simpliﬁed models of ﬂame structure
[25–27]. These studies yield simple expressions for the variation of
the burning velocity and ﬂame temperature from their unstretched
values, emphasizing the interaction of stretch with preferential dif-
fusion (e.g. non-unity Lewis number) effects. The impact of inlet
temperature on thermoacoustic instabilities, ﬂame structure and
blowout limits have also been investigated and noticeable shifts
in regions of unstable combustion have been observed [28,29].
In this paper, we carry out a parametric study by varying the
equivalence ratio, Reynolds number, inlet temperature and the fuel
composition to examine the ﬂame–vortex interaction driven com-
bustion dynamics in an atmospheric backward-facing step combus-
tor. Extensive instrumentation of the combustor allows monitoring
the temporal variations in pressure, heat release, and ﬂow velocity,
as well as the temporal and spatial variations in equivalence ratio.
We ﬁred the combustor at Reynolds numbers of 6500 and 8500
based on the step height using pure propane or propane enriched
with hydrogen by adding 30% by volume (2.0% by mass; 4.8% by
LHV) or 50% by volume (4.4% by mass; 10.6% by LHV) hydro-
gen. The temperature of the inlet mixture is varied from ambient
(300 K) to 600 K, in 100 K increments. At each fuel composition,
Reynolds number and the inlet temperature, we varied the equiv-
alence ratio of the fuel–air mixture from near the lean blowout
limit to a value approaching the ﬂashback limit near stoichiome-
try. We conducted the experiments with the fuel injector located
93 cm upstream of the step, which ensures that the equivalence
ratio reaching the combustion zone is temporally and spatially uni-
form.
We demonstrate the presence of different regimes in which the
ﬂame is impacted by different ﬂow structures depending on the
operating parameters. The response curves of the combustor—the
pressure amplitude as function of the equivalence ratio—are pre-
sented for a range of fuel compositions and inlet temperatures.
We use numerical results to collapse the response curves, show-
ing that the transitions between the combustor dynamic modes
are correlated with changes in a heat release parameter which
incorporates the effect of strained ﬂame consumption speed and
volumetric expansion. We show that the complex interactions be-
tween the hydrodynamics and the ﬂames under different operating
conditions can approximately be captured using the heat release
parameter alone. Formulating a simple theory, we determine the
critical values of this parameter at which transitions between dif-
ferent dynamic operating modes take place.
The article is structured as follows. In Section 2, we describe
the experimental setup and the diagnostic tools. In Section 3, we
report the results describing the stability map of the combustor,
the combustor acoustics, the high speed ﬂame images and the
derived theory using strained ﬂame consumption speeds. We use
acoustic analysis to determine the unstable modes analytically, and
explain the observations. We use strained ﬂame calculations to
ﬁnd a “reducing” parameter that can collapse the measurements.
In Section 4, the article ends with conclusions.
2. Combustor description
Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram of the backward-facing step
combustor. The combustor consists of a rectangular stainless steel
duct with a cross section 40 mm high and 160 mm wide. The air
inlet to the combustor is choked. At a location 0.45 m downstream
from the choke plate, a 0.15 m long ramp contracts the channel
height from 40 mm to 20 mm followed by a 0.4 m long constant
area section that ends with a sudden expansion back to 40 mm.
The step height is 20 mm. The overall length of the combustor is
5.0 m. A circular exhaust pipe comprises the last 3.0 m of the com-
bustor with a cross sectional area approximately four times that
of the rectangular section. The exhaust exits to a trench with a
large cross sectional area. The combustor is equipped with quartz
viewing windows. An air compressor supplies air up to 110 g/s
at 883 kPa. A pair of Sierra C100M mass ﬂow controllers allow
arbitrary propane/hydrogen mixtures at maximum ﬂow rates of
2.36 g/s for propane and 0.30 g/s for hydrogen. The uncertainty of
the ﬂow rates is ±1% of the full scale. Fuel is injected through sev-
eral spanwise holes in a manifold located 93 cm upstream of the
step. Images of the ﬂame are captured at 2000 frames per second
using a Phantom v7.1 high-speed camera. Pressure measurements
are obtained using Kulite MIC-093 high intensity microphones de-
signed for laboratory investigations. Flow velocity is measured us-
ing TSI IFA300 hot wire anemometer. An optical bandpass ﬁlter
centered at 430 nm is placed in front of a Hamamatsu H9306-
02 photosensor module to measure the CH∗chemiluminescence
emitted by the ﬂame, which is proportional to the instantaneous


--- Page 3 ---

H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
1113
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram showing the temporal equivalence ratio measurement
setup.
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram showing the spatial equivalence ratio measurement setup.
heat release rate [30,31]. More details on CH∗chemiluminescence
measurement technique can be found in Ref. [16]. Temporal equiv-
alence ratio variations are measured 14 cm upstream of the step
using a Hamamatsu P4245 photodiode to detect absorption of a
HeNe laser by propane at a wavelength of 3.39 μm. This laser is
modulated using a Scitec Instruments 360 OEM optical chopper
in order to distinguish between the light emitted by the ﬂame
when it ﬂashes back and the laser signal. When the fuel passes
through the laser beam, it absorbs some of the laser light, reduc-
ing the photodiode signal. The intensity of the light can be related
to the fuel concentration using the Beer–Lambert law, as described
by Lee et al. in Ref. [32]. Fig. 2 shows the schematic diagram of the
temporal equivalence ratio measurement setup. The spatial con-
centration/equivalence ratio measurements are performed under
non-reacting ﬂow conditions by injecting CO2 into the combustor
as a fuel surrogate and taking point measurements of its concen-
tration using a California Analytical Instruments ZRH CO/CO2 ana-
lyzer. The gas probe automatically traverses the combustor cross
section near the location of the step. The spatial concentration
measurement setup is shown schematically in Fig. 3. The inlet
mixture temperature is set using an Osram Sylvania 18 kW in-
line electric heater with on/off temperature controller. All data are
acquired using a National Instruments PCIe-6259 data acquisition
board and the Matlab Data Acquisition Toolbox. A custom Matlab
code is used to store the data and control the experiment.
3. Results
Temporal oscillations of the equivalence ratio, and non-uniform-
ities in the equivalence ratio distribution entering the ﬂame zone
can signiﬁcantly impact the combustion dynamics by impacting
the local burning velocity along the ﬂame front as well as the
ﬂame structure. Here, since we are interested in investigating
only the ﬂame–vortex interaction driven combustion dynamics, we
ensure that the equivalence ratio entering the combustion zone
is steady, i.e. no temporal variations of the equivalence ratio is
present at the combustion zone. Moreover, in order to achieve
premixed combustion, the spatial equivalence ratio distribution en-
tering the ﬂame zone should be uniform.
In Fig. 4 we show the temporal variation of the equivalence
ratio measured 14 cm upstream of the step when the combus-
tor is ﬁred at an equivalence ratio of 0.80 and a Reynolds number
Fig. 4. Temporal equivalence ratio measurements 14 cm upstream of the step at
Re = 8500, φ = 0.80 while injecting the fuel 93 cm upstream of the step.
of 8500, without hydrogen enrichment, when the fuel injector is
located 93 cm upstream of the step. At this location of the fuel in-
jector no temporal variations of the equivalence ratio are observed
as a result of two factors: (i) the amplitude of equivalence ratio os-
cillations established at the fuel injector location are small, since
the injector is located near the choke plate where velocity oscilla-
tions are small; and (ii) the convective time scale, τ = L/ ¯U is long
so that there is enough time for the oscillations to be damped by
turbulent mixing before reaching the combustion zone, where L is
the distance between the fuel injector and the step and ¯U is the
average ﬂow velocity [4,33].
Next, we measure the spatial distribution of the equivalence ra-
tio keeping the fuel injector at the same location, under steady,
non-reactive conditions using the technique described in the pre-
vious section. The measurements are performed at a cross section
immediately downstream of the step, without hydrogen enrich-
ment, at Re = 8500 and mean equivalence ratio of 0.70. The
maximum variation of the measured equivalence ratio distribution
along the cross section is less than 1%. This indicates uniform spa-
tial equivalence ratio distribution, ensuring premixed combustion.
In the rest of the paper, in order to investigate ﬂame–vortex
interaction driven premixed combustion dynamics, we introduce
the fuel 93 cm upstream of the step as suggested by the above re-
sults. We conduct a series of experiments in order to: (i) determine
the stability map; (ii) investigate the resonant acoustic modes;
(iii) distinguish between the ﬂame–vortex interaction dynamics
observed under distinct operating modes. Finally, we formulate
a theory supported by numerical simulations of one-dimensional,
strained ﬂames to predict the transitions between different oper-
ating modes of the combustor.
3.1. Stability map
We systematically vary the inlet temperature, fuel composition
and the Reynolds number, and measure the response curves of the
combustor while varying the equivalence ratio between the lean
blowout limit and near stoichiometry. We report the measured
pressure ﬂuctuations in terms of the overall sound pressure level
(OASPL) using the pressure sensor located 1.28 m downstream of
the choke plate, which is close to the location of the ﬂame. The
OASPL in dB is deﬁned as:
OASPL = 10 log10
 p(t) −p(t)
po
2
(1)
where overbars indicate average values, p(t) is the pressure mea-
sured in an interval t1 < t < t2 and po = 2 × 10−5 Pa.
While performing the tests, we observed that the combustor
dynamics were strongly inﬂuenced by the history of the operating
mode and the conditions. In order to illustrate this history depen-
dence, we plot the OASPL as a function of equivalence ratio for
propane ﬂames at Reynolds numbers of 6500 and 8500 and the
inlet temperature of 300 K in Fig. 5. At each Reynolds number,


--- Page 4 ---

1114
H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
Fig. 5. OASPL as a function of equivalence ratio without hydrogen enrichment at an
inlet temperature of 300 K. The equivalence ratio is either increased from near the
blowout limit toward stoichiometry, or decreased from near stoichiometry toward
the lean blowout limit for (a) Re = 6500; (b) Re = 8500.
the equivalence ratio is either increased from the lean blowout
limit toward stoichiometry, or decreased from near stoichiometry
toward the lean blowout limit. When we increase the equivalence
ratio from the lean blowout limit, the transitions in the response
curves shown in Fig. 5 shift toward higher equivalence ratios at
both Reynolds numbers. The dependence of the combustor dynam-
ics on the history, i.e. the presence of hysteresis, is attributed to
the highly non-linear nature of the system. In the rest of the pa-
per, the data are obtained while decreasing the equivalence ratio
from near stoichiometry toward the lean blowout limit.
In Fig. 6, we plot the OASPL as a function of the equivalence ra-
tio using pure propane or propane enriched with 50% by volume
(4.4% by mass; 10.6% by LHV) hydrogen at Reynolds numbers of
6500 and 8500, and inlet temperatures of 300 K and 500 K. When
the inlet temperature is 300 K, we observed three distinct operat-
ing modes corresponding to sound pressure levels of 158–160 dB,
145–150 dB and 130–135 dB. The combustor operating modes cor-
responding to the 158–160 dB bands are referred to as unstable,
145–150 dB bands are referred to as quasi-stable and OASPL val-
ues between 130–135 dB close to the lean blowout are referred to
as stable. The origin of each characterization will become appar-
ent when we depict the ﬂame images during the corresponding
operating modes. When the inlet temperature is raised to 500 K,
the OASPL in the unstable region decreases slowly with increas-
ing equivalence ratio and suddenly jumps to much higher values
Fig. 6. OASPL as a function of equivalence ratio using pure propane and propane
enriched with 50% by volume hydrogen at Re = 6500 and Re = 8500 at an inlet
temperature of (a) Tin = 300 K; (b) Tin = 500 K.
as the equivalence ratio exceeds a certain threshold (0.80 with-
out hydrogen enrichment at both Reynolds numbers). This is the
high-frequency unstable mode, where a higher acoustic mode of the
combustor is excited. The impact of the Reynolds number on the
stability map is minor. The quasi-stable mode is wider when the
Reynolds number is 8500, especially at inlet temperature of 500 K.
Enriching propane with hydrogen or increasing the temperature of
the inlet mixture lower the lean blowout limit and shift the ob-
served transitions between operating modes to lower equivalence
ratios.
We investigate the results in Fig. 6 in more detail by show-
ing the combustor’s frequency response in Figs. 7 and 8 for the
cases corresponding to Figs. 6(a) and 6(b), respectively. These ﬁg-
ures show the amplitude of pressure oscillations as a function of
frequency for the ranges of equivalence ratios in Fig. 6. High am-
plitudes correspond to darker regions.
Fig. 7(a) shows the frequency response for Reynolds number of
6500, inlet temperature of 300 K, without hydrogen enrichment.
As the equivalence ratio is dropped from 0.90 to 0.70, the acoustic
mode around 40 Hz is excited and the combustor operates in the
unstable mode. As the equivalence ratio is reduced just below 0.70,
there is a slight increase in the resonant frequency, and a transition
to the quasi-stable operating mode. The resonant frequency drops
slowly, as the equivalence ratio is decreased further until the lean
blowout limit. Similar acoustic response is observed in Fig. 7(b),


--- Page 5 ---

H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
1115
Fig. 7. Sound pressure spectrum level maps as a function of equivalence ratio at inlet temperature of 300 K for (a) Re = 6500, no H2 enrichment; (b) Re = 8500, no H2
enrichment; (c) Re = 6500, 50% by volume H2 enrichment; (d) Re = 8500, 50% by volume H2 enrichment. Dark bands indicate high amplitude frequency components.
which shows the frequency response for Reynolds number of 8500,
inlet temperature of 300 K, without hydrogen enrichment. How-
ever, at this Reynolds number, the transition to the quasi-stable
mode occurs around the equivalence ratio of 0.73, which is slightly
higher than that in the Re = 6500 case. When 50% by volume hy-
drogen is added to propane, the transition to quasi-stable mode
occurs at an equivalence ratio of 0.62 at both Reynolds numbers,
as shown in Figs. 7(c) and 7(d). When the inlet temperature is
300 K, only the resonant mode around 40 Hz is dominant for the
unstable and the quasi-stable operating modes of the combustor.
When the inlet temperature is raised to 500 K, there are signif-
icant changes in the acoustic response of the combustor as shown
in Fig. 8. Without hydrogen addition, at both Reynolds numbers, as
the equivalence ratio drops below 0.85, the combustor resonates
around 130 Hz, until the equivalence ratio reaches 0.80, as shown
in Figs. 8(a) and 8(b). These operating bands correspond to OASPLs
of 153 dB and 158 dB for Re = 6500 and Re = 8500, respec-
tively, in Fig. 6(b), and are referred to as the high-frequency un-
stable mode. As the equivalence ratio is reduced further, the 40 Hz
band is excited until blowout occurs. However, near φ = 0.60, at
both Reynolds numbers, the OASPL drops signiﬁcantly, correspond-
ing to the transition from an unstable to a quasi-stable band. The
OASPL increases until the equivalence ratio reaches 0.57 for Re =
6500 and 0.52 for Re = 8500. When 50% by volume hydrogen is
added to propane, as the equivalence ratio is reduced from 0.72,
the combustor resonates at 130 Hz until the OASPL reaches its lo-
cal minimum around equivalence ratios of 0.68 for Re = 6500 and
0.65 for Re = 8500, as shown in Fig. 6(b). As the equivalence ratio
is reduced further, the 40 Hz band is excited until the combustor
shifts from unstable to quasi-stable operating mode around equiv-
alence ratio of 0.49 at both Reynolds numbers.
So far we have demonstrated that changing the hydrogen con-
tent in the fuel and the inlet temperature affect the response
curves signiﬁcantly. Changing the Reynolds number has a minor
impact. We investigate the impact of hydrogen enrichment and
the inlet temperature further by extending the parameter set to
include two additional inlet temperatures and one additional hy-
drogen concentration. In Fig. 9, we plot the OASPL as a function
of the equivalence ratio at Reynolds number of 6500 for differ-
ent fuel compositions and inlet temperatures. Fig. 9 shows that
at all inlet temperatures, increasing the hydrogen fraction in the
fuel shifts the response curves toward leaner equivalence ratios. In-
creasing the inlet temperature at constant fuel composition has the
same impact on the response curves. With preheating, the OASPL
drops as the equivalence ratio increases until the high-frequency
unstable mode is excited, as shown in Figs. 9(c) and 9(d). At the
local minimum, which is the transition point between the unstable
and the high-frequency unstable modes, the combustor operates
in the quasi-stable mode when the inlet temperature is 600 K.
Moreover, the distinct quasi-stable band disappears at this inlet
temperature. Preheating the inlet mixture allows the excitation of
higher frequency modes, impacting the combustion dynamics sig-
niﬁcantly.


--- Page 6 ---

1116
H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
Fig. 8. Sound pressure spectrum level maps as a function of equivalence ratio at inlet temperature of 500 K for (a) Re = 6500, no H2 enrichment; (b) Re = 8500, no H2
enrichment; (c) Re = 6500, 50% by volume H2 enrichment; (d) Re = 8500, 50% by volume H2 enrichment. Dark bands indicate high amplitude frequency components.
3.2. Combustor acoustics
In the previous section, we showed that two different acous-
tic modes of the combustor, corresponding to frequencies of 40 Hz
and 130 Hz, were excited under different operating conditions. In
this section we investigate the combustor acoustics in detail to ex-
plain the origin of the observed resonant frequencies.
In Fig. 10, we plot the simultaneous pressure oscillations mea-
sured at four different locations along the length of the combus-
tor corresponding to unstable, high-frequency unstable and quasi-
stable modes. For the unstable and quasi-stable modes, the res-
onant frequency is close to 40 Hz and the pressure oscillations
measured at different locations are nearly in phase. This shows
that the resonant frequency may correspond to the 1/4 wavemode
of the combustor. On the other hand, for the high-frequency un-
stable mode, a pressure node exists between the measurement
locations of 0.15 m and 0.76 m (since the pressure measurements
are out of phase); and another pressure node exists between mea-
surement locations of 1.28 m and 3.82 m. The presence of two
pressure nodes along the length of the combustor suggests that
the resonant frequency around 130 Hz may correspond to the 5/4
wavemode. In Fig. 11 we plot the pressure modeshapes along the
length of the combustor for unstable, high-frequency unstable and
quasi-stable modes at the same operating conditions as in Fig. 10.
The sign of the rms pressure amplitude is reversed whenever mea-
surements at two consecutive locations are out of phase. Fig. 11
clearly shows that the quasi-stable and unstable modes correspond
to the 1/4 wavemode, and the high-frequency unstable mode cor-
responds to the 5/4 wavemode of the combustor. The resonant
frequency of 130 Hz is much smaller than what we expect for a
5/4 wavemode: 5 × 40 Hz = 200 Hz. Moreover, the pressure os-
cillations do not satisfy the open boundary condition at the end
of the exhaust tube (at 5.0 m) as we expect, suggesting a longer
acoustic length. It is also interesting to see that 3/4 wavemode is
not excited.
In order to explain the observed resonant frequencies, we an-
alytically modeled the combustor acoustics. The acoustics of the
combustor are modeled by solving the linear one-dimensional
wave equation while neglecting viscous effects. The Mach num-
ber of the ﬂow in our combustor is very low (∼0.02), therefore the
effect of the mean ﬂow is neglected. Fig. 12 shows a schematic dia-
gram of the combustor. The combustor is divided into two regions
by the combustion zone. For simplicity, we treat the combustion
zone as a thin planar ﬂame located at a ﬁxed axial location. The
effect of heat addition at the ﬂame location is neglected for sim-
plicity. The general solution of the homogeneous wave equation
can be written in the following form [34]:
p′(x,t) = f (t −x/¯c) + g(t + x/¯c)
(2)
where the functions
f (t) and g(t) are arbitrary. From the lin-
earized one-dimensional momentum equation, the velocity oscil-
lations are obtained in the following form:
u′(x,t) = 1
¯ρ¯c

f (t −x/¯c) −g(t + x/¯c)

(3)


--- Page 7 ---

H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
1117
Fig. 9. OASPL as a function of equivalence ratio at different hydrogen concentration for (a) Tin = 300 K; (b) Tin = 400 K; (c) Tin = 500 K; (d) Tin = 600 K. Re = 6500.
where ¯ρ and ¯c are the average density and speed of sound, re-
spectively. It is convenient to write f (t) = Re[ ˆf eiωt] where the
circumﬂex denotes a complex amplitude. Using this notation, we
rewrite Eqs. (2) and (3) as follows:
ˆp(x) = ˆf e−iωx/¯c + ˆgeiωx/¯c,
(4)
ˆu(x) = 1
¯ρ¯c
 ˆf e−iωx/¯c −ˆgeiωx/¯c
.
(5)
In each section of the combustor, Eqs. (4) and (5) give the pressure
and velocity mode shapes. The resonant frequencies follow from
the application of the appropriate boundary conditions at the inlet
and exit of the combustor and matching the solutions at the ﬂame
location.
The solution of the homogeneous wave equation in the up-
stream section satisfying the choked inlet boundary condition,
ˆu1(0) = 0 is:
ˆp1(x) = A cos(ω/¯c1x),
(6)
ˆu1(x) = −i A
¯ρ1¯c1
sin(ω/¯c1x)
(7)
where A is an arbitrary constant. The solution of the homogeneous
wave equation in the downstream section satisfying the open exit
boundary condition, ˆp2(Ltot) = 0 is:
ˆp2(x) = B sin
ω/¯c2(Ltot −x)

,
(8)
ˆu2(x) = −iB
¯ρ2¯c2
cos
ω/¯c2(Ltot −x)

(9)
where B is an arbitrary constant. Matching the velocity and pres-
sure solutions at the location of the ﬂame, x = L f , we obtain the
following equation which is solved numerically to calculate the
resonant frequencies:
¯ρ1¯c1
¯ρ2¯c2
= tan(ω/¯c1 · L f ) tan
ω/¯c2 · (Ltot −L f )

.
(10)
Fig. 13 shows the modeshapes and associated resonant frequen-
cies corresponding to the 1/4, 3/4, 5/4 and 7/4 wavemodes of
the combustor. The temperature of the reactants and products are
taken as 300 K and 1880 K, respectively, corresponding to a pure
propane ﬂame with φ = 0.70. The speed of sound is 342 m/s in the
reactants and 830 m/s in the products. The density of the reactants
is 1.194 kg/m3 and the density of the products is 0.190 kg/m3. We
assume that the ﬂame is located 8 cm downstream of the dump
plane, i.e. L f = 1.06 m. Note that these values change with op-
erating conditions, resulting in small differences in the resonant
frequencies shown in Fig. 13. The total acoustic length of the com-
bustor, Ltot = 6.0 m, is consistent with the observations in Fig. 11,
where p′ ≈0 around 6 meters downstream of the choke plate.
The observed resonant frequencies as well as the modeshapes
are predicted well using the acoustic model. The pressure nodes of


--- Page 8 ---

1118
H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
Fig. 10. Pressure oscillations measured at four different locations along the com-
bustor length corresponding to the (a) unstable mode: φ = 0.80, Re = 8500, Tin =
300 K, no hydrogen enrichment; (b) high-frequency unstable mode: φ = 0.70, Re =
6500, Tin = 500 K, 50% by volume hydrogen enrichment; (c) quasi-stable mode:
φ = 0.70, Re = 8500, Tin = 300 K, no hydrogen enrichment.
the 5/4 wavemode occur around 0.8 m and 2.9 m, which matches
closely the experimental measurements shown in Fig. 11. These
results clearly prove that the unstable and high-frequency unsta-
ble operating modes of the combustor correspond to the 1/4 and
the 5/4 wavemodes, respectively. The resonant frequencies associ-
Fig. 11. Pressure modeshapes corresponding to the unstable, high-frequency unsta-
ble and quasi-stable operating modes.
Fig. 12. Schematic diagram of the combustor used in the acoustic model.
Fig. 13. Pressure modeshapes calculated from the acoustic model corresponding to
the 1/4, 3/4, 5/4 and 7/4 wavemodes.
ated with different acoustic modes of the combustor correspond
to distinct bands in Figs. 7 and 8. However the amplitude is sig-
niﬁcantly higher at the excited frequencies (the bands are much
darker) corresponding to either the 1/4 or the 5/4 acoustic modes
depending on the operating conditions. The ﬁgure also shows that
the location of the ﬂame is very close to a pressure node in the
3/4 wavemode, where the pressure amplitude is very low. This is
the reason why the 3/4 wavemode was not excited.


--- Page 9 ---

H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
1119
Fig. 14. Flame images of the unstable mode. φ = 0.80, Re = 8500, Tin = 300 K,
no hydrogen enrichment. The resonant frequency is 36 Hz. The time between the
frames is 4 ms.
3.3. Flame images
In order to distinguish between the dynamics at different oper-
ating modes, we examine ﬂame images extracted from high speed
videos of typical unstable, high-frequency unstable, quasi-stable
and stable operating modes and describe corresponding unsteady
pressure, velocity, heat release rate and equivalence ratio measure-
ments. The pressure is measured using the sensor located 1.28 m
downstream of the choke plate under all operating modes, which
is close to the ﬂame location.
3.3.1. Unstable mode
In Fig. 14, we show a sequence of ﬂame images correspond-
ing to one cycle of the unstable mode taken at φ = 0.80, Re =
8500, Tin = 300 K, without hydrogen enrichment. Fig. 15 shows
simultaneous heat release rate, velocity, pressure and equivalence
ratio measurements covering the same time period as the images
shown in Fig. 14. The resonant frequency is 36 Hz, which corre-
sponds to the quarter wave mode of the combustor. Since we use
a hot wire anemometer to perform the velocity measurements, we
do not have information about the direction of the ﬂow. Therefore,
the sign of the hot wire reading is corrected to account for ﬂow
reversal. In the unstable mode, a wake vortex is formed in the re-
circulation zone downstream of the step (1). At this moment, the
velocity is rising, and the acceleration and the pressure are at their
maxima. As the velocity at the step increases, the vortex convects
downstream, while moving toward the upper wall of the combus-
tor. As a result, a packet of unburned reactants forms between the
growing vortex and the ﬂame of the previous cycle (2, 3). In ad-
dition, the heat release rate is decreasing following the end of the
intense burning from the previous cycle. Between instants 2 and 3,
heat release rate reaches its minimum, and the velocity is near its
maximum value. As the velocity drops from its maximum value,
the vortex continues to move downstream toward the upper wall
of the combustor. The heat release rate starts to rise as the reac-
Fig. 15. Simultaneous heat release rate, velocity, pressure and equivalence ratio mea-
surements corresponding to the unstable mode shown in Fig. 14.
tant packet sandwiched between the ﬂame from the earlier cycle
and the ﬂame surrounding the new vortex begins to burn (4–6). As
the velocity reaches its minimum value between images 6 and 7,
the vortex reaches the upper wall of the combustor, and the reac-
tant packet burns by two “advancing” ﬂames on both sides causing
intense burning. As a result, the heat release rate reaches its max-
imum near the moment of maximum pressure, resulting in the
positive feedback between the unsteady heat release rate and the
pressure, which drives the instability (7). The ﬂame moving up-
stream of the step indicates very small or negative velocity at the
step (6, 7). Next, as the velocity starts to rise again, the heat re-
lease rate starts to drop, fresh reactants enter the ﬂame anchoring
zone and the cycle repeats. Since the fuel injector is located far
enough from the combustion zone, the equivalence ratio remains
nearly constant throughout the cycle. The maximum pressure am-
plitude is near 3 kPa.
3.3.2. High-frequency unstable mode
When the inlet mixture is preheated to higher temperatures,
we observe instability at higher frequencies. Fig. 16 shows a se-
quence of ﬂame images corresponding to one cycle of the high-
frequency unstable mode observed at φ = 0.70, Re = 6500, Tin =
500 K, with 50% by volume hydrogen enrichment. Fig. 17 shows
simultaneous heat release rate and pressure measurements cov-
ering the same time period as the images shown in Fig. 16. At
elevated inlet temperatures we were not able to do point velocity
measurements using the hot wire anemometer. Equivalence ratio
measurements are not performed at this operating mode because
the quality of the photodiode signal drops signiﬁcantly as the inlet
temperature increases. However, we expect the equivalence ratio
to remain temporally constant since we placed the fuel injector
far upstream of the step and as veriﬁed at Tin = 300 K. The reso-
nant frequency is 132 Hz (which corresponds to the 5/4 wavemode
of the combustor). The observed combustion dynamics are very
similar to the unstable mode described before, except that the
unsteady ﬂame dynamics are faster in this case. In this operat-
ing mode, the vortex forms at the step when the pressure is at
a minimum. Since the step is located between a pressure node
and a pressure antinode (see Fig. 13), u′ leads p′ by 90 degrees.
That instant again corresponds to the moment of maximum ac-
celeration, similar to the unstable case. As a result of the higher
frequency, the ﬂame is more compact and the wake vortex reaches
the upper wall of the combustor closer to the step. The heat re-
lease rate and pressure oscillations are nearly in phase, resulting
in the observed instability. The more compact ﬂame causes smaller
variations in the ﬂame surface area, resulting in smaller amplitude


--- Page 10 ---

1120
H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
Fig. 16. Flame images of the high-frequency unstable mode. φ = 0.70, Re = 6500,
Tin = 500 K, with 50% by volume hydrogen enrichment. The resonant frequency is
132 Hz. The time between the frames is 1.1 ms.
Fig. 17. Simultaneous heat release rate and pressure measurements corresponding
to the high-frequency unstable mode shown in Fig. 16.
heat release rate oscillations compared to the unstable case. The
unsteady pressure amplitude is also lower than the unstable case
as a result of the smaller amount of energy supplied to the acous-
tic ﬁeld due to heat release. The maximum pressure amplitude is
around 1.5 kPa.
3.3.3. Quasi-stable mode
When the equivalence ratio is reduced while the combustor is
operating in the unstable mode, the noise from the combustor
decreases signiﬁcantly as the equivalence ratio reaches a certain
threshold, which depends on the operating conditions. This is the
quasi-stable operating mode of the combustor which corresponds
to the 140–150 dB plateau observed in Fig. 9 at all operating con-
ditions.
In Fig. 18, we show a sequence of ﬂame images correspond-
ing to the quasi-stable mode observed at φ = 0.70, Re = 8500,
Tin = 300 K, without hydrogen enrichment. Fig. 19 shows simul-
taneous heat release rate, velocity, pressure and equivalence ratio
Fig. 18. Flame images of the quasi-stable mode. φ = 0.70, Re = 8500, Tin = 300 K,
without hydrogen enrichment. The resonant frequency is 38 Hz. The time between
the frames is 3.8 ms.
Fig. 19. Simultaneous heat release rate, velocity, pressure and equivalence ratio mea-
surements corresponding to the quasi-stable mode shown in Fig. 18.
measurements covering the same time period as the images shown
in Fig. 18. The resonant frequency is 38 Hz, again corresponding to
the 1/4 wavemode of the combustor. Similar to the unstable mode
operation, in the quasi-stable case, a vortex is formed at the edge
of the step near the moment of maximum acceleration (1). The
vortex grows and convects downstream, forming a packet of reac-
tants (4–8). Unlike the unstable case, the vortex never grows to
reach the top wall, and the reactant packet is not pinched off by
the vortex. The burning is concentrated near the reactant pocket.
Compared to the unstable case, the burning of the pocket is not
sudden and produces relatively weak heat release rate ﬂuctuations
as shown in Fig. 19. This results in signiﬁcantly lower sound pres-
sure levels compared to the unstable mode. The maximum pres-
sure amplitude is 0.6 kPa.


--- Page 11 ---

H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
1121
Fig. 20. Flame images of the stable mode. φ = 0.57, Re = 6500, Tin = 300 K, with
50% by volume hydrogen enrichment. The time between the frames is 4 ms.
3.3.4. Stable mode
Very close to the lean blowout limit, the combustor operates
in the stable mode, resulting in nearly silent burning. As the in-
let temperature increases, the stable mode becomes narrower as
shown in Fig. 9. In Fig. 20, we show a sequence of ﬂame im-
ages corresponding to the stable mode observed at φ = 0.57, Re =
6500, Tin = 300 K, with 50% by volume hydrogen enrichment.
Fig. 21 shows simultaneous heat release rate and pressure mea-
surements covering the same time period as the images shown in
Fig. 20. In the stable case, small vortices are shed from the step
at high frequencies. The vortex shedding frequency does not corre-
spond to one of the low frequency acoustic modes of the combus-
tor. Thus, there is no coupling between the heat release rate and
pressure as shown in Fig. 21. The heat release rate is steady, and
the pressure oscillates at very small amplitude and high frequency,
which corresponds to the vortex shedding frequency.
3.4. Theory
In this section we develop a theory to predict the conditions at
which the sudden transition between different dynamics operating
modes take place. The high speed ﬂame images of the unstable
and high-frequency unstable operating modes revealed that during
an unstable cycle, the ﬂame is convoluted around a vortex forming
in the wake of the step. Moreover, careful inspection of the re-
sults in Figs. 14 and 16 shows that as the wake vortex reaches the
upper wall of the combustor, the reactant packet formed between
adjacent ﬂames burns, causing the heat release rate to reach its
maximum value. For both operating modes, the vortex forms at the
moment of maximum acceleration. We deﬁne the time elapsed be-
tween the moment of vortex formation and the moment when the
vortex reaches the upper wall (moment of maximum heat release
rate) as τvor. We assume that the vortex moves toward the wall
predominantly as a result of the expansion velocity in the vertical
direction. The expansion velocity is proportional to the heat release
rate parameter ST (ρu/ρb −1) where ST is the turbulent burning
Fig. 21. Simultaneous heat release rate and pressure measurements corresponding
to the stable mode shown in Fig. 20.
velocity and ρu and ρb are the unburned and burned mixture den-
sities [35]. Assuming a linear relationship between the turbulent
and laminar burning velocities, the vertical velocity of the vortex,
vvor, is:
vvor = SL
c (ρu/ρb −1)
(11)
where SL is the laminar burning velocity of the mixture. The con-
stant of proportionality between the expansion velocity and the
heat release rate parameter, and the proportionality between the
turbulent and laminar burning velocities are represented by an ar-
bitrary constant c. Representing the vertical distance between the
corner of the step where the vortex forms and the upper wall as
H, we obtain τvor = H/vvor. Substituting vvor from Eq. (11):
τvor =
cH
SL(ρu/ρb −1).
(12)
In Fig. 22, we schematically show τvor, and the time between the
maximum heat release rate and maximum pressure, τqp, for the
unstable and high-frequency unstable cases. The quasi-stable to
unstable, and unstable to high-frequency unstable transitions oc-
cur when the pressure and heat release rate oscillations become in
phase, that is τpq = NT , where N is an integer and T is the os-
cillation period. According to Fig. 22, the quasi-stable to unstable
transition takes place when (for N = 1)
τvor =
1
f1/4
(13)
and the unstable to high-frequency unstable transition takes place
when
τvor = 3
2
1
f5/4
(14)
where f1/4 and f5/4 are the resonant frequencies corresponding
to unstable and high-frequency unstable modes. Using Eqs. (12)
and (13), for the quasi-stable to unstable transition (qs →u):
SL(ρu/ρb −1)|qs→u = cH f1/4.
(15)
Similarly, using Eqs. (12) and (14), for the unstable to high-
frequency unstable transition (u →hfu):
SL(ρu/ρb −1)|u→hfu = 2
3cH f5/4.
(16)
The left-hand sides of Eqs. (15) and (16), i.e. the heat release pa-
rameters at transition, depend on the operating conditions (φ, fuel
composition and Tin). For a set of operating conditions satisfying


--- Page 12 ---

1122
H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
Fig. 22. Schematic diagram showing pressure, velocity and heat release rate os-
cillations in a typical cycle corresponding to the (a) unstable; (b) high-frequency
unstable operating modes.
Eq. (15) or (16), we expect quasi-stable to unstable, or unstable to
high-frequency unstable transitions to take place, respectively.
In order to test this hypothesis, we regenerate the response
curves of the combustor—the OASPL as function of the equiva-
lence ratio—shown in Fig. 9 by plotting the OASPL against the
heat release parameter. Since, the dependence on all the operating
conditions are represented by this parameter alone, the response
curves should collapse onto a global curve independent of the op-
erating conditions. However, attempting to collapse the data using
the laminar burning velocity did not produce satisfactory results.
For this reason, we focused our attention in modifying the lam-
inar burning velocity by including the role of strain on laminar
ﬂames over the same range of equivalence ratios, fuel compositions
and inlet temperatures. Especially with different fuel compositions,
strain signiﬁcantly impacts the burning velocity [36].
We investigated the effect of strain by simulating a laminar
ﬂame stabilized in a planar stagnation ﬂow. Reactants are supplied
on one side, the equilibrium state products of the reactants are
supplied on the other, and the ﬂame stabilizes in the vicinity of the
stagnation point. The corresponding potential ﬂow velocity ﬁeld is
characterized by the time-varying strain rate parameter a. The one-
dimensional governing equations for the ﬂame structure are found
by using a boundary layer approximation across the ﬂame thick-
ness. The governing equations are discretized using an implicit
ﬁnite-difference method. The solution is obtained using a precon-
ditioned inexact Newton–Krylov method. Cantera [37] is used to
evaluate the chemical source terms and the various physical prop-
erties. Because of its strong inﬂuence on the diffusion of hydrogen,
the Soret contribution to diffusive ﬂuxes is included. Details of the
numerical method may be found in previous papers [38,39]. We
Fig. 23. Laminar burning velocities of propane–hydrogen ﬂames as a function of
equivalence ratio, fuel composition and inlet temperature.
use a reduced chemical kinetic-mechanism for propane combus-
tion developed at the UCSD Center of Energy Research [40].
There are many possible ways to deﬁne a ﬂame speed for a
strained ﬂame. Here, we use the consumption speed, Sc, found by
integrating the energy equation across the ﬂame. The consumption
speed is deﬁned as
Sc =
 ∞
−∞q′′′/cp dy
ρu(Tb −Tu)
(17)
where q′′′ is the volumetric heat release rate, cp is the speciﬁc
heat of the mixture, y is the coordinate normal to the ﬂame, ρu
is the unburned mixture density, and Tu and Tb are the unburned
and burned temperature, respectively. As the strain rate parameter
a approaches 0, the consumption speed approaches the laminar
burning velocity.
To
understand
the
effects
of
strain
on
propane–hydrogen
ﬂames, we ran a comprehensive set of numerical simulations cov-
ering the fuel compositions, equivalence ratios and inlet tempera-
tures used in Fig. 9, and strain rates ranging from 10 to 6000 s−1.
In all cases, the oxidizer was air and the pressure was atmospheric.
The laminar burning velocity, i.e. at a = 0, as a function of
equivalence ratio for each fuel composition considered in the ex-
periment and inlet temperatures of 300 K and 500 K is shown in
Fig. 23. The laminar burning velocity is determined by extrapolat-
ing the consumption speed to a strain rate of zero, analogous to
the commonly employed technique for determining laminar burn-
ing velocity from experimentally observed strained ﬂames. The
burning velocity rises substantially with inlet temperature as ex-
pected. For the equivalence ratios considered here, increasing hy-
drogen concentration raises the burning velocity despite the neg-
ligible change in the adiabatic ﬂame temperature as shown in
Fig. 24. Clearly, the impact of hydrogen enrichment is physical and
not chemical.
Fig. 25 shows the effect of strain rate on ﬂames with equiva-
lence ratio φ = 0.70 for each of the fuel compositions considered
in the experiment, and inlet temperatures of 300 K and 500 K.
Asymptotic analysis of strained ﬂames predicts that the consump-
tion speeds of ﬂames with Lewis numbers greater than unity de-
crease with positive strain, and that decrease is proportional to the
departure of the Lewis number from unity. The results shown in
this ﬁgure are consistent with the expected trend; the consump-
tion speed of the ﬂames with highest hydrogen content (Lewis
number is closest to unity) has the weakest response to increasing
the strain rate. When the inlet temperature is raised, the response


--- Page 13 ---

H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
1123
Fig. 24. Adiabatic ﬂame temperatures of propane–hydrogen ﬂames as a function of
equivalence ratio, fuel composition and inlet temperature.
Fig. 25. Effect of strain rate on consumption speed of ﬂames at φ = 0.70 with vary-
ing fuel compositions and inlet temperature.
on the strain rate becomes stronger for all fuel compositions. (In
the case of syngas ﬂames, we observed opposite trends for the re-
sponse of ﬂames with different hydrogen content to the strain rate,
since in this case the Lewis number is less than unity. Increasing
the amount of hydrogen in syngas ﬂames increases the departure
of Lewis number from unity, resulting in stronger response of the
consumption speed to strain rate [36,41].)
In Fig. 26, we plot the consumption speed as a function of the
equivalence ratio for each fuel composition, and inlet temperatures
of 300 K and 500 K, at a strain rate of a = 2000 s−1. The depen-
dence of the consumption speed on the equivalence ratio is nearly
linear for each fuel composition and inlet temperature. When we
compare this ﬁgure to the unstrained case, Fig. 23, we observe that
the strained ﬂames with less hydrogen content are more strongly
impacted by the strain rate when compared to higher hydrogen
content ﬂames, especially at high equivalence ratios. The Lewis
number dependent response of the consumption speed to stretch
is greater at higher equivalence ratios.
These results clearly demonstrate that the strained ﬂame con-
sumption speed Sc is more sensitive to the operating conditions
than the laminar burning velocity. When using the consumption
to reduce the experimental data, there is one undetermined con-
Fig. 26. Consumption speed of propane–hydrogen ﬂames at a ﬁxed strain rate of
a = 2000 s−1 as a function of equivalence ratio at different fuel compositions and
inlet temperatures.
stant a, which can be thought of as a typical strain rate averaged
over the entire ﬂame. Here, we select values of a which produces
the best correspondence with the experimental data at each inlet
temperature, i.e. the value for which the OASPL as a function the
heat release parameter looks essentially the same for all fuel com-
positions at each inlet temperature. In Fig. 27 we plot the OASPL
against the heat release parameter using the consumption speed
for the burning velocity for the data in Fig. 9 using strain rates of
2000 s−1, 2300 s−1, 2700 s−1 and 3000 s−1 for inlet temperatures
of 300 K, 400 K, 500 K and 600 K, respectively. As the inlet tem-
perature increases, the average inlet velocity also increases for the
same Reynolds number. Since the strain rate is proportional to the
velocity, the strain rates are higher at higher inlet temperatures,
consistent with the values used in generating Fig. 27. Moreover,
as the inlet temperature increases, the average ﬂame location be-
comes closer to the step, where the strain rate is the highest. Here
we see that, for the most part, the data are well-correlated with
the heat release parameter at these values of the strain rates.
We next proceed to further validate the collapse of the data
when plotted against the heat release parameter. We plot the
OASPL against the heat release parameter in Fig. 28 selecting ar-
bitrary fuel compositions and inlet temperatures from Fig. 27.
The ﬁgure shows that the transitions between different operat-
ing modes—independent of the fuel composition, equivalence ra-
tio and the inlet temperature—are correlated well with the heat
release parameter, which is a global parameter representing the
ﬂame–vortex interaction dynamics. As mentioned before, since the
combustor shows strong dependence on the history of the oper-
ating conditions, minor differences at different operating condi-
tions are expected. The transition from the quasi-stable to unsta-
ble mode occurs at Sc(ρu/ρb −1) ≈50 cm/s, and the unstable
mode to high-frequency unstable mode transition takes place at
Sc(ρu/ρb −1) ≈120 cm/s.
Finally, we verify the theory derived in Eqs. (15) and (16). We
deﬁne r as the ratio between the heat release parameters at the
unstable to high-frequency unstable transition and at the quasi-
stable to unstable transition. From Eqs. (15) and (16):
r = SL(ρu/ρb −1)|u→hfu
SL(ρu/ρb −1)|qs→u
= 2
3
f5/4
f1/4
.
(18)
The resonant frequencies corresponding to high-frequency unstable
and unstable cases, respectively, are 132 Hz and 36 Hz (see Sec-
tion 3.3). Thus, the ratio predicted by the theory is: r = 2.44. The


--- Page 14 ---

1124
H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
Fig. 27. OASPL as a function of heat release parameter, Sc(ρu/ρb −1), at different hydrogen concentrations for (a) Tin = 300 K, a = 2000 s−1; (b) Tin = 400 K, a = 2300 s−1;
(c) Tin = 500 K, a = 2700 s−1; (d) Tin = 600 K, a = 3000 s−1.
Fig. 28. OASPL as a function of heat release parameter, Sc(ρu/ρb −1), at different
hydrogen concentrations and inlet temperatures.
ratio found from the experimental measurements is: r = 120/50 =
2.40. The theory predicts the experimental measurements with
great accuracy! The constant c in Eqs. (15) and (16) is calculated
using the experimental heat release rate parameter at the quasi-
stable to unstable transition:
c = SL(ρu/ρb −1)|qs→u
H f1/4
(19)
which is 0.7.
This analysis show that the stability of the combustor is gov-
erned by the transport of the large wake vortex to the upper wall
of the combustor. The complicated ﬂame–vortex interaction dy-
namics can be reduced to a single parameter, Sc(ρu/ρb −1), which
carries information about the interaction between the ﬂame and
the hydrodynamics with different reactant mixture compositions
and the volume expansion as a result of the chemical reaction. The
former is represented by the consumption speed Sc, and the latter
is represented by ρu/ρb −1.
4. Conclusions
In this paper, we systematically investigated the stability map
and combustion dynamics in a backward-facing step combustor


--- Page 15 ---

H.M. Altay et al. / Combustion and Flame 156 (2009) 1111–1125
1125
where the dynamics are driven solely by ﬂame–vortex interactions,
that is in the absence of equivalence ratio oscillations. Simulta-
neous pressure, velocity, heat release rate and equivalence ratio
measurements and high-speed video from the experiments were
used to identify and characterize several distinct operating modes.
We observed four distinct operating modes of the combustor de-
pending on the inlet temperature and the equivalence ratio. At
high but lean equivalence ratios, the combustor is unstable as a
result of the strong interaction between the large unsteady wake
vortex and the ﬂame. The ﬂame propagates upstream of the step
during a part of the cycle. At intermediate equivalence ratios, the
combustor is quasi-stable with the ﬂame staying attached to the
step at all times. Near the blowout limit, long stable ﬂames are
observed. When the inlet temperature is atmospheric, the quasi-
stable and the unstable ﬂames couple with the 1/4 wavemode of
the combustor. When the inlet temperature is increased, at high
but lean equivalence ratios, the 5/4 wavemode of the combus-
tor is excited, increasing the resonant frequency signiﬁcantly. This
operating mode is the high-frequency unstable mode, where the
ﬂame is more compact compared to the unstable case. Increas-
ing the inlet temperature and hydrogen concentration shifts the
response curves of the combustor toward lower equivalence ra-
tios. As the inlet temperature is increased, the stable operating
band becomes narrower. The vertical velocity of the large wake
vortex is proportional to the heat release parameter, and controls
the moment when the vortex reaches the upper wall of the com-
bustor producing a heat release pulse. We demonstrated that the
consumption speed of strained ﬂames can be used to collapse
the response curves describing the transitions among different dy-
namic modes onto a function of the heat release parameter alone.
We predict the critical values of the heat release parameter at
which transitions between quasi-stable to unstable, and unstable
to high-frequency unstable operating modes take place, which may
provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts during the design stage of the combus-
tors.
In future studies, we plan to extend this work by performing
high speed PIV measurements in order to determine the instan-
taneous velocity ﬁelds and to deﬁne the origin of the strain rates
used to calculate the ﬂame consumption speeds. We will move the
fuel injector closer to the step to introduce temporal equivalence
ratio variations and analyze their impact on the ﬂame–vortex in-
teraction mechanism.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by ONR contracts N00014-
05-1-0434 and N00014-05-1-0252, and US Department of En-
ergy, University Turbine Systems Research Program, grant DE-FC26-
02NT41431. We would like to thank the MIT Edgerton Center for
generously allowing use of their high-speed video camera to cap-
ture the ﬂame images shown in this article.
References
[1] L. Rayleigh, The Theory of Sound, vol. 2, 2nd edition, Macmillan, London, 1896,
pp. 224–234.
[2] W.C. Strahle, J. Fluid Mech. 49 (2) (1971) 399–414.
[3] A.P. Dowling, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. 214 (Part A) (2000) 317–331.
[4] S. Ducruix, T. Schuller, D. Durox, S. Candel, J. Propul. Power 19 (5) (2003) 722–
733.
[5] T. Lieuwen, J. Propul. Power 19 (5) (2003) 765–781.
[6] K.K. Venkataraman, B.J. Lee, L.H. Preston, D.W. Simons, J.G. Lee, D.A. Santavicca,
J. Propul. Power 15 (6) (1999) 909–918.
[7] D. Bernier, F. Lacas, S. Candel, J. Propul. Power 20 (4) (2004) 648–656.
[8] T.J. Poinsot, A.C. Trouve, D. Veynante, S. Candel, E. Esposito, J. Fluid Mech. 177
(1987) 265–292.
[9] K.C. Schadow, E. Gutmark, T.P. Parr, D.M. Parr, K.J. Wilson, J.E. Crump, Combust.
Sci. Technol. 64 (1989) 167–186.
[10] K.H. Yu, A. Trouve, J.W. Daily, J. Fluid Mech. 232 (1991) 47–72.
[11] H.N. Najm, A.F. Ghoniem, J. Propul. Power 10 (6) (1994) 769–776.
[12] D. Thibaut, S. Candel, Combust. Flame 113 (1–2) (1998) 53–65.
[13] C. Fureby, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28 (2000) 783–791.
[14] Y. Huang, H.G. Sung, S.Y. Hsieh, V. Yang, J. Propul. Power 19 (5) (2003) 782–794.
[15] T.C. Lieuwen, V. Yang (Eds.), Combustion Instabilities in Gas Turbine Engines:
Operational Experiences, Fundamental Mechanisms and Modeling, Progress in
Astronautics and Aeronautics, vol. 210, AIAA, 2005.
[16] A.F. Ghoniem, S. Park, A. Wachsman, A.M. Annaswamy, D. Wee, H.M. Altay,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 1783–1790.
[17] T. Yoshimura, V.G.M.G.S. Samuelsen, in: 50th ASME Turbo Expo Conference,
2005, ASME Paper GT2005-68785.
[18] L. Figura, J.G. Lee, B.D. Quay, D.A. Santavicca, in: 52nd ASME Turbo Expo Con-
ference, 2007, ASME Paper GT2007-27298.
[19] D.M. Wicksall, A.K. Agrawal, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 32 (2007) 1103–1112.
[20] T. Lieuwen, V. McDonell, E. Petersen, D. Santavicca, J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power 130
(2008), 011506, 10 pp.
[21] C. Uykur, P.F. Henshaw, D.S.K. Ting, R.M. Barron, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 26
(2001) 265–273.
[22] G.A. Karim, I. Wierzba, Y. Al-Alousi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 21 (7) (1996) 625–
631.
[23] J.L. Gauducheau, B. Denet, G. Searby, Combust. Sci. Technol. 137 (1998) 81–99.
[24] G.S. Jackson, R. Sai, J.M. Plaia, C.M. Boggs, K.T. Kiger, Combust. Flame 132
(2003) 503–511.
[25] M. Matalon, B.J. Matkowsky, J. Fluid Mech. 124 (1982) 239–259.
[26] C.K. Law, Proc. Combust. Inst. 22 (1988) 1381–1402.
[27] S.M. Candel, T.J. Poinsot, Combust. Sci. Technol. 70 (1990) 1–15.
[28] M. Janus, G.A. Richards, M.J. Yip, E.H. Robey, in: 42nd ASME Turbo Expo Con-
ference, 1997, ASME Paper GT97-266.
[29] D. Fritsche, M. Furi, K. Boulouchos, Combust. Flame 151 (1–2) (2007) 29–36.
[30] B. Higgins, M.Q. McQuay, F. Lacas, S. Candel, Fuel 80 (2001) 1583–1591.
[31] H.N. Najm, O.M. Knio, P. Paul, P.S. Wyckoff, Combust. Sci. Technol. 140 (1998)
369–403.
[32] J.G. Lee, K. Kwanwoo, D.A. Santavicca, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28 (2000) 415–421.
[33] T. Lieuwen, H. Torres, C. Johnson, B. Zinn, J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power 123 (1) (2001)
182–189.
[34] A.P. Dowling, S.R. Stow, J. Propul. Power 19 (5) (2003) 751–764.
[35] P.G. Mehta, M.C. Soteriou, A. Banaszuk, Combust. Flame 141 (4) (2005) 392–
405.
[36] R.L. Speth, A.F. Ghoniem, Proc. Combust. Inst. 32 (2) (2009) 2993–3000.
[37] D.G. Goodwin, Cantera: Object-oriented software for reacting ﬂows, Tech. rep.,
http://www.cantera.org/.
[38] Y.M. Marzouk, A.F. Ghoniem, H.N. Najm, AIAA J. 41 (4) (2003) 641–652.
[39] R.L. Speth, Y.M. Marzouk, A.F. Ghoniem, in: 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences
Meeting, 2005, AIAA-2005-143.
[40] M.V. Petrova, F.A. Williams, Combust. Flame 144 (3) (2006) 526–544.
[41] R.L. Speth, H.M. Altay, D.E. Hudgins, A.M. Annaswamy, A.F. Ghoniem, in: 46th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, 2008, AIAA-2008-1053.
