
--- Page 1 ---

Department 
of Chemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 
Oklahoma 
Sublimation of Iodine Crystals Suitable 
for Profile Angle Measurements 
By 
A. (]. Shead 
With 1 Figure 
(Received November 14, 1961) 
Very volatile substances that tend to evaporate rapidly at room 
temperature require special methods to obtain and preserve them in 
crystalline form long enough to measure angles and to take photographs. 
Examples of such sublimable substances include p-dichlorobenzene, 
naphthalene, and iodine. The last is chosen to illustrate the method. 
A pparatu~ and Procedure 
The apparatus used is described elsewhere 2 and mentioned in the 
preceding article on pseudosublimation but will be briefly referred to 
as necessary. The sublimation cell used is a glass ring about 4 mm high 
and about 16 mm in diameter sandwiched between two microscope 
slides at their centers. The upper condensing slide is greased with sebum 
from the face and fingers and the excess is wiped off as completely as 
possible with a dean, lintless cloth. 
At the center of the slide in contact with the surface of the gradient 
hot plate is placed the ring that forms the cell wall. Within this ring 
is spread as thinly and uniformly as possible but not as a continuous film, 
a small quantity ol finely crushed iodine. 
This even distribution is 
important as it tends to produce an even evolution of vapor and an even 
build up of symmetrical crystals. Otherwise, distorted forms are more 
likely to appear. The 50.0 ~ C spot on the gradient hot plate is located by 
strewing p-dichlorobenzene (m. p. 53.0 ~ C) crystals on it. The sublimation 
cell is placed on the spot where the p-dichlorobenzene just fails to melt. 
After a few seconds, the ring is capped by the greased condensing 
slide, preheated to about the same temperature (50.0 ~ C). After heating 
at this temperature for from one to five minutes with about 1.5 rain. 


--- Page 2 ---

A. C. Shead: Sublimation of Iodine Crystals 
499 
to 2.5 rain. as the optimum time, the cell is removed from the hot plate 
as a unit and allowed to cool to room temperature for a minute or two. 
The condensing slide is now removed from the cell and immediately 
covered with a coverslip of much greater area than the crystalline deposit on 
the slide. A square cover glass of about 25 mm on a side is satisfactory. If the 
volatile crystals are left in the subliming cell for any length of time at room 
temperature, they will start to evaporate and lose their sharp outlines. 
By restricting the space into which they might evaporate by covering 
Fig. 1. Iodine Crystals; approx. 450• 
the crystals with a cover glass, they are preserved long enough for photo- 
graphing or angular measurement. 
Different preparations may have 
robe made for these purposes. The bottom and top slides can be clamped 
to the ring of the cell with rubber bands over their ends while the cell 
cools, and later the cover glass can be sealed to the condensing slide with 
scotch tape if desired or necessary for more volatile substances than 
iodine. This is not necessary for iodine unless the same crystals are to be 
used for both, measurement and photography. 
The following values were found for profile angles with straight sides 
on crystals, the outlines of which were completely in focus 1. 
Obtuse Profile Angle o/ Rhomb (and the two opposite angles of a 
hexagon): 128.4 ~ , measured average of twelve different angles. 
Acute Profile Angle o/Rhomb (and the two opposite angles of another 
hexagon): calculated, 180 ~ --128.4 ~ =51.6~ 
measured: 51.4 ~ an 
average of three different angles. 
32* 


--- Page 3 ---

500 
A.C. Shead: Sublimation of Iodine Crystals 
Four Equal Angles o] a Hexagon." 115.7 ~ measured as an average of 
six different values. 
Four Equal Angles o/ a Hexagon: calculated: 0.25 (720 ~ -- 2 • 128.4 ~ 
= 115.8 ~ 
Four Equal Angles o/ Another Hexagon: calculated: 0.25 (720 ~ 
2 • 51.6 ~ -~ 154.2 ~ 
Each angle was measured once in each of the four quadrants marked 
out by the cross hairs in the ocular, and the values were averaged for 
each result reported. This is expecially important for a black, opaque 
crystal like iodine since the variation in individual measurements is 
greater than for a transparent crystal where both sides of a boundry 
line are visible. The average is satisfactory and can be duplicated even 
in cases where the difference in individual measurements may amount 
to as much as two angular degrees or :~ 1.0 ~ from the average. 
Fig. 1 shows a representative iodine crystal. 
Acknowledgements 
Financial assistance from the Faculty ]~esearch Fund in defraying 
the expenses for photomicrographs is gratefully acknowledged. 
Summary 
The sublimation and preservation of very volatile substances are 
discussed. The material must be evenly distributed over the heated 
surface of the cell. 
To preserve volatile crystals for measurement and photography, the 
surrounding space must be reduced to a minimum. 
Zusammen~assung 
Um gleiehm~Big entwiekelte, plattenf6rmige Kristalle zur Profilwinkel- 
messung and Mikrophotographie zu erhalten, ist es notwendig, das Sub- 
limationsgut gleichmi~f3ig auf den Boden der Kammer zu verteilen. Um 
die Form der Kristalle fliiehtiger Substanzen far einige Zeit unver~ndert zu 
erhalten, m~ssen sie nach der Sublimation sehnell in einem kleinen Raum 
eingeschlossen werden, um die u 
hintanzuhMten. 
R4sum6 
Pour obtenir des cristaux en plaques, rdguli6rement ddvelopp6s, pour la 
mesure des angles di6dres et leur microphotographie, il est n6eessaire de 
distribucr bien r6guli6rement la matibre ~ sublimer sur le fond de la chambre. 
Pour emp6eher pendant un certain temps la forme des cristaux des substances 
volatilcs de se modifier, on doit los enfermer rapidement dans un petit volume 
apr6s lear sublimation afin de retarder la vaporisation. 
Literature 
1 E. M. Chamot and C. W. Mason, Handbook of Chemical Microscopy, 
Vol. 1, NewYork: Wiley. 1938. p. 406. 
2 A. C. Shead, Mikroehem. Acts [Wien] 1959, 657. 
