
--- Page 1 ---

Controlling mechanisms for low NOx emissions in
a non-premixed stagnation point reverse ﬂow combustor
P. Gopalakrishnan *, M.K. Bobba, J.M. Seitzman
School of Aerospace Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0150, USA
Abstract
The controlling processes in the operation of a non-premixed, stagnation point reverse ﬂow (SPRF)
combustor are investigated. The combustor consists of a central injector at the single open end of a cylin-
drical chamber. The injector inlet area is much less than the area through which exhaust products leave.
The SPRF combustor operates stably at low equivalence ratios without external preheating or swirl,
and produces low NOx emissions in both premixed and non-premixed modes of operation. Non-intrusive
imaging diagnostics are used to understand the combustor operation. Simultaneous Planar Laser-Induced
Fluorescence (PLIF) imaging of OH radicals and chemiluminescence imaging are used to characterize the
reaction and heat release zone and the ﬂame products. Separate measurements with Particle Image Veloc-
imetry (PIV) provide the reacting velocity ﬁeld, and elastic laser sheet scattering from liquid droplets seeded
into the fuel characterize its mixing. The velocity and chemiluminescence data indicate the ﬂame is stabi-
lized in a region of low mean and high rms velocity. Together with some product entrainment, this enables
stable operation of the combustor at very lean overall equivalence ratios. The non-premixed mode of oper-
ation is found to be similar to the premixed case in many ways. Though, in non-premixed operation, the
ﬂame is lifted well away from the injector, so that signiﬁcant air and fuel premixing occurs before combus-
tion. Similar NOx emission for both operating modes is attributed to eﬃcient mixing of nearly all the fuel
and air before burning. This is conﬁrmed through a combination of oil droplet results, OH PLIF compar-
isons and laminar ﬂame modeling. The latter indicates entrainment of products is not directly responsible
for low NOx emissions at a given overall fuel–air ratio, but rather is likely to contribute to a slight increase
in NOx levels compared to a system with no product entrainment.
 2006 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: NOx; Non-premixed combustion; SPRF combustor
1. Introduction
Environmental concerns and legislative regula-
tions are driving combustor manufacturers to
meet increasingly more stringent emission stan-
dards while maintaining (or improving) eﬃciency
and reliability. For example, reductions in NOx
emissions from land-based, gas turbine combus-
tors have been achieved mainly through lean pre-
mixed/partially premixed combustion, dilution
with exhaust gases and staged combustion, all of
which lower peak ﬂame temperatures and conse-
quently NOx emissions. In the most common
approach, premixed (or partially premixed) com-
bustion however, static and dynamic stability is
compromised as the mixture is made leaner. This
results from the weaker combustion process,
1540-7489/$ - see front matter  2006 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.256
* Corresponding author. Fax: +1 404 463 0888.
E-mail address: gtg243c@mail.gatech.edu (P. Gopala-
krishnan).
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 31 (2007) 3401–3408
www.elsevier.com/locate/proci
Proceedings
of the
Combustion
Institute


--- Page 2 ---

which is more vulnerable to small perturbations in
combustor operating conditions [1].
Flames with highly preheated combustion air
can be much more stable and homogeneous as
compared to room-temperature air combustion
[2]. Hence the combustor can operate at much
leaner equivalence ratios. Combined with the
more uniform thermal ﬁeld, this results in lower
peak temperatures and reduced NOx. An alterna-
tive approach to lowering NOx is ﬂue gas recircu-
lation (FGR). Dilution of the reactants with
cooled, inert products lowers the oxygen concen-
tration
and
temperature
before
combustion,
which increases ignition delay [3]. This causes
the combustion zone to be spread over the entire
mixing region rather than in a thin front. The
increased ignition delay also allows suﬃcient time
for premixing of fuel and air before burning
occurs. The result is a more uniform temperature
distribution that helps to lower NOx. In contrast
to FGR, many combustors also have some inter-
nal or external recirculation of hot products,
denoted
here
as
exhaust
gas
recirculation
(EGR). NOx reductions similar to those obtained
by FGR have been predicted for hot EGR [4].
However, the role of EGR in lowering NOx emis-
sions
is
not
completely
understood,
as
the
enhanced reactivity due to addition of hot prod-
ucts and radicals oﬀsets the increased ignition
delay
produced
by
lowering
the
oxygen
concentration.
Measurements of NOx emissions in jet diﬀu-
sion ﬂames with coaxial air [5–7] have shown sig-
niﬁcant reduction of NOx in hydrogen- and
methane–air ﬂames. The high shear produced by
the high velocity coaxial air results in enhanced
fuel–air mixing before combustion and lowers
the residence times, resulting in lower emissions.
A lab-scale, ultra-low emissions combustor
incorporating some of the above features was
recently demonstrated [8]. This Stagnation Point
Reverse Flow (SPRF) combustor’s unique design
enables it to burn gaseous or liquid fuels with
low NOx and CO emissions. The combustor con-
sists of a tube with one open end and the other
closed. Contrary to most combustors, the reac-
tants and products enter and leave this combustor
at the same (open) end. In the investigated conﬁg-
uration, the reactants are injected along the com-
bustor center line, while the products ﬂow in the
reverse direction to exit the combustor, allowing
the outﬂowing products and inﬂowing reactants
to come into direct contact in a thin shear layer.
A somewhat similar reverse ﬂow geometry was
employed previously for turbulent combustion
studies [9]. However in that partially premixed
reactor, a large recirculation zone produced by a
water-cooled bluﬀbody separated the reactant
and product ﬂows.
Because the exiting products ﬂow directly over
the reactant injector in the SPRF design, they pro-
duce ‘‘internal’’ preheating of the reactants before
injection. While low NOx emissions from this
combustor operating with lean premixed reactants
might be expected, non-premixed operation can
also achieve very low NOx levels. For example,
previous work [8] showed that the NOx emissions
at a ﬁxed equivalence ratio were roughly similar
for both modes of operation.
To experimentally examine the operation of
the SPRF combustor with non-premixed reac-
tants, we employ several non-intrusive ﬂowﬁeld
imaging methods, including planar laser-induced
ﬂuorescence (PLIF) of OH radicals, which marks
the reaction zone and hot products, and chemilu-
minescence imaging, which indicates regions of
heat release. These techniques have been com-
monly employed, for example to study turbulent
jet ﬂames [10,11]. Particle image velocimetry
(PIV) [12] is used to characterize the velocity ﬁeld
of the reacting ﬂow. Finally, scattering from oil
droplets seeded into the fuel provides information
on fuel mixing with air and products.
2. Experimental setup
The SPRF combustor used for the current
studies is a laboratory scale, atmospheric pressure
device. It consists of a dual concentric tube injec-
tor (diameter, Dinj = 12.5 mm) centrally located in
a 70 mm inner diameter quartz tube, which is
closed at the bottom end (Fig. 1). Premixed reac-
tants (natural gas and air) are introduced through
the injector’s annulus in premixed operation. For
non-premixed
combustion,
fuel
is
injected
through the inner tube and air through the annu-
lus; so no mixing can occur until the ﬂows enter
the combustor. Fuel and air ﬂow rates are con-
trolled
separately
with
calibrated
rotameters.
The combustor is insulated with a close ﬁtting,
hollow alumina cylinder cut into four sections.
For optical access, a 150 window is removed
from one of the sections, which can be placed at
diﬀerent axial locations. Thus the optical mea-
surements are acquired for one-quarter of the
combustor at a time; the complete ﬁeld is derived
by splicing them together. The sheets for the laser
diagnostic
techniques
enter
the
combustor
through a quartz base plate. The temperature of
the reactants and the exhaust gases are monitored
with an unshielded K-type thermocouple. Emis-
sion measurements are obtained with a gas ana-
lyzer (Horiba PG-250) and an uncooled, ceramic
sampling
probe
located
in
the
exhaust
gas
25 mm into the combustor. The thermocouple
and sampling probe are not present, however,
while the optical measurements are recorded.
Measurements of the two-dimensional velocity
ﬁeld are obtained with a typical PIV system. The
combustion air and fuel are separately seeded with
1–2 lm aluminum oxide particles and illuminated
3402
P. Gopalakrishnan et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 31 (2007) 3401–3408


--- Page 3 ---

with a laser light sheet produced from the 2nd
harmonic output of a dual-head, pulsed Nd:YAG
laser (Surelite I-10). The beam is converted into a
thin sheet (0.4 mm) with two cylindrical lenses,
and enters the combustor from the closed end
(Fig. 1). For the current measurements, the laser
pulse energies were nearly 90 mJ. The correlated
pairs of particle scattering images are acquired
with a 12-bit interline CCD camera (MicroMAX,
1300 · 1030 pixels) and a 50 mm, f 1/1.8 camera
lens. The timing between the two laser heads
and the camera shutter is synchronized with a dig-
ital pulse generator. Pulse delays between the
image pairs vary from 3 to 11 ls for diﬀerent
regions
of
the
combustor.
The
images
are
acquired for 55 · 89 mm segments of the combus-
tor and then spliced together to produce the com-
plete
combustor
velocity
ﬁeld.
Commercial
software (Insight 6, TSI) is used to calculate the
velocity ﬁeld. An FFT based cross-correlation
technique is employed to ﬁnd the average particle
displacement in a 64 · 64 pixel region with a 50%
overlap in the interrogation areas yielding a total
of 1209 vectors. The particle displacements are
obtained with a 0.1 pixel accuracy using a Gauss-
ian sub-pixel interpolation algorithm. Each vector
represents the average velocity in an interrogation
volume 2.19 · 2.19 · 0.4 mm.
Mixing of unburned, cold fuel with air and hot
products is investigated by seeding the fuel with 5–
10 lm diameter olive oil droplets (and without
alumina seeding of either fuel or air). The oil
droplets are generated with a laskin nozzle seeder
design [13], where the nozzle is immersed in the
oil. The number of droplets produced from this
device remains linear with input pressure, as long
as the nozzles are choked. The distribution of
droplets in the combustor is determined with the
same optical system employed for PIV.
OH ﬁelds are determined with a PLIF system
tuned
to
excite
the
Q1(6)
line
of
the
A2R+(m
0 = 1) ‹ X2P(m00 = 0). The excitation radi-
ation is produced by frequency-doubling the out-
put of a tunable (Lambda Physik) dye laser,
pumped by the second harmonic of a Nd:YAG.
The laser beam, with a pulse energy of roughly
17 mJ, is expanded into a sheet 69 mm wide and
300 lm thick with three fused silica lenses. The
laser sheet passes through a diametrical plane,
and illuminates nearly the whole width and length
of the combustor. The emitted ﬂuorescence light is
detected normal to the sheet with a 25 mm inten-
siﬁed
camera
(PI-MAX,
1024 · 256
pixels)
equipped
with
a
UV-Nikkor
lens
(105 mm,
f/4.5). Schott glass ﬁlters (WG305, UG11) placed
in front of the lens limit the detected ﬂuorescence
to the range 300–370 nm. A pixel resolution of
300 lm is obtained with this conﬁguration.
A second intensiﬁed camera (Princeton Instru-
ments
ICCD-576-S/RB-E,
18 mm
intensiﬁer,
384 · 576
pixels)
and
interference
ﬁlter
(430 ± 5 nm) is used to collect CH* and CO
2
chemiluminescence. The intensiﬁer gate of the sec-
ond camera is synchronized with the OH-PLIF
system, such that the exposure begins 100 ns after
the OH laser (after the OH ﬂuorescence has
decayed) and lasts 250 ls. This provides nearly
simultaneous measurement of OH and chemilumi-
nescence. The chemiluminescence camera is also
mounted at right angles to the laser sheet, and
its ﬁeld-of-view covers the full width of the com-
bustor, resulting in a pixel resolution of 250 lm.
3. Results and discussion
As noted previously, one of the interesting fea-
tures of the SPRF conﬁguration is its ability to
Fig. 1. Schematic of experimental set-up—OH-PLIF/Chemiluminescence and PIV data acquired non-simultaneously.
P. Gopalakrishnan et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 31 (2007) 3401–3408
3403


--- Page 4 ---

achieve essentially premixed combustor perfor-
mance in a non-premixed mode of operation. Fig-
ure 2 shows a comparison of NOx emissions for
the current conﬁguration operating in premixed
and non-premixed modes. The non-premixed
emissions are comparable to those obtained in
premixed operation across a wide range of condi-
tions. Possible explanations are that the fuel and
air are completely premixed within the combustor,
before burning, or that the entrainment of prod-
ucts into the fuel and air (essentially EGR) acts
to lower O-atom concentrations thereby reducing
NOx levels. To better understand the non-pre-
mixed operation of the combustor, velocity ﬁelds
and ﬂame structure were determined for a total
(fuel + air) inlet mass ﬂow rate of 8.1 g/s and an
overall equivalence ratio (/) of 0.58 correspond-
ing to a power density of 13.3 MW/m3. These con-
ditions were chosen to match a separate study of
the combustor operating in premixed mode.
The average axial velocity ﬁeld (Fig. 3a) based
on 400 individual realizations, indicates peak air
velocities of the order of 90 m/s. This is higher
than the calculated value based on the cold, reac-
tant inlet ﬂow. However, preheating of the incom-
ing air by the exhaust products ﬂowing over the
outside of the injector will tend to increase the
inlet velocity. Since the inner fuel tube is shielded
by the air, the fuel has little preheating. The closed
end opposite the injector forces the incoming jet
to slow down and reverse direction. The reverse
ﬂow velocities of the product gases are around
20 m/s. On average, there is also noticeable recir-
culation between the forward (jet) and reverse
ﬂows for x > 75 mm, where x denotes axial dis-
tance from the injector exit.
The mean velocities and turbulence intensities
are compared for premixed and non-premixed
modes in Fig. 3b. Near the open end of the com-
bustor (x < 100 mm), the centerline axial veloci-
ties
are
higher
for
premixed
combustion.
Initially, some diﬀerence would be expected due to
the diﬀerence in inlet area; premixed operation
utilizes only the annular passage of the concentric
injector. However, it is unlikely that this diﬀerence
would persist more than a few injector diameters.
Further downstream, the axial velocities are
approximately equal, with the premixed mode
exhibiting greater turbulence levels. The overall
ﬂow features, however, are similar in both pre-
mixed and non-premixed modes of operation with
the presence of a low U and high u0rms region in
the second half of the combustor that has been
shown to help stabilize the ﬂame for premixed
operation in a separate study.
The importance of this region for non-pre-
mixed operation is evident from the average (100
images) chemiluminescence ﬁeld (Fig. 4a). Most
of the heat release occurs for 150 < x < 220 mm.
Unlike the premixed combustor (Fig. 4b), there
is negligible heat release close to the injector; the
ﬂame is completely lifted and stabilized only in
the region of lower velocity and high unsteadiness.
The large standoﬀdistance suggests there is time
Fig. 2. Variation of NOx emissions with adiabatic ﬂame
temperature based on overall equivalence ratio and
measured inlet temperature in premixed and non-
premixed modes.
Fig. 3. (a) Mean axial velocity contours and streamlines
in non-premixed mode. (b) Centerline variation of mean
axial velocity and turbulence intensity for premixed and
non-premixed modes of operation.
3404
P. Gopalakrishnan et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 31 (2007) 3401–3408


--- Page 5 ---

for fuel and air to mix, and also to entrain product
gases before reaching the ﬂame zone. The reduced
heat release in the ﬁrst half of the combustor also
explains the lower initial velocities found for non-
premixed operation (Fig. 3); the lower heat release
causes less expansion and a reduced acceleration
of the ﬂow.
The rate of fuel mixing was studied by imaging
light scattered from oil droplets seeded into the
fuel as described in the experimental section.
The boiling point of olive oil is 570 K; hence the
droplet size and therefore the scattered intensity
is reduced either by: (1) evaporation caused by
partial mixing with hot products or proximity to
the ﬂame zone, or (2) dilution due to mixing with
air or products. Mixing with air that has not
mixed with products will not lead to signiﬁcant
droplet evaporation, since the inlet air tempera-
ture is below 450 K. For an average droplet size
of 7 lm and for fuel velocities above 50 m/s, it is
estimated that a rapid drop in scattering intensity
due to evaporation would occur for temperatures
greater than 900 K. Hence, it may be inferred
that the regions where droplets are observed rep-
resent locations where the local temperature does
not exceed 900–1100 K.
Figure 5 shows the variation of the normalized
average, centerline droplet intensity with axial dis-
tance from the injector exit. Also shown is the
average chemiluminescence intensity along the
centerline. The decrease in droplet scattering
intensity is less than 20% within the ﬁrst 40 mm
(3Dinj). The corresponding chemiluminescence
intensities in this region are essentially zero. These
observations suggest some fuel–air mixing occurs
here, but little entrainment of products into the
fuel stream. In other words, the fuel is initially
shielded from the hot products by the annular air.
Further downstream, the scattered intensities
drop nearly linearly, until x  125 mm, at which
point the droplet scattering is reduced to the local
background level. The nearly linear decrease in
droplet scattering before this point suggests sig-
niﬁcant dilution of the fuel with air, and possibly
products, is occurring, but that the fraction of
products is suﬃciently low that the temperatures
do not exceed the 900–1100 K level much before
x  125 mm. The rapid increase in average chemi-
luminescence (or heat release) for the region
beyond 125 mm indicates temperatures there are
high enough to evaporate the oil droplets.
These results suggest that fuel–air mixing
occurs in the initial zone of the combustor, while
air and product mixing occurs in the shear layer
between the forward going reactants and the
reverse ﬂow of products. Though not shown here,
the instantaneous velocity ﬁelds indicate the pres-
ence of large vortical structures in the region of
the combustor where the chemiluminescence rap-
idly rises. These vortices cause rapid mixing of
partially premixed fuel–air packets with product
or product-air packets. Therefore, it may be
inferred that the fuel and air are at least partially
premixed before combustion occurs, and there is
some amount of products mixed with the fuel
and air when it burns. This product entrainment
facilitates the stabilization of lean ﬂames in the
downstream region characterized by low average
velocities and high turbulence levels. At this stage,
it is still unclear whether the comparable NOx
Fig. 5. Variation of centerline droplet intensity and
average centerline chemiluminescence signal with axial
distance from injector.
Fig. 4. Comparison of average chemiluminescence ﬁelds
for (a) non-premixed and (b) premixed modes of
operation.
P. Gopalakrishnan et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 31 (2007) 3401–3408
3405


--- Page 6 ---

levels between premixed and non-premixed modes
is a result of product dilution or fuel–air premix-
ing to the overall equivalence ratio of 0.58 before
burning occurs.
This question is addressed by comparing the
OH ﬁelds for the two modes of operation. Figure
6 shows the instantaneous OH ﬁelds for premixed
and
non-premixed
operation.
Starting
at
x  110 mm, the reactant streams (the central
dark regions in the images) show similar struc-
tures and penetration for both premixed and
non-premixed cases. However, just beyond the
point of maximum penetration, where the PLIF
images show somewhat uniform signals over a
broad region, the non-premixed case produces
higher ﬂuorescence intensities. Comparing 100
instantaneous images for each case, the non-pre-
mixed intensities are approximately 40% higher.
Based on the assumption that these broad uni-
form regions are close to OH equilibrium, the var-
iation of equilibrium OH concentration and the
corresponding (simulated) PLIF signal, which
also takes into account variations in quenching
and population fraction, were calculated as a
function of equivalence ratio. From the simula-
tion results (Fig. 7), it is seen that a 40% increase
in PLIF signal would indicate that the ﬂame in the
non-premixed mode is burning only slightly richer
(/  0.615) than in the premixed case (/ = 0.58).
This marginal increase in equivalence ratio of
the ﬂame above the overall value indicates eﬀec-
tive mixing of nearly all the fuel and air before
they reach the ﬂame zone. This would also explain
the similarities in NOx emissions for the two com-
bustor modes. The above analysis is valid even if
there are products entrained with the reactants,
as the equilibrium OH concentrations would not
be aﬀected by recirculation of adiabatic products.
To explore the alternative, that recirculation of
hot product gases has an eﬀect on NOx emissions
at a given equivalence ratio, laminar one-dimen-
sional ﬂame simulations (CHEMKIN, GRIMech
3.0) were carried out. The eﬀect of hot product
gas recirculation was simulated by adding a frac-
tion of hot products (fP ” product mass fraction
in the reactants) back into the inlet reactant
stream. The temperature and composition of the
adiabatic products was based on results for
fP = 0. Results were obtained at two initial reac-
tant temperatures (before mixing) of 300 and
600 K. The measured entering air temperature is
between these values. The simulated emission lev-
els (Fig. 8) correspond to the NOx concentration
just after the ﬂame front, i.e., where the heat
release has dropped to 1% of its peak value. The
adiabatic ﬂame temperatures for the two cases
are 1630 and 1860 K respectively. At these relative-
ly low ﬂame temperatures, the amount of thermal
NOx produced downstream is expected to be low.
In both cases, EGR of adiabatic products
appears to only slightly increase NOx emissions.
For an initial reactant temperature of 300 K, cor-
rected NOx emissions (at 15% O2) obtained for
diﬀerent product fractions show little variation
with increasing fP. For the elevated preheat tem-
perature of 600 K and with 50% of the preﬂame
mixture being products (fP = 1), the NOx emission
increase from 2 to 3 ppm. Hence, moderate
amounts of product entrainment in the non-pre-
mixed SPRF combustor would not reduce NOx
compared to premixed operation, and should only
increase it by a small amount. To compare the
Fig.
6. Instantaneous
OH
PLIF
ﬁeld
for
ﬂow
rate = 8.1 g/s, U = 0.58 (a) non-premixed (b) premixed.
Fig. 7. Variation of equilibrium OH concentration and
PLIF signal with equivalence ratio.
3406
P. Gopalakrishnan et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 31 (2007) 3401–3408


--- Page 7 ---

eﬀect of only partial premixing of fuel and air,
Fig. 8 includes a third case, with reactant equiva-
lence ratio of 0.7 and a preheat temperature of
600 K, but no product entrainment. The ﬂame
NOx increases to 3.5 ppm, and since the adiabatic
ﬂame
temperature
of
this
condition
is over
2000 K, some added thermal NOx would be likely.
This supports the earlier conclusion that nearly all
the fuel and air are mixed before they reach the
ﬂame zone when the SPRF combustor operates
in non-premixed mode. Otherwise, we would
expect higher (corrected) NOx emissions.
4. Conclusions
The ﬂowﬁeld and ﬂame structure of a stagna-
tion point, reverse ﬂow combustor operating were
investigated for overall lean fuel–air mixtures at
atmospheric pressure. Emission measurements
performed on this combustor indicate that com-
parable, low NOx emission levels are achieved in
both non-premixed and premixed modes of oper-
ation. Various optical diagnostic techniques were
employed to explain these similarities.
The lower reactant velocities for non-premixed
operation in the region of the combustor close to
the injector, and the lack of chemiluminescence
emissions from this area indicate little heat release
occurs here. This is in contrast to premixed oper-
ation, which shows a ﬂame stabilized in the near
ﬁeld shear layer. Measurements of the non-pre-
mixed velocity ﬁeld conﬁrm the existence of a
region with low average velocity but high turbu-
lence in the lower half of the combustor. This
region is also the source of most of the chemilumi-
nescence
emissions
(heat
release),
and
thus
represents the ﬂame stabilization zone for non-
premixed operation. Instantaneous velocity and
(non-simultaneous) OH PLIF data point to the
presence of large vortical structures in the midsec-
tion of the combustor that can entrain hot com-
bustion products into the reactant stream, and
thereby increase the chemical rates and aid stabil-
ization. Thus stabilization is a combined result of
product entrainment, low U and high u0rms. Since
the low velocity region with high product entrain-
ment must exist for most inlet ﬂow rates, the
SPRF geometry can produce stable operation
even at high loadings and for very lean mixtures.
Similarity in NOx emissions for both operating
modes is attributed to eﬃcient mixing of nearly all
the fuel and air before burning. Since the ﬂame is
lifted well away from the injector, air and fuel can
premix before combustion occurs. This is con-
ﬁrmed by the oil droplet scattering results, which
also show that hot products are initially shielded
from the fuel by the surrounding air ﬂow. Com-
parisons of OH PLIF results for non-premixed
and premixed operation with equilibrium calcula-
tions indicate the ﬂame in non-premixed opera-
tion is burning only slightly richer than in the
premixed case. It is also shown with the help of
laminar ﬂame calculations that the entrainment
of products is not directly responsible for the
low NOx emissions at a given overall fuel–air
ratio, but rather, is likely to contribute to a slight
increase in NOx levels compared to a system with
no product entrainment.
In summary, the SPRF geometry produces a
stable ﬂame even at lean operating conditions, with
NOx emissions for non-premixed operation that
are nearly as low as those produced with premixed
reactants. The low emission levels are attributed to
the shielding of the fuel from the hot products, and
eﬃcient mixing of most of the fuel and air (and
some products) before combustion occurs. For
applications at elevated pressures, it is anticipated
that the ﬂow structure of the SPRF combustor will
remain similar, though increased pressure will
increase chemical kinetic rates and inﬂuence the
balance between chemical and ﬂow times.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Mr. John Crane for
performing the NOx measurements and Dr. Yedi-
dia Neumeier for help with the combustor design
and many productive discussions. This research
was supported by NASA through the University
Research, Engineering, and Technology Institute
for Aeropropulsion and Power, directed by Prof.
Ben Zinn, under Grant/Cooperative Agreement
Number NCC3-982.
References
[1] E. Gutmark, T.P. Parr, D.M. Hanson-Parr, K.C.
Schadow, AIAA-89-0154 Aerospace Sciences Meet-
ing, 27th, Reno, NV, January 9–12, 1989.
Fig. 8. Eﬀect of adiabatic exhaust gas recirculation on
ﬂame NOx from laminar ﬂame calculations.
P. Gopalakrishnan et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 31 (2007) 3401–3408
3407


--- Page 8 ---

[2] A.K. Gupta, Flame AIAA-2000-0593 38th Aero-
space Sciences Meeting & Exhibit Reno, NV Janu-
ary 10–13, 2000.
[3] M. Arai, IJPGC2000-15073, in: Proceedings of 2000
International Joint Power Generation Conference
Miami Beach, Florida, July 23–26, 2000.
[4] J.R. Kalb, T. Sattelmayer, in: Proceedings of ASME
Turbo Expo 2004, Power for Land, Sea, and Air,
June 14–17, 2004, Vienna, Austria.
[5] J.F. Driscoll, R.-H. Chen, Y. Yoon, Combust.
Flame 88 (1992) 37–49.
[6] R.-H. Chen, J.F. Driscoll, Proc. Combust. Inst. 23
(1990) 281–288.
[7] S.-H. Kim, Y. Yoon, I.-S. Jeung, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 28 (2000) 463–470.
[8] Y. Neumeier, Y. Weksler, B.T. Zinn, J.M. Seitzman,
J. Jagoda, J. Kenny, AIAA 2005-3775 41st AIAA/
ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference &
Exhibit, July 10–13, 2005, Tucson, Arizona.
[9] M.S. Mansour, R.W. Bilger, S.H. Starner, Combust.
Sci. Technol. 65 (1989) 83–101.
[10] P. Griebel, R. Bombach, A. Inauen, R. Scha¨ren, S.
Schenker, P. Siewert, GT2005-68565, in: Proceed-
ings of GT2005 ASME Turbo Expo 2005: Power for
Land, Sea, and Air, June 6–9, 2005, Reno-Tahoe,
Nevada, USA.
[11] P. Griebel, R. Scha¨ren, P. Siewert, R. Bombach, A.
Inauen, W. Kreutner, GT2003-38398, in: Proceed-
ings of ASME Turbo Expo 2003 Power for Land, Sea,
and Air, June 16–19, 2003, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
[12] L. Muniz, R.E. Martınez, M.G. Mungal, Develop-
ments in Laser Techniques and Fluid Mechanics,
Springer, Berlin, 1997, pp. 411–424.
[13] A. Melling, Meas. Sci. Technol. 8 (1997) 1406–1416.
Comments
Shigeru Hayashi, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agen-
cy, Japan. Did you compare the measured CO concentra-
tions with the equilibrium ones to estimate the magnitude
of lost heat?
Pleasecommentonthedistributionoflocal‘‘dilutionra-
tio,’’i.e.,thefractionofburnedgastototalmixture(burned
gas + fuel + air)forthepremixedcaseifyoumeasuredthe
fresh mixture.
Reply.ThemeasuredCOconcentrationsarelowerthan
equilibriumvaluesandthisismainlyduetorecombination
ofCOinthegasanalyzerprobe.Separatemeasurementsof
productgastemperaturesattheexitofthecombustorhave
been carried out and results indicate that the magnitude of
heat losses in the SPRF combustor is less than 10%.
The ‘‘dilution ratio’’ or product fraction has not been
measured to date; however, work is currently underway
to measure this quantity.
d
Bassam Dally, The University of Adelaide, Aus-
tralia. Your ﬂames look similar to those achieved
under MILD combustion. You argue that the ex-
haust gases do not play any role in the low NOx
levels, would this imply that you will be able to
have an open ended channel and achieve the same
results? Can you
comment
what is
the eﬀect of
exhaust gases then?
Reply. The presence of a closed end facilitates
entrainment of the returning product gases. The main
role of internal product gas recirculation in the SPRF
combustor is to aid in stabilization of the ﬂame at very
lean equivalence ratios thereby resulting in low NOx
emissions.
3408
P. Gopalakrishnan et al. / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 31 (2007) 3401–3408
