
--- Page 1 ---

Alexander Jaeschke1
Chair of Fluid Dynamics,
Technische Universit€at Berlin,
Berlin 10623, Germany
Bernhard Cosic´
MAN Energy Solutions SE,
Oberhausen 46145, Germany
Dominik Wassmer
MAN Energy Solutions SE,
Oberhausen 46145, Germany
Christian Oliver Paschereit
Chair of Fluid Dynamics,
Technische Universit€at Berlin,
Berlin 10623, Germany
Experimental Investigation
of a Multi Tube Burner
for Premixed Hydrogen
and Natural Gas Low
Emission Combustion
Hydrogen as an essential part of future decarbonization of the energy industry makes it a
crucial necessity to replace conventional, natural gas based concepts in gas turbine
combustion. This paper presents an experimental study of a multi-tube jet ﬂame burner. The
study is carried out with natural gas and pure hydrogen fuel at gas turbine relevant
conditions at atmospheric pressure. To identify key differences between hydrogen-air and
natural gas–air ﬂames on the overall robustness and ﬂame ﬂashback behavior, air bulk
velocity (80–120 m/s), adiabatic ﬂame temperature (1235–2089 K) and air inlet temperature
(623–673 K) are varied over a wide range, covering a range of Reynolds numbers of
10,000–20,000. Depending on ﬂame temperature, two different ﬂame shapes are observed
for natural gas–air ﬂames. The shape of the hydrogen-air ﬂame changes less over the range
of ﬂame temperatures tested, but is generally more compact. The process of fuel-air mixing is
further investigated by concentration distribution measurements in a water tunnel setup.
Therefore, planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence is utilized for visualization. The measured
concentration distributions conﬁrm the overall good mixing quality but also give an
explanation on the observed ﬂashback behavior of the different burner designs at reacting
tests. The ﬁndings of the study are composed in a ﬂashback correlation combining the
observed ﬂashback drivers for the burner conﬁgurations investigated.
[DOI: 10.1115/1.4063378]
Keywords: hydrogen combustion, jet ﬂame, multi tube, ﬂashback, gas turbine
Introduction
The combustion of hydrogen in gas turbines is a viable pathway
for the re-electriﬁcation of hydrogen generated by electrolysis with
the help of surplus wind or solar power. Especially, gas turbines
employed for the generation of elevated temperature steam and
electrical power at the same time as well as compressor drives at
remote locations are difﬁcult to substitute with electrical steam
generators or drives, respectively.
While fuel ﬂexible diffusion gas turbine combustors are capable
of burning hydrogen (H2) and natural gas (NG) in the full range, they
also produce excessive NOx (nitrogen oxides) emissions [1]. The
challenges to operate dry ultralow emission combustion systems
with hydrogen and natural gas at the same time are much higher than
traditional diffusion combustors because premixed combustion
tends to promote thermoacoustic instabilities [2]. Additionally, fuel-
ﬂexible premixed combustors struggle to ensure ﬂame stability at
part load conditions with natural gas and to provide high ﬂashback
(FB) safety at base load conditions for hydrogen while at the same
time producing ultralow NOx emissions.
Recently, advances have been reported for commercially
available industrial gas turbines that feature fuel ﬂexibility from
pure natural gas to higher hydrogen blending ratios in the range of
40–60 vol. % hydrogen with only small changes in the combustor
design [3–5]. Here, the key challenge is to remain in a low emission
mode without the risk of ﬂame ﬂashback. However, in order to
achieve signiﬁcant CO2 saving in the range of 50% and more,
volumetric hydrogen contents of 80–100 vol. % in the fuel are
needed because of the extreme difference in density between
hydrogen and natural gas. Currently, there are commercially
available systems, e.g., based on micromix technology. Since they
are based on small diffusion ﬂames with only limited premixing,
they feature lower but not ultralow NOx emissions [6]. At the same
time, these systems suffer of limited fuel ﬂexibility in terms of
combustion of pure natural gas [7]. This is because the ﬂame
stabilization of micromix based combustors relies inherently on the
high reactivity of the hydrogen fuel. Natural gas ﬂames, however,
have much lower ﬂame speeds, especially, at gas turbine part load
and the associated lower ﬂame temperatures. Another industrial
system capable of hydrogen that relies on a trapped vortex to
stabilize the ﬂame has been presented recently by Koomen et al. [8].
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received August 2, 2023; ﬁnal manuscript received September 4, 2023;
published online October 17, 2023. Editor: Jerzy T. Sawicki.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2023, Vol. 145 / 121010-1
Copyright V
C 2023 by ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 2 ---

It features high fuel ﬂexibility at low NOx emissions but is currently
only validated for a maximum pressure of 6.9 bar and 280 C inlet
temperature. Thus, the currently unsolved challenge is to avoid
ﬂame ﬂashback at base load ﬂame temperatures and high pressure
with pure hydrogen and at the same time avoid lean blow out (LBO)
at part load with natural gas, while remaining in the regime of low
emissions and thermoacoustically stable combustion.
A promising approach to handle these diverging demands is a
burner design with arrays of premixed jet ﬂames. Lammel et al. [9]
reported successful experimental high pressure tests with very high
hydrogen contents using a multi-tube combustor. The combustor
features 12 relatively large tubes circumferentially arranged in the
combustor. In contrast to that, York et al. [10] developed a multi-
tube burner with a very large number of smaller jets. Multiple of
these burners were used to achieve the full engine power of a single
can. They pointed out the potential for hydrogen combustion but the
study was focused on low emission combustion of natural gas at
elevated turbine inlet temperatures. A similar approach has been
presented by Asai et al. for hydrogen rich fuels [11] but with a
convex shaped mixing passage. Witzel et al. have recently reported
that they haveconducted highpressure combustion tests withnatural
gas and pure hydrogen at gas turbine relevant conditions. They state
to use jet burner technology but do not provide details on the
investigated geometry [12]. Besides these industrial systems, there
is a large number of general investigations for academic single jet
ﬂames like, for instance, Refs. [13] and [14].
Studies conducted by Kalantari et al. [15] on ﬂame ﬂashback with
hydrogen fuel showed experimentally that gas turbine relevant
conditions like increased combustor pressure, high ﬂame temper-
atures, and high compressor outlet temperatures promote ﬂashback.
The increased chemical reactivity at elevated temperatures leads to
turbulent ﬂame speeds locally exceeding the convective ﬂow
velocities of unburnt premixed gas. Especially at the boundary
layers of the combustor walls, the ﬂow velocities are locally small
enough to facilitate ﬂashback [16,17]. With the onset of ﬂashback, a
separation zone becomes present upstream of the anchored ﬂame
[18]. In this backﬂow region, ignition of unburnt gas is governed by
heat transfer from the ﬂame front to the external streamlines and the
wall. At constant air mass ﬂow, an increase in the height of the
backﬂow region is observed as the equivalence ratio increases [15].
When this region grows large enough to overcome the quenching
effect of the heat loss, ﬂashback occurs. Therefore, boundary layer
ﬂashback is the most likely type of ﬂashback related to jet ﬂames at
high mixing tube velocities. From a general point of view, jet
burners are a promising approach to handle the challenges regarding
premixed hydrogen ﬂames because the pressure loss of the burner,
which is strictly limited from a gas turbine efﬁciency point of view,
is converted almost fully into axial velocity, which protects the
burner most efﬁciently from wall induced ﬂashback. High axial
velocities in the range of 55–85 m/s seem to be sufﬁcient to avoid
wall induced ﬂashback by hydrogen for gas turbine relevant
conditions in an ideal ﬂow channel [15] and can be realized by jet
burners with a pressure loss in the range of 1.5% of the combustor
pressure. In contrast to that, traditional swirl combustor concepts
offer by design many zones of small axial velocity at the walls and in
the center of the swirl vortex to allow for a stable operating of natural
gas. They demand much higher pressure losses to achieve sufﬁciently
high axial bulk velocities for ﬂashback safe hydrogen combustion.
This paper investigates two multi-tube premixed jet burner
concepts with different fuel gas injectors for pure natural gas and
pure hydrogen fuel. The focus of the investigation is the atmospheric
assessment of the premixed operating regime of the MAN MGT
6000 industrial gas turbine. However, the investigated combustors
are only capable to deliver a portion of the full thermal power
necessary at full load and full pressure conditions. Furthermore, only
single stage operation is considered in this study. For the ﬁrst time, to
the knowledge of the authors, a practically relevant multi-tube
premixed burner with helical tubes is experimentally investigated
for pure hydrogen and natural gas in terms of ﬂashback, mixing
quality and emissions. We call this concept helix burner. The burner
is combined with different fuel gas injector concepts and it is
compared with a more traditionally designed jet burner with straight
tubes.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: First the
experimental setup and the tested operating points are described,
subsequently, the results of the water channel measurements are
discussed as well as the combustion experiments. Finally, the results
are summarized, and conclusions are presented.
Experimental Setup and Diagnostics
Burner Setup. A schematic sketch of the test rig is provided in
Fig. 1. Two geometrical variants of the multi-tube burner are
employed in the experiments: the jet burner and the helix burner.
Each burner consists of 19 individual mixing tubes arranged in an
inner and outer ring of 6 and 13 tubes, respectively. The diameter of
all tubes is equal. They end in the base plate, also referred to as
burner plate, which separates the burner plenum from the
combustion chamber. While the straight mixing tubes of the jet
burner form an orthogonal outlet in the burner plate, the twisted
shape of the helix burner results in an angled outlet, seen in Fig. 1 on
the right, from which a swirling motion of the ﬂow results. The
burners are tested with three different types of fuel injectors, referred
to as nozzles. A sketch of the nozzles is provided in Fig. 1 on the left.
Fig. 1
Schematic of the burner setup (top) with preheat air ﬂow
(blue dashed lines) and fuel injection (red dashed lines). In the
middle on the left side, the different nozzle conﬁgurations are
sketched to illustrate their working principles. On the right side in
this row, the burners are shown with a detailed sketch of the mixing
tube outlet into the combustion chamber. The green dots mark the
positionofthethermocouples(TC)pluggedintothesockets(visible
in the middle photo of the burners). The bottom row shows a visual
impression of the jet burner ﬁring hydrogen. (Color version online.)
121010-2 / Vol. 145, DECEMBER 2023
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 3 ---

They can be differentiated according to their degree of complexity in
terms of fuel–air interaction at the injection point. Conﬁguration #1
is the most simple, where the fuel jet is injected coaxially into the air.
Nozzle #2 and #3 are jet-in-crossﬂow conﬁgurations, whereas #3 is
additionally equipped with turbulators near the fuel injection hole to
enhance the mixing. The different injectors are not mixed within one
single conﬁguration. Hence, six experimental conﬁgurations
consisting of two burner geometries in combination with three
fuel gas injection variants are investigated. The basic mode of
operation remains the same for all burner conﬁgurations.
Preheated air enters the burner from the left-hand side (illustrated
at the top in Fig. 1, indicated by the blue dashed line) and ﬂows
around the fuel plenum. When reaching the front section of the
burner, the air ﬂow splits homogeneously into the 19 mixing tubes.
At this location, the fuel is injected into the air stream and mixes on
the way through the tubes, before entering the combustion chamber
at the burner plate. Hence, fuel and air are technically premixed. The
mixing length is constant for both burner geometries and in order to
provide optical access to the ﬂame, the cylindrical combustion
chamber consists of quartz glass. To achieve a more symmetric fuel
distribution for the nozzles, the main fuel line, which is controlled by
a coriolis type ﬂowmeter, is split into two identical lines before
entering the fuel plenum at opposite points. From the fuel plenum,
the fuel is injected through a nozzle in each mixing tube.
Consequently, the fuel amount going through each nozzle is only
determined by their individual pressure loss. To ensure a
homogeneous distribution of the fuel amongst all nozzles, the
individual pressure losses have been measured beforehand, and
outliers have been sorted out. Therefore, the nozzles utilized have an
overall standard deviation of less than 2.75% of the measured
averaged pressure losses.
To detect a possible ﬂashback event, each mixing tube is equipped
with a thermocouple that tracks the individual tube material
temperature shortly upstream of the burner plate. Small sockets
are embedded in the mixing tube outer surface (see Fig. 1) to hold
each thermocouple in place and to ensure that there is no convective
inﬂuence from the surrounding burner volume. In this study, a
ﬂashback is deﬁned as a ﬂame anchoring inside of at least one of the
mixing tubes. With the ﬂame inside a mixing tube, the measured
temperature increases rapidly within very few seconds, which
makes the FB unfailingly detectable. Such a ﬂashback detection
technique was successfully employed in other works [15,17]. The
combination with a pressure probe for a faster detection was also
tested. Therefore, a pressure probe was installed inside the burner
plenum near the burner inlet. However, the ﬂashback of a single
mixing tube results in only a very small pressure rise in the burner
plenum,whichcannotbereliablydetectedbythesensorduetothelow
signal-to-noiseratio.Additionally,thetemperaturesensorsareusedto
evaluate the base plate temperature of the burners.
Flame shape and position are determined by line-of-sight
OH*–chemiluminescence images, since the OH* radical qualita-
tively correlates with the location of the heat release zone which
indicates the ﬂame front. Flame detection is managed by a bandpass
ﬁltered, intensiﬁed high-speed camera with a center wavelength at
k ¼ 310 nm recording at 10,000 fps, an exposure time of 1/fps, and a
spatial resolution of 3.5px/mm. The acquisitiontime of 0.728 s leads
to an averaging over 7280 frames for the mean OH* intensity images
presented in this study. In addition, the time resolved ﬂame images
can provide a visual conﬁrmation for ﬂashback.
Exhaust gas for the emission measurement is extracted in the
exhaust tube with a gas probe installed 1080 mm downstream of the
burner plate. The gas sample isguided to the gas analyzer by a heated
tube to prevent condensation and is analyzed for NOx on a wet basis
by a chemiluminescence detector. For more details on the emission
analyzing process refer to [19]. Behind the gas probe, at the end of
the exhaust tube, an oriﬁce with an area contraction ratio of 0.23 is
installed to suppress thermoacoustic instabilities. The inﬂuence of
area contraction on the combustion process was investigated by
Terhaar et al. [20] and is therefore not expected to have an inﬂuence
on the combustion process.
Water Tunnel. The reliable operation of combustion devices
depends to a large degree on the mixing process [21]. A good
measure for the mixing quality of the main air ﬂow and the fuel is the
fuel concentration distribution, but visualization of natural gas in air
is challenging and quite harder for hydrogen. To qualitatively assess
the resulting mixing quality of the different burner conﬁgurations,
planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) measurements are con-
ducted in a water tunnel. With the law of similarity, the ﬂow
conditions that determine the mixing process are transferred from air
to water. For this purpose, the Reynolds number and impulse ratio of
the fuel surrogate are adjusted to correspond to the values set in the
combustion tests, which allows the evaluation of the mixture quality
using the water tunnel. Water with dissolved Rhodamin 6G dye is
utilized as the fuel surrogate with a ﬂuorescence peak at k ¼ 480 nm.
For the dye excitation, a CW-Laser (continuous wave) with a
maximum power output of 4200 mW at a wavelength of k ¼ 532 nm
is applied. The laser illuminates a horizontal plane of 1 mm
thickness at a position 3 mm downstream from the exit of the mixing
tubes. Image sampling of the emitted ﬂuorescence is accomplished
by a bandpass ﬁltered, intensiﬁed CMOS camera with a recording
frequency of 8 Hz, and a spatial resolution of 4 px/mm.
The water tunnel and the setup for the experiments are shown in
Fig. 2. For more details about the water tunnel test rig the reader is
referred to Ref. [22]. The time-averaged ﬂuorescence light intensity
IðxÞ


is related to a known homogeneous intensity distribution
IhomðxÞ, both corrected for background intensity IbgðxÞ. Subse-
quently, the respective global mean concentration C is subtracted to
obtain the time-averaged concentration ﬂuctuation
~CðxÞ


, deﬁned
as
~C x
ð Þ
D
E
¼
I x
ð Þ

  Ibg x
ð Þ
Ihom x
ð Þ  Ibg x
ð Þ  C
(1)
To evaluate the temporal mixing quality and the level of
intermittency, the intensity of segregation as proposed by Danck-
werts [23] or in a more common formulation, the unmixedness Ut is
calculated with
Fig. 2
Water tunnel setup for PLIF measurements. Flow
direction is bottom to top, with the measurement plane (laser
sheet) 3 mm downstream of the base plate in the combustion
chamber.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2023, Vol. 145 / 121010-3
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 4 ---

Ut ¼
r2
C
C x
ð Þ Cmax  C x
ð Þ


(2)
The utilized parameter, in our case the measured intensity, is
determined at each position of the image plane. At a point of
maximum variance of the ﬂow, with CðxÞðCmax  CðxÞÞ ! r2
C, it
becomes unity. This corresponds to equal shares of pure air and pure
fuel passing the image plane. A value of 0 is reached for perfectly
mixed conditions.
Tested Conditions. This section gives a brief overview of the
tested conditions at the atmospheric test rig and at the water tunnel.
The test conditions for the multi-tube burner are down-scaled from
full load gas turbine operating conditions. Furthermore, only single
stage operating isconsidered in this study. Thus, the covered thermal
power is in the range of 50–100 kW with adiabatic ﬂame temper-
atures of up to 2100 K. The investigated preheat temperatures
(623 K and 673 K) are chosen to simulate the gas turbine compressor
exit temperatures relevant for gas turbine combustion. Pure
hydrogen and pure natural gas are used as fuel. Hydrogen is
supplied by pressurized bottles, while natural gas is supplied by the
pipeline grid of Berlin. In case of hydrogen the whole operating
window, from lean blow-off to ﬂashback is investigated. Depending
on the air mass ﬂow, the mixing tube bulk velocity ranges from 80 to
120 m/s, which results in a range of Reynolds numbers of
10,000–20,000 with regard to a single tube. The fuel momentum
ratio J for the conducted nozzles ranges from 0.65 to 28 and 0.5 to 19
for hydrogen and natural gas, respectively. An overview of the fuel
momentum ratios of the different nozzle variants is provided in
Fig. 3. A higher momentum ratio is achieved for hydrogen at the
same adiabatic ﬂame temperature compared to natural gas. Due to
the design of the combustor, the fuel is preheated on its way to the
injection point to an assumed temperature of 523 K. This calculated
fuel temperature and a measured air temperature of 673 K are used to
calculate the similarity for the water tunnel experiments. The
transfer of ﬂow conditions from gas to water results in a reduction of
the mixing tube bulk velocity to a range of 0.8–1.3 m/s, since the
same combustor geometry is used as for reactive conditions. The
mass ﬂow ratio of the injected fuel surrogate and hydrogen fuel is
_mwater/ _mhydrogen ¼ 74:3.
With the measured fuel and air mass ﬂows at a given preheat
temperature, the laminar ﬂame speed and the adiabatic ﬂame
temperature can be calculated with the chemical kinetic solver
CANTERA and the GRI 3.0 mechanism. The associated turbulent
combustion regime of the multi-tube burner is depicted in Fig. 4.
Both, the turbulence intensity v0 ¼ 0:227 Re1=10 [25] and the
turbulent integral length scale lint are characterized by the mean ﬂow
properties of the jet ﬂames. A constant value of 20% of the mixing
tube diameter is chosen for lint, which is in agreement with the value
observed by Aleyasin et al. [26] for the present ﬂow conditions. The
thermal ﬂame thickness dL ¼ ðTb  TuÞ=ðdT=dzÞmax [27] is calcu-
lated based on the maximum temperature gradient, whereby the
subscripts b and u denote burned and unburned conditions,
respectively. Most of the data points are within the thin reaction
zone, which represents the common practical operating range of gas
turbines. Since the bulk velocity for hydrogen changes only slightly
compared to the sharp increase in laminar ﬂame speed, the data
points in Fig. 4 transition to the wrinkled ﬂamelets regime with
increasing thermal load. Consequently, the chemical reactivity of
hydrogen predominates and the interaction between ﬂame front and
the turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld is assumed to become kinematic in terms of
the interaction between ﬂame front and turbulence. All observed FB
events occurred in the ﬂamelet regimes and thus lie outside the thin
reaction zones regime. In the case of hydrogen, the LBO points are
also not within the thin reaction zone regime but in the distributed
reactions regime.
Results and Discussion
Isothermal Experiments—Mixing Quality. Fuel-air mixing
and the resulting quality of fuel concentration distribution prior to
combustion is essential for various aspects of gas turbine operation.
Primarily it affects NOx emissions but also (thermoacoustic)
combustion stability. Qualitative concentration distribution meas-
urements are conducted in the water tunnel by means of PLIF. The
mixing capability of the helix and the jet burner is compared in
Fig. 5, showing the ﬂuctuation around the mean concentration
distribution. The burners are equipped with nozzle #1 and the
momentum ratio varies in the range of J ¼ 3–28. These conditions
correspond to adiabatic ﬂame temperatures of Tad ¼ 1235–2089 K at
an air mass ﬂowrate of 0:8 _mnom in the reactive tests. The water
tunnel study focuses on nozzle #1 in combination with the different
characteristics of the two burner geometries. Nozzle #1 is employed
because its ﬂow interaction efﬁciently reduces FB propensity, which
will be discussed later. However, the mixing quality increases with
the complexity of the nozzle–ﬂow interaction from nozzle #1 to
nozzle #3 (results not shown).
For both tube rings of the jet burner (Fig. 5, ﬁrst row), it is
observed that the fuel-rich share of the jets is attached to the outer
Fig. 3
Fuel momentum ratios for the investigated range of
adiabatic ﬂame temperature for hydrogen (solid line) and natural
gas (dashed line). The fuel momentum ratio depends on the
nozzle, since the number of holes and the diameter of the holes
change.
Fig. 4
Turbulent combustion regimes for the multi-tube burner
at the tested conditions. Natural gas is shown with black symbols
and hydrogen with blue symbols (ﬂame regimes deﬁned by
Peters [24]). (Color version online.)
121010-4 / Vol. 145, DECEMBER 2023
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 5 ---

part of the tube walls, oriented away from the global radial center of
the burner. Since this is the case for all tubes, assembly tolerances
can be ruled out as cause for this phenomenon and the nozzle
positions are designed to be in the center of the tubes. Considering
the higher velocity of the injected fuel jet surrogate and the increased
ﬂow volume, Bernoulli’s law suggests a higher pressure for the
unmixed fraction of the air surrogate ﬂow in the tube. Since all tubes
are fed with air surrogate from the shared burner plenum, the
pressure of each individual tube also affects the pressure in
the burner plenum which in turn would feedback to the tubes. The
observed outward orientation of the fuel jets might be supported by
the pressure reduction toward the burner radial center, which in turn
would favor higher ﬂow velocities at the outside. Pressure reduction
toward the center is assumed to be caused by the blockage of the
outer nozzles and tubes.
The second row of Fig. 5 depicts the concentration ﬂuctuations of
the helix burner, which look quite different compared to the jet
burner. Note that the tubes twist clockwise around the radial center
of the burner and exit the burner plate at a speciﬁc angle causing a
swirling motion of the ﬂow. All tubes show a fuel enriched region at
the same location of the tube outlet. In case of the inner ring this
results in forming wave-like shaped engulfed areas of concentration
above and beneath the mean concentration value (best seen for the
medium momentum ratio). The reason for the described concen-
tration distributions is most likely that the fuel jets are attaching to
the tube walls at the point where the twist of the tubes starts and then
staying attached to this side of the wall. With an increase of the
momentum ratio, the deviation from the mean value for the inner
ring increases and becomes leaner. Additionally, the fuel enriched
regions of the wave-like patterns are diminishing. For the outer ring,
a concentration distribution is observed that is closer to the mean
overall, with a slight increase in deviation as the amount of fuel
increases.
Another difference between helix and jet burner arises in the
center of the burners. The jet burner conﬁguration shows a uniform
concentration distribution near the global mean in the center region.
In case of the helixtype burner,however, the combination ofthe wall
attached fuel and the swirling motion of the ﬂow results in a lean
concentration distribution in the center region of the burner within
the inner ring.
If the fuel-rich portion of the ﬂow were always attached to the
same circumferential location of the tubes, this would most likely
decrease the ﬂashback resistance, especially if the mean concen-
tration in this area is increased. However, the individual snapshots
(not shown) recorded to calculate the mean images show that the
fuel-rich shares of the jets do not remain permanently attached to the
same position within the tubes, but oscillate along the circumference
of the tube walls. Therefore, in Fig. 6, the temporal unmixedness
factor for helix and jet burner is depicted for a momentum ratio of
J ¼ 12. In the upper half of the picture, the helix burner is shown and
in the lower half the jet burner, separated by the white dashed line.
While the absolute value of unmixedness for the outer rings is quite
low with Ut  0:06, it is increased for the inner rings. For the helix
burner, the unmixedness of the inner tubes is at a low level
(Ut ¼ 0.05–0.06) in most areas and has a better mixture quality than
the jet burner. However, the unmixedness is increased in the regions
where the mean fuel concentration is also increased
(Ut ¼ 0.075  0.085). For the jet burner, on the other hand, the
areas of high unmixedness (Ut  0:10) are distributed along the tube
walls. This leads to a very discontinuous localization of the fuel-rich
share of the ﬂow over time, which might improve ﬂashback
resistance for this type of conﬁguration. In Atmospheric Combus-
tion Tests section, the effects of the differences in mixture quality on
the combustion characteristics are discussed.
Fig. 5
Fluctuation around the mean concentration distribution
~CðxÞ
D
E
for the jet (top row) and helix burner (bottom row)
at a constant air mass ﬂow of 0:8 _mnom for three different fuel momentum ratios J. Since the mean values are subtracted,
zero equals the spatial mean. The data are clipped at 61.5% of the mean value for a better visibility.
Fig. 6
The temporal unmixedness factor of the helix burner (top
half) is compared to the jet burner (bottom half) for J 5 12,
separatedbythewhitedashedline. Avalueclosetozeroindicates
a perfectly mixed ﬂuid.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2023, Vol. 145 / 121010-5
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 6 ---

Atmospheric Combustion Tests
Natural Gas. OH*–chemiluminescence images for natural gas
are shown in Fig. 7. Helix and jet burner are compared at the nominal
air mass ﬂow equipped with nozzle #3. Flow direction is from left to
right with the burner plate position on the left end of each image.
Over the range of tested ﬂame temperatures very different ﬂame
shapes with distinct transition points are observed (left to right).
Since the ﬂame transition occurs at different ﬂame temperatures for
each burner, the ﬂame temperatures shown are Tad ¼ 1700 K,
1800 K, 2000 K and Tad ¼ 1650 K, 1700 K, 2000 K for the jet and the
helix burner, respectively. The ﬂame regime observed for low ﬂame
temperatures is quite narrow bounded by LBO and the ﬁrst ﬂame
transition point. In this regime, at Tad  1700 K (jet burner, image a)
and Tad  1650 K (helix burner, image d), the ﬂame spreads over a
large space in the combustion chamber and no individual jet ﬂames
can be observed. At this ﬂame temperature, the laminar ﬂame speed
is only SL ¼ 0.9 m/s. Thus, the jet velocities (ubulk  100 m=s)
extensively exceed the burning velocity. In case of the jet burner a
ﬂame lift of x/D ¼ 4 isobserved, compared to the helix burnerwith x/
D ¼ 2.5. The ﬂame lift is deﬁned as the distance between the burner
plate and the downstream position in x-direction where a threshold
of 1% of the maximum OH* intensity is exceeded. Reason for the
smaller ﬂame lift of the helix burner is a lower bulk velocity in x-
direction due to the swirling motion of the ﬂow. For all tested
conditions with natural gas, the ﬂame of the helix burner attaches to
the combustion chamber walls. However, the ﬂame shape of both
burners alters fundamentally with an increasing adiabatic ﬂame
temperature. In particular, at Tad ¼ 1700 K (image e), the ﬂow
conditions allow for a reacting recirculation zone at the burner plate,
as seen in swirl-stabilized burners, the so-called “M”–ﬂames. This
indicates that recirculation occurs for the ﬂames of the helix burner,
which might support ﬂame stabilization. At Tad ¼ 2000 K, the ﬂame
lift decreases to x/D ¼ 0.6 and x/D ¼ 0.35 for the jet burner and the
helix burner, respectively. This leads to a shorter mixing length and
less balancing among the mixing tube streams resulting in enhanced
local heat releases. The ﬂames are now separable for the individual
tubes, indicating the transition from one globally distributedﬂame to
multiple local ﬂames due to the increased burning velocity. The ratio
of ﬂame lift between the jet and the helix burner remains constant for
all ﬂame temperatures and is therefore controlled by the proportion
of velocity in the x–direction. In the range of Tad ¼ 1800–1900 K,
thermoacoustic instabilities are present which inhibit meaningful
measurements. For more details on the thermoacoustic stability of
the multi-tube burner, the reader is referred to Ref. [28]. For a better
understanding of the ﬂow ﬁeld and the underlying mechanisms of
the corresponding ﬂame shapes, particle image velocimetry
measurements have to be part of future investigations. Optical
measurement data for the other fuel nozzle designs are not available
due to a technical issue during the measurements.
Hydrogen Flame. Firing of the multi-tube burners with hydrogen
is shown in Fig. 8 by means of OH*–chemiluminescence images. As
for the natural gas case, nozzle #3 is installed for fuel injection. The
depicted condition is at the nominal air mass ﬂow and an adiabatic
ﬂame temperature of Tad ¼ 1700 K. Flow direction is from left to
right with the burner plate position on the left end of each image. The
hydrogen ﬂames of the jet burner and the helix burner are rather
compact with a length of x/D ¼ 5.9 and x/D ¼ 4.9, respectively.
Compared to NG, the ﬂame length is reduced by over 60%, and
ﬂame anchoring occurs immediately downstream of the burner
plates at x=D < 0:1. For the helix burner, the ﬂame is shorter and
widens radially in downstream direction due to the twisted tube
shape and the resulting centrifugal force. The ﬂames of the jet
burner, on the other hand, are directed slightly toward the axial
centerline.
In order to analyze the ﬂame position in more detail, Fig. 9 shows
the radially integrated OH* intensity as a function of the axial
position. Varied is the adiabatic ﬂame temperature, as well as the air
mass ﬂow for the jet burner. The OH* intensity is normalized by the
corresponding maximum global intensity. By varying the ﬂame
temperature, only slight modulations of the ﬂame shape are
observed, which is exempliﬁed for an air mass ﬂowrate of
1:2 _mnom in Fig. 9 (top). A maximum displacement of x=D  1 in
the upstream direction is observed over the entire range of ﬂame
temperature variation. At the same time, the position of ﬂame
anchoring and ﬂame brush remains constant. Nevertheless, for
Tad  1500 K, the sharp decrease of heat release causes a slight
ﬂame lift and thus decreases the ﬂame anchoring, as indicated by the
lower slope of the dotted line.
Fig. 7
Natural gas ﬂame OH*–chemiluminescence images of the jet burner (top row) and the helix burner (bottom row)
for three different ﬂame temperatures, respectively
Fig. 8
Hydrogen ﬂame OH*–chemiluminescence images for
both burner geometries at Tad 5 1700 K
121010-6 / Vol. 145, DECEMBER 2023
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 7 ---

In contrast, the variation of the air mass ﬂow leads to a broadening
of the ﬂame in downstream direction, as shown in Fig. 9 (bottom).
Depicted are 0.8–1.2 _mnom at a ﬂame temperature of Tad ¼ 1900 K.
The ﬂame expands by x=D  2 in the downstream direction, while
ﬂame anchoring and ﬂame shape remain mostly unaffected.
It can be concluded that the position of the ﬂame front is
determined by the ﬂow ﬁeld. The ﬂame stabilizes in the shear layer
of the jets since the velocity gradient across the shear layer is capable
to match a wide range of ﬂame velocities without signiﬁcantly
altering the ﬂame position.
Emissions. Figure 10 presents the measured NOx concentrations
for natural gas and hydrogen combustion for both burner geometries
on a dry basis normalized to 15% O2. Emissions from ﬁring natural
gas and hydrogen are indicated by circle markers and square
markers, respectively. The dashed lines are least square ﬁts of the
data points for a better visualization of the trend, with the blue
dashed line for hydrogen and the red dashed line for natural gas.
Additionally, a correction factor as proposed by Douglas et al. [29] is
applied to each hydrogen measurement point. This correction allows
for a comparison of natural gas and hydrogen in consideration of the
actual NOx molecules produced at constant heat input. For more
details on the correction of emission data, the reader is referred to
Ref. [30].
Curve shapes for both fuels are quite similar on a low emission
level, with under 10 ppm NOx up to a temperature of Tad ¼ 1950 K.
Nevertheless, a steep rise of emissions already starts at a temperature
of Tad ¼ 1800 K, which is due to the sharp decrease of mixture
quality at higher fuel momentum ratios observed in the water tunnel
tests. In addition, the inﬂuence of the thermal NOx pathway also
increases. Based on the overall good agreement of the emission data
between the different geometries, a comparable mixing quality
seems to be achieved, which, however, contradicts the observations
in the water tunnel with signiﬁcant differences in the temporal
unmixedness. Besides the qualitative character of the water tunnel
measurements, one reason for this could be the neglected diffusivity
that enhances the mixing quality. Although, the diffusivity of
hydrogen is greater than that of natural gas, the higher ﬂame lift and
thus longer mixing length might compensate for this. Another
reason for the low distinguishability of the emissions of the two
burner types is the very low absolute level of the NOx emissions at
atmospheric conditions. For such small numbers of ppm, a potential
difference between the two burner variants might vanish within the
measurement accuracy. Consequently, under high-pressure con-
ditions, differences in NOx emissions might be detected.
Recent studies on swirl–stabilized burners, which were originally
designed for natural gas combustion, suggest that switching from
natural gas to hydrogen signiﬁcantly increases the NOx emissions
for the same gas turbine operating point [3,12]. Often, the reason for
this behavior is the changed position of the reaction zone due to the
increased reactivity of the hydrogen. The tested multi-tube burners
show little dependence of NOx emissions on the fuel composition,
indicating high potential to comply with existing emission
regulations, for natural gas as well as for hydrogen.
Impact of Burner Plate Temperature. Obviously, the burner plate
temperature has an inﬂuence on two important mechanisms: one is
to ensure proper anchoring of the ﬂame at the lower stability limit to
prevent LBO, and the other is on FB propensity. The inﬂuence of the
burner geometry on the base plate temperature for natural gas is
depicted in Fig. 11. Shown is a variation of the main air ﬂow with
respect to the calculated adiabatic ﬂame temperature by utilizing
nozzle #1.To account for the temperature ofthe unburnt mixture,the
measured preheat temperature of T2  673 K is subtracted from the
mean temperature of the inner tube ring Tbp. The inner ring is chosen
because it reaches higher temperatures and thus has a greater
inﬂuence on ﬂame stability.
When ﬁring with natural gas, the burner plate temperature is
higher than the preheat temperature for both burner types. In the
investigated range of Tad ¼ 1600–2000 K, the burner plate temper-
atures increase from 10 K to 20 K for the jet burner and from 40 K to
80 K for the helix burner above the preheat temperature. The effect
on heat transport due to the variation of air mass ﬂow is very limited.
One reason for the higher temperatures of the helix burner might be
that the ﬂame is more compact, thus the heat ﬂux is less distributed
over the combustion chamber wall as it is for other combinations of
burner geometry and fuel type. This observation is already discussed
in the last section for Fig. 7. Another effect of the angled mixing tube
outlets might be the resulting difference in the ﬂow ﬁeld leading to
recirculations of hot combustion gases that heat the base plate as it is
observable in Fig. 7(e). The effect of recirculations on burner
material temperature was also described by [31] for a bluff body
conﬁguration. As the adiabatic ﬂame temperature approaches the
Fig. 9
Flame positions of the jet burner identiﬁed by integrated
OH* intensity in y-direction. Variation of the ﬂame temperature
over the range Tad 5 1500 K, 1700 K, and 1900 K at an air mass ﬂow
of 1:2 _mnom,air (top) and variation of the air mass ﬂow at Tad 5 1900
K (bottom). The sequences are normalized by the maximum of the
global intensity.
Fig. 10
NOx emissions for hydrogen (squares, blue dashed line)
and natural gas (circles, red dashed line) combustion over the
adiabatic ﬂame temperature Tad. Hydrogen is additionally
corrected with respect to exhaust gas composition. The dashed
lines are least squares ﬁts of the data points for a better
visualization of the trend. (Color version online.)
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2023, Vol. 145 / 121010-7
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 8 ---

observed transition point of the NG ﬂame at Tad  1700 K, the base
plate temperatures of both burner types decrease signiﬁcantly and
thus approach their LBO limit in proximity to 1600 K. An inﬂuence
of the different nozzle geometries on the base plate temperature is
not observed.
By switching the fuel from natural gas to hydrogen, the base plate
temperatures show a totally different behavior, as seen in Fig. 12.
For the helix burner, the level of the base plate temperature at
1.0 _mnom is comparable to the natural gas case, but with a slightly
steeper increase, especially at higher ﬂame temperatures. For
Tad ¼ 2000 K, the base plate reaches a temperature of 95 K above
the preheat temperature. But even for very low ﬂame temperatures,
close to the LBO limit, the base plate temperature is still above the
preheat temperature value. The most prominent difference for the
helix type burner regarding the combustion of hydrogen and NG is
the strong inﬂuence of the air mass ﬂow. The temperature levels of
the base plate for the three air mass ﬂows tested increasingly deverge
as the ﬂame temperature increases. At Tad ¼ 1600 K, the temper-
ature deviation between the tested air mass ﬂows is already 40 K. For
Tad ¼ 1900 K this deviation increases to 50 K between 1.0 _mnom and
1.2 _mnom only, since for 0.8 _mnom FB already occurs at Tad ¼ 1700 K.
At Tad ¼ 1900 K, the base plate temperature for 1.2 _mnom is even
lower than in the NG case. Reasons for the elevated temperature of
the helix burner have already been given for the natural gas case. For
hydrogen, these effects are combined with the opposing effect of a
lower mixture temperature of the unburnt gas. This can be shown by
determining the ﬁnal mixture temperature Tmix of the fuel (subscript
1) and the air (subscript 2) under the assumption of a constant
speciﬁc heat capacity cp, by
Tmix ¼ m1cp,1T1 þ m2cp,2T2
m1cp,1 þ m2cp,2
(3)
While air mass and air temperature are equal for both fuels, the ratio
0:21 < mH2cp,H2
mNGcp,NG
< 0:51
(4)
indicates a lower mixture temperature when hydrogen is employed.
This effect increases for elevated fuel mass ﬂows. Additionally, the
attachment of the injected fuel jets to the walls of the mixing tubes,
which was observed in the water tunnel, also enhances the cooling
effect of the hydrogen. Since no signiﬁcant effect of the air mass
ﬂow on ﬂame shape or ﬂame position was observed in the
OH*–images, this cause can be ruled out.
In contrast, the base plate temperature of the jet burner remains
below the preheat temperature for all air mass ﬂows and ﬂame
temperatures tested. It even decreases with increasing ﬂame
temperatures to a minimum of 37 K below the preheat value. This
results in a temperature difference between both burners of up to
130 K at the same operating condition. The reasons can be found in
the lower inﬂuence of the ﬂame on the burner temperature combined
with the cooling effect of the hydrogen that allows for higher ﬂame
temperatures without an increase of the burner plate temperature.
Flame Stability Margins. Limits for a reliable combustion
process in this study are deﬁned by LBO as the lower stability limit
and FB as the upper stability limit.
Concerning the stability limits of the natural gas ﬂames, no ﬂame
ﬂashback occurred under the tested conditions due to the high ﬂow
velocity in the mixing tubes, which is supposed to ensure the stable
combustion of hydrogen. The operable window for NG is nearly the
same for both burners with a LBO limit in the range of
Tad ¼ 1600  1650 K, independent of the air mass ﬂow. Since the
ﬂame starts to be distributed and far lifted from the burner plate at
Tad  1700 K, as observed in Figs. 7(a) and 7(d), ﬂame anchoring
becomes signiﬁcantly more unstable and leads to the prompt LBO.
Differences in the stability limits related to the different nozzle
conﬁgurations are not identiﬁed.
The stability limits for hydrogen fuel are shown in Fig. 13. Each
subplot comprises one type of fuel injection nozzle. The ﬁlled
markers represent the helix burner and the empty markers represent
the jet burner. The tested LBO limits are indicated with blue dashed
lines, while the detected FB limits are marked with red symbols. The
different level of bulk ﬂow velocities are caused by the different air
mass ﬂow rates tested. In the test procedure, the amount of hydrogen
for a constant air mass ﬂowrate is increased until ﬂashback occurs or
the thermal limit of the test rig is reached. The observable increase of
mixture bulk velocity for a speciﬁc air mass ﬂow is caused by the
increasing amount of hydrogen. This increase in bulk velocity is
more pronounced for hydrogen than for natural gas due to the larger
ratio between volume and thermal power. An overview on the
inﬂuence of fuel amount on the bulk ﬂow velocity is provided in
Table 1.
For the helix burner, the lowest bulk velocity that is achieved for
relevant ﬂame temperatures is ubulk  90 m=s, which corresponds to
an air mass ﬂow of 0.8 _mnom and is independent of the utilized fuel
injector nozzle. The maximum ﬂame temperature reached for these
bulk velocities is Tad ¼ 1600 K. As the bulk velocity increases, the
FB limits for the different fuel injection nozzles become more
Fig. 11
Burner plate temperatures when burning natural gas
with the helix burner (circles) and jet burner (squares). Depicted
are three cases of nominal air mass ﬂow: 0.8 _mnom (dotted line),
1.0 _mnom (dashed line), and 1.2 _mnom (solid line).
Fig. 12
Burner plate temperatures when burning hydrogen with
the helix burner (circles) and jet burner (squares). Depicted are
three cases of nominal air mass ﬂow: 0.8 _mnom (dotted line),
1.0 _mnom (dashed line), and 1.2 _mnom (solid line). The preheat
temperature T2 is subtracted from the base plate temperature Tbp.
121010-8 / Vol. 145, DECEMBER 2023
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 9 ---

separable, as indicated by the red-ﬁlled markers moving to different
ﬂame temperatures in each plot. At Tad ¼ 1800 K nozzle #3 reaches
its FB limit, closely followed by nozzle #2 at Tad ¼ 1880 K. For
nozzle #1, the ﬂashback limit is shifted to a signiﬁcantly higher
ﬂame temperature of Tad ¼ 2070 K. For the highest bulk velocity
tested no injector reached the FB limit in the allowed operating
window of the test rig. The reason for the higher FB tendency of the
helix burner was found in the elevated base plate temperatures
observed in Fig. 12. Multiple investigations [32–35] described the
inﬂuence of burner material temperature on FB propensity. With the
increased wall temperature, the quenching distance reduces and
allows for higher burning velocities in the near wall region. Due to
the higher material temperatures of the inner tube ring, all observed
FBs occurred at one of those mixing tubes.
The lower stability limit of the helix burner was tested for nozzle
#1 only. The LBO for this conﬁguration occurred at Tad ¼ 1200 K,
which is 400 K below the value for the corresponding natural gas
operating point. This is due to the higher chemical reactivity of
hydrogen.
With regard to the applied criteria for ﬂame stability, the jet
burner outperformed the helix geometry, although the LBO limit is
at slightly higher ﬂame temperatures compared to the helix type
burner. For ubulk  100 m=s, which associates to the nominal air
mass ﬂow 1:0 _mnom, all three nozzle conﬁgurations performed
properly, without FB, until the thermal limit of the test rig was
reached. First differences between the nozzles are found for
ubulk  90 m=s, with nozzle #2 and #3 reaching their FB limits at
Tad ¼ 2000 K and 2090 K, respectively. For nozzle #1, the bulk ﬂow
velocity had to be reduced even further to ubulk < 80 m=s (0.7 _mnom)
and the ﬂame temperature increased to Tad ¼ 2000 K in order to
achieve its FB limit for the jet burner. Thus, as with the helix burner,
nozzle #1 provides the highest ﬂashback resistance.
Therefore, for both burner geometries, the FB limit shifts to
higher ﬂame temperatures withthe degree of temporal unmixedness.
Although no global effect on the measured emissions could be
recognized, it might be the temporal discontinuous localization of
the fuel-rich share at the tube walls that prevents the occurrence of
FB, even though the mean concentration is increased in the near wall
region, seen in Fig. 5. The oscillation of the fuel jet of nozzle #1 is
caused by ﬂow instabilities. In contrast, nozzle #2 and #3 with the
jet-in-crossﬂow conﬁgurations tend to increase the fuel concen-
tration in the near wall region while exhibiting lower temporal
unmixedness. As a consequence of the FB suppression, the FB
mechanism will be shifted from the boundary layer to the core ﬂow.
The comparable effect of staged and homogeneous fuel-air
distributions on FB was numerically investigated by Gruber
et al. [36].
At the same time, the unmixedness leads to higher ﬂow velocities
in the fuel-rich regions of the mixing tube. This is assumed due to the
additional momentum the coaxial jet introduces into the air ﬂow.
Based on this, Fig. 6 can also be associated with velocity ﬂuctuations
with the local velocities near the mixing tube wall continuously
exceeding the bulk velocity. Both effects can sufﬁciently suppress
backﬂow regions at the onset of FB. It requires further investigations
to ﬁnd out whether the temporal fuel concentration ﬂuctuation or the
velocity ﬂuctuation is more crucial for FB suppression.
In order to summarize the ﬂame stability of the multi-tube burners
for hydrogen combustion, a ﬂashback mapping for all tested
conditions and conﬁgurations is presented in Fig. 14. For this
purpose, the two observed main factors for ﬂame stability in this
study are related to each other. The ﬁrst is the approximated burner
plate temperature and the second is the chemical reactivity, which is
represented by the laminar ﬂame speed. The burner plate
temperature is normalized by the auto-ignition temperature of a
fuel-air mixture with / ¼ 0.45. This equivalence ratio corresponds
to the ﬂame temperature ( 1800 K) at which most of the observed
ﬂashbacks occurred for the helix burner. The auto-ignition
temperature was calculated by means of a perfectly stirred reactor
model in CANTERA with an estimated residence time of s ¼ 0:01 ms.
This time span is based on a bulk velocity of 100 m/s but the actual
velocity near the walls where ﬂashback is initiated is assumed to be
lower, which makes it a lower estimation limit for the residence
time. Therefore, the y-axis in Fig. 14 represents the thermally related
inﬂuences on ﬂame stability. The achievable maximum of this
relation is unity, at which the fuel-air mixture would selﬁgnite at the
considered conditions. On the x-axis, the laminar ﬂame speed is
normalized by the bulk velocity of the unburnt fuel-air mixture,
representing the ratio between chemical reactivity and ﬂow
condition that leads to a FB event following the idea of the
Damk€ohler number. For this relation, it is not assumed that it does
reach unity due to turbulent ﬂow conditions.
All tested operating conditions and all hardware conﬁgurations
for hydrogen combustion are shown in Fig. 14. Each heat map
illustrates the FB propensity of a single type of fuel injector nozzle
with a fade from yellow to red, where red denotes the highest FB
propensity. A measured FB event is marked with a red cross.
Therefore, each of the tested hardware conﬁguration spreads out its
Fig. 13
Stability limits for hydrogen combustion are grouped
according to the employed types of injection nozzles. In each
diagram, the ﬁlled markers show the helix burner, and the empty
markers denote the jet burner. A red symbol indicates a ﬂame
ﬂashback.ThebluedashedlineindicatestheLBOlimit,butnotevery
conﬁguration/condition was tested for LBO. (Color version online.)
Table 1
Overview of mixture bulk velocity with increasing fuel
amount for the nominal air mass ﬂow
Fuel
Tad (K)
q ðkg=m3Þ
ubulk (m/s)
NG
1647
0.526
102.7
2003
0.531
102.8
H2
1607
0.492
108.1
1994
0.478
111.7
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2023, Vol. 145 / 121010-9
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 10 ---

own stability map within the plot. Two clusters of heat maps (helix
and jet burner) can be identiﬁed, each with three superimposed heat
maps (the nozzles). The separation between the two clusters occurs
approximately at a temperature ratio of 0.63. The cluster above this
temperature ratio comprises the helix burner while the cluster below
belongs to the jet burner. Both areas cover very different conditions.
The jet burner is completely unaffected by the temperature effects.
Only the change in the experimentally adjusted preheating
temperature causes the values of the temperature ratio on the y-
axis to increase from an average value of 0.57–0.62. The increase of
ﬂame temperature leads to an increase of the laminar ﬂame speed but
without a relevant increase of the bulk velocity. This causes the areas
related to the jet burner to expand horizontally to the right until FB
occurs. Although the maximum value of SL=ubulk ¼ 0.157 might be
estimated as a small value, it must be taken into account that with
v0=SL  1 the estimated ratio of turbulence intensity and laminar
ﬂame speed is already at a very low level. Thus, the turbulent ﬂame
speed is already much closer to the bulk velocity. However, this
parameter is difﬁcult to determine.
The second cluster, above the temperature ratio of 0.63, is related
to the helix burner. The values that determine the three stability
maps of this cluster completely diverge from the jet burner with
increasing laminar ﬂame speed and rise to the top right of the plot. This
is due to the steep increase in burner plate temperature with increasing
thermal load resulting in a FB. It is assumed that temperature ratios
close to unity are actually reached in the experiments, since the tips of
the thermocouples which detect the base plate temperature are not
located directly at the mixing tube edges. The wider separation of the
stability map boundaries for the helix burner is due to the observed
deviation of base plate temperatures with increasing amounts of
hydrogen for this particular geometry.
Summary and Conclusions
The presented study investigated two geometrical variants of a
multi-tube jet ﬂame burner: the JET burner and the HELIX burner. Both
are tested with three different types of fuel injectors and examined
for the effects of different inlet conditions such as air preheat
temperature, adiabatic ﬂame temperature, and air bulk velocity.
Pure hydrogen and pure natural gas are used as fuels in order to
evaluate the fuel ﬂexibility of the multi-tube burner. The test
conditions are down-scaled from full load gas turbine operating
conditions for single stage operation. PLIF measurements are
conducted in a water tunnel to evaluate the resulting fuel/air mixing
quality prior to combustion. Temporal unmixedness shows
differences of up to 50% between the tubes of the two burner
conﬁgurations. The helix burner shows a single region of enhanced
unmixedness at each tube, while the regions of unmixedness for the
jet burner are distributed along the circumference of each of the
mixing tube inner walls. In particular, this feature appears to
increase FB resistance in case of coaxial fuel injection (nozzle #1).
Although qualitative differences in mixing quality were found
between the burner geometries, there was no indication in the
measured NOx emissions. For both burners, NOx emissions are at a
low level with less than 10 ppm NOx up to a ﬂame temperature of
Tad ¼ 1950 K. No clear separation was found in the geometry
variations either. This indicates a comparable and good mixture
quality for all conﬁgurations.
In terms of ﬂame stability margins, the differences are more
pronounced between the burner geometries. For natural gas
combustion, the LBO limits are at Tad  1650 K. A ﬂame transition
point is observed at Tad  1700 K, where the ﬂame shape changes
from a broad distribution over the combustion chamber to a compact
ﬂame with increasing temperature. Since the burner has been
designed for pure hydrogen operation, the FB limits are not reached
for natural gas within the feasible operating conditions.
With hydrogen as fuel, the base plate temperatures of the burner
geometries differ greatly. At the same operating conditions, the
temperature difference of the base plates can be up to 130 K. This
greatly reduces the FB resistance of the helix burner while only
slightly increasing the LBO limit. In addition, the FB limit is
affected by the type of fuel injection nozzle, with the FB resistance
increased for the coaxial fuel injection at nozzle #1.
It is concluded that the temperature of the burner base plate is
important for stability margins, especially for hydrogen fuel. But
also a higher unmixedness can enhance FB resistance of a multi-tube
jet ﬂame burner.
Acknowledgment
This work has been conducted as a part of the joint research
program InnoTurbinE within the scope of AG Turbo and is
supported by the German ministry of economy and technology.
The authors gratefully acknowledge MAN Energy Solutions SE for
their support and permission to publish this paper. Furthermore, the
authors would like to thank Philipp Fockenberg for designing the
combustor unit and the additive manufacturing team at MAN
Energy Solutions SE for printing the burner. We also thank Noah
Lichter for his support at the measurements and David L€uck for
technical support.
Funding Data
 Bundesministerium f€ur Wirtschaft und Klimaschutz (Grant
No. 03EE5041E; Funder ID: 10.13039/501100006360).
Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated and supporting the ﬁndings of this article are
obtainable from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Nomenclature
C(x) ¼ concentration
~C(x) ¼ concentration ﬂuctuation
FB ¼ ﬂashback
H2 ¼ hydrogen
I ¼ intensity
J ¼ momentum ratio
LBO ¼ lean blow-off
_m ¼ mass ﬂow
NG ¼ natural gas
NOx ¼ nitrogen oxides
PLIF ¼ planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence
SL ¼ laminar burning velocity
Ut ¼ temporal unmixedness
Fig. 14
Flashback mapping for all tested conditions. Data
clustering is based on the identiﬁed main factors for FB: burner
plate temperature ratio and velocity ratio. The black dots mark the
data points. FB events are highlighted with a red cross. Each area
shows the FB propensity of a single type of fuel injector nozzle
with a fade from yellow to red. Red denotes the highest FB risk.
(Color version online.)
121010-10 / Vol. 145, DECEMBER 2023
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 11 ---

k ¼ wavelength
r ¼ standard deviation
References
[1] Noble, D., Wu, D., Emerson, B., Sheppard, S., Lieuwen, T., and Angello, L., 2021,
“Assessment of Current Capabilities and Near-Term Availability of Hydrogen-
Fired Gas Turbines Considering a Low-Carbon Future,” ASME J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power, 143(4), p. 041002.
[2] Keller, J. J., 1995, “Thermoacoustic Oscillations in Combustion Chambers of Gas
Turbines,” AIAA J., 33(12), pp. 2280–2287.
[3] Cosic´, B., Wassmer, D., Kluß, D., Jaeschke, A., Reichel, T., and Paschereit, C. O.,
2022, “Experimental and Numerical Advancement of the MGT Combustor
Towards Higher Hydrogen Capabilities,” ASME Paper No. GT2022-82110.
[4] Magnusson, R., and Andersson, M., 2021, “Operation of SGT-600 (24 MW) DLE
Gas Turbine With Over 60% H2 in Natural Gas,” ASME Paper No. GT2020-
16332.
[5] Ciani, A., Bothien, M., Bunkute, B., Wood, J., and Fr€uchtel, G., 2019, “Superior
Fuel and Operational Flexibility of Sequential Combustion in Ansaldo Energia
Gas Turbines,” J. Global Power Propul. Soc., 3, pp. 630–638.
[6] Funke, H. H.-W., Beckmann, N., Keinz, J., and Horikawa, A., 2021, “30 Years of
Dry-Low-NOx Micromix Combustor Research for Hydrogen-Rich Fuels–an
Overview ofPastand Present Activities,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power,143(7),
p. 071002.
[7] Kroniger, D., Horikawa, A., Okada, K., and Ashida, Y., 2022, “Novel Fuel Injector
Geometry for Enhancingthe Fuel Flexibility of aDry Low NOxMicroMix Flame,”
ASME Paper No. GT2022-83025.
[8] Koomen, J., Dammers, T., Demougeot, N., Stuttaford, P., Heinze, J., Stockhausen,
G., and Fleing, C., 2022, “High Pressure Testing With Optical Diagnostics of a
Hydrogen Retroﬁt Solution to Eliminate Carbon Emissions,” ASME Paper No.
GT2022-82652.
[9] Lammel, O., Sch€utz, H., Schmitz, G., L€uckerath, R., St€ohr, M., Noll, B., Aigner,
M., et al., 2010, “FLOXV
R Combustion at High Power Density and High Flame
Temperatures,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 132(12), p. 121503.
[10] York, W. D., Ziminsky, W. S., and Yilmaz, E., 2013, “Development and Testing of
a Low NOx Hydrogen Combustion System for Heavy-Duty Gas Turbines,”ASME
J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 135(2), p. 002001.
[11] Asai, T., Dodo, S., Koizumi, H., Takahashi, H., Yoshida, S., and Inoue, H., 2011,
“Effects of Multiple-Injection-Burner Conﬁgurations on Combustion Character-
istics for Dry Low-NOx Combustion of Hydrogen-Rich Fuels,” ASME Paper No.
GT2011-45295.
[12] Witzel, B., Mo€ell, D., Parsania, N., Yilmaz, E., and Koenig, M., 2022,
“Development of a Fuel Flexible H2-Natural Gas Gas Turbine Combustion
Technology Platform,” ASME Paper No. GT2022-82881.
[13] Zhang, F., Zirwes, T., Nawroth, H., Habisreuther, P., Bockhorn, H., and Paschereit,
C. O., 2017, “Combustion-Generated Noise: An Environment-Related Issue for
Future Combustion Systems,” Energy Technol., 5(7), pp. 1045–1054.
[14] Dunn, M. J., Masri, A. R., and Bilger, R. W., 2007, “A New Piloted Premixed
Jet Burner to Study Strong Finite-Rate Chemistry Effects,” Combust. Flame, 151
(1–2), pp. 46–60.
[15] Kalantari, A., Sullivan-Lewis, E., and McDonell, V., 2016, “Flashback Propensity
of Turbulent Hydrogen–Air Jet Flames at Gas Turbine Premixer Conditions,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 138(6), p. 061506.
[16] Lewis, B., and von Elbe, G., 1943, “Stability and Structure of Burner Flames,”
J. Chem. Phys., 11(2), pp. 75–97.
[17] Hoferichter, V., Mohammadzadeh Keleshtery, P., Hirsch, C., Sattelmayer, T.,
and Matsumura, Y., 2016, “Inﬂuence of Boundary Layer Air Injection on
Flashback of Premixed Hydrogen-Air Flames,” ASME Paper No. GT2016-56156.
[18] Baumgartner, G., Boeck, L. R., and Sattelmayer, T., 2016, “Experimental
Investigation of the Transition Mechanism From Stable Flame to Flashback in a
Generic Premixed Combustion System With High-Speed Micro-Particle Image
Velocimetry and Micro-PLIF Combined With Chemiluminescence Imaging,”
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 138(2), p. 021501.
[19] Reumsch€ussel, J. M., von Saldern, J. G. R., Kaiser, T. L., Reichel, T., Beuth, J. P.,
Cosic´, B., Genin, F., et al., 2021, “NOx Emission Modelling for Lean Premixed
Industrial Combustors With a Diffusion Pilot Burner,” ASME Paper No. GT2021-
59071.
[20] Terhaar, S., Bobusch, B. C., and Paschereit, C. O., 2012, “Effects of Outlet
Boundary Conditions on the Reacting Flow Field in a Swirl-Stabilized Burner at
Dry and Humid Conditions,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 134(11),
p. 111501.
[21] Schulz, C., and Sick, V., 2005, “Tracer-LIF Diagnostics: Quantitative Measure-
ment of Fuel Concentration, Temperature and Fuel/Air Ratio in Practical
Combustion Systems,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 31(1), pp. 75–121.
[22] Lacarelle, A., and Paschereit, C. O., 2012, “Increasing the Passive Scalar Mixing
Quality of Jets in Crossﬂow With Fluidics Actuators,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power, 134(2), p. 021503.
[23] Danckwerts, P. V., 1952, “The Deﬁnition and Measurement of Some
Characteristics of Mixtures,” Flow Turbul. Combust., 3, pp. 279–296.
[24] Peters, N., 1999, “The Turbulent Burning Velocity for Large-Scale and Small-
Scale Turbulence,” J. Fluid Mech., 384, pp. 107–132.
[25] Russo, F., and Basse, N. T., 2016, “Scaling of Turbulence Intensity for Low-Speed
Flow in Smooth Pipes,” Flow Meas. Instrum., 52, pp. 101–114.
[26] Aleyasin, S. S., Fathi, N., Tachie, M. F., Vorobieff, P., and Koupriyanov, M., 2017,
“Experimental-Numerical Analysis of Turbulent Incompressible Isothermal Jets,”
ASME Paper No. FEDSM2017-69418.
[27] Spalding, D. B., 1955, “Gas Turbines II: Some Fundamentals of Combustion,” J.
R. Aeronaut. Soc., 59(538), pp. 714–714.
[28] Beuth, J. P., Reumsch€ussel, J. M., von Saldern, J. G., Wassmer, D., Cosic´, B.,
Paschereit, C. O., and Oberleithner, K., 2023, “Thermoacoustic Characterization
of a Premixed Multi Jet Burner for Hydrogen and Natural Gas Combustion,”
ASME Paper No. GT2023-104112.
[29] Douglas, C. M., Emerson, B. L., Lieuwen, T. C., Martz, T., Steele, R., and Noble,
B., 2022, NOx Emissions From Hydrogen-Methane Fuel Blends, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, GA.
[30] Garan, N., Dybe, S., Paschereit, C. O., and Djordjevic, N., 2023, “Consistent
Emission Correction Factors Applicable to Novel Energy Carriers and Conversion
Concepts,” Fuel, 341, p. 127658.
[31] Vance, F. H., Shoshin, Y., de Goey, L. P. H., and van Oijen, J. A., 2022,
“Quantifying the Impact of Heat Loss,Stretch and Preferential Diffusion Effects to
the Anchoring of Bluff Body Stabilized Premixed Flames,” Combust. Flame, 237,
p. 111729.
[32] Gruber, A., Sankaran, R., Hawkes, E. R., and Chen, J. H., 2010, “Turbulent
Flame–Wall Interaction: A Direct Numerical Simulation Study,” J. Fluid Mech.,
658, pp. 5–32.
[33] Duan, Z., Shaffer, B., and McDonell, V., 2013, “Study of Fuel Composition,
Burner Material and Tip Temperature Effects on Flashback of Enclosed Jet
Flame,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 135(12), p. 121504.
[34] Shaffer, B., Duan, Z., and McDonell, V., 2013, “Study of Fuel Composition
Effects on Flashback Using a Conﬁned Jet Flame Burner,” ASME J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power, 135(1), p. 011502.
[35] Vance, F. H., de Goey, L. P. H., and van Oijen, J. A., 2022, “Development of a
Flashback Correlation for Burner-Stabilized Hydrogen-Air Premixed Flames,”
Combust. Flame, 243, p. 112045.
[36] Gruber, A., Richardson, E. S., Aditya, K., and Chen, J. H., 2018, “Direct
Numerical Simulations of Premixed and Stratiﬁed Flame Propagation in
Turbulent Channel Flow,” Phys. Rev. Fluids, 3(11), p. 110507.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
DECEMBER 2023, Vol. 145 / 121010-11
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/145/12/121010/7052245/gtp_145_12_121010.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025
