
--- Page 1 ---

Paul O. Hedman
Thomas H. Fletcher
Daniel V. Flores
Stewart G. Graham
Jason K. Haslam
Robert L. Murray
G. Wayne Timothy
Department of Chemical Engineering and
Advanced Combustion Engineering Research
Center,
Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT 84602
Observations of Flame Behavior
in a Laboratory-Scale Premixed
Natural Gas/Air Gas Turbine
Combustor From Planar Laser
Induced Fluorescence
Measurements of OH, Laser
Doppler Anemometer Velocity
Measurements, and Coherent
Anti-Stokes Roman Spectrometer
Temperature Measurements
Instantaneous planar laser induced ’¼éuorescence (PLIF) images of OH, simultaneous
axial/radial and axial/tangential velocity measurements with an LDA (laser Doppler
anemometer), and instantaneous gas temperature measurements using a coherent anti-
Stokes Raman spectrometer (CARS) were obtained in a pre-mixed, swirl-stabilized
laboratory-scale combustor, ’¼üred with natural gas. Four operating conditions were ex-
amined (two swirl conditions and equivalence ratios of 0.80 and 0.65). The instantaneous
PLIF images of OH illustrate the chaotic nature of the turbulent ’¼éame eddies. Mean and
standard deviations of each variable were measured at different locations in the ’¼éame,
along with probability density functions. Stability of the ’¼éame at each condition is related
to measurements in the central and side recirculation zones. DOI: 10.1115/1.1914804
Introduction
Lean, premixed combustion is being used as a means to meet
severe NOx and CO emission regulations on stationary gas tur-
bines. A series of laser-diagnostic experiments was performed in a
lean-premixed combustion apparatus at the same lean operating
conditions. Planar laser-induced ’¼éuorescence PLIF was used to
image OH, two-component laser Doppler anemometry LDA 1
was used to measure velocity, and coherent anti-Stokes Raman
spectroscopy CARS 2 was used to measure temperature. These
data were obtained principally for evaluation of comprehensive
gas turbine combustion models 3ŌĆō5. The laser diagnostic data
presented in this paper were obtained in a laboratory-scale, gas-
turbine combustor LSGTC with a pre-mixed, swirl-stabilized,
natural gas ’¼éame. The LSGTC was operated at two swirl condi-
tions high swirl HS and medium swirl MS and two fuel
equivalence ratios 0.80 and 0.65 at atmospheric pressure. The
LSGTC simulates many of the key combustor characteristics of
commercial gas turbines 6, and provides a realistic ’¼éame where
model predictions and in situ measurements can be compared. Use
of advanced optical diagnostics permits near-instantaneous about
10-ns resolution, nonintrusive measurements that provide insight
into the physical processes that govern the combustion processes.
This set of data is thought to be among the most complete for lean
premixed combustion applicable to gas turbines, and therefore
serves as a good test set for modern computer models.
Combustor Test Facility
The combustion facility used for this study is the same used by
Hedman and co-workers 7ŌĆō11. The facility was further modi’¼üed
for this study to allow investigation of a premixed natural gas/air
’¼éame. This premixed natural gas/air combustor was developed
with support from the US/DOE Advanced Turbine Systems pro-
gram, and is referred to as the ATS burner. The laboratory-scale,
gas-turbine combustor LSGTC, illustrated in Fig. 1, was de-
signed to reproduce the characteristics found in a modern annular
combustor 6. The combustor, which was provided to BYU by
Wright Laboratory 12, consists of a four-sided chamber with
metal corner ’¼üllets to more nearly simulate an axisymmetric com-
bustor while maintaining adequate optical access. A metal plate or
a quartz window can be placed in each wall, depending on the
optical access required. The exit of the reactor was restricted by a
’¼éat plate with a 92-mm hole in the center.
The premixed swirl injector, illustrated in Fig. 2, is located in
the center of the combustion chamber base. The injector consists
of a stainless steel tube with a honeycombed brass insert. The
brass insert serves to smooth the ’¼éow as well as provide a ’¼éame
arrestor in case of ’¼éashback in the premixed fuel/air mixture.
Inserts are installed in the injector to provide different magnitudes
of swirl to the inlet ’¼éow. The swirler inserts are placed 40 mm
Contributed by the Fuels and Combustion Division of THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
MECHANICAL ENGINEERS for publication in the ASME JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR
GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received by the F&C Division July 30, 2003;
’¼ünal revision received May 5, 2004. Associate Editor: P. C. Malte.
724 / Vol. 127, OCTOBER 2005
Copyright ┬® 2005 by ASME
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

above the brass honeycomb and secured by a threaded post that
anchors the swirler to the brass honeycomb. A cap with an 18-mm
hole in the center and beveled walls is placed on the top of the
steel tube to coalesce the swirling ’¼éow at the injector exit. This
cap was needed in order to make the burner operate successfully.
Figure 2 shows a schematic of the two swirl inserts used in this
study. The inserts are labeled high swirl HS and medium swirl
MS to coincide with the 60- and 45-deg slot angles. The swirl
number SN indicated in Fig. 2 is a nondimensional number de-
’¼üned by the ratio of the axial ’¼éux of tangential momentum di-
vided by the product of the axial ’¼éux of axial momentum and the
equivalent nozzle radius 13.
Fuel ’¼éow to the burner was measured with a variable area ’¼éow
meter and is reported in slpm standard liters per minute, or
10ŌłÆ3 standard m3/min referenced to 1 atm 101 kPa and 70 ┬░F
21.1 ┬░C. Air’¼éow was controlled by varying the upstream pres-
sure of a choked ’¼éow nozzle. The diameter of the nozzle used for
this study was 0.1485 in. 3.77 mm providing air’¼éow rates from
250 to 1000 slpm, depending on upstream pressure. Uniform mix-
ing of gaseous fuel and air was assured by a the length of the
tube from the mixing point to the burner, b a jet mixer in the
feed system, and c a honeycomb ’¼éame arrestor. The air ’¼éow rate
for the four test conditions used in this study was 500 slpm.
Visual Flame Characterization. Figure 3 presents a schematic
drawing of the ’¼éow patterns present in the swirl-stabilized ’¼éame.
The swirling ’¼éow creates a funnel or tornado-like vortex ’¼éow
centered on the injector exit. A central recirculation zone and a
side recirculation zone accompany the tornadolike ’¼éow. Both re-
circulation zones have been found to in’¼éuence ’¼éame stability.
Depending on swirl number and fuel equivalence ratio, one or the
other of the recirculation zones may dominate the ’¼éame stability
1.
Wide variations in ’¼éame shape have been observed in the ATS
burner for different combinations of swirl number and fuel
equivalence ratio. These structures were studied both visually,
through photographic and video recordings, with the PLIF images,
and with the velocity and temperature results obtained in this
study. Such observations have yielded insight into the location of
the ’¼éame front, variation of ’¼éame structure with operating condi-
tions, and the presence and strength of the recirculation zones.
These ’¼éame shapes are primarily a result of the effect of the swirl
intensity and fuel equivalence ratio on the ’¼éow ’¼üeld, with the
magnitude of the air’¼éow rate being of secondary importance. The
equivalence ratio was varied by changing the fuel ’¼éow rate while
maintaining a constant 500 slpm air ’¼éow rate. The changes in
’¼éame shape were characterized using the point of attachment, the
location of the ’¼éame front, the structure of the vortex, and the
visible intensity of the ’¼éame.
An example of a visual image of the ’¼éame structure is pre-
sented in Fig. 4 for a stoichiometric =1.0, MS case. The 
=1.0 image was included in the paper to provide a photographic
illustration of the ’¼éame structure. The =1.0 image was used
because this image was brighter, more visual, and reproduced bet-
ter than images from ’¼éames with 1.0. It was visually observed
that the ’¼éame at =0.80 was more stable than at =0.65. The
’¼éame with the HS injector was more coalesced and closer to the
injector than with the MS injector. At =0.65, the ’¼éame was near
the lean ’¼éammability limit, and was quite unstable for both swirl
injectors. When using the MS injector, the ’¼éame would oscillate
between two different ’¼éame structures, one that was more or less
Fig. 1
Schematic of premixed combustor ŌĆ×adapted from
Schmidt and Hedman ŌĆĀ11ŌĆĪŌĆ”
Fig. 2
Schematic of premixed injector and medium and high
swirl block inserts ŌĆ×adapted from Schmidt and Hedman ŌĆĀ11ŌĆĪŌĆ”
Fig. 3
Flow patterns in a con’¼üned, bluff-base, premixed, swirl-
stabilized combustor ŌĆ×adapted from Gupta et al. ŌĆĀ13ŌĆĪŌĆ”
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
OCTOBER 2005, Vol. 127 / 725
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

attached to the vortex funnel, and one that was lifted well above
the vortex funnel. The MS case at =0.65 was at the very edge of
the lean ’¼éammability limit, and on occasion would actually extin-
guish.
Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence. Planar laser-induced
’¼éuorescence PLIF is a valuable tool for studying combustion
phenomena. Flame propagation is partly governed by the diffusion
and transport of important combustion intermediates like OH and
CH. Laser-induced ’¼éuorescence has the potential of measuring
trace amounts of these short-lived combustion species at near in-
stantaneous temporal resolution 10ŌĆō100 ns. Likewise, because
PLIF is laser-based, probing of the burner is nonintrusive. Laser-
induced ’¼éuorescence measurements are often made at the focal
point of a converging excitation laser 14. However, due to the
advances in detector and laser performance, ’¼éuorescence can be
captured instantaneously over a two-dimensional area for many
species. The two-dimensional image area captured resembles an
instantaneous photograph-like image directly related to the con-
centration distribution of the combustion species being probed.
The ’¼éame is probed with a thin sheet of laser light tuned to the
appropriate wavelength. The PLIF images of OH provide detailed
information regarding the location and shape of the ’¼éame struc-
ture. This structural information is very useful in analyzing burner
designs, understanding combustion phenomena, and validating
combustion computer models.
The use of PLIF to determine ’¼éame properties has become
more popular in the last few years. For instance, use of PLIF and
acetone tracers is a popular method to determine mixing charac-
teristics 15ŌĆō18. Measurements of NO using PLIF are reviewed
by Cooper and Laurendeau 19. Measurements of OH using PLIF
to determine ’¼éame structure in natural gas/air ’¼éames 20ŌĆō25 and
kerosene spray ’¼éames 26,27 related to gas turbine combustors
have also been reported recently reported. However, none of these
previous measurements have been combined with detailed laser-
based measurements of velocities and/or temperature.
The excitation source used to pump the OH radical 283 nm
came from frequency doubling 566-nm laser light from a tunable
dye laser Spectra Physics PDL-3 with a KD*P crystal in the
wave extender. The tunable dye laser used a frequency doubled
Nd:YAG laser Quantaray as a pump source. The ’¼ünal exiting
laser beam at 283 nm was formed into a thin sheet approximately
0.5 mm thick and 13.0 cm wide. No attempt was made to deter-
mine exactly which OH transition was being pumped. For the
purposes of this study, it was suf’¼ücient to simply scan across the
OH transitions and select the one that gave the most intense OH
image. This setting was then maintained for images at all test
conditions so that the detector counts would be proportional to
OH concentration. As the laser beam passed through the ’¼éame, an
electronic camera Princeton Instruments, ICCD-5765/RB-E that
uses an intensi’¼üed charge coupled display ICCD with an elec-
tronic shutter speed of 100 ns was used to capture the induced
’¼éuorescence 308 nm of OH. The ICCD camera was set up or-
thogonal to the laser beam and was ’¼ütted with appropriate ’¼ülters
to block unwanted light and with a Nikon f/1.2 quartz lens that
would pass the uv light. A detailed schematic of the PLIF appa-
ratus used here is found elsewhere 28. Captured images were
digitally transferred to computer memory for subsequent analysis.
Since the optical setup was identical for all test conditions, the
actual detector counts may be proportional to the concentration of
OH present at a given diagnostic location. Eckbreth 14 has sug-
gested that in the linear regime the ’¼éuorescence signal power is
proportional to the laser irradiance and the species population
prior to laser excitation. However, the effects of saturation and
quenching may cause the counts to be nonlinear. It is beyond the
scope of this study to try to quantify this effect.
Figure 5 presents four example instantaneous OH images for
each of the four test conditions. Images were selected that repre-
sent: A the least intense i.e., lowest image counts, and most
fragmented image ’¼éame structure, B a ’¼éame structure of near
average intensity, and C the most intense highest image counts,
and the most well-de’¼üned image. The fourth image column D
was selected and included because of its oddity. The computer
processing of the counts from each pixel into the false color im-
ages presented is somewhat misleading. For each image, the de-
tector counts for each pixel were normalized to the peak detector
count, and the image was scaled using Lab-View software to a
false color image, with red scaled to the peak normalized value
and black scaled to the minimum value. The false color images
were converted to gray-scale images for publication. The detector
counts were normalized to the peak relative intensity for that im-
age whether the value of the peak detector count was 400 or 4000.
Nevertheless, the instantaneous structure is well represented. Ac-
tual detector counts for representative locations within selected
images are tabulated below see Fig. 8 on normalized probability
distribution functions PDFs for that location.
The observations about ’¼éame structure noted from the visual
and camera images are con’¼ürmed with the instantaneous PLIF
images. Operation at =0.80 produced stable ’¼éames with both
the HS and MS injectors e.g., Fig. 5, Images B-101 and B-126.
The ’¼éame with the HS injector was more coalesced and closer to
the injector than that with the MS injector. At =0.65, the ’¼éame
was near the lean ’¼éammability limit, and was quite unstable for
both swirl injectors. As noted visually, the ’¼éame would oscillate
between two different ’¼éame structures, one that was more or less
attached to the vortex funnel, and one that was lifted well above
the vortex funnel. Visual observations showed that the MS case at
=0.65 was at the very edge of the lean ’¼éammability limit. Fig-
ure 5, Image A-062, supports this observation, showing little OH
in the central vortex and the ’¼éame being nearly extinguished.
Even the image near the average structure Fig. 5, Image B-105
shows little of the OH needed to support ’¼éame propagation.
The PLIF diagnostic capability allowed the collection of a sig-
ni’¼ücant number of separate instantaneous OH images 256 images
at each test condition. Consequently, images of the mean and the
standard deviation in the ’¼éuorescence signal were obtained by
applying the appropriate statistical analysis to the collection of
images, pixel by pixel. Figure 6 presents the average image of the
Fig. 4
Example video image of premixed natural gas/air ’¼éame
ŌĆ×MS burner, 500-slpm air ’¼éow rate, =1.0ŌĆ”
726 / Vol. 127, OCTOBER 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

256 separate laser shots for the OH species for the four test con-
ditions. The mean image is very similar to the observed video
images. However, the variation in pixel count, as re’¼éected in the
normalized gray image, allows more insight into the structure of
the ’¼éame and the character of the two different recirculation
zones. As with the video images and instantaneous PLIF images,
the mean PLIF images from the =0.80 cases indicate a very
structured stable ’¼éame for both the HS and MS injectors. The
vortex for the HS case is narrower, and the top of the ’¼éame zone
is closer to the injector than in the MS case. The =0.65 cases
re’¼éect a narrower vortex and lower ’¼éame zone for the HS con-
’¼üguration. Both con’¼ügurations are near lean blowout at =0.65,
but the MS case is more unstable, and consequently more likely to
extinguish than the HS case. Standard deviation PLIF images
were also calculated pixel by pixel and are shown in Fig. 7 for the
four cases. The standard deviation gives insight into the amount of
large-scale turbulence and zones where ignition/extinction occur
within the ’¼éame. The greater coalescence in the ’¼éows with the HS
injector is more readily apparent in the standard deviation images
see Fig. 7, images B and D compared to images A and C, respec-
tively. The greater instability associated with the MS =0.65
case is also apparent in Fig. 7, image C. As noted above, the
normalized transform from the detector counts has a different
maximum value for each image. These normalized images there-
fore provide means for comparison of the shape of the ’¼éow ’¼üeld,
as depicted by the standard deviation calculation, rather than the
relative intensity.
The actual detector counts at selected pixel locations have been
used to create PDFs within the ’¼éame structure. The average count
and peak count, and the shape of the PDFs provide additional
insights into the ’¼éame characteristics, and have provided a mea-
sure of the effect of operating condition on the relative level of
OH in the ’¼éame. Examples of PDF distributions for the most
stable test case HS, =0.80 and for the least stable test case
Fig. 5
Instantaneous PLIF OH images of ’¼éame structure
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
OCTOBER 2005, Vol. 127 / 727
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

MS, =0.65 are presented in Figs. 8 and 9, respectively. Eight
locations where the PDFs have been determined are superimposed
on the mean PLIF image for both cases presented. The eight lo-
cations shown in Figs. 8 and 9 are identical for both cases. Loca-
tions were selected above the ’¼éame, in the most intense regions of
the ’¼éame, and below the ’¼éame. The PDF plots appear to be more
similar to beta distributions rather than Gaussian distributions. In
every case, the PDF shows that there is a signi’¼ücant amount of
time that no OH exists at that location e.g., Fig. 8, even in the
most intense part of the ’¼éame zone. Likewise, signi’¼ücant levels of
OH are seen even in regions that are predominately outside, but
near the ’¼éame zone. In Fig. 8 HS, =0.80 the maximum detec-
tor count 4633 counts at maximum, 1652 counts at average oc-
curs at a location inside the intense part of the ’¼éame location D.
In Fig. 9 MS, =0.65, the maximum detector count in the in-
tense part of the ’¼éame 1926 counts at maximum, 402 counts at
average occurs at location B. This suggests that the concentration
of OH in the MS, =0.65 case is about one fourth that of the HS,
=0.80 case. The nonlinear PLIF response and the possibility of
’¼éuorescence saturation may alter the interpretation of concentra-
tion slightly. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the detector counts,
as well as the corresponding PDFs, provides considerable insight
into the character of the turbulent, reacting ’¼éame.
Figure 9 further quanti’¼ües the unstable nature of the MS, 
=0.65 case. Even in the most intense region location B, there is
a considerable amount of time when no OH is detected in the
central vortex region. It is apparent that the stabilization process
in the turbulent, swirl-stabilized ’¼éame is a very complicated pro-
cess. The PLIF images obtained have provided some insight into
this process, but must be considered with the velocity and tem-
perature data to provide a more complete understanding about the
turbulent combustion process and ’¼éame stability.
LDA Velocity Measurements. The LDA setup used in this
study is a two-color system in forward scattering mode 1,29
originally developed by Schmidt and Hedman 11. The argon-ion
laser was operated in multi-line mode lasing at several frequencies
simultaneously. The multi-frequency laser beam was passed
through a collimator to reduce beam divergence, and then polar-
ized. A color separator and mirrors were used to select the two
strongest wavelengths, 488 nm blue and 514.5 nm green. The
green beam was split into two beams in the horizontal plane, and
the blue beam was split into two beams in the vertical plane. One
green and one blue beam were passed through separate Bragg
cells which allowed negative velocities to be obtained. The four
beams were passed through a beam expander and focused into two
superimposed elliptical probe volumes with major axes of about
2.3 mm and minor axes of about 0.13 mm. The focal length of the
Fig. 6
Mean PLIF images of OH in the ATS burner ŌĆ×premixed natural gas/air,
air flow=500 slpmŌĆ”
728 / Vol. 127, OCTOBER 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

transmitting lens was 762 mm with the beams intersecting at a
half angle of 3.1 deg. The diameter of the laser beam at the lens
face was approximately 4 mm. This two-color, four-beam LDA
con’¼üguration formed a probe volume with two fringe patterns at
right angles to each other, with a blue fringe spacing of 4.44 m
and a green fringe spacing of 4.68 m.
The air’¼éow was seeded with about 6-m diameter hollow alu-
minum oxide micro-spheres. The aerodynamic diameter of these
particles was such that they followed the gas ’¼éow patterns, even
in the recirculation zones. The seeding of the air’¼éow occurred
prior to the fuel addition point and well before the fuel injector. A
particle traversing the probe volume produced two Doppler sig-
nals. The fringes of the blue beams gave Doppler signals for the
axial velocity component and the fringes of the green beams gave
the Doppler signals that corresponded to either the radial or tan-
gential velocity component. Sample rates ranged from 400 counts
per second to 10,000 counts per second, depending on where the
probe volume was positioned in the ’¼éame. Sample rates were
signi’¼ücantly lower in the high-temperature regions of the ’¼éame.
The Doppler signals were collected in two different photo-
multiplier tubes PMT. Each PMT was connected to a signal
processor 30 for ’¼ültering and validation. Valid velocity signals
were recorded and stored by computer using a direct memory
access DMA digital I/O card from TSI and a data acquisition
program 31 also developed by TSI.
Figures 10 and 11 provide example axial, radial, and tangential
iso-velocity contour plots for the HS =0.80 and the MS 
=0.65 cases, respectively. The results for the other two cases are
reported by Murray 1. The analysis of the approximately 4000
instantaneous velocities obtained at each measurement location in
the ’¼éame zone allows statistical investigation into the turbulent
character of the ’¼éame to be made. Example standard deviations
in m/s for the axial, radial, and tangential velocities were cal-
culated at each location in the combustion chamber, and corre-
sponding contour plots are shown in Figs. 12 and 13 for the HS
=0.80 and MS =0.65 cases, respectively. Maximum and mini-
mum standard deviation velocities are also presented.
Comparison of the standard deviation velocity maps with the
corresponding mean velocity maps Figs. 10 and 11 show that the
highest standard deviation axial, radial, and tangential velocities
occur in the positive velocity ’¼éow channel where the fastest posi-
tive mean axial, radial, and tangential velocities occur. In addition,
the lowest standard deviation velocities occurred in the upper re-
gion of the combustion chamber and in the side recirculation zone
SRZ. Lower mean velocities were present in these areas. Past
studies have suggested that a large standard deviation correlated
with high turbulence regions 9,11. In this study, the largest stan-
dard deviations occurred in the same location as the largest mean
velocity.
Probability distribution functions PDFs have been used to de-
scribe the ’¼éow characteristics and to con’¼ürm the accuracy of the
Fig. 7
Standard deviation PLIF images of OH in the ATS burner ŌĆ×premixed
natural gas/air, air flow=500 slpmŌĆ”
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
OCTOBER 2005, Vol. 127 / 729
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

data. Figures 14 and 15 show examples of axial velocity PDFs at
an axial position of 80 mm and radial positions from near the
centerline to about a 40-mm radial location for the HS =0.80
and MS =0.65 cases, respectively. Additional PDF results are
provided by Murray 1. Labeled on the PDF are the axial posi-
tion, radial position, mean axial velocity, and standard deviation.
Generally, the axial velocity PDFs have a near Gaussian distribu-
tion in an identi’¼üable ’¼éow zone. However, these PDFs had a
bimodal distribution when gas velocities were measured across
the shear layer between two different identi’¼üable ’¼éow zones.
Typically, this can be seen at a position near the zero velocity
contour. These measurements have velocity components from
both sides of the zero velocity boundary.
In Fig. 14, starting at a radial position of ŌłÆ1 mm, the PDF has
a basic Gaussian pro’¼üle with a slightly increased gradient in the
positive velocity region. As measurements move to a radial posi-
tion of 11 mm, the PDF became less Gaussian, with the positive
velocity region of the PDF increasing in size, the negative veloc-
ity region decreasing in size, and the standard deviation increas-
ing. At 17 mm, the positive velocity region of the PDF has in-
creased signi’¼ücantly. At radial positions of 23 and 29 mm, the
positive velocity region of the PDF continues to increase, the
mean axial velocity becomes positive overall, the standard devia-
tion continues to increase, and the bimodal peaks are about equal
in size and shape. It should be noted that these two positions 23
and 29 mm straddle the zero axial velocity contour, and hence
have velocity components from both sides of the zero velocity
boundary. At a radial position of 35 mm, the bimodal distribution
continues, the positive region of the PDF increases, the positive
mean axial velocity increases in magnitude, and the standard de-
viation remains fairly constant. At a radial position of 41 mm, the
negative velocity region of the PDF has nearly disappeared, the
mean positive velocity dominates the distribution, and the stan-
dard deviation has decreased slightly. Similar observations regard-
ing the changes in PDF distributions as one moves from near
centerline past the zero axial velocity contour can be seen in Fig.
15 for the MS =0.65 case.
As expected, the observations regarding the PDFs support the
conclusion of strong shear layers in the combustion chamber. Bi-
modal distributions across the shear layer zero axial velocity con-
tour were typically found from an axial position of 60 mm to an
axial position of 100 mm. Below an axial position of 60 mm
bimodal distributions were sometimes seen, but the spacing be-
tween measurements was too great to get a good progression of
PDFs. At axial positions above 125 mm, the measured velocities
across the shear layer were not high enough to demonstrate the
bimodal distributions in the PDFs. Instead, the PDF usually rep-
resented a near Gaussian distribution with the peak of the distri-
bution being at or near the axial centerline.
Discussion of Recirculation Zones. Recirculation zones play a
major role in stabilizing a turbulent, premixed natural gas com-
bustor. In this study, it was assumed that gas moving down into
the ignition zone and radially towards the axial centerline im-
proved the stability of the ’¼éame. In other words, the incoming
premixed fuel and air needed a source of heat and/or radicals from
the recirculated products to stabilize the ’¼éame. The intensity of
the recirculation zones was based on how well the recirculation
zones moved hot gases to the middle of the combustion chamber
and down into the ignition zone. Examination of the zero axial
velocity and zero radial velocity contours helps de’¼üne recircula-
tion regions. Zero velocity contours for both the axial and radial
velocity maps are shown in both Fig. 10 and 11. The sizes of the
recirculation zones are directly related to the heights and widths of
the zero velocity contours. For convenience, a set of dimensions is
de’¼üned in Fig. 10 and 11. The maximum height of the zero axial
velocity contour, measured from the combustor base plate is la-
beled ŌĆ£hcuŌĆØ for the central recirculation zone CRZ and ŌĆ£hsuŌĆØ for
Fig. 8
Example PDFs from OH-PLIF images ŌĆ×HS injector, =0.80ŌĆ”
730 / Vol. 127, OCTOBER 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

the side recirculation zone SRZ. The maximum horizontal dis-
tance between the zero axial velocity contours for the CRZ is the
width of the axial ’¼éow channel wcu, with a similar value wsu
for the SRZ. Murray and co-workers 1,29 have used the heights
and widths to quantitatively investigate the effect of ’¼éow recircu-
lation on ’¼éame stability. The measured axial velocities were radi-
ally averaged inside both the central and side recirculation zones
for each case. The resultant volumetric ’¼éow rates are shown at
each axial position in Fig. 16 and 17.
The conclusions drawn are 1 the MS cases had a higher ’¼éow
rate in the CRZ at an axial position of 120ŌĆō150 mm than observed
in the corresponding HS cases, 2 the HS cases had a higher Qc at
Fig. 9
Example PDFs from OH-PLIF images ŌĆ×MS injector, =0.65ŌĆ”
Fig. 10
Iso-contour maps of mean axial, radial, and tangential velocity ŌĆ×HS injector, =0.80ŌĆ”
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
OCTOBER 2005, Vol. 127 / 731
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

an axial position of 50ŌĆō120 mm than observed in the correspond-
ing MS cases, and 3 the MS =0.80 case had about the same
CRZ ’¼éow rate as the MS =0.65 case up to an axial position of
105 mm above the base of the combustion chamber.
The ’¼éow rates through the SRZ were much greater and ex-
tended higher up into the combustion chamber for the MS cases
than the HS cases. The ’¼éow rates were only calculated out to a
radial position of about 40ŌĆō45 mm. Some of the cases had a SRZ
that extended beyond a radial position of 40ŌĆō45 mm. For these
cases, the ’¼éow rate could only be determined up to the farthest
radial position where data were taken, hence the values shown in
Fig. 17 should be larger in most cases. Figure 17 shows that the
MS cases had greater SRZ ’¼éow rates than the HS cases, with the
largest ’¼éow rate in the MS =0.80 case. The MS =0.80 case
was the only case that had the SRZ extend up into the visible
’¼éame zone.
The HS cases had larger CRZ ’¼éow rates than the MS cases at
axial positions of 10ŌĆō110 mm. The ignition zone was located be-
low an axial position of 50 mm and the lower half of the visible
’¼éame zone was located from 50 to 110 mm. Therefore, HS cases
had a larger CRZ ’¼éow rate, recirculating hot gases down through
the lower half of the visible ’¼éame zone and into the ignition zone
Fig. 11
Iso-contour maps of mean axial, radial, and tangential velocity ŌĆ×MS injector, =0.65ŌĆ”
Fig. 12
Iso-contour maps of standard deviations of axial, radial, and tangential velocity ŌĆ×HS
injector, =0.80ŌĆ”
732 / Vol. 127, OCTOBER 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 10 ---

than for the MS cases. In addition, the MS case did not have a
change in the CRZ until after an axial position of 105 mm. This
suggested that the CRZ played only a small role in stabilizing the
MS cases. Large increases in the CRZ ’¼éow rate appear to occur in
the visible ’¼éame zone. These large increases in the CRZ ’¼éow rate
could partly be due to an increase in temperature. Further studies
need to be made to identify the relationship between recirculated
’¼éow rates and temperature.
The MS cases had much larger SRZ ’¼éow rates than the HS
cases in spite of limitations in completely calculating the SRZ
’¼éow rates for the MS cases. The MS =0.80 case was the only
case where the SRZ extended up into the visible ’¼éame zone. It
appears that the MS cases needed to have more recirculated hot
gases coming down into the ignition zone to stabilize the ’¼éame.
These conclusions support observations made earlier. However,
only the MS =0.80 case extended up into the visible ’¼éame zone
and thus only the MS =0.80 case had improved stability from
the stronger side recirculation.
Gas Temperature Measurements
Coherent anti-Stokes spectroscopy CARS is based on Raman
scattering of high-energy, coherent, laser beams. In general, a
pump beam is split into two beams of equal intensity, and crossed
with a Stokes beam that is tuned to the particular Raman reso-
nance for the species being probed e.g., 2331 cmŌłÆ1 for N2 and
2143 cmŌłÆ1 for CO. Nonlinear wave mixing occurs in the diag-
nostic volume where the three probe beams cross, and a fourth
beam is generated at the anti-Stokes frequency for the species
being probed. The anti-Stokes spectra contain information that
relates to gas temperature and species concentration. The nonlin-
ear wave mixing is a vector process, and the laser-like anti-Stokes
signal leaves the diagnostic volume in a prescribed direction that
depends on the vector angles of the pump and Stokes beams.
Since the signal is laser-like, it can be focused into a spectrometer
for analysis. A detailed discussion of CARS theory and applica-
tion can be found in Eckbreth 14.
Several types of CARS setups have been explored previously
by Hedman and co-workers 32ŌĆō35 in combustion systems. The
current BYU CARS instrument 2,36 uses a frequency doubled
ND:Yag laser 532 nm to supply the two pump beams. A portion
of the 532-nm laser energy is split off and used to excite the
Stokes laser. A broadband, dual pyromethene dye laser py-
romethene 597 and 650 from Exciton is used to simultaneously
excite the Raman frequencies of N2, CO, O2, and CO2. The spec-
trometer used in this study was patterned after the one used by
Eckbreth at UTRC 14,37. The diagnostic volume had a 200
-m waist and a 1-mm length. The spectra were imaged onto an
intensi’¼üed photodiode array IPDA of an EG&G PARC 1421B
camera, and recorded to a computer via an EG&G OMA model
1461. The speci’¼üc characteristics of the IPDA and OMA system
were determined by Boyack and co-worker 32,33. Gas tempera-
tures were determined from the N2 CARS spectra using the FT-
CARS code 38 from SANDIA National Laboratories with modi-
’¼üed input and output interfaces. Spectra that were too noisy or that
could not be ’¼üt well with the FTCARS code were discarded. Flores
and co-workers 2,36 conducted temperature calibration mea-
surements on air in an electrically heated tube furnace equipped
with a type-K thermocouple and a digital readout. Measurements
in the range of 300ŌĆō1000 K resulted in an average error of 30 K
and standard deviations of 50 K. Accuracy of the temperature
measurements at higher temperatures is thought to be within the
usual ┬▒50 K generally assumed for the CARS technique. Addi-
tional details of the instrumentation and calibration are given by
Flores 2,36. This study used the N2 anti-Stokes spectra to de-
duce the gas temperatures presented herein.
Figure 18 presents the iso-contour mean gas temperature maps
for the four cases tested in this study HS and MS and =0.65
and 0.80. Figure 18a presents the results for the MS =0.65
least stable ’¼éame case and Figure 18d presents the results for
the HS =0.80 most stable ’¼éame case. Comparison of these two
’¼ügures shows the broadest effect of both swirl level and stoichi-
ometry. The de’¼ünition of stability used here is in regards to ’¼éame
extinction rather than the amount of turbulent ’¼éuctuations present.
The MS =0.65 least stable ’¼éame case was quite unstable, and
the visible ’¼éame would move from a ’¼éame attached to the injector
inlet to a ’¼éame that was lifted up into the combustion chamber.
The mean temperature map does not show this effect because of
the averaging involved. The average temperature contours do
Fig. 13
Iso-contour maps of standard deviations of axial, radial, and tangential velocity ŌĆ×HS
injector, =0.65ŌĆ”
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
OCTOBER 2005, Vol. 127 / 733
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 11 ---

show that the ’¼éame in the MS =0.65 case is higher in the com-
bustion chamber when compared to the HS =0.80 most stable
’¼éame case. The peak temperature of the MS =0.65 least stable
’¼éame case was also lower 1449 versus 1648 K than the HS 
=0.80 case. The adiabatic ’¼éame temperatures were 2000 and 1750
K for the =0.80 and =0.65 cases, respectively. The differences
between measured and adiabatic ’¼éame temperature are attributed
to the heat losses from the burner.
Comparison of Figs. 18a and 18b, or Figs. 18c and 18d
show that the increased heat release associated with the higher
fuel equivalence ratio 0.80 versus 0.65 had the effect of increas-
ing ’¼éame stability, causing the vortex core to be closer to the
injector inlet. The increased heat release also causes a signi’¼ücant
increase in the peak ’¼éame temperature.
The effect of swirl on ’¼éame structure can be seen by comparing
Figs. 18a and 18c or Figs. 18b and 18d. The higher swirl
level has increased ’¼éame stability as evidenced by 1 the location
of the ’¼éame vortex HS moves the vortex closer to the injector,
and 2 the higher peak ’¼éame temperatures associated with the
higher swirl level 1550 versus 1449 K for the =0.65 cases, and
1648 versus 1603 K for the =0.80 cases.
As noted above, recirculation zones play a major role in stabi-
lizing a turbulent, premixed natural gas combustor. Gas moving
down into the ignition zone and radially towards the axial center-
line improved the stability of the ’¼éame. The intensity of the recir-
culation zones was based on how well the recirculation zones
moved hot gases to the middle of the combustion chamber and
down into the ignition zone. The vortex structures shown in the
gas temperature maps are consistent with the previous observa-
tions of OH-PLIF images, and the similar iso-velocity contours
above.
The analysis of the approximately 1000 instantaneous gas tem-
perature measurements obtained at each in situ measurement lo-
cation in the ’¼éame zone allowed statistical investigation into the
turbulent character of the ’¼éame to be made. Standard deviations
for the gas temperatures were calculated at each location in the
combustion chamber. Iso-contour plots of standard deviation T
temperature are shown in Fig. 19 for all four test cases. The actual
values of T were normalized by the local mean temperature, and
the normalized standard deviation results are presented as per-
cents. This treatment is analogous treatments of ’¼éuctuating veloc-
ity data to determine local turbulent intensities. Maximum and
minimum mean temperatures are also included in Fig. 19.
The effects of swirl level and stoichiometry on gas temperature
’¼éuctuations are apparent in these maps. The effect of swirl level
on ’¼éame structure and stability can be obtained by comparing
Figs. 19a and 19c or Figs. 19b and 19d. In general, the
maximum values of T are close to the same for all four cases.
Within the ’¼éame, the highest levels of T follow the high velocity
shear zone that separates the central recirculation zone with the
side recirculation zone. This is consistent with the velocity obser-
vations. In the velocity study, the highest values of u correlated
directly with the high velocity channel that was associated with
the vortex ’¼éow. Past studies have suggested that a large standard
Fig. 14
Mean axial velocity contour map and example velocity PDFs ŌĆ×HS injector, =0.80ŌĆ”
734 / Vol. 127, OCTOBER 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 12 ---

deviation correlated with high turbulence regions 8,11. In this
study, the largest values of T occurred in the same location as the
largest values of mean velocity.
The effect of stoichiometry on ’¼éame structure and stability can
be obtained by comparing Figs. 19a and 19b or Figs. 19c and
19d. In general, the higher heat release associated with the 
=0.80 cases resulted in 1 a reduction of the size of the highly
’¼éuctuating zone, and 2 a movement of that zone closer to the
injector inlet.
Probability distribution functions PDFs have been used to de-
Fig. 15
Mean axial velocity contour map and example PDFs ŌĆ×MS injector, =0.65ŌĆ”
Fig. 16
Volumetric ’¼éow rates in the central recirculation zone,
computed from axial velocities
Fig. 17
Volumetric ’¼éow rates in the side recirculation zone,
computed from axial velocities
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
OCTOBER 2005, Vol. 127 / 735
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 13 ---

scribe the characteristics of the ’¼éuctuating temperature. Figures
20 and 21 show examples of gas temperature PDFs at axial loca-
tions of 40, 60, and of 80 mm and radial positions from the cen-
terline to a 30-mm radial location for the HS =0.80 and MS
=0.65 cases. Additional PDF results are included in the disser-
tation by Flores 2. Labeled on the PDF are the axial position
radial position mean gas temperature K standard deviation tem-
perature K and normalized standard deviation temperature, T
%.
In Fig. 20, the PDFs generally do not exhibit a Gaussian distri-
bution. The distributions in a single identi’¼üable zone i.e., in ei-
ther the central recirculation zone or the side recirculation zone
seem to follow a Beta distribution. As with the velocity distribu-
tions, the distributions that bridged the two recirculation zones
tended to have a bimodal PDF. Comparison of distributions E and
F 40 mm in Fig. 20 show that these two PDF distributions are
clearly on opposite sides of the boundary between the central and
side recirculation zones. At a higher position 80 mm, distribu-
tions M, N, and O all exhibit a wide distribution that has a bimo-
dal character. This suggests that in the higher part of the ’¼éame
there was a signi’¼ücant side to side ’¼éuctuation, even though the T
was not large, that shifted the side and central recirculation zones
back and forth across the diagnostic locations.
Figure 21 presents similar PDF results for the HS =0.80 case.
Fig. 18
Contour maps of mean gas temperatures for the four test conditions
Fig. 19
Contour maps of normalized /T% for the four test conditions
736 / Vol. 127, OCTOBER 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 14 ---

Since the vortex is more coalesced near the injector for the HS
=0.80 case, the bimodal character is easier to identify. Attention
is drawn to locations A and B z=40 mm where there is a bimo-
dal character to the PDF distribution even though these locations
are near the centerline. Locations C, D, and E also at 40 mm
re’¼éect distributions in the high velocity region where cooler un-
reacted gases are being brought into the combustion chamber.
Location F shows a bimodal character, but seems to be dominated
by a higher temperature region associated with the side recircula-
tion zone. The distributions at locations G, H, and I z=60 mm
are dominated by a high-temperature zone associated with the
central recirculation zone. However, at locations J, K, and L also
at 60 mm, the distributions have the bimodal character associated
with components from both the central and side recirculation
zones. Higher in the burner z=80 mm the distributions are
nearly Gaussian in shape, and of nearly the same magnitude. This
suggests that for this test condition, the combustion was nearly
complete and near uniform ’¼éow had been achieved. In Fig. 20 at
z=80 mm, the mean temperatures showed greater variation with
radius, and were much below the ’¼ünal peak temperature in the
burner. The location of the PDFs with bimodal distributions is
shown in Fig. 22, showing that the bimodal distributions occur in
the strong shear layers between the central and side recirculation
zones.
Summary and Conclusion
A laboratory-scale gas turbine combustor LSGTC was used to
reproduce the characteristics found in a modern annular gas tur-
bine combustor. This laboratory scale gas turbine combustor was
used to investigate the characteristics of a premixed natural gas/air
’¼éame using PLIF, LDA, and CARS at four operating conditions
two swirl conditions, HS and MS, and two equivalence ratios,
=0.65 and 0.80. These data comprise one of the most complete
characterizations of ’¼éames in lean premixed systems, and there-
fore present an important benchmark for testing computer models.
Data from all four types of measurements video, PLIF, LDA,
and CARS showed that the least stable case was the MS 
=0.65 case, and that the most stable case was the HS =0.80
case. This was con’¼ürmed by heights of recirculation zones, loca-
tion of OH, intensity of the OH measurements, PDF distributions
of OH showing the fraction of time when no OH was present,
maximum temperatures, location of maximum temperatures, and
standard deviations in OH and temperatures. The MS =0.65
’¼éame would oscillate between two different ’¼éame structures, one
that was more or less attached to the vortex funnel, and one that
was lifted well above the vortex funnel. The MS case at =0.65
was at the very edge of the lean ’¼éammability limit, and would
occasionally extinguish.
The variations in ’¼éame shapes were primarily a result of the
effect of the swirl intensity and fuel equivalence ratio on the ’¼éow
’¼üeld, with the magnitude of the air’¼éow rate being of secondary
importance.
Probability density functions were generated at each measure-
ment location for all three components of velocity, for OH inten-
sity, and for temperatures. In general, PDF shapes were Gaussian
in the downstream region after the main ’¼éame zone, were bimodal
in the shear layer between the central and side recirculation zones,
and followed a beta distribution inside the recirculation zones.
The PDF plots show that there is a signi’¼ücant amount of time that
no OH is detected in the most intense part of the ’¼éame zone.
Likewise, signi’¼ücant levels of OH are seen even in regions that
are predominately outside, but near the ’¼éame zone. The detector
counts suggest that the maximum and average concentrations of
OH for the MS, =0.65 case are about one fourth that of the HS,
=0.80 case.
Boundaries of the recirculation zones were determined from the
zero velocity contours, and the axial velocity was integrated radi-
Fig. 20
Mean gas temperature contour map and example temperature PDFs ŌĆ×HS injector, =0.80ŌĆ”
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
OCTOBER 2005, Vol. 127 / 737
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 15 ---

Fig. 21
Mean gas temperature contour map and example temperature PDFs ŌĆ×HS injector, =0.65ŌĆ”
Fig. 22
Location of the bimodal distribution PDFs for all combustion cases, as indicated by horizontal lines
738 / Vol. 127, OCTOBER 2005
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 16 ---

ally across the two zones to provide a volumetric ’¼éow rate in the
reverse direction in each recirculation zone. This analysis showed
that the ’¼éame stabilization was strongly in’¼éuenced by the central
recirculation zone for the HS =0.80 case, and by the side recir-
culation zone for the MS =0.65 case.
Acknowledgment
This paper presents results from a study that was funded in part
by a U.S. Department of EnergyŌĆÖs DOE Advanced Turbine Sys-
tems ATS program, with additional support by the Brigham
Young University BYU Advanced Combustion Engineering Re-
search Center ACERC.
Nomenclature
CRZ  central recirculation zone
h  height
HS  HS condition
lpm  liters per minute
MS  MS condition
PDF  probability density function
Q  ’¼éow rate
r  radius
SN  swirl number
SRZ  side recirculation zone
w  width
  equivalence ratio
Subscripts
c  central referring to central recirculation zone
s  side referring to side recirculation zone
u  axial velocity
v  radial velocity
w  tangential velocity
x  horizontal distance from centerline
z  vertical distance from burner surface
References
1 Murray, R. L., 1998, ŌĆ£Laser Doppler Anemometry Measurements in a Turbu-
lent, Premixed, Natural Gas/Air Combustor,ŌĆØ M.S. thesis, Chemical Engineer-
ing Department, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.
2 Flores, D. V., 2003, ŌĆ£Analysis of Lean Premixed Turbulent Combustion Using
Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy Temperature Measurements,ŌĆØ
Ph.D. dissertation, Chemical Engineering Department, Brigham Young Uni-
versity, Provo, UT.
3 Cannon, S. M., Brewster, B. S., and Smoot, L. D., 1998, ŌĆ£Stochastic Modeling
of CO and NO in Premixed Methane Combustion,ŌĆØ Combust. Flame, 113, pp.
135ŌĆō146.
4 Cannon, S. M., Brewster, B. S., and Smoot, L. D., 1999, ŌĆ£PDF Modeling of
Lean Premixed Combustion Using In Situ Tabulated Chemistry,ŌĆØ Combust.
Flame, 119, pp. 233ŌĆō252.
5 Mallampalli, H. P., Fletcher, T. H., and Chen, J. Y., 1998, ŌĆ£Evaluation of
CH4/NOx Reduced Mechanisms Used for Modeling Lean Premixed Turbulent
Combustion of Natural Gas,ŌĆØ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 120, pp.
703ŌĆō712.
6 Sturgess, G. J., Sloan, D. G., Lesmerises, A. L., Heneghan, S. P., and Ballal, D.
R., 1992, ŌĆ£Design and Development of a Research Combustor for Lean Blow-
out Studies,ŌĆØ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 114, pp. 13ŌĆō19.
7 Hedman, P. O., Sturgess, G. J., Warren, D. L., Goss, L. P., and Shouse, D. T.,
1995, ŌĆ£Observations of Flame Behavior from a Practical Fuel Injector Using
Gaseous Fuel in a Technology Combustor,ŌĆØ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power, 117, pp. 441ŌĆō452.
8 Hedman, P. O., and Warren, D. L., 1995, ŌĆ£Turbulent Velocity and Temperature
Measurements from a Gas-Fueled Technology Combustor with a Practical Fuel
Injector,ŌĆØ Combust. Flame, 100, pp. 185ŌĆō192.
9 Warren, D. L., and Hedman, P. O., 1997, ŌĆ£Differential Mass and Energy Bal-
ances in the Flame Zone from a Practical Fuel Injector in a Technology Com-
bustor,ŌĆØ ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 119, pp. 352ŌĆō361.
10 Pyper, D. K., 1994, ŌĆ£The Study of Non-Swirl and Swirl Non-Premixed Flame
Stability Near Lean Blow Out and the Design of a Research Combustion
Facility,ŌĆØ M.S. thesis, Mechanical Engineering Department, Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT.
11 Schmidt, S. E., and Hedman, P. O., 1995, ŌĆ£CARS Temperature and LDA
Velocity Measurements in a Turbulent, Swirling, Premixed Propane/Air Fueled
Model Gas Turbine Combustor,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. 95-GT-64.
12 Roquemore, W. M., 1992, personal communication, Wright Laboratory, Wright
Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, OH.
13 Gupta, A. K., D. G. Lilley, and N. Syred, 1994, Swirl Flows, Abacus Press,
Kent, United Kingdom.
14 Eckbreth, A. C., 1996, Laser Diagnostics for Combustion Temperature and
Species, 2nd Ed., Gordon and Breach Publishers, Amsterdam, The Nether-
lands.
15 Tait, N. P., and Greenhalgh, D. A., 1993, ŌĆ£PLIF Imaging of Fuel Fraction in
Practical Devices and LH Imaging of Soot,ŌĆØ Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem.,
9712, pp. 1619ŌĆō1625.
16 Campbell, R. P., Checkel, M. D., and Wilson, D. J., 1996, ŌĆ£Measurements of
Time-Varying Jet Isopleths Using Dual Light Sheet PLIF,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No.
96-GT-28.
17 McDonell, V. G. and Samuelson, G. S., 2000, ŌĆ£Measurement of Fuel Mixing
and Transport Processes in Gas Turbine Combustion,ŌĆØ Meas. Sci. Technol.,
11, pp. 870ŌĆō886.
18 Thomsen, D. D., Ravikrishna, R. V., Cooper, C. S., Jiang, Y., and Laurendeau,
N. M., 2001, ŌĆ£Concentration Measurements in a Mixing Module for Lean,
Premixed, Gas-Turbine Combustors,ŌĆØ J. Propul. Power, 17, pp. 218ŌĆō222.
19 Cooper, C. S., and Larendeau, N. M., 2000, ŌĆ£Laser-Induced Fluorescence
Measurements in Direct-Injection Spray Flames: Technique Development and
Application,ŌĆØ Meas. Sci. Technol., 11, pp. 902ŌĆō911.
20 Broda, J. C., Seo, S., Santoro, R. J., Shirhattikar, G., and Yang, V., 1998, ŌĆ£An
Experimental Study of Combustion Dynamics of a Premixed Swirl Injector,ŌĆØ
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 27, pp. 1849ŌĆō1856.
21 Lee, S.-Y., Seo, S., Broda, J. C., Pal, S., and Santoro, R. J., 2000, ŌĆ£An Experi-
mental Estimation of Mean Reaction Rate and Flame Structure During Com-
bustion Instability in a Lean Premixed Gas Turbine Combustor,ŌĆØ Proceedings
of the Combustion Institute, 28, pp. 775ŌĆō782.
22 Hicks, Y. R., Locke, R. J., and Anderson, R. C., 2000, ŌĆ£Optical Measurement
and Visualization in High-Pressure, High-Temperature, Aviation Gas Turbine
Combustors,ŌĆØ Proc. SPIE 4076, pp. 66ŌĆō77.
23 Birouk, M., and Gupta, A. K., 2001, ŌĆ£Structure of Lean Premixed Swirling
Flames Using PLIF Imaging,ŌĆØ J. Flow Visualization Image Process., 84, pp.
341ŌĆō353.
24 Kobayashi, H, 2002, ŌĆ£Experimental Study of High-Pressure Turbulent Pre-
mixed Flames,ŌĆØ Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 26, pp. 375ŌĆō387.
25 Griebel, P., Scharen, R., Siewert, P., Bombach, R., Inauen, A., and Kreutner,
W., 2003, ŌĆ£Flow Field and Structure of Turbulent High-Pressure Premixed
Methane/Air Flames,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. GT-2003-38398.
26 Hicks, Y. R., Locke, R. J., Anderson, R. C., Zaller, M., and Schock, H. J.,
1998, ŌĆ£Imaging Fluorescent Combustion Species in Gas Turbine Flame Tubes:
On Complexities in Real Systems,ŌĆØ NASA Technical Memorandum No.
113157, 1074.
27 Locke, R. J, Zaller, M. M., Hicks, Y. R., and Anderson, R. C., 1999, ŌĆ£Non-
Intrusive Laser-Induced Imaging for Speciation and Patternation in High Pres-
sure Gas Turbine Combustors,ŌĆØ Proc. SPIE, 3783, pp. 332ŌĆō338.
28 Hedman, P. O., Fletcher, T. H., Graham, S. G., Timothy, G. W., Flores, D. V.,
and Haslam, J. K., 2002, ŌĆ£Observations of Flame Behavior in a Laboratory-
Scale Pre-Mixed Natural Gas/Air Gas Turbine Combustor from PLIF Mea-
surements of OH,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. GT-2002-20052.
29 Hedman, P. O., Murray, R. L., and Fletcher, T. H., 2002, ŌĆ£Observations of
Flame Behavior in a Laboratory-Scale Pre-Mixed Natural Gas/Air Gas Turbine
Combustor from LDA Velocity Measurements,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. GT-2002-
20053.
30 Laser Velocimetry Systems, 1990, TSI Inc., St. Paul, MN.
31 Find Software, 1996, TSI Inc., St. Paul, MN.
32 Boyack, K. W., and Hedman, P. O., 1990, ŌĆ£Dual-Stokes CARS System for
Simultaneous Measurement of Temperature and Multiple Species in Turbulent
Flames,ŌĆØ Twenty-Third Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Com-
bustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA.
33 Boyack, K. W., 1990, ŌĆ£A Study of Turbulent Nonpremixed Jet Flames of
CO/N2 Using Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy,ŌĆØ Ph.D. dissertation,
Chemical Engineering Department, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.
34 Haslam, J. K., and Hedman, P. O., 1996, ŌĆ£The Use of Two Pyromethene Dyes
in a Single Stokes Dye Laser to Make CARS Temperature and Multiple Spe-
cies CO, CO2, O2, and N2 Concentration Measurements,ŌĆØ Paper No. WSS/CI
96F-086, Fall Meeting of the Western States Section of the Combustion Insti-
tute, The University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, October 28-29.
35 Dawson, R. W., and Hedman, P. O., 1996, ŌĆ£A Technique for Determining
Instantaneous N2, CO, O2, CO2, and H2O Species Concentrations Using Mul-
tiplex CARS in Premixed Gaseous Flames,ŌĆØ Paper No. WSS/CI 96F-087, Fall
Meeting of the Western States Section of the Combustion Institute, The Uni-
versity of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, October 28-29.
36 Hedman, P. O., Flores, D. V., and Fletcher, T. H., 2002, ŌĆ£Observations of
Flame Behavior in a Laboratory-Scale Pre-Mixed Natural Gas/Air Gas Turbine
Combustor from CARS Temperature Measurements,ŌĆØ ASME Paper No. GT-
2002-20054.
37 Eckbreth, A. C., 1985, personal communication.
38 Palmer, R. E., 1989, ŌĆ£The CARSFT Computer Code for Calculating Coherent
Anti-Stokes Raman Spectra: User and Programmer Information,ŌĆØ Sandia Re-
port No. SAND89-8206, Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
OCTOBER 2005, Vol. 127 / 739
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
