
--- Page 1 ---

 
 
1
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISABE-2007-1270 
 
 
HIGH PRESSURE LOW NOX EMISSIONS RESEARCH: 
RECENT PROGRESS AT NASA GLENN RESEARCH CENTER 
 
Chi-Ming Lee 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 44135 USA 
 
Kathleen M. Tacina 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 44135 USA 
 
Changlie Wey 
ASRC Aerospace Corporation, Cleveland, Ohio, 44135 USA 
 
Abstract 
In collaboration with U.S. aircraft engine 
companies, NASA Glenn Research Center has 
contributed to the advancement of low emissions 
combustion systems.  For the High Speed Research 
Program (HSR), a 90% reduction in nitrogen oxides 
(NOx) emissions (relative to the then-current state of 
the art) has been demonstrated in sector rig testing at 
General Electric Aircraft Engines (GEAE).  For the 
Advanced Subsonic Technology Program (AST), a 
50% reduction in NOx emissions relative to the 1996 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
standards has been at demonstrated in sector rigs at 
both GEAE and Pratt & Whitney (P&W).  During the 
Ultra Efficient Engine Technology Program (UEET), 
a 70% reduction in NOx emissions, relative to the 
1996 ICAO standards, was achieved in sector rig 
testing at Glenn in the world class Advanced 
Subsonic Combustion Rig (ASCR) and at contractor 
facilities.  Low NOx combustor development 
continues under the Fundamental Aeronautics 
Program. 
To achieve these reductions, experimental and 
analytical research has been conducted to advance the 
understanding of emissions formation in combustion 
processes.  Lean direct injection (LDI) concept 
development uses advanced laser-based non-intrusive 
diagnostics and analytical work to complement the 
emissions measurements and to provide guidance for 
concept 
improvement. 
This 
paper 
describes 
emissions results from flametube tests of a 9-
injection-point LDI fuel/air mixer tested at inlet 
pressures up to 5500 kPa.  Sample results from CFD 
and laser diagnostics are also discussed.  
 
 
Nomenclature 
FAR 
[-] 
fuel to air ratio 
FNUS 
[-] 
fuel injector flow number  
p 
[kPa] 
pressure 
T 
[K] 
temperature 
Δp/p 
[-] 
combustor pressure drop, (p3 – 
p4)/p3 
ηc 
[-] 
fuel combustion efficiency 
φ 
[-] 
equivalence ratio 
 
 
 
Subscripts 
 
3 
 
combustor inlet conditions 
4 
 
combustor exit conditions 
ref 
 
reference conditions 
 
Introduction 
Although most gas turbine engines currently used 
in commercial aircraft meet the 1996 International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standard for 
emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx), NOx emissions 
are still a concern due to their harmful effects on the 
atmosphere.  NOx contributes to the production of 
harmful ozone at ground level and in the troposphere, 
and also contribute to ground level smog.  At the 
stratospheric altitudes that would be used for 
supersonic flight, NOx contributes to the depletion of 
the protective ozone layer.  To ensure combustion is 
as clean as possible and that aircraft gas turbines 
meet future more stringent regulations, low NOx 
combustion concepts are being developed at NASA.   
In addition to meeting more stringent emissions 
requirements, next-generation engine cycles will be 
required to simultaneously increase fuel efficiency.  
In order to achieve both efficiency and emissions 
goals NASA decided to support the development of 
high pressure cycle engines. Over the past two 
decades, NASA has sponsored both in-house research 
and collaborations with U.S. engine companies to 
develop advanced engines with higher efficiency that 
produce emissions.  During the High Speed Research 
(HSR) program, the goal was to reduce NOx 
emissions 90% relative to the then-current engine 
technology. 
 
Then, 
the 
Advanced 
Subsonic 
Technology (AST) project was initiated in the mid-
1990’s to increase fuel efficiency by 15% and reduce  


--- Page 2 ---

 
 
2
landing and takeoff cycle NOx emissions to 50% of 
the 1996 ICAO standard while maintaining the 
present levels of carbon monoxide (CO) and 
hydrocarbon emissions.  Following the AST Project, 
in the beginning of this century NASA introduced 
Ultra Efficient Engine Technology (UEET) Project to 
continue subsonic aircraft technology development 
with goals of 15% fuel efficiency improvement 
relative to current engines and 70% NOx reduction.     
NASA has investigated several combustion 
concepts to reduce NOx emissions while maintaining 
high 
combustion 
efficiency: 
 
lean 
premixed 
prevaporized (LPP) combustion1,2; rich burn-quick 
quench 
(RQL) 
combustion1,3,4; 
catalytic 
combustion5,6; 
lean 
direct 
injection 
(LDI) 
combustion; and rich front end combustion1.  LPP 
combustion met the HSR goal; the LPP, LDI, and 
RQL concepts all met the AST and UEET goals.  
This paper focuses on the LDI concept.    
On the lean side of stoichiometric combustion, 
NOx production is an exponential function of 
equilibrium flame temperature.  Lean-burn low NOx 
combustor concepts minimize the flame temperature 
by burning as lean as possible and avoiding local 
stoichiometric zones by mixing the fuel and air as 
well as possible.  All of the combustor air, except for 
the liner cooling air, enters through the combustor 
dome.  In lean, premixed, prevaporized (LPP) 
combustion, the fuel is mixed and vaporized 
upstream of the flame zone to ensure maximum 
mixing.  However, due to the high pressures and 
temperatures and the wide-ranging duty cycles of 
aircraft gas turbine engines, autoignition and 
flashback into the premixing zone are a concern for 
LPP combustors.  LDI combustion reduces the  
 
Figure 2: Fuel/air mixer element 
 
potential for these problems by injecting the fuel 
directly into the flame zone.  To ensure uniform 
mixing in LDI combustion, the fuel injector/swirler 
must be designed to produce small droplet sizes and 
quick mixing.  Therefore, multi-injector LDI 
concepts --- where many small fuel/air mixers replace 
one conventional fuel injector --- have been studied.  
Under these conditions, NOx emissions can approach 
those of LPP combustors1.  This paper focuses on 
very high pressure (up to 5500 kPa) tests of an in-
house multipoint LDI fuel/air mixer concept 
developed under the AST program.  The results are 
also compared to those from second-generation LDI 
sector and flametube tests. 
   
Experimental Setup and Procedure 
Fuel Injector/Mixer Configuration 
 
The LDI module described here is a first-
generation multipoint fuel-injection concept with 9 
fuel/air mixers occupying a 76.2 mm x 76.2 mm 
square area, as shown in Figure 1.  The 9 fuel/air 
mixers replace a single conventional fuel injector.  
Each fuel/air mixer is composed of a converging-
diverging venturi section with an upstream swirler; a 
fuel injector is inserted at the center of each swirler 
(see Figures 1 and 2).  The center-to-center distance 
between the fuel/air mixers is 25.4 mm.  All of the air 
enters through the fuel/air mixers to provide an 
overall lean burning zone.  Each fuel/air mixer 
provides rapid mixing of fuel and air and results in a 
small recirculation zone to stabilize the combustion 
process; the uniform mixing and short recirculation 
zone result in ultra low NOx emissions.    
 
Swirlers with helical, axial blades are used for 
mixing and generating a recirculation zone.  All 
swirlers are co-rotating with a blade angle of 60o, as 
shown in Figure 2.   The blades have an inside 
diameter of 9.4 mm and an outside diameter of 22 
mm.  The calculated swirl number, as defined by 
Beer and Chigier7, is 1.02.  The measured effective 
area of the air swirler array is 940 mm2.  
Each fuel injector is of the simplex type.  A 
similar fuel injector design was used in both the  
 
Figure 1: 9-element fuel injector module 


--- Page 3 ---

 
 
3
 
  
 
Figure 3: CE-5 test section showing quartz windows and 
a detail of the fuel injector module 
 
 
Figure 4: Advanced Subsonic Combustion Rig (ASCR) 
 
 
Figure 5:  NOx, EI as a function of adiabatic flame temperature at a pressure drop, Δp/p3, of 7%, and an inlet pressure of (a) 
5500 kPa, (b) 5200 kPa, (c) 3800 kPa, and (d) 4500 kPa. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 


--- Page 4 ---

 
 
4
ASCR and CE-5 tests.  For the ASCR tests, the flow 
number FNUS (as defined by Lefebvre8) of the each 
fuel injector is 9, and the fuel orifice diameter is 1.97 
mm. For the CE-5 tests, FNUS is 2.9 
 
Experimental Installation 
Testing was done in two facilities at NASA Glenn 
Research Center: CE-5 and the Advanced Subsonic 
Combustor Rig (ASCR).   
CE-5 is a high pressure/high temperature 
combustion facility capable of supplying air at up to 
2100 kPa, 4.5 kg/s, and 870 K.  For the tests 
described in this paper, CE-5 was configured with a 
76.2-mm by 76.2-mm square flametube.  As shown  
in Figure 3, the combustion section can be configured 
with 4 quartz windows, spaced 90o apart, for non-
intrusive laser diagnostics; each window is 38.1-mm 
by 50.8-mm.  If laser diagnostics are not desired, 
blanks can replace the quartz windows.  The hot 
combustion products are quenched with water and 
then vented to the altitude exhaust system, which was 
run at atmospheric pressure. 
ASCR is a very high pressure/high temperature 
combustion facility capable of supplying air at up to 
5500 kPa, 17 kg/s, and 975 K (see Figure 4).   Before 
being exhausted to the atmosphere, the hot 
combustion products are quenched with water.  See 
Bianco9 for further details. 
 
Results and Discussion 
 
This section is divided into three parts. First, NOx 
emissions 
measurements 
taken 
in 
the 
high 
pressure/high 
temperature 
ASCR 
facility 
are 
presented.  Then, a correlation for NOx emissions as 
a function of combustor conditions is given and 
Figure 6: NOx emissions as a function of 
equivalence ratio and inlet pressure. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7: NOx emissions as a function of inlet 
pressure and inlet temperature at equivalence 
ratios of (a) 0.5 and (b) 0.35. 
 
 
Figure 8: NOx emissions as a function of inlet 
pressure at an inlet temperature of 755 K and a 
pressure drop of 7%. 


--- Page 5 ---

 
 
5
compared to both medium pressure/high temperature 
data taken in CE-5 and the high pressure/high 
temperature ASCR data.  Finally, insights from CFD 
calculations and optical diagnostic measurements are 
used to explain why second generation LDI designs 
have lower emissions than the first generation LDI 
design described in this report. 
 
Emissions Data 
Figures 5-8 plot the NOx emissions as a function 
of combustor conditions.   NOx values are given as 
emissions index, defined as grams of NOx per 
kilogram of fuel.   
In Figure 5, the log of the NOx emissions index is 
plotted as a function of adiabatic flame temperature 
T4 for inlet temperatures T3 of 755 K (circles), 810 K  
(squares), and 865 K (triangles) and inlet pressures p3 
of 5500 kPa, 5200 kPa, 3800 kPa, and 4500 kPa.  
Note that the log of NOx appears to vary linearly 
with adiabatic flame temperature, which indicates tha    
t, as expected, NOx emissions are an exponential 
function of adiabatic flame temperature. 
Figure 6 plots the log of NOx emissions index as 
a function of the log of equivalence ratio at an inlet 
temperature of 865 K and inlet pressures of 3800 kPa 
(squares), 4500 kPa (open circles), and 5500 kPa 
(closed circles).   At the 5500 kPa, NOx emissions 
seem to be a much weaker function of equivalence 
ratio than they are at lower pressures. 
The log of the NOx emissions index is plotted 
against the log of the inlet pressure in Figures 7 and 
8. In part (a) of Figure 7, the equivalence ratio is 0.50 
and the inlet temperatures are 755 K (triangles), 810 
K (squares), and 865 K (circles); in part (b), the same 
three inlet temperature curves are plotted but the 
equivalence ratio is 0.35. In Figure 8, the inlet 
temperature is kept constant at 755 K, but 
equivalence ratios of 0.35 (circles) and 0.50 (squares) 
are plotted together. The log of the NOx emissions 
index seems to be a linear function of the log of the 
inlet pressure, indicating that NOx emissions are a 
power function of inlet pressure.  
 
NOx correlation for data comparison 
 
The NOx data are compared to two 
correlations that give the NOx emissions index as a 
function of inlet temperature, inlet pressure, pressure 
drop, and fuel-to-air ratio.  The first correlation was 
developed for this LDI configuration using the high 
temperature, high pressure data taken in ASCR, and 
is given by: 
 
EINOx = 0.104 exp(T3/185) FAR1.32 p3,
0.68 (Δp/p3)-0.36
 ,    (1) 
 
The second correlation, 
 
EINOx = 1.359 exp(T3/194) FAR1.69 p3
0.595 (Δp/p3)-0.565, (2) 
 
is almost identical to the NOx severity parameter 
developed by Wey10 using several multipoint LDI 
configurations: the only difference is the coefficient, 
1.359, which was found using the high pressure, high 
temperature ASCR data.  All of the other constants in 
equation 2 were found using several different data 
sets taken during the AST. 
 
Figure 9 plots the measured NOx emissions index 
against the NOx emissions index calculated from 
equations 1 (filled red symbols) and 2 (open blue 
symbols).  The high pressure, high temperature 
ASCR data is plotted using squares, and the medium 
pressure, high temperature CE-5 data is plotted using 
circles.  Both correlations fit the high pressure, high 
temperature ASCR data quite well (R2=0.95 for 
equation 1 and 0.92 for equation 2).  However, 
equation 
2 
fits 
the 
medium 
pressure, 
high 
temperature data taken in CE-5 (R2=0.90) much 
better than equation 1 (R2=0.78).  Since equation 1 
fits only the high pressure data well, but equation 2 
fits both the high pressure and the medium pressure 
data well, the correlation equation 2 is a more general 
equation. 
Finally the four points on the 5500 kPa curve in 
Figure 6 are plotted a second time in Figure 9 using 
yellow stars for the correlation in equation 1 and cyan 
stars for the correlation in equation 2.  Although 
Figure 6 seems to indicate that NOx emissions are a 
weaker function of equivalence ratio at high pressure 
and temperature, Figure 9 shows that NOx 
correlation equations 1 and 2 still predict NOx 
emissions fairly well.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Comparison of measured and calculated NOx 
emissions index.   
 


--- Page 6 ---

 
 
6
Analysis and Comparison with Second Generation 
LDI 
The 
data 
presented 
here 
were 
the 
first 
measurements taken in the high pressure/high 
temperature ASCR facility and showed that this 
facility operated well under these high pressure 
conditions.  In addition, these were also the first 
emissions measurements on the LDI concept at very 
high pressure conditions and showed that LDI 
combustion produced low NOx emissions varied 
smoothly with inlet pressure, even at pressures up to 
5500 kPa.   The measurements also showed that the 
operability and durability of LDI was good even at 
high pressure/high temperature conditions. 
Based on the success of this first generation LDI 
injector, second generation LDI geometries have 
been designed and tested14,15. Included in the second 
generation are designs that incorporate more injection 
points in the same cross section area to minimize the 
recirculation zone and the residence time effect.  The 
smaller recirculation zone and decrease in residence 
time results in a decrease in NOx emissions.   
Figure 10 compares first and second generation 
LDI emissions; the data shown are corrected to a 
constant inlet temperature of 810 K, inlet pressure of 
2750 kPa, and Δp/p3 of 4%.  The first generation 9- 
point LDI (hollow blue squares) has higher NOx 
emissions than any of the three second generation 
LDI concepts shown, which are: the 25-point LDI 
(hollow red triangles), the 49-point LDI (solid purple 
circles), and 36 points LDI (solid green triangles).  In 
addition, all of the second generation multi-injection 
LDI concepts have a better operability range (i.e, 
wider FAR range) than the first generation LDI 
concepts.  The 36-point has the best NOx emissions 
reduction potential.  The 49-point LDI had 
disappointing NOx emission results; after testing we 
examined the injector with the designer and found 
that there were a few blockages inside the fuel 
passage which caused non-uniform fuel/air mixing.  
In addition, all of the second generation multi-
injection LDI designs have better operability range 
than the first generation (i.e., a wider FAR range).   
Table 1 shows a hypothetical engine cycle for the 
NASA Ultra Efficient Engine, the ICAO landing-take 
off (LTO) characteristic for that engine is calculated 
for both first and second generation LDI concepts.  
Assuming 15% cooling air for the engine, the LTO 
NOx is 63% below the 1996 ICAO standard for the 
first generation LDI, and 71% below 1996 ICAO 
standard for the second generation LDI.  
We 
applied 
advanced 
laser 
diagnostics 
techniques6 and the in-house National Combustion 
Code7 to better understand fuel injector design.     
 Particle imaging velocimetry (PIV) was used to 
measure the velocity field downstream of the 
injector.  This allowed the size and location of the 
recirculation zones to be identified.  Figure 11 shows 
side view contours of axial velocity at locations 
ranging from 3 mm to 35 mm downstream of the 
injector exit plane; this image was taken in unfueled 
cold flow at an inlet temperature of 617 K, inlet 
pressure of 1030 kPa, and pressure drop of 4%.  
 
Figure 10: Comparison of first generation 9-point 
and second generation LDI flametube NOx emissions. 
 
 
Power 
Time 
Total 
pressure 
at 
station 
3 
Δp/p3 
 
% 
min 
kPa 
% 
SLTO 
100.0 
0.7 
969.8 
4 
Climb 
85.0 
2.2 
933.7 
4 
Approach 
30.0 
4 
740.4 
4 
Idle 
7.0 
26 
615.4 
4 
Table 1: UEET large engine LTO cycle 
 
Figure 11: Velocity field compiled from 200 PIV 
images. 
 


--- Page 7 ---

 
 
7
From these images we observe that the heart of the 
flow recirculation zone occurs between 5-7 mm from 
the injector exit and provides confirmation of the 
presence 
of 
recirculation 
zone 
immediately 
downstream of each injection point.   Note the three 
strong recirculation zones (indicated by the arrows to 
the left and by light blue and blue colors) 
approximately 7 mm from the injector exit.  More 
details are given in Hicks et al11.   
This strong recirculation zone was also calculated 
using the National Combustion Code.  The  
recirculation zones associated with the injection 
points are illustrated by the iso-surfaces of zero axial 
velocity in Figure 12 computed by Davoudzahed et 
al12.  
 
Summary 
This paper presents results from the first 
combustion test done in the high pressure/high 
temperature ASCR facility at NASA Glenn Research 
Center.  This test was also the first high pressure/high 
pressure test of the LDI concept and showed that LDI 
had good operability and durability even at pressures 
up to 5500 kPa.  NOx emissions varied smoothly 
with 
inlet 
pressure, 
flame 
temperature, 
and 
equivalence.  The limited number of data points at 
very high pressure and temperature conditions 
indicated that, at very high pressures, NOx emissions 
are a weaker function of equivalence ratio than they 
are at lower pressures.  A correlation for NOx 
emissions as a function of inlet temperature, inlet 
pressure, pressure drop, and fuel/air ratio was 
developed and showed high correlation with the 
measured NOx emissions at high pressure and 
temperature.  However, another correlation that was 
based on the Advanced Subsonic Technology  
Program(AST) NOx severity parameter had almost as 
high a correlation with the high pressure/high 
temperature data and a much higher correlation with 
the medium pressure/high temperature data. 
This paper also summarizes LDI concept 
development through design, analysis, and testing.  In 
the LDI concept, fuel is injected directly into the 
primary zone; this minimizes auto-ignition potential.  
However, in order to achieve low NOx, it is 
important to have fine atomization from fuel and 
uniform mixing from fuel and air.  In addition, a 
small recirculation zone and a short flame zone are 
also critical for NOx reduction.  Based on NOx 
reduction achieved by the first generation of LDI 
concepts, a second generation of LDI concepts was 
developed to further reduce NOx emissions.   
  
References 
1. Tacina, R.R., (1989). "Low NOx Potential of 
Gas Turbine Engines," AIAA 89-0550, 38th 
Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, 1990. 
2. Lee, C.-M., Bianco, J., Deur, J.M., and Ghorashi, 
B., (1992). "Nitric Oxide Formation in a Lean 
Premixed Prevaporized Jet A/Air Flame Tube: 
an 
Experimental 
and 
Analytical 
Study", 
NASA/TM---105722. 
3. Chang, C.T, and Holdeman, J.D., (2001). "Low 
Emissions RQL Flametube Combustor Test 
Results," NASA/TM---2001-211107. 
4. Peterson, C.O., Sowa, W.A., and Samuelson, 
G.S. (2002). "Performance of a Model Rich 
Burn-Quick Mix-Lean Burn Combustor at 
Elevated Temperature and Pressure," NASA/CR-
--2002-21192. 
5. Brabbs, T.A., and Gracia-Salcedo, C.M., (1989). 
"Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion of Jet-A Fuel -
-- Equivalence Ratios 5.0 to 8.0," NASA TM/ 
101975. 
6. Rollbuhler, R.J., (1991).  "Fuel-Rich, Catalytic 
Reaction Experimental Results," NASA/TM 
104423. 
7. Beer, 
J.M., 
and 
Chigier, 
N.A., 
(1972).  
Combustion Aerodynamics, John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc., New York. 
8. Lefebvre, 
A.H., 
(1998). 
Gas 
Turbine 
Combustion, Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia. 
9. Bianco, J., (1995).  ”NASA Lewis Research 
Center's 
Combustor 
Test 
Facilities 
and 
Capabilities," 
AIAA 
1995-2681, 
31st 
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE 
Joint 
Propulsion 
Conference, San Diego, CA. 
10. Wey, Changlie (2004), "A High Pressure and 
 
Figure 12: Nine-point, LDI results that show zero axial 
velocity iso-surfaces. 
 


--- Page 8 ---

 
 
8
High Temperature NOx Correlation", paper in 
progress. 
11. Hicks, Y. R., Anderson, R.C., Locke, R.J., and 
Wey, C., (2006). "Experimental Study to 
Characterize a Baseline Nine-Point Lean Direct 
Injector," Spring Technical Meeting of the 
Central States Section of the Combustion 
Institute, Cleveland, OH, 2006. 
12. Davoudzahed, F., Liu, N.-S., and Moder, J.P., 
(2006). "Investigation of Swirling Air Flows 
Generated by Axial Swirlers in a Flame Tube," 
GT-2006-91300, ASME Turbo Expo 2006: 
Power for Land, Sea, and Air, Barcelona, Spain, 
2006. 
13. Iannetti, A. and Moder, J., "Analysis of MEMS-
LDI Technology Using the National Combustion 
Code," AIAA 2005-169, 43rd AIAA Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, 2005. 
14. Tacina, R., Wey, C., Laing, P., and Mansour, A., 
(2002).  "A Low NOx Lean-Direct Injection, 
MultiPoint 
Integrated 
Module 
Combustor 
Concept for Advanced Aircraft Gas Turbines," 
NASA/TM—211347. 
15. Tacina, R., Mao, C.-P., and Wey, C., (2003).  
"Experimental Investigation of a Multiplex Fuel 
Injector 
Integrator 
for 
Low 
Emission 
Combustors," AIAA 2003-0287, 41st Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, 2003. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
