
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion dynamics linked to ﬂame behaviour in a partially
premixed swirled industrial burner
Fernando Biagioli *, Felix Gu¨the, Bruno Schuermans
Alstom, Brown Boveri Strasse 7, Baden CH-5401, Switzerland
Received 16 November 2007; accepted 17 November 2007
Abstract
Previous work [Biagioli, F., Stabilization mechanism of turbulent premixed ﬂames in strongly swirled ﬂows, Combustion, Theory and
Modelling 10 (3) (2006) 389–412; Guethe, F., Lachner, R., Schuermans, B., Biagioli, F., Geng, W., Inauen, A., Schenker, S., Bombach,
R., Hubschmid, W., Flame imaging on the ALSTOM EV-burner: thermo acoustic pulsations and CFD-validation, in: AIAA Paper
2006-437 presented at the 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, January 9–12, 2006] has shown that tur-
bulent dry low NOx (partially premixed) ﬂames in high swirl conical burners may be subject to a large change of their anchoring location
at the symmetry axis when a critical value of the bulk equivalence ratio is reached, i.e. they are bi-stable. This ﬂame behavior is linked
here to combustion pressure dynamics measured in an atmospheric test rig for a prototype version of the Alstom EnVironmental (EV)
conical burner. The link is made via the solution of the problem of the ‘travelling ﬂameholder’, which shows that the unsteady displace-
ment of the ﬂame anchoring location implies an unsteady variation of the ﬂame surface area and therefore unsteady heat release. The
relevance of this source of unsteady heat release—which is diﬀerent from more usual ones due to variations in turbulent burning rate and
in the sensible enthalpy jump across the ﬂame—to the generation of combustion dynamics in strongly swirled ﬂows is conﬁrmed here by
the strong positive correlation between the tendency of the ﬂame to be displaced and the measured amplitude of pressure pulsations.
 2007 Published by Elsevier Inc.
Keywords: Turbulent partially premixed combustion; Large eddy simulation; Combustion dynamics
1. Introduction
The stabilization of turbulent lean premixed ﬂames in
industrial burners is usually obtained by the method of vor-
tex breakdown. This consists in the formation of a central
recirculation zone (CRZ) which acts as an aerodynamic
ﬂameholder, when suﬃciently high swirl is given to the ﬂow
of reactants. Very often the swirl level is adjusted in a way
that vortex breakdown takes place in the downstream free
ﬂow (free standing CRZ) without touching any burner
wall. Stable anchoring of a turbulent ﬂame via a free stand-
ing CRZ zone is a big challenge in the development of low
NOx industrial burners, especially considering that, to keep
NOx emissions below prescribed levels, such anchoring
must take places with a good degree of fuel/air premixing.
In the case of an high swirl conical burner with charac-
teristics like the Alstom EnVironmental (EV) double cone
burner, it has been shown in [1], via CFD at the level of
large eddy simulation (LES) and in [2] via ﬂame imaging
techniques, that the properties of the CRZ generated via
the vortex breakdown phenomenon have large eﬀect on
the stabilization behavior of turbulent premixed ﬂames.
This is a direct consequence of the fact that, in strongly
non-uniform ﬂows, the position and shape of the ﬂame
do not depend only on the mean volumetric consumption
rate of reactants for unit of mean ﬂame cross sectional area
(the turbulent burning rate Ut) but also on the rate at which
reactants are fed into the ﬂame. This point of view is con-
ﬁrmed by the LES analysis performed in [1], which was
complemented with a simple one-dimensional boundary
0894-1777/$ - see front matter  2007 Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1016/j.expthermﬂusci.2007.11.007
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +41 056 2058583; fax: +41 056 2057713.
E-mail address: fernando.biagioli@power.alstom.com (F. Biagioli).
www.elsevier.com/locate/etfs
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353


--- Page 2 ---

layer type model describing ﬂame anchoring at the burner
axis. It was shown there that turbulent premixed ﬂames in a
swirling ﬂow anchor at the symmetry axis in a position
determined by the mean axial convective velocity, the tur-
bulent burning rate Ut and, especially, the turbulent radial
inﬂow of reactants, this last inversely proportional to the
ﬂame curvature radius at the symmetry axis RF. The ﬂame
radius of curvature RF was found to be strongly related to
the distribution of the mean axial velocity in the near axis
region. it is therefore clear that the position and behavior
of the ﬂame are determined also by the characteristics
(especially the radial size) of the CRZ and not only by
the turbulent burning rate. The results from the analytical
investigation were conﬁrmed by experimental data.
A recent experimental investigation [2] has shown addi-
tional properties of turbulent premixed ﬂames stabilized in
high swirl conical burners. More in details, it was observed
that the ﬂame stabilized in these kind of burners are subject
to a bi-stable behavior when the ﬂame tip reaches (for
example, with a variation in equivalence ratio) a critical
position close to the exit of the burner and that a strong
correlation exists between this bi-stable ﬂame behavior
and the distribution of the measured combustion pressure
dynamics.
An hypothesis on the relation between the ﬂame stabil-
ization properties and combustion dynamics in strongly
swirled ﬂows is made here with a simple model describing
the response of the ﬂame surface area to an unsteady dis-
placement of the ﬂame anchoring location, as it happens
close to the critical conditions of ﬂame bi-stability. This
mechanism is equivalent to the one proposed in [3,4],
where, for the case of a premixed ﬂame anchored at a
ﬂameholder ﬁxed in space, the ﬂame surface changes
unsteadily due to the time dependent variation of the inﬂow
velocity of reactants. The diﬃculty in the present case is
however represented by the characterization of the ﬂame
anchoring properties (which determine the ﬂame anchoring
location at the axis) in terms of any unsteady perturbation
like, for example, an acoustically modulated equivalence
ratio ﬂuctuation. The analytical investigation in [1] has in
fact shown that, close to the critical conditions separating
the two stable combustion modes in the conical burner, a
small variation in equivalence ratio leading to a small dis-
placement of the ﬂame and a small change in the hot gas
density can activate a ﬂame–velocity ﬂowﬁeld interaction
(very likely of baroclinic nature) which can in turn alter
the ﬂame anchoring properties and then further displace
the ﬂame. Ideally, the dependency of the ﬂame anchoring
location from a perturbation should be expressed on the
basis of detailed understanding of the above ﬂame–velocity
interaction. Given however the complexity of this problem,
an alternative method is proposed here. This consists in
determining the ﬂame position-equivalence ratio depen-
dency directly from the experimental or CFD data.
The present work is organized as follows. In Section 2,
the behavior of turbulent partially premixed ﬂames in the
conical burner is described from an experimental point of
view. In Section 3, the ﬂame behavior is studied using
CFD and a 1D boundary layer type ﬂame model which
was developed in [1]. Finally, in Section 4, the pulsation
characteristics of the burner are linked to the ﬂame behav-
ior via a simple model describing the generation of
unsteady heat release due to unsteady displacement of the
ﬂame anchoring location at the symmetry axis.
2. Experimental investigation of ﬂame behavior in the conical
burner
The tests, which are reported in full details in [2], have
been performed in an atmospheric single burner combus-
tion test rig at a full-scale industrial burner as described
earlier [5,6]. Combustor air, which is electrically preheated
and fed into a plenum chamber, ﬂows from there through
the burner and the combustion chamber. The combustion
Nomenclature
c
reaction progress variable
dA
mean ﬂame area element
Dt
turbulent diﬀusion coeﬃcient
f
fuel mixture fraction
lt
integral length scale of turbulence
r
radial coordinate
R
radius of combustor
RF
ﬂame radius of curvature
S
amplitude of ﬂameholder velocity
sL
laminar ﬂame speed
Sr
Strouhal number
t
time
Tﬂame
adiabatic ﬂame temperature
TRef
reference ﬂame temperature
Ut
turbulent burning rate
u0
turbulent velocity ﬂuctuation
U
reactants inﬂow velocity
u
velocity vector
x
axial coordinate
_xF
ﬂameholder velocity
Greek letters
a
angle between ﬂame and axis
Dp
pressure drop across burner
k
molecular diﬀusion coeﬃcient
s
ﬂame element time lag
f
non-dimensional pressure drop across burner
q
density
( )u
quantity in reactants
F. Biagioli et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353
1345


--- Page 3 ---

chamber has a rectangular cross-section with the dimen-
sions of 283 mm  381 mm  1250 mm. Cooling of the
combustor section is achieved by a combination of radia-
tion and water-cooling. The burner geometry is a generic
conical one based on the Alstom EV-Burner [7]. This bur-
ner shape (see Fig. 1) is obtained by shifting two halves of a
cone in opposite directions, orthogonally to the cone axis,
such that two inlet slots of constant width are produced.
The incoming stream of reactants is therefore given a
strong swirl component when ﬂowing through the two inlet
slots. Due to the high swirl number, a central recirculation
zone, which acts like a ﬂameholder, is formed at the burner
axis via the mechanism of vortex breakdown.
An exhaust probe, located about 550 mm downstream
of the burner exit, extracts ﬂue gas, which is analysed for
contents of oxygen O2, carbon dioxide CO2, carbon mon-
oxide CO, unburned hydrocarbons UHC, and nitric oxides
NOx (NO and NO2). The gas analysis data (and the tem-
peratures of combustor inlet air and fuel) as well as the
measured mass ﬂows allow a determination of the bulk adi-
abatic ﬂame temperature Tﬂame in the burner. The accuracy
of the absolute Tﬂame measurement is estimated to be
approx 25 K. The pressure drop coeﬃcient f is obtained
from measurement of the pressure diﬀerence (Dp) upstream
and down stream of the burner non-dimensionalized with
the dynamic pressure calculated using a bulk average veloc-
ity in the burner. Flames inside the burner having a higher
ﬂow resistance lead to higher f values. A microphone is
placed in the combustion chamber around 180 mm down-
stream of the burner exit to measure combustion-driven
pressure ﬂuctuations. Two air-cooled quartz windows of
ca. 200 mm  200 mm realize optical access to the combus-
tion chamber and are placed 90 to each other and to the
mean ﬂow direction. The upstream window edge is located
20 mm downstream of the burner exit in the combustion
chamber. To enable a visualization of the pulsations, the
test rig is excited with loud speakers mounted upstream
of the combustor [8] forcing the system to follow the natu-
rally occurring frequency. The laser set-up [9,10] for the
LIF detection of OH radicals and camera were locked on
this forcing signal and the phase shift adjusted by manually
changing the delay constant. The OH-LIF data were
recorded on a regular grid with approx 0.5 mm spacing.
The LIF-images are 2D cuts through the combustor along
the illuminating laser sheet, which is located in the center of
the combustor. The LIF intensity is sensitive to the concen-
tration of OH radicals in their electronic ground states,
which are found in regions of heat release, but also in the
exhaust gas. Images form chemiluminescence (CL) are also
presented.
Fig. 2 shows CL (top) and OH-LIF (bottom) images
(total mean, averaging over 300–400 images) in the conical
Fig. 1. Sketch of the Alstom EV burner.
1346
F. Biagioli et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353


--- Page 4 ---

burner at four diﬀerent values of the bulk adiabatic ﬂame
temperature. The experimental axial velocity ﬂowﬁeld from
a water rig facility is instead shown in Fig. 3. The OH-LIF
images show that, while the ﬂame at lower adiabatic ﬂame
temperatures is located outside of the burner in the com-
bustion chamber, at higher Tﬂame the ﬂame sits rather deep
inside the burner. The images indicate that the ﬂame can be
stabilized at two diﬀerent locations: inside or outside of the
burner. The transition between the ﬂame ‘inside burner’ to
ﬂame ‘outside burner’ modes takes place within a rather
small variation in ﬂame temperature at the TRef value,
i.e. the ﬂame is bi-stable. With exception of close to the
conditions where the transition takes place, both ﬂame
positions (inside and outside the burner) seem to be stable
over a large range of temperatures. Additionally, the ﬂame
anchored inside the burner is not attached to any solid wall
of the burner shell, as this would result in a harmful event.
It is observed that this ﬂame behavior strongly correlate
with the characteristics of the CRZ produced via vortex
breakdown. As shown by Fig. 2, in fact, vortex breakdown
takes place inside the burner with the appearance of a small
CRZ after which low positive axial velocity is recovered
and followed by a second CRZ which expands with a large
radius in the combustor. Other variants of this burner,
which also show a bi-stable ﬂame behavior, show instead
a single CRZ that starts very narrow deep into the burner
and then grows in thickness in the downstream direction
[1].
Interestingly, it is found that the pressure pulsations at
the natural acoustic frequency of the combustor (this at a
Strouhal number Sr = 0.57) have a trend which strongly
correlates with the ﬂame behavior. They are in fact rather
low at those values of Tﬂame where the ﬂame is stable out-
side and inside the burner but have a peak at the values of
Tﬂame where the transition between the two ﬂame modes
takes place. This is shown in Fig. 4 (left), where also the
pressure drop in the burner is plotted which, increasing
with the displacement of the ﬂame anchoring location
inside the burner, is an excellent indicator of ﬂame position
(see the following section). The strong link between the
pressure pulsations and the ﬂame behavior becomes clear
from images at Tﬂame = TRef phase locked to the forcing
signal (see Fig. 5), where the pressure pulsations amplitude
versus mean ﬂame temperature attains the maximum value.
Fig. 2. Flame imaging in the EV burner from chemiluminescence (top) and OH-LIF (bottom).
Fig. 3. Contours of mean axial velocity in the conical burner from a water
rig facility.
F. Biagioli et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353
1347


--- Page 5 ---

Resolving the phase angle shows that the ﬂame is moving
between the two positions where the ﬂame can be stable,
similarly to the eﬀect on the total mean of variations in
bulk Tﬂame. This behavior is resumed in Fig. 4 (right),
reporting phase locked values of Tﬂame (these estimated
from chemiluminescence intensity and due to ﬂuctuations
in equivalence ratio induced by the external forcing of
the air mass ﬂow rate) and the position of the leading edge
of the ﬂame as function of the phase angle. The depen-
dency of the ﬂame temperature Tﬂame from the chemilumi-
nescence intensity ICL is calibrated using the totally
averaged chemiluminescence data.
3. Analysis of vortex breakdown in industrial burners via
Large Eddy Simulation
The problem of vortex breakdown in the conical burner
is investigated here with the help of CFD. Because
Reynolds Averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS, k– approach)
methods have been previously [1] found unable to correctly
describe the kinematic properties of this kind of ﬂows (with
strong impact on the accuracy with which the stabilization
of turbulent premixed ﬂames could be predicted), the
present investigation is based on large eddy simulation
(LES) performed using the commercial solver FLUENT
T-TREF [K]
norm. pressure pulsations and dζ/dTflame
Normalized ζ
-200
-100
0
100
200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Pressure pulsations
ζ
dζ / dTflame
Fig. 4. Left: burner non-dimensional pressure drop f, df/dTﬂame and amplitude of combustion dynamics versus bulk ﬂame temperature. Right: mean
phase locked position of the ﬂame tip and ﬂame temperature from chemiluminescence plotted versus the ﬂame angle from the case at the bulk adiabatic
ﬂame temperature T = TRef.
Fig. 5. Flame imaging in the EV burner from chemiluminescence. Phase locked averging.
1348
F. Biagioli et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353


--- Page 6 ---

version 6.1.22. All geometric quantities and velocities are
non-dimensionalized with the burner diameter D and
burner bulk velocity U0. The combustor has circular
cross-section with non-dimensional diameter and length,
respectively, equal to 2 and 7. The computational domain
has been meshed with a tetrahedrals mesh of approx. 1.3
million. The ﬁnite volumes elements inside the burner
and in the combustor close to the burner exit have an aver-
age non-dimensional size of 0.025. Turbulent transport is
modelled with the standard Smagorinsky method. Convec-
tive terms are discretized with the central diﬀerencing
scheme for all equation with exception of the fuel mixture
fraction equation which is discretized with a second-order
upwind scheme. The partially premixed turbulent premixed
ﬂame is simulated with the Turbulent Flame Speed model
from Zimont [11]. This model represents the ﬂame as a
propagating boundary layer which increases in thickness
according to the turbulent dispersion law and propagates
with speed given by the expression:
U t ¼ Au00:75l0:25
t
k0:25s0:5
L
ð1Þ
where the laminar ﬂame speed sL is calculated with the pre-
mix module of the CHEMKIN II package using GRI3.0
[12] chemical kinetics at the local value of the mean mixture
fraction ~f . The mean progress variable transport equation
of the TFC model is therefore given by
oðq~cÞ
ot
þ r  ðq~u~cÞ ¼ r  ðqDtr~cÞ þ quU tjr~cj
ð2Þ
The main outcome of these CFD–LES simulations is in line
with the results obtained in [1] for a variant of the EV bur-
ner with higher swirl number. Until a given critical value of
the adiabatic ﬂame temperature, the turbulent premixed
ﬂame stabilizes outside the burner with its tip very close
to the burner exit (see Fig. 6, left). Interestingly, the ﬂame
completely intersects the CRZ indicated via the white ~u ¼ 0
contour. It should be observed that the structure of the
CRZ in front of the ﬂame is in line with the one measured
in the water rig facility (see Fig. 4, left), i.e. starting small
and narrow deep inside the burner, then contracting and
expanding again more downstream. When this critical
value of the adiabatic ﬂame temperature is just slightly
exceeded, the ﬂame anchoring location is subject to a large
displacement into the burner (see Fig. 6, right) at the apex
of the CRZ. For higher values of the adiabatic ﬂame tem-
perature, the ﬂame anchoring position does not change
signiﬁcantly anymore. Fig. 7 (left) shows also that, at the
critical conditions of the ﬂame displacement into the
burner, the pressure drop across burner and ﬂame has a
Fig. 6. Results from LES analysis. Left: mean progress variable isolines and velocity contours at T < TRef. Right: at T > TRef.
Fig. 7. Left: comparison of the pressure drop across the ﬂame from LES with experimental data. Right: estimation of the mean progress variable
distribution at the axis from 1D boundary layer method developed in [1] using the velocity distribution measured in a water rig.
F. Biagioli et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353
1349


--- Page 7 ---

discontinuity in line with the one measured in the experi-
ments (note that this ﬁgure refers to a variant of the burner
which, due to both the higher swirl number and fully
premixed conditions, is characterized by a more sudden
transition between the two ﬂame stabilization modes).
Such bi-stable ﬂame behavior might be interpreted as an
obvious transfer of the ﬂame anchoring location between
two consecutive CRZs at the axis separated by a contrac-
tion which represent a recovery of positive axial velocity.
The investigation performed in [1] shows however that
the situation is much more complex than just a jump of
the ﬂame from one CRZ to the other. In [1], a bound-
ary layer method was developed to deal the problem of
ﬂame anchoring at the symmetry axis in strongly swirled
ﬂows. It was assumed that the velocity ﬂowﬁeld approach-
ing the ﬂame is like the one measured in a water rig facility
(non-reacting velocity ﬂowﬁeld). Using a second-order
Taylor expansion in the radial direction, it was shown that
the 2D mean progress variable transport equation can be
written as the following 1D equation (valid along the
symmetry axis):
q ~u þ 2
RF
Dt

 d~c
dx ¼ d
dx qDt
d~c
d


þ quU t
d~c
dx


ð3Þ
This equation shows that the radial turbulent transport
term ’ Dto2~c=o2r in the 2D progress variable equation writ-
ten in a cylindrical coordinate system is transformed at the
axis in the term 2ðDt=RFÞd~c=dx which has a convective form
and where RF is the ﬂame radius of curvature at the axis.
The radius RF of the ﬂame at the symmetry axis is obtained
from a second transport equation (not reported here) for
the second-order contribution in the Taylor expansion of
the progress variable ~c in radial direction. In ﬁrst approxi-
mation the ﬂame radius of curvature is inversely propor-
tional to the radial variation of the mean axial velocity,
i.e. the factor o2~u=or2 calculated at the symmetry axis.
The application of this method using the velocity ﬂow-
ﬁeld from the water rig shows that the ﬂame cannot enter
into the burner because there the inﬂow of reactants into
the ﬂame ~u þ 2Dt=RF would be much higher than how
much the ﬂame can burn, i.e. than the turbulent burning
rate Ut. This result is given in Fig. 7 (right) where the cal-
culated mean progress variable, the terms ~u and ~u þ 2Dt=RF
along the symmetry axis are plotted. It must be observed
that, the ﬂame would be accommodated deep into the bur-
ner if the turbulent burning rate was balanced only with the
mean axial inﬂow of reactants ð~q~u ¼ quU tÞ. Inside the bur-
ner however RF would be very small, due to very narrow
CRZ, which is the reason of the high radial turbulent
inﬂow 2Dt/RF. For this reason, if the velocity ﬂowﬁeld is
kept like the non-reacting one, the ﬂame does not move
inside the burner even with a very high increase in the tur-
bulent burning rate Ut. This strong resistance of the base-
line non-reacting velocity ﬂowﬁeld to the ﬂame moving
inside the burner was conﬁrmed in [1] with LES simula-
tions where the density ratio across the ﬂame was forced
to be constant. This indicates that, in the variable density
simulations where the ﬂame moves rather suddenly into
the burner (see Fig. 6 and the sudden change in the pres-
sure drop across the burner in Fig. 7, left) at a critical value
of the bulk adiabatic ﬂame temperature, a ﬂame–velocity
interaction must take place which acts on the structure of
the approaching velocity ﬂowﬁeld (for example, changing
o2u˜/or2 at the axis). Even if a full study has not been yet
performed, the indication, also from other investigators
[13], is that such an interaction consists in the generation
of baroclinic azimuthal vorticity due to the non-alignment
of density gradient across the ﬂame and pressure gradient
in the radial direction due to ﬂow centrifugation. This
added vorticity of baroclinic nature has the eﬀect of induc-
ing (according to the Biot–Savart law, see [14]) negative
axial velocity in the near axis region.
4. Relation between unsteady displacement of the ﬂame
anchoring point and combustion pressure dynamics
It has been shown in the previous section that turbu-
lent premixed ﬂames stabilized in the high swirling ﬂow
produced by a conical burner are bi-stable. Below a crit-
ical value of the bulk equivalence ratio in the burner, the
ﬂame is stabilized in the combustor with its tip close to
the exit of the burner and above this critical value the
ﬂame is anchored with its tip deep into the burner. It
is observed, via phase averaging of chemiluminescence
data, that, at the critical conditions, the ﬂame anchoring
location is characterized by large sensitivity to equiva-
lence ratio ﬂuctuations. The experiments also show that,
with increasing mean equivalence ratio in the burner, the
amplitude of combustion dynamics ﬁrst increases, reach-
ing a peak slightly before the critical conditions for rapid
ﬂame accelaration, then decreases, when the ﬂame has
steadily anchored inside the burner. Finally, it has been
shown via LES and a simple 1D approach, that the
strong sensitivity of the ﬂame anchoring location to per-
turbation in equivalence ratio at the critical conditions
cannot be explained just in terms of the change in turbu-
lent burning rate but it must necessarily imply a rather
complex interaction between ﬂame and aerodynamics of
the burner which leads to a modiﬁcation of the ﬂow in
the burner and hence of the local ﬂame anchoring
properties.
From a thermo-acoustics point of view, ﬂuctuations in
acoustic pressure are generated by ﬂuctuations in heat
release, more directly by ﬂuctuations in the volumetric rate
of reactants consumption (or, equivalently, in products
formation). The total volumetric rate of reactants con-
sumption is given by _V R ¼
R
A U t dA where Ut is the turbu-
lent burning rate, i.e. the volumetric rate of reactants
consumption for unit of mean ﬂame cross-sectional area
and dA an inﬁnitesimal element of mean ﬂame area. The
rate
of
heat
release
associated
to
_V R
is
given
by
_Q ¼
R
A qufH FU t dA, where HF is the fuel caloriﬁc value, f
the fuel mass fraction, qu the local density of reactants.
This relation indicates that unsteady heat release can be
1350
F. Biagioli et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353


--- Page 8 ---

generated by ﬂuctuations at the ﬂame in: reactant density
qu, fuel mixture fraction f (or equivalently the equivalence
ratio /), turbulent burning rate Ut and mean ﬂame surface
area A. Fluctuations in Ut are usually connected to ﬂuctu-
ations in the parameters controlling this quantity, i.e. the
turbulent velocity ﬂuctuation u0 and the fuel mixture frac-
tion f at the ﬂame. In order to determine the stability of the
burner–ﬂame–combustor system, ﬂuctuations in mixture
fraction f at the ﬂame (which also directly aﬀects the heat
release rate) are put in relation, via a convective time lag,
with the f ﬂuctuations generated at the position of fuel
and air injection by variations in acoustic velocity. The
generation of unsteady heat release based only on these
mechanisms seems however not suﬃcient to explain the
combustion dynamics levels observed in the present exper-
iments. Assuming in fact that acoustic forcing in the
present experimental tests has the same amplitude at all
test conditions and assuming that there is not large ampli-
ﬁcation from the system (due to a combustion instability
issue), also ﬂuctuations in equivalence ratio, hence in Ut,
_Q and the combustion dynamics amplitude should be
constant.
The problem mentioned above can be solved if the
contribution to the unsteady heat release originating from
ﬂuctuations in the mean ﬂame surface area A is also
accounted for. These ﬂuctuations in A arise from the
unsteady displacement of the ﬂame anchoring location
due to a perturbation, displacement which becomes strong
when the ﬂame reaches a critical position at the burner
axis. This problem is investigated here in a qualitative
way, considering the ﬂame ﬂat and inﬁnitesimally thin,
anchored at the axis in a uniform ﬂow, with an angle to
the axis determined by the mean ﬂow velocity U and
the turbulent burning rate Ut. It is assumed that the ﬂame
anchoring location is subject to an unsteady displacement
with velocity _xFðtÞ (negative in the downstream direction)
whose dependency from equivalence ratio ﬂuctuations will
be clariﬁed later. The turbulent burning rate Ut is
assumed constant. When the ﬂame moves unsteadily
between two positions, unsteady heat release is generated
because of the consumption of the reactants volume
included between the two positions. We study this prob-
lem of the ‘‘travelling ﬂameholder” in the frame of refer-
ence travelling with the ﬂame anchoring location. In this
frame of reference the eﬀect becomes equivalent to a var-
iation in the velocity of the incoming reactants into
uðtÞ ¼ U þ _xFðtÞ, i.e. equivalent to the problem addressed
in [3] via the use of the so-called G equation which tracks
a
propagating
front
of
inﬁnitesimal
thickness.
It
is
assumed that, at the initial time t = t1, until which the
ﬂame has been steady with an angle to the axis given
by mass conservation as a0 = arcsin(Ut/U), the ﬂame
anchoring point changes its speed from zero to _xF;1 in
the upstream direction as shown in Fig. 8, top. The ﬂame
starts reacting from its anchoring location to this pertur-
bation as follows. In the frame of reference moving with
the ﬂame anchoring point, the convective velocity of reac-
tants through the ﬂame becomes U þ _xF;1 such that, start-
ing from t = t1, the ﬂame leaves the anchoring point with
an angle a1 ¼ arcsin½U t=ðU þ _xF;1Þ which is smaller than
the initial angle a0 = arcsin(Ut/U). Those elements of the
ﬂame which have been released at t < t1 are instead only
convected downstream at the new velocity which implies
that they keep the initial angle a0 to the axis. At t = t2
the ﬂame anchoring location changes again its speed to
_xF;2 in the downstream direction and the new shape
assumed by the ﬂame can be estimated also as explained
above. The shape of the ﬂame changes, at diﬀerent time
steps, as shown in Fig. 8 (top). The bottom part of the
ﬁgure shows instead the response of the ﬂame to an har-
monic variation in the velocity of the anchoring location
(calculated
according
to
the
above
procedure
as
a
x
0
0.3
0.6
0.9
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
t1 < t < t2
t2 < t < t3
x
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t / T = 3.2
t / T = 5.6
t/T
U+xF(t)
0
1
2
3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
.
U+xF(t)
.
t3
t1
t2
x
rF
rF
rF
rF
0
0.3
0.6
0.9
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0 < t < t1
t1 < t < t2
x
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
t / T = 0
t / T = 3.2
t/T
0
4
8
12
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Fig. 8. Evolution of ﬂame area with displacement of the ﬂame anchoring location. Top: due to a stepwise variation in the velocity of the ﬂame anchoring
location at the axis. Bottom: due to harmonic variation. Time non-dimensionalized with the bulk residence time in the burner.
F. Biagioli et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353
1351


--- Page 9 ---

sequence
of
many
small
steps
whose
amplitude
is
distributed harmonically in time).
For a more generic time variation of the ﬂameholder
velocity _xFðtÞ, we proceed as follows. According to the
previous discussion, the angle of the ﬂame element at a
given radial location r and time t can be calculated as the
angle which the ﬂame elements had at the time t  s(r),
when it was released by the ﬂameholder:
sin aðr; tÞ ¼
U t
U þ _xF½t  sðrÞ
ð4Þ
where s(r) is the time delay at which the ﬂame element at
radius r was released by the ﬂameholder. Therefore the an-
gle of the ﬂame at radius r is the angle of the ﬂame at the
ﬂame anchoring location calculated with constant Ut and
the inﬂow velocity at the time the ﬂame element was re-
leased. Assuming small perturbations, we estimate here this
time using the mean radial velocity of the ﬂame element
Utcosa0.
sðrÞ ¼
r
U t cos a0
ð5Þ
the area of the ﬂame element at radius r and time t is there-
fore given by
dAðr; tÞ ¼
2prdr
sin½aðr; tÞ ¼ 2prfU þ _xF½t  sðrÞgdr
U t
ð6Þ
assuming a periodic variation in the velocity of the ﬂame
anchoring location we have (for t > s(R) with R maximum
radius):
_xF½t  sðrÞ ¼ S sin½xðt  r=U tÞ= cos a0
ð7Þ
where H is the step function to account for the perturba-
tion starting at t = t1. The integration of this equation be-
tween 0 and the maximum radius R yields
AðtÞ ¼ pR2 U
U t
þ 2S cos a0
x
R cos x t 
R
U t cos a0



þ1
x U t cos a0 sin x t 
R
U t cos a0


 sin xt


ð8Þ
where the ﬁrst term represent the mean ﬂame area and the
second one the ﬂuctuation in mean area due to the unstea-
dy displacement of the ﬂame anchoring location. In order
to close the problem, the amplitude S of the ﬂuctuation
in ﬂame anchoring location must be expressed in terms of
the controlling parameters. As already discussed, the rela-
tion between the ﬂuctuation in equivalence ratio and the
position of the ﬂame anchoring location is a complex prob-
lem which involves a not yet fully understood ﬂame–veloc-
ity interaction mechanism. The dependency of the ﬂame
anchoring location from the equivalence ratio (or, equiva-
lently, the adiabatic bulk ﬂame temperature Tﬂame in the
burner) can be however worked out directly from experi-
ments or from CFD results. For example, at a qualitative
level, it can be assumed that the ﬂame position is propor-
tional to the pressure drop coeﬃcient (xF = kf) and then
obtain an index of the sensitivity of the ﬂame anchoring
position at the axis to Tﬂame as dxF/dTﬂame = kdf/dTﬂame.
This quantity, which is shown in Fig. 4, reaches a peak
close to the Tﬂame where combustion dynamics also attain
their peak conﬁrming the idea presented here. We assume
here that the ﬂame position responds dynamically to the
variations in equivalence ratio following the steady state
characteristic behaviour (quasi-steady-state assumption).
In reality, it can be expected that the mechanism of ﬂame–
aerodynamics interaction which is responsible for altering
the ﬂame anchoring conditions and then displacing the
ﬂame will become eﬀective after a characteristic time delay
to the incoming equivalence ratio perturbation. It follows
therefore that the eﬀectiveness of such a mechanism
decreases with increasing frequency. Given the quasi-steady
state assumption on the ﬂame response, the ﬂuctuation in
ﬂame position due to a ﬂuctuation in ﬂame temperature
around a mean value T flameH can be expressed as
x0
F ¼ k
df
dT flame

T flameH
T 0
flame
ð9Þ
The speed _xF at which the ﬂame anchoring location moves
can be worked out from this relation for an equivalence
ratio ﬂuctuation with a given frequency f = x/2p. The
modulation of the equivalence ratio at the ﬂame could
be, for example, due to the change in acoustic velocity
(hence in air mass ﬂow rate) at the location where fuel is
injected. Therefore, given the harmonic ﬂuctuation in adi-
abatic ﬂame temperature:
T 0
flame ¼ DT flame cosðxtÞ
ð10Þ
we obtain from (7), (9) and (10):
S ¼ k
df
dT flame
x

T flameH
‘DT flame
ð11Þ
Introducing this expression into (8) yields the transfer
function between the ﬂuctuating ﬂame surface area and
the ﬂuctuations of adiabatic ﬂame temperature in the
burner. This is a fundamental ingredient in the network
based analysis [15] of the thermo-acoustics stability of
combustor devices. This contribution has to be added to
the classic one given by variations in turbulent burning
rate.
5. Conclusions
It has been shown that ﬂames in high swirled ﬂows
undergoing vortex breakdown are characterized by com-
plex stabilization properties. The analysis has been carried
out in the case of a conical burner with characteristics like
the Alstom EV one. It is shown that the narrowing of the
CRZ inside the burner is responsible for bi-stable behavior
of the ﬂame, very likely driven by ﬂame–velocity ﬂowﬁeld
interaction. Close to the critical conditions separating the
two stable positions of the ﬂame (inside and outside the
burner), the ﬂame anchoring location is strongly sensitive
1352
F. Biagioli et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353


--- Page 10 ---

to ﬂow and equivalence ratio perturbation. This generates
unsteady heat release via the unsteady creation and
destruction of the ﬂame surface area which accounts for
the consumption of the reactants included between the
two stable positions. It is shown that combustion pressure
dynamics produced via acoustic forcing of the burner at its
natural acoustic frequency have a very strong relation to
the unsteady heat release generated in this way. Future
work should clarify the nature of the ﬂame–velocity inter-
action at the critical conditions and also address the role
of the present source of unsteady heat release within the
problem of combustion instability which has not been con-
sidered here.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank A. Inauen, S. Schenker,
R. Bombach, N. Tylli and W. Hubschmid from the Paul
Scherrer
Institut,
Combustion
Diagnostics
Group
in
Switzerland
for
contributing
to
the
OH-LIF
data
campaign.
References
[1] F. Biagioli, Stabilization mechanism of turbulent premixed ﬂames in
strongly swirled ﬂows, Combustion, Theory and Modelling 10 (3)
(2006) 389–412.
[2] F. Guethe, R. Lachner, B. Schuermans, F. Biagioli, W. Geng,
A. Inauen, S. Schenker, R. Bombach, W. Hubschmid, Flame imaging
on the ALSTOM EV-burner: thermo acoustic pulsations and CFD-
validation, in: AIAA Paper 2006-437 presented at the 44th AIAA
Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, January 9–
12, 2006.
[3] C. Jianhua, K. Kamiya, I. Kodama, J. Toyama, M. Fleiﬁl, A.M.
Annaswamy, Z.A. Ghoneim, A.F. Ghoniem, Response of a laminar
premixed ﬂame to ﬂow oscillations: a kinematic model and thermoa-
coustic instability results, Combustion and Flame 106 (1996) 487–510.
[4] T. Lieuwen, Modeling premixed combustion acoustic wave inter-
actions: a review, Journal of Combustion and Power 19 (2003)
765–781.
[5] C.O. Paschereit, E. Gutmark, The Eﬀectiveness of Passive Combus-
tion Control Methods, ASME Turbo Expo 2004, GT2004-53587.
[6] B. Schuermans, V. Bellucci, F. Guethe, F. Meili, P. Flohr, C.O.
Paschereit, A Detailed Analysis of Thermoacoustic Interaction
Mechanisms in a Turbulent Premixed Flame, ASME Turbo Expo
2004, GT2004-53831.
[7] K. Do¨bbeling, J. Hellat, H. Koch, 25 Years of BBC/ABB/Alstom
Lean Premix Combustion Technologies, ASME Turbo Expo 2005,
GT2005-68269.
[8] C.O. Paschereit, E. Gutmark, W. Weisenstein, Physics of Fluids 11
(1999) 2667–2678.
[9] M. Reinke, J. Mantzaras, R. Schaeren, R. Bombach, W. Kreutner, A.
Inauen, Homogeneous ignition in high-pressure combustion of
methane/air
over
platinum:
comparison
of
measurements
and
detailed numerical predictions, Proceedings of the Combustion
Institute 29 (2002) 1021–1029.
[10] S. Schenker, R. Bombach, W. Hubschmid, A. Inauen, W. Kreutner,
P. Flohr, K. Haﬀner, C. Motz, C.O. Paschereit, B. Schuermans, M.
Zajadatz, 2-D LIF measurements of thermo-acoustic phenomena in
lean premixed ﬂames of a gas turbine combustor, Institute of Physics
Conference Series 177 (2003) 215–220.
[11] V.L. Zimont, Gas premixed combustion at high turbulence. Turbu-
lent ﬂame closure combustion model, Experimental Thermal and
Fluid Science 21 (2000) 179–186.
[12] <http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri_mech/>.
[13] S. Burmberger, C. Hirsch, T. Sattelmayer, Design rules for the
velocity ﬁeld of vortex breakdown swirl burners, paper GT2006-
90495, in: Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo, Barcelona, Spain,
2006.
[14] G.K.
Batchelor,
Introduction
to
Fluid
Dynamics,
Cambridge
University Press, 1967.
[15] V. Bellucci, B. Schuermans, D. Nowak, P. Flohr, C.O. Paschereit,
Thermoacoustic modeling of a gas–turbine combustor equipped
with acoustic dampers, Journal of Turbomachinery 127 (2) (2005)
372–379.
F. Biagioli et al. / Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 32 (2008) 1344–1353
1353
