
--- Page 1 ---

A. Duncan Walker
Jon F. Carrotte
e-mail: j.f.carrotte@lboro.ac.uk
James J. McGuirk
Department of Aeronautical and Automative
Engineering,
Loughborough University,
Loughborough LE11 3TU, UK
The Inﬂuence of Dump Gap on
External Combustor
Aerodynamics at High Fuel
Injector Flow Rates
The increasing demand to reduce fuel burn, hence CO2 emissions, from the gas turbine
requires efﬁcient diffusion to reduce the system pressure loss in the combustor. However,
interactions between prediffuser and combustor can have a signiﬁcant effect on diffuser
performance. For example, the consequence of increased fuel injector ﬂow at a dump gap
set using conventional design guidelines has been shown (Walker, A. D., Carrotte, J. F.,
and McGuirk, J. J., 2007. “Compressor/Diffuser/Combustor Aerodynamic Interactions in
Lean Module Combustors,” ASME Turbo Expo 2007—Power for Land Sea and Air,
Paper No. GT2007-27872) to introduce a destabilizing interaction between fuel injector
and upstream components. The present paper concentrates on examining the effects of
increased dump gap. Dump gap ratios of 0.8, 1.2, and 1.6 were employed, with each test
utilizing the same inlet guide vane, compressor rotor, integrated outlet guide vane (OGV)/
prediffuser, and dump geometry. The ﬂow fraction of compressor efﬂux entering the
combustor cowl was set to be representative of lean combustors (50–70%). Measure-
ments were made on a fully annular rig using a generic ﬂame tube with metered cowl and
inner/outer annulus ﬂows. The results demonstrate that, with ﬁxed cowl ﬂow, as the dump
gap increases, component interactions decrease. At a dump gap ratio of 0.8, the proximity
of the ﬂame tube inﬂuences the prediffuser providing a beneﬁcial blockage effect. How-
ever, if increased to 1.2, this beneﬁcial effect is weakened and the prediffuser ﬂow dete-
riorates. With further increase to 1.6, the prediffuser shows strong evidence of separation.
Hence, at the dump gaps probably required for lean module injectors, it is unlikely the
prediffuser will be inﬂuenced beneﬁcially by the ﬂame tube blockage; this must be taken
into account in the design. Furthermore, with small dump gaps and high cowl ﬂow
fraction, the circumferential variation in cowl ﬂow can feed upstream and cause OGV/
rotor forcing. At larger dump gaps, the circumferential variation does not penetrate
upstream to the OGV, and the rotor is unaffected. The optimum dump gap and prediffuser
design for best overall aerodynamic system performance from rotor through to feed
annuli is a compromise between taking maximum advantage of upstream blockage effects
and minimizing any 3D upstream forcing. DOI: 10.1115/1.3028230
Introduction
In future aeroengine gas turbine combustor designs, lean mod-
ule combustion will be essential in order to achieve required NOx
targets. Consequently, up to 70% of the ﬂow issuing from the
compressor may be required to enter the combustor cowl, com-
pared with typically 30% in current combustor designs. To ac-
commodate this increased mass ﬂow requirement while maintain-
ing an acceptable pressure drop, lean module fuel injectors will be
signiﬁcantly larger than their conventional air-spray counterparts.
This will necessitate geometric changes to the combustor external
aerodynamic layout, such as a deeper ﬂame tube and larger dump
gaps, potentially increasing the aerodynamic loss due to increased
turning within the dump region. Additionally, these geometry and
ﬂow split changes and the strongly 3D circumferential distribu-
tion of the ﬂow into the combustor head compared to current
practice are likely to increase the coupling or interaction between
the combustor external aerodynamics and upstream components
such as the compressor outlet guide vane OGV/prediffuser com-
bination and possibly even lead to forcing of the ﬁnal compressor
rotor stage. Indeed previous work by Walker et al. 1 showed that
it may be necessary to adopt an integrated design approach in
order reduce the aerodynamic loss. By integrating the design of
the OGV into the prediffuser and by introducing lean and sweep,
the secondary ﬂow structure at exit from the OGV was manipu-
lated promoting radial transfer of higher momentum ﬂuid into the
diffuser end wall boundary layers. Not only did this enable the
prediffuser area ratio to be increased to 1.8 from a conventional
nonintegrated design of 1.6 but it also improved the prediffuser
exit proﬁle. The net result was an improvement in the overall ﬂow
uniformity and an estimated reduction in the system total pressure
loss of approximately 20%. However, although this work was
conducted using a generic lean module combustor geometry, the
ﬂow split was still typical of conventional systems. In a further
piece of work, Walker et al. 2 investigated the effect of increas-
ing the cowl ﬂow from typical air-spray levels to those required
for lean combustion 30% and 50–70% of compressor efﬂux, re-
spectively. The results demonstrated that, with ﬁxed geometry, as
the injector ﬂow increases, the performance of the prediffuser and
feed annuli suffers. Prediffuser losses increased and at higher cowl
ﬂow rates the diffuser moved close to separation. Furthermore, the
substantial circumferential variation in cowl ﬂow fed upstream
causing notable differences in performance to be observed inline
and between injectors at OGV exit, ultimately causing rotor forc-
ing.
The present investigation extends the studies of Walker et al.
1,2 to consideration of the dump gap. The earlier studies em-
Manuscript received April 21, 2008; ﬁnal manuscript received May 8, 2008;
published online February 11, 2009. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031506-1
Copyright © 2009 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

ployed a ﬁxed dump gap typical of conventional combustors.
However, it is unlikely that dump gaps deﬁned using existing
design rules will be sufﬁcient to accommodate the increased size
of lean module fuel injectors. The dump gap is deﬁned as the axial
distance d from the prediffuser exit plane to the ﬂame tube and
is usually expressed as a fraction of the diffuser exit height, d/hX4
for a deﬁnition of geometric parameters, see Fig. 1. As this ratio
reduces, the proximity of the ﬂame tube induces ﬂow curvature
within the prediffuser and a migration of ﬂow toward the end
walls. Hestermann 3 showed that this results in a more uniform
diffuser exit proﬁle and can suppress ﬂow separation due to the
introduction of higher momentum ﬂuid into the boundary layers.
Fishenden and Stevens 4 demonstrated that optimizing the dump
gap also increases prediffuser pressure recovery but stated that it
does not necessarily follow that this will result in lower losses to
the feed annuli. Initially, as the dump gap reduces, the beneﬁcial
blockage effect increases diffuser performance and reduces the
annulus losses. However, as the dump gap reduces beyond a cer-
tain point, the annulus loss begins to increase rapidly as the dif-
fuser efﬂux must now turn in a much shorter space hence incur-
ring a higher loss. Hestermann 3, Fishenden and Stevens 4,
and Carrotte and Barker 5 all attempted to optimize the dump
gap, in terms of diffuser and annulus performance, but for ﬂame
tube depths appropriate to traditional and not lean module com-
bustors. Expressing the ﬂame tube depth as a ratio of diffuser inlet
height W/hX3, their results are summarized in Table 1 and it is
noticeable that the optimum dump gap increases with ﬂame tube
depth. It is difﬁcult to say how applicable these data are to lean
module combustors, hence the current study was undertaken to
characterize the extent that the inevitable change in dump gap will
alter the external combustor aerodynamics. The experimental
study utilizes the same rig as used by Walker et al. 1,2, which
comprises a fully annular generic combustor downstream of a
single stage axial compressor. The OGV/prediffuser coupling is
effected via an advanced integrated OGV/prediffuser geometry
1. Several traverse planes are used to gather ﬁve-hole probe
data, which allow the ﬂow structure to be examined through the
rotor, OGV, prediffuser, and in the inner/outer annulus supply
ducts, quantifying the extent of the component interactions and
associated system performance. Several conﬁgurations have been
investigated where the cowl mass ﬂow has been set at typical lean
combustion levels 50–70% of compressor efﬂux and the dump
gap ratio d/hX4 varied from 0.8 to 1.6.
Experimental Facility
During this project, all experimental data were obtained on a
low speed isothermal test facility operating at nominally atmo-
spheric conditions. Figure 2 provides an illustrative sketch, and
full details are provided in Ref. 1. The working section Fig. 3
comprises a single stage axial compressor IGV and rotor, an
OGV/prediffuser assembly, and a generic representation of a
downstream combustion system. Geometric details of the IGV,
rotor, and OGV rows are also given in Ref. 1. The rotor is
operated at a ﬁxed nondimensional speed ND/ RT and
mass ﬂow m˙ RT/AP, the mass ﬂow being derived from mea-
surements in the calibrated inlet section located upstream of the
compressor. The operating conditions corresponded to a ﬁxed ﬂow
coefﬁcient =Va/U of 0.403 and a mass ﬂow of approximately
4 kg s−1 resulting in an axial velocity through the blade rows of
approximately 40 m s−1 Mach number 0.12 and a Reynolds
number based on OGV chord of approximately 1.6105. The
downstream ﬂow distribution to the feed annuli and combustor
cowl is controlled by a system of throttles, and a centrifugal fan is
utilized as a further throttle to ensure that the axial compressor
maintains the desired operating condition. It should be noted that
for all the geometry and ﬂow split conditions studied experimen-
tally here, the overall nondimensional rotor speed and mass ﬂow
operating conditions remained unchanged.
Test Geometry
Integrated OGV/Prediffuser. The OGV row has 160 vanes,
whose geometry includes speciﬁc lean, sweep, and camber char-
acteristics that were determined in Ref. 6 by a process of manual
computational ﬂuid dynamics CFD optimization. This achieves
a spanwise blade loading variation that creates secondary ﬂows,
which transport higher momentum ﬂuid toward the walls, thus
ofﬂoading the end wall boundary layers within the prediffuser.
Hence, as reported in Ref. 1, this integrated OGV IOGV de-
sign was able to achieve a prediffuser area ratio of 1.8 without
separation while maintaining the same nondimensional length
L/hin=2.23. According to the standard diffuser loading chart of
Howard et al. 7, a conventionally designed diffuser would have
resulted in separation.
Generic Flame Tube, Cowl, and “Fuel Injectors”. The same
simple ﬂame tube geometry as used previously by Walker et al.
1,2 was retained in the present work. This presents the IOGV/
prediffuser with a representative downstream blockage. Lean
module combustors may not feature air admission ports in the
annuli, hence no holes were included in the ﬂame tube liner walls.
The resultant generic ﬂame tube, illustrated in Fig. 4, has 20 simu-
lated “fuel injectors” represented for convenience by 20 simple
holes. The initial area of these holes was set in Ref. 2 to match the
effective area of a traditional air-spray injector. As the mass ﬂow
through the cowl was increased, the ratio of cowl mass ﬂow to
hole area was maintained by increasing the size of the holes. This
means that as the mass ﬂow increased the relative acceleration of
the dump ﬂow into the cowl did not change. In the current study,
cowl ﬂows relevant to lean module levels were employed 50–
70% of compressor efﬂux with the remaining ﬂow split equally
between the annuli. Three dump gaps ratios d/hX4 were em-
ployed beginning with a value of 0.8 as employed in Refs. 1,2.
However, it is unlikely that such a dump gap would provide
enough space for a lean module injector. Thus, the dump gap ratio
was increased to 1.2 and 1.6 representing values that are large
enough to accommodate a typical lean module injector.
Fig. 1
Geometrical notation
Table 1
Optimum dump gap †3–5‡
Flame tube depth W/hX3
Dump gap d/hX4
3.5
0.6
4.8
0.7–0.8
5.5
0.8–1.0
Lean module combustor 6.0
1.0?
031506-2 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

Instrumentation
Probes. Aerodynamic performance was assessed using suitably
calibrated miniature ﬁve-hole probes as described by Wray and
Carrotte 8 and employed in a non-nulled mode to determine the
local ﬂow vector and total and static pressures. As indicated in
Fig. 3, ﬁve-hole probe area traverses could be conducted at rig
inlet X1, rotor exit X2, OGV exit X3, prediffuser exit X4,
within the inner X5i and outer X5o feed annuli and at various
axial locations within the dump. The probes were traversed in the
radial direction using a stepper motor powered linear guide at-
tached to the external casings of the test section. Circumferential
traversing was achieved by rotation of the casing or rotation of the
IGV, OGV, and ﬂame tube. The ﬂow passage area traversed typi-
cally consisted of two OGV passages at stations close to the com-
pressor e.g., X2 and X3 but as whole combustor sector informa-
tion was required further downstream e.g., at prediffuser exit and
within each feed annuli, the traverse area was typically increased
to eight OGV passages one combustor sector.
Data Reduction and Errors. Overall aerodynamic perfor-
mance is quantiﬁed in terms of total pressure loss and static pres-
sure recovery coefﬁcients derived from the ﬁve-hole probe area
traverses data, corrected to ICAO standard day conditions. Thus,
at any measurement plane the mass ﬂow rate and bulk average
velocity are deﬁned via
m˙ = UdA = U¯ A
1
The mass ﬂow balance on area traverse planes was within 1%
of the rig mass ﬂow entering the test facility measured via a ﬁve-
hole probe traverse at plane X1. Spatially averaged values of
total and static pressures at each plane were derived using the
mass-weighted technique described by Klein 9, e.g.,
P˜ = 1
m˙  Pdm˙ =
1
U¯ A PUdA
2
The mass-weighted total pressure loss  and static pressure rise
Cp coefﬁcients are then deﬁned as
1−2 = P˜ 1 −P˜ 2
P˜ 1 −p1
,
Cp1−2 = p˜2 −p˜1
P˜ 1 −p˜1
3
The mass-weighted total pressures were repeatable to within
1 mm H2O, which amounts to less than 0.5% of the dynamic
pressure at OGV exit. Thus, the repeatability of the derived total
pressure loss and static pressure rise coefﬁcients was better than
0.005 of the values presented.
Fig. 2
Test facility
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031506-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

Results and Discussion
Prediffuser Exit „X4… and Dump Flow. Figure 5 presents nor-
malized axial velocity contours over a full injector sector for
dump gap ratios of 0.8, 1.2, and 1.6 and with the ﬂow split enter-
ing the cowl set at 70% of the compressor efﬂux. OGV wakes are
still clearly visible at prediffuser exit and exhibit only subtle dif-
ferences as the dump gap ratio increases. However, the most no-
table change is the deterioration of the end wall boundary layer
ﬂow, particularly on the inner wall. The OGV/prediffuser was
optimized for a conventional combustor, with a 30% cowl ﬂow, in
the previous study by Barker et al. 6. Certainly it is shown here
not to be the optimum design for the current conﬁguration. With
an increase in the cowl ﬂow to 70%, while maintaining the dump
gap Fig. 5a, the inner wall shows some low velocity regions.
But, as the ﬂame tube moves away from diffuser exit, its inﬂuence
reduces and the low velocity regions become larger and more
distinct. Indeed, at the highest dump gap Fig. 5c, the inner wall
ﬂow shows strong evidence of separation. The changing character
of the ﬂame tube blockage effect acting to stabilize the predif-
fuser ﬂow as the cowl ﬂow fraction increases is clearly illustrated
in Fig. 6. This displays the prediffuser exit static pressure proﬁle
for a ﬁxed dump gap d/hX4=0.8 for varying cowl ﬂow 30%,
50%, and 70%. At the smallest cowl ﬂow, the pressure proﬁle has
the expected “n” shape indicating a positive blockage effect—
increasing the pressure at diffuser center relative to the walls,
hence driving ﬂow toward the end wall boundary layers. As the
cowl ﬂow increases, the suction effect eventually turns the pres-
sure proﬁle into a “u” shape low pressure at diffuser center rela-
tive to the walls, which is not beneﬁcial for end wall boundary
layers to remain attached. Pitch-averaged proﬁles generated from
sector data at the highest cowl ﬂow Fig. 7 further highlight the
deterioration of the prediffuser ﬂow with the end wall velocity
dropping to less than 10% and 40% of the bulk mean for the inner
and outer walls, respectively, at the larger dump gap. Given the
data are time averaged it is thought that to avoid any transient
separation within the prediffuser a value at the location nearest to
the wall of above 40% is desirable. The pitch-averaged static pres-
sure proﬁles demonstrate that, at this cowl ﬂow, any beneﬁcial
back pressure generated by the ﬂame tube is so weak relative to
the suction effect that the u shaped pressure proﬁle is present for
all dump gaps. Static pressure contours Fig. 8 also show this
trend but reveal, at the smallest dump gap ratio of 0.8, a high
Fig. 3
Measurement planes
Fig. 4
Combustor details
031506-4 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

azimuthal variation caused by the circumferentially varying
downstream pressure ﬁeld on the combustor head from a high
impingement value between cowl holes to a low suction value in
line with the holes caused by the high 70% cowl ﬂow. Velocity
data show that, with respect to the overall rig mass ﬂow rate, the
indicated mass ﬂow per sector varies from inline to between in-
jectors by 10%. However, as the dump gap ratio increases be-
yond 1.2, the circumferential static pressure variation decreases
suggesting the prediffuser no longer feels any inﬂuence of the
ﬂame tube. In order to examine this phenomenon, further axial
traverses were performed along the prediffuser centerline line
L-L in Fig. 4 inside the prediffuser and dump region at 50% and
70% cowl ﬂows. Figure 9 plots the normalized static pressure for
the three dump gap ratios both inline and between the injectors.
Also shown on each plot is a numerically generated prediction for
the prediffuser with no ﬂame tube which provides data in which
the prediffuser ﬂow develops with no inﬂuence from ﬂame tube
blockage or circumferential variation due to cowl ﬂow. For a
dump gap ratio of 0.8, the static pressure inline and between in-
jectors begins to diverge from the data at d/h2−0.35, suggesting
the ﬂow within the prediffuser is inﬂuenced by the ﬂame tube. As
the dump gap ratio increases to 1.2 and 1.6, the static pressure
only begins to deviate downstream of diffuser exit at d/h20.1
and 0.25, respectively, suggesting that the prediffuser, at least on
its centerline, does not feel the any inﬂuence from the ﬂame tube
blockage. Figure 9 also serves to illustrate the circumferential
variation caused by the ﬂow through the injectors and the fact that
Fig. 5
Axial velocity contours at prediffuser exit „X4… „height
65.9 mm, sector angle =18 deg, 8-OGV passages…
Fig. 6
Pitch average static pressure at prediffuser exit „X4…,
ﬁxed dump „d/hX4…, varying ﬂow
Fig. 7
Pitch averaged proﬁles at prediffuser exit „X4… injector
mass ﬂow, mcowl=70%
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031506-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

this penetrates further upstream at reduced dump gaps with a
larger circumferential difference inline and between at the higher
ﬂow rates.
Mass-weighted static pressure recovery and total pressure loss
coefﬁcients Table 2 for a complete injector sector with respect to
rotor exit do not show a noticeable difference in performance for
the two smaller dump gaps due to the fact that the low mass-ﬂow
near wall regions do not contribute signiﬁcantly in the mass-
weighted averaging process. However, at the larger dump gap, the
near wall ﬂow deterioration is indicated by a clear increase in 
and a decrease in Cp.
OGV Exit „X3…. Axial velocity contours at a cowl mass ﬂow of
70% are plotted for each dump gap in Fig. 10. Data were taken
over a two OGV sector both inline and between injectors. Adja-
cent OGV wakes differ because there is one IGV per two OGV
and the IGV wakes persists through the rotor, deepening one of
the OGV wakes. Note that the OGV downstream of an IGV wake
is the right-hand vane for the inline sector, but the left-hand vane
for the between sector. For the two larger dump gaps, where the
results above showed that the presence of the ﬂame tube is not felt
at the prediffuser exit, there is nominally no difference between
the ﬂow ﬁeld inline and between the injectors. However, Fig. 10
shows that with the smallest dump gap there is a notable differ-
Fig. 8
Static pressure contorus at prediffuser exit „X4…,
„height 65.9 mm, sector angle =18 deg, 8-OGV passages…
Fig. 9
Dump static pressure „on line L-L in Fig. 3…
031506-6 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

ence. Indeed the velocity data show that with respect to the overall
rig mass ﬂow rate, the indicated mass ﬂow per sector varies form
inline to between injectors by 10%. Table 3 details the total pres-
sure loss and static pressure recovery across the OGV.
For the two larger dump gap ratios, performance is maintained.
Over a whole injector sector, it would appear that the smallest
dump gap produces a similar level of OGV performance. How-
ever, if separate 2-OGV sectors are considered, this is not the
case. Between injectors, where there is a ﬂow deﬁcit,  increases
from 0.13 to 0.15, whereas inline with injectors, where there is
increased ﬂow,  falls to 0.1.
It is clear therefore that at the smallest dump gap, the circum-
ferential variation generated by the injectors can modify the ﬂow
ﬁeld as far upstream as the OGV. This is also conﬁrmed by Fig.
11, which shows the circumferential variation of a single OGV
exit X3 total pressure measurement located at midannulus height
between two OGVs as the combustor is rotated through one in-
jector sector. With a dump gap ratio of 0.8 and a cowl ﬂow of
70%, the measured pressure at OGV exit varies signiﬁcantly and
periodically with the injector location. The magnitude of this
variation is relatively large at 7% of the local dynamic pressure.
At all other dump gaps and ﬂow rates measured, the pressure is
constant to within measurement accuracy. Caution must be exer-
cised here in that this measurement is only at midblade passage,
midannulus height, so it cannot be unequivocally concluded that
the OGV row does not see the variation in circumferential block-
age provided by the combustor at other dump gaps and cowl
ﬂows, but it is likely to be the case as the midpassage region is
probably the least sensitive to downstream conditions.
Rotor Exit „X2…
Figure 12 illustrates clearly that the circumferential variation
seen at OGV exit persists into the rotor for a dump gap ratio of 0.8
and a cowl ﬂow of 70%. The plot shows data from a ﬁxed wall
static tapping at rotor exit as the combustor was rotated though
two sectors. At dump gap ratios of 1.2 and 1.6, there are only
slight variations in the measured pressure circumferentially eight
Table 2
Prediffuser performance data „mcowl=70%…
Dump gap d/hX4
X2–X4
CpX2–X4
0.8
0.163
0.660
1.2
0.165
0.660
1.6
0.179
0.648
Fig. 10
Axial velocity contours at OGV exit „X3… „height
=36.6 mm, sector angle =4.5 deg, 2-OGV passages…
Table 3
OGV performance data „mcowl=70%…
Dump gap d/hX4
X2–X3
CpX2–X3
0.8 2-OGV sector inline
0.097
0.39
0.8 2-OGV sector between
0.153
0.36
0.8 injector sector
0.129
0.38
1.2
0.127
0.38
1.6
0.126
0.38
Fig. 11
OGV exit „reference… total pressure
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031506-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

peaks and troughs can be seen, with the circumferential reso-
lution in the data being just sufﬁcient to pick up these changes in
static pressure, which are associated with the potential ﬁeld of the
OGVs. However, the static pressure for the 0.8 case can be seen to
vary signiﬁcantly from inline to in between injectors, showing a
low pressure inline. The variation caused by the cowl ﬂow suction
ﬁeld is much larger than the OGV potential disturbance and is
equivalent to approximately 5% of the rotor total pressure rise.
This is enough to force the rotor to move locally up or down its
characteristic, a fact that is conﬁrmed in the pitch-averaged veloc-
ity and total pressure proﬁles presented in Fig. 13. The forced
proﬁles exhibit a velocity deﬁcit at the tip, a feature not seen in
any of the other conﬁgurations where the proﬁles remain un-
changed see also Walker et al. 2. It is emphasized again that
upstream of the rotor, at rig inlet X1 for all conﬁgurations, the
conditions remained constant.
The fact that the changes in dump gap and downstream ﬂow
split can penetrate as far upstream as the rotor and affect its op-
eration is signiﬁcant, and shows that dump gap design rules to
achieve optimum stability and performance for prediffusers will
clearly not be transferable between conventional and lean module
combustors.
Annuli „X5iÕo… and Overall System Performance. Overall
system performance was established from measurements in both
feed annuli. Traditionally, as the dump gap increases, it would be
expected that the turning loss within the dump and hence the
annulus loss would reduce. However, at annulus ﬂow splits as low
as 15%, the ﬂow entering the annulus is almost entirely comprised
of prediffuser boundary layer ﬂow. Already of low quality, this
ﬂow is seen to further deteriorate as the dump gap increases and
the beneﬁcial blockage effect offered by the ﬂame tube is re-
moved. Indeed, the boundary layers show evidence of separation,
which would undoubtedly produce higher levels of turbulence,
which would, in turn, increase losses in the shear layer passing
around the ﬂame tube head. Tables 4 and 5 detail the mass-
weighted performance and conﬁrm that as the dump gap ratio
increases from 0.8 to 1.6, the loss increases in both the inner and
outer annuli from 26% to 29% of rotor exit dynamic. Further the
ﬂow becomes much less uniform as illustrated by normalized
axial velocity contours plotted in Figs. 14 and 15. However, asso-
ciated with the low ﬂow rate, the velocity in the annuli is low
Mach number 0.02 and consequently the absolute magnitude
of the variation is not excessive. For example, Fig. 16 plots con-
tours of total pressure loss coefﬁcient with respect to rotor exit
X2 at a dump gap ratio of 1.6. This conﬁguration results in the
greatest nonuniformity in the velocity ﬁeld but the ﬁgure shows
that the total pressure loss varies by less than 2% of its mean
value.
Conclusions
The effect on combustion system external aerodynamics of in-
creasing the dump gap from a typical air-spray injector value to
Fig. 12
rotor exit static pressure „mcowl=70%…
Fig. 13
Pitch averaged proﬁle at rotor exit „X2… cowl mass, ﬂow, mcowl
=70%
Table 4
Inner annulus performance data „mcowl=70%…
Dump gap d/hX4
X2–X5i
CpX2–X5i
0.8
0.262
0.71
1.2
0.265
0.72
1.6
0.290
0.70
031506-8 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

values typical of lean module injectors has been studied. Dump
gap ratios of 0.8, 1.2, and 1.6, were employed with each test
utilizing the same inlet section, IGV, rotor and integrated OGV/
prediffuser. The ﬂow fraction of compressor efﬂux entering the
combustor cowl was set to representative lean module levels 50–
70%. From the results presented here, the following conclusions
can be made.
•
At a dump gap ratio d/hX4 of 0.8, typical of an optimum
value for conventional combustor systems, the proximity of
the ﬂame tube inﬂuences the ﬂow within the prediffuser
providing a beneﬁcial blockage effect. However, with an
increase to 1.2, possibly needed for access reasons for a lean
module injector, the effect is negligible and the prediffuser
ﬂow deteriorates. With a further increase to 1.6, the predif-
fuser no longer feels any inﬂuence from the ﬂame tube and
shows strong evidence of separation. Hence, at the magni-
tude of dump gap required for lean module injectors, it is
unlikely the prediffuser will “feel” any beneﬁt from the
ﬂame tube blockage. This will certainly inﬂuence predif-
fuser design rules, perhaps enforcing more conservative de-
signs.
•
The high cowl ﬂow rates of lean module combustors gener-
ate a strong circumferential variation in the ﬂame tube head
static pressure ﬁeld. At small dump gaps, this is strong
enough to feed upstream through the prediffuser affecting
OGV performance and ultimately forcing the rotor. Note
that this implies in the present experiment that the compres-
sor moves locally up/down its characteristic as a result of
the downstream pressure changes, while keeping the overall
ﬂow coefﬁcient constant. However, at larger lean module
Table 5
Outer annulus performance data „mcowl=70%…
Dump gap d/hX4
X2–X5o
CpX2–X5o
0.8
0.263
0.72
1.2
0.268
0.72
1.6
0.291
0.69
Fig. 14
Axial velocity contours in inner annulus „X5i… „sector
angle =18 deg…
Fig. 15
Axial velocity contours in outer annulus „X5o… „sector
angle =18 deg…
Fig. 16
Loss contours in the feed annuli „X5… „d/hX4=1.6,
mcowl=70%, sector angle =18 deg…
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
MAY 2009, Vol. 131 / 031506-9
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 10 ---

dump gaps, the circumferential variation does not penetrate
as far upstream as the OGV and the rotor operating condi-
tion is unaffected.
•
System performance from rotor through to feed annuli is a
function of the amount of turning in the dump in conjunc-
tion with the condition of the ﬂow at prediffuser exit, par-
ticularly the boundary layer. As the dump increases, the
turning loss should reduce but here degradation in the pre-
diffuser ﬂow negates this causing a slight increase in loss
and a decrease in ﬂow uniformity.
•
The present set of experiments has concentrated on a con-
stant ﬂow coefﬁcient case corresponding to the deign con-
dition of the system. It would also be of interest to know the
sensitivity of optimum dump gap to off-design operating
conditions, and this should be the subject of future work.
Acknowledgment
The ﬁnancial support of the European Union under Contract
No. F-AST3-CT-2003-502961 INTELLECTDM is gratefully
acknowledged. The authors would also like to express their appre-
ciation to A. Fardoe, L. Monk, and W. Niven for their help in the
construction of the test facility.
Nomenclature
A 	 passage area
AR 	 area ratio
Cp 	 static pressure rise coefﬁcient
d 	 distance, dump gap
h 	 annulus passage height
L 	 diffuser length
m˙ 	 mass ﬂow rate
N 	 rotor speed
P,p 	 local total or static pressure
R 	 gas constant perfect gas law
r 	 radius relative to rig centerline
ri, ro 	 inner casing, outer casing radius
T, t 	 total or static temperature
U 	 rotor midpassage blade speed
Va 	 midpassage axial velocity
x 	 axial distance
W 	 ﬂame tube depth

 	 kinetic energy ﬂux coefﬁcient
 	 ﬂow coefﬁcient va/U
 	 density
 	 total pressure loss coefﬁcient
Subscripts
X1 	 rotor inlet traverse plane
X2 	 rotor exit/OGV inlet traverse plane
X3 	 OGV exit traverse plane
X4 	 prediffuser exit traverse plane
X5i/o 	 inner/outer annulus traverse plane
Superscripts
 	 area weighted spatially averaged mean value
 	 mass-weighted spatially averaged mean value
References
1 Walker, A. D., Carrotte, J. F., and McGuirk, J. J., 2007, “Enhanced External
Aerodynamic Performance of a Generic Combustor Using an Integrated OGV/
Pre-Diffuser Design Technique,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 1291,
pp. 80–87.
2 Walker, A. D., Carrotte, J. F., and McGuirk, J. J., 2007, “Compressor/Diffuser/
Combustor Aerodynamic Interactions in Lean Module Combustors,” ASME
Paper No. GT2007–27872.
3 Hestermann, R., Kim, S., and Wittig, S., 1991, “Geometrical Dependence of
the Fluid Dynamic Parameters of Plane Combustor Model Diffusers,” Pro-
ceedings of the International Symposium on Air Breathing Engines, Paper No.
ISABE 91-7105, pp, 995–1001.
4 Fishenden, C. R., and Stevens, S. J., 1977, “Performance of Annular
Combustor-Dump Diffusers,” J. Aircr., 14, pp. 60–67.
5 Carrotte, J. F., and Barker, A. G., 1994, “Annular Dump Diffuser Systems,
Part II: The Combined Effects of Shortened Pre-Diffusers and Dump Gap
Variation,” Loughborough University, Internal Report No. TT94R07.
6 Barker, A. G., Carrotte, J. F., Luff, J., and McGuirk, J. J., 2003, “D1.1 Design
of an Integrated OGV/Diffuser System,” Loughborough University, Report
No. TT03R01.
7 Howard, J. H. G., Henseler, H. J., and Thornton-Trump, A. B., 1967, “Perfor-
mance and Flow Regimes for Annular Diffusers,” ASME New York, 67-WA/
FE-2.
8 Wray, A. P., and Carrotte, J. F., 1993, “The Development of a Large Annular
Facility for Testing Gas Turbine Combustor Diffuser Systems.” Paper No.
AIAA-93-2546.
9 Klein, A., 1995, “Characteristics of Combustor Diffusers,” Prog. Aerosp. Sci.,
319, pp. 171–271.
031506-10 / Vol. 131, MAY 2009
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
