
--- Page 1 ---

Experiments in Fluids 5, 197-200 (1987) 
Experiments in Fluids 
© Springer-Vertag 1987 
Visualization and numerical simulation of supersonic micro jets 
K. Teshima 
Department of Aeronautical Engineering, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606, Japan 
M. Sommerfeld 
Lehrstuhl fiir Str6mungstechnik, Egerlandstrage 13, D-8520 Erlangen, F. R. Germany 
Abstract. Very narrow supersonic jets expanding from a small size 
convergent-divergent nozzle are visualized by the laser induced 
fluorescence method and simulated numerically using the piece- 
wise linear method. Good agreement between the experiment and 
the numerical result is obtained in the jet structure, i.e. the shape 
of the barrel shock, the location of its reflection point on the axis, 
and the shape of the jet boundary. 
1 Introduction 
Small-size Laval nozzles have some advantages in an effi- 
cient production of clusters condensed from the expanding 
gas, in the concentration of high speed flows within a very 
small angle, which will be useful in direction control of 
propulsion systems, in the acceleration and the transpor- 
tation of small particles in space and also in the produc- 
tion of high intensity molecular beams. 
In the present paper we report visualization and nu- 
merical simulation of a microjet issued from such a small- 
size Laval nozzle. For the visualization we use the laser 
induced fluorescence (LIF) method (Smalley et al. 1976; 
Hiller & Schmidt-Ott 1977; Teshima et al. 1984; Teshima 
& Nakatsuji 1984), which can be used for a wide density 
range from high density, where the optical interferometry 
is still effective, to low density, where electron beam 
excitation or electric discharge is usually applied. Numer- 
ical simulations are made using the piecewise linear 
method (PLM). It has been proved that this method has 
very small smearing effects with practically no oscillations 
in its solution near discontinuities such as shocks and 
contact surfaces (Woodward & Colella 198I; Saito etal. 
1986). 
2 Flow visualization by laser induced fluorescence 
Iodine molecules can be excited by an argon ion laser of 
514.5 nm to states which fluoresce at longer wavelengths. 
The strength of LIF is strong enough to allow us to 
visualize the flow to naked eyes with a small amount of 
iodine molecules seeded in the flow medium at its vapor 
pressure (about 30 Pa at room temperature), which does 
not disturb the flow itself, and with a laser power of 
0.3-1.0 W. 
The strength of LIF relates to the power of the laser, 
the number density in the lower state of the absorption 
line, its absorption coefficient and the transition probabil- 
ity of the excited state. The absorption coefficient and the 
number density of the lower state depend on the pressure, 
density and temperature of the flow. Therefore, the shock 
waves and the jet boundary, where the flow properties 
change largely, can be seen as differences in the strength 
of LIF. Since we use a longitudinally multi-mode laser, 
which includes many distinct resonance lines, the strength 
of LIF also depends on the laser lines mainly being 
absorbed, The output power is maximum at the frequency 
center of the laser, v0~, and it decreases with increasing 
frequency difference from'~i{. The absorption lines are 
mainly P13 and R15 lines in the (43-0) band of B-X 
system of iodine, which :have the same unresolved fre- 
quency lower than Vo, (Gerstenkorn & Luc 1979). There- 
fore, the iodine molecules with a velocity component, 
which increases the frequency of the absorption lines by 
the Doppler effect, absorb stronger laser lines, and vice 
versa. Consequently, the strength of LIF becomes unsym- 
metrical with respect to the jet axis. 
A schematic view of the experimental apparatus is 
shown in Fig. 1. Supersonic jets are obtained by expand- 
ing the gas through a Laval nozzle after flowing through 
an iodine cell. Since iodine molecules have very aggressive 
properties, most of the I2-vapor is collected by a cold trap 
mounted between the chamber and the vacuum pump. 
The jet was irradiated by the laser beam focused on the 
jet axis at right angles with the axis, and the resultant LIF 
was recorded photographically by sweeping the laser 
beam along the jet axis at the direction perpendicular to 
both the jet axis and the laser beam. The laser (NEC 
GLG3200) was operated at a laterally single- and longi- 
tudinal multi-mode. The Laval nozzle had a 30 ° half- 


--- Page 2 ---

198 
I 2 Cell • 
Jet / 
Window 
--I 
~ 
I-- 
Pump 
Fig. 1. Schematic view of experimental apparatus 
Ar + Loser 
I 
I 
Experiments in Fluids 5 (1987) 
J= NY-I~ 
Ambient 
I 
~AX/2 
Ambient I I 
I 
[ 
Inflow i 
J:l i=1 
Nozzle exit 
AX= Ar 
Reflection 
]~-A r/7 
i 
i 
i 
[ 
I 
3utflow 
i 
1 
E 
I 
I 
I 
I .L~ 
NX 
Fig. 2. Computational domain and boundary conditions 
angle and 3.5 ram-long conical convergent section and a 
10 ° full-angle and 8.5 mm-long conical divergent section 
with a 0.5 mm throat diameter. The area ratio of the 
nozzle exit to the throat section was 15.7. Nitrogen gas at 
room temperature was used at the stagnation pressure, P0, 
of 1-4bar. 
In order to obtain the pressure ratios, 
Po/poo = 500, 1,000, 1,500 and 2,000, the pressure in the 
vacuum chamber Po~ was changed accordingly. 
3 Numerical simulation by the pieeewise linear method 
The governing equation for an axisymmetric flow of an 
inviscid-compressible gas without heat conduction can be 
written as follows: 
0U 
OF 
0G 
ot 
+ - 7-r +z=°' 
where 
(1) 
F= 
u2+p 
, G= 
uv 
~Quv 
] 
~v2+p 
1' 
(e E + p)/ 
and t is time, x and r are axial and radial distances, p and 
e are pressure and density of the flow, u and v are the 
velocities in x and r directions, respectively, and E is the 
energy of the gas per unit mass which can be written as 
1 
p F1 
E 
(,,/2 q_ u2) 
7-1 
Q 
2 
for a perfect gas with specific heat ratio 7. 
Table 1. Conditions at nozzle exit. a is speed of sound and suffix 0 
denotes stagnation conditions 
Mach number 
4.40 
pressure 
0.39 x 10-2p0 
density 
0.19 x 10 -1 Q0 
velocity in r direction vj/ao 
J= 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
0.0087 
0.026 
0.044 
0.061 
0.078 
Applying the operator splitting method to Eq. (1), the 
solution, W "+ 1, at the time step t + A t, can be obtained by 
the three one-dimensional sweeps in terms of the solution, 
W", at time t as 
W ~+1 = [Lx(At/2) Lr(At) Lx(At/2)] W". 
Each set of the one-dimensional equations was solved 
numerically using the PLM. The details of the scheme is 
described by Woodward and Colella (1981) and Saito 
et al. (1986). The computational domain and the boundary 
conditions are shown in Fig. 2. We took 30 meshes in r-di- 
rection including 5 meshes as the radius of the nozzle exit 
and in x-direction 150, 180 and 210 meshes were taken for 
the pressure ratios of 500 and 1,000, 1,500, and 2,000, 
respectively. At the nozzle exit the flow properties, cal- 
culated from the stagnation condition and the isentropic 
relations using the geometrical area ratio, were given. We 
assumed that the boundary layer effect was negligible, 
because the observed shape of the jet did not change 
significantly by changing the stagnation pressure. We also 
assumed that the radial velocity at the nozzle exit was 
given so as the flow expanded radially along the divergent 
angle of the nozzle. These values on the grid points at the 
nozzle exit used for the calculation are given in Table 1. 
Outside of the nozzle exit at the left edge and on the 
outer edge of the computational domain the ambient 
conditions (Poo, ~oo, To and u=v=0) 
were given as 
boundary conditions. At the downstream right end out- 
flow conditions and on the jet axis reflection conditions 
were given as boundary conditions. At t = 0 we set the 


--- Page 3 ---

K. Teshima and M. Sommerfeld: Visualization and numerical simulation of supersonic microjets 
199 
same conditions as those of the nozzle exit to the mesh 
points inside the region where r is smaller than the radius 
of the nozzle exit, and gave the ambient conditions to the 
rest of the mesh points. The calculation was made until a 
stationary flow was obtained. 
4 Numerical results 
The flow properties for 7= 1.4 and Po/Poo = 1,000 are 
shown in Fig. 3 as a typical numerical result. For this case 
750 steps were necessary to obtain a converged solution, 
which required 25 minutes with FACOM M382 at the 
Data Processing Center of Kyoto University. The dis- 
tances in the figure are normalized with the radius of the 
nozzle exit, re, The density and the pressure contour lines 
are shown in Fig. 3a and b, where their total range is 
divided equally into 30 in a logarithmic scale. Close to the 
axis the density and pressure decrease rapidly until the 
barrel shock, which starts from the edge of the nozzle exit, 
reflects at the axis. Then the barrel shock expands again 
tt.O 
0,_0. 
On 
4.0 
8,0 
12.0 
16.0 
20.0 
24.0 
28.0 
a 
OENSITT 
0"00 0 
u, 0 
8 0 
12 0 
I6 0 
20 0 
2q 0 
28 0 
b 
PRESSURE 
0.0 
c 
VELOCITT 
10,50 
9.54 
8.58 
7.62 
6.66 
5.70 
u,. 7t~ 
3.78 
2.82 
1.86 
O. 900. 
J 
u,.O 
8.0 
12.0 
16.0 
20.0 
2q.O 
28.0 
d 
MRCH NUMBER 
Fig. 3a-d. Numerical results for ~= 1.4 and po/p~ = 1,000. 
Distances x and r are normalized with radius of nozzle exit. 
a Density contour lines, b pressure contour lines, c velocity vec- 
tors, d Mach number change on axis 
and interacts with the jet boundary where the diameter of 
the jet becomes a minimum. Different from the free jet 
expanding from a sonic orifice, the normal shock (Mach 
disk) does not exist. As can be seen in Fig. 3 C showing the 
velocity vectors, the flow continues to expand after the 
nozzle exit but is suppressed by the converging barrel 
shock and then expands again after the point of shock 
reflection. The velocity decreases slightly at this point but 
still remains supersonic thereafter. The Mach number on 
the axis increases from the exit value, 4.40, to a maximum 
value just before the shock reflects. It takes a minimum 
value at the point where the diameter of the jet becomes 
minimum and increases again with the further expansion. 
Since the velocity on the axis is almost constant, this 
change of the Mach number is mainly attributed to the 
temperature change. 
5 Comparison between visualization 
and numerical simulation 
As is described in Chap. 2, the strength of LIF depends on 
the thermodynamic states of the flow. If we assume that 
the absorption coefficient is independent of temperature 
and pressure, then the strength of LIF is proportional to 
the number density in the lower states of the absorption 
lines of iodine molecule. Assuming the rotational tem- 
perature of the iodine molecules being equal to the trans- 
lational temperature of the flow, the relative strength of 
LIF can be expressed as a function of the density and tem- 
perature of the flow. Then we can calculate the relative 
strength of LIF in the whole flow field using the numeri- 
cal results. In this calculation, however, quenching effects, 
which also depend on the density and temperature, and 
Doppler effects are not included. Comparing the numeri- 
cally obtained distribution of the relative strength of LIF 
with the photographs shows that the numerical computa- 
tion is appropriate to simulate the jet structure quite well 
(Fig. 4). The unsymmetry in the experimentally obtained 
LIF intensity with respect to the jet axis, is a result of the 
Doppler effect, which was not included in the calculation. 
When the temperature of iodine molecules decreases so 
that the Doppler width of the absorption lines becomes 
sufficiently narrow, the absorption of the laser by the 
iodine molecules only occurs by the Doppler tuning, i.e. 
the laser is absorbed discontinuously along the beam, and 
the resultant LIF represents stripes in the flow field 
(Teshima & Nakatsuji 1984). These stripes can be seen in 
the photographs for the cases of the pressure ratios 1,500 
and 2,000. Since the velocity is almost constant in the 
region surrounded by the shock, these stripes represent the 
directions of flow. Comparisons of the photographs with 
the calculated velocity vectors are shown in Fig. 5. It can 
be seen that the directions of the flow and the stripes also 
agree well. 
As the representative values for the jet size we may 
take the maximum diameter, xt, of the jet and the dis- 


--- Page 4 ---

200 
Experiments in Fluids 5 (1987) 
2ol 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
i 
i 
I I 
--o-- Experiment 
PLM Calculation 
X s 
,~o 
/j~/°f 
~o 
x~ 
1 
~ 
e 
t 
I 
',,~1 
' 
t 
100 
500 
1000 2000 
po/poo-----,.- 
Fig. 6. Maximum jet diameter, xt, and location of shock reflection 
point, xs, normalized with diameter of nozzle exit, De, obtained 
experimentally and numerically as a function of po/p~ 
stand the details of the flow. Good agreement between the 
experiment and the numerical results was obtained in the 
jet structure, i.e. the shape of the barrel shock and the 
location of its reflection point on the axis and also the 
shape of the jet boundary. 
Fig. 4. Comparison between visualized jets and numerical simula- 
tion at various values of po/p~ 
Fig. 5. Comparison between visualized flow directions and cal- 
culated velocity vectors for po/pm = 2,000 
tance, xs, of the shock reflection point measured from the 
nozzle exit. These values obtained from the experiment 
and the calculation are compared in Fig. 6, showing also a 
very good agreement. 
6 Conclusions 
Supersonic jets issued from a small Laval nozzle with 
large pressure ratios were visualized and numerically 
simulated. The structure of the jet can be clearly seen by 
the LIF method. The numerical result is useful to under- 
Acknowledgements 
M. Sommerfeld wishes to acknowledge the fellowship from the 
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science and the Alexander 
yon Humboldt Foundation. This work was partially supported by 
the Data Processing Center of Kyoto University as one of its 
Program Development Projects. 
References 
Gerstenkorn, S.; Luc, P. 1979: Assignments of several groups of 
iodine (I2) lines in the B-X system. J. Mol. Spectrosc. 77, 
310-321 
Hiller, W. J.; Schmidt-Ott, W. D. 1977: Visualization of low 
density gas-jets by laser induced fluorescence. ICIASF Record, 
pp. 68-73 
Saito, T.; Nakatsuji, H.; Teshima, K. 1986: Numerical simulation 
and visualization of freejet flow-fields. Trans. Jpn~ Soc. Aeron. 
, 
Space Sci. 28, 240-247 
Smalley, R. E.; Levy, D. H.; Wharton, L. 1976: The fluorescence 
excitation spectrum of the HeI2 van der Waals complex. 
J. Chem. Phys. 64, 3266-3276 
Teshima, K.; Moriya, T.; Mort, T. 1984: Visualization of freejets 
by a laser induced fluorescence method. J. Jpn. Soc. Aeron. 
Space Sci. 32, 61-64 
Teshima, K.; Nakatsuji, H. 1984: Visualization of rarefied gas 
flows by a laser induced fluorescence method. In: Rarefied gas 
dynamics (ed. Oguchi, H.), Vol. I, pp. 447-454. Tokyo: Tokyo 
University Press 
Woodward, P. R.; Colella, P. 1981: High resolution difference 
schemes for compressible gas dynamics. In: Seventh Int. Conf. 
on Num. Methods in Fluid Dyn., Proc. of the Conf. (eds. Rey- 
nolds, W. C.; MacCormack, R. W.), pp. 434-441. Berlin, 
Heidelberg, New York: Springer 
Received August 7, 1986 
