
--- Page 1 ---

RESEARCH ARTICLE
Residence time measurement of an isothermal combustor
ﬂow ﬁeld
Liangta Cheng • Adrian Spencer
Received: 30 September 2010 / Revised: 8 March 2011 / Accepted: 20 March 2011
 Springer-Verlag 2011
Abstract
Residence times of combustors have commonly
been used to help understand NOx emissions and ﬂame
blowout. Both the time mean velocity and turbulence ﬁelds
are important to the residence time, but determining the
residence time via analysis of a measured velocity ﬁeld is
difﬁcult due to the inherent unsteadiness and the three-
dimensional nature of a high-Re swirling ﬂow. A more
direct approach to measure residence time is reported here
that examines the dynamic response of fuel concentration
to a sudden cutoff in the fuel injection. Residence time
measurement was mainly taken using a time-resolved
planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) technique, but a
second camera for particle image velocimetry (PIV) was
added to check that the step change does not alter the
velocity ﬁeld and the spectral content of the coherent
structures. Characteristic timescales evaluated from the
measurements are referred to as convection and half-life
times: The former describes the time delay from a fuel
injector exit reference point to a downstream point of
interest, and the latter describes the rate of decay once the
effect of the reduced scalar concentration at the injection
source has been transported to the point of interest. Resi-
dence time is often deﬁned as the time taken for a con-
served scalar to reduce to half its initial value after
injection is stopped: this equivalent to the sum of the
convection time and the half-life values. The technique was
applied to a high-swirl fuel injector typical of that found in
combustor applications. Two test cases have been studied:
with central jet (with-jet) and without central jet (no-jet).
It was found that the relatively unstable central recircula-
tion zone of the no-jet case resulted in increased transport
of fuel into the central region that is dominated by a pre-
cessing vortex core, where long half-life times are also
found. Based on this, it was inferred that the no-jet case
may be more prone to NOx production. The technique is
described here for a single-phase isothermal ﬂow ﬁeld, but
with consideration, it could be extended to studying
reacting ﬂows to provide more insight into important
mixing phenomena and relevant timescales.
1 Introduction
Measurement of residence time and temperature is of
practical interest in gas turbine combustor research because
the two parameters have usually been used to correlate
with various emission indices. For example, Roffe and
Venkataramani (1978) showed for a propane ﬂame that the
NO emission index, NOEI, was described well by the
empirical expression:
lnðNOEI=tGÞ ¼ 72:28 þ 2:80
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
TAF
p
 TAF=38
ð1Þ
where TAF is the adiabatic ﬂame temperature (Kelvin), tG is
the characteristic combustor residence time (ms), and
numerical
constants
have
units
consistent
with
the
equation. The residence time only becomes insigniﬁcant
for very lean mixtures (equivalence ratios below *0.4)
because the temperature, which determines the equilibrium
point of the dissociation reaction (e.g., NO production from
Extended version of Lisbon 2010 Paper #1736 for consideration of
Special Issue in Lisbon 2012, Revision 2, March 2011.
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this
article (doi:10.1007/s00348-011-1085-3) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
L. Cheng  A. Spencer (&)
Department of Aero & Auto Engineering,
Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK
e-mail: a.spencer@lboro.ac.uk
123
Exp Fluids
DOI 10.1007/s00348-011-1085-3


--- Page 2 ---

O2 and N2 in the Zeldovich chain mechanism (Heywood
et al. 1970)), is then very low. In a relevant study, Driscoll
et al. (1992) showed that the Damkho¨ler number, which
may be interpreted as the ratio of residence time, sres, and
chemical kinetic time, schem, correlated well with NOx
emission data in hydrogen and helium ﬂames that have
simple chemistry. The Damkho¨ler number, as deﬁned in
Eq. 2, has also been used to predict ﬂame blowoff with
success (Lieuwen 2006; Noble et al. 2006):
Da ¼ sres
schem
¼ S2
Ld
aUref
ð2Þ
where SL is the laminar ﬂame speed, a is the thermal dif-
fusivity, Uref is the reference velocity (e.g., temperature-
scaled fuel velocity), and d is typically taken to be the
length of the combustor or recirculation zone. Hence, res-
idence time under this deﬁnition (sres = d/Uref) simply
refers to the convective time it takes to complete one
through ﬂow or recirculation in the case of a ﬂame holder.
Although such global measures of residence time allow
correlations of emissions to be made and hence allow
combustor scaling to be done, they do not help identify the
regions of emission production. Such estimates of sres are
also questionable because there are many routes via which
ﬂuid could travel through the combustor, and the length of
recirculation zone could also be subject to inconsistencies
in interpretation. Other methods to estimate residence
times in a combustor have been reported. For example,
residence time can be inferred from tracing particles
through a measured (Giordano et al. 2001) or CFD-pre-
dicted velocity ﬁelds (Di Nardo et al. 2009). Ozdemir and
Peters (2001) used TiO2 as a particulate passive tracer in
the mild combustion reaction zone of a combustor. Con-
centration was measured at a point via Mie-scattering in
response to ceasing the tracer injection and referred to as a
‘‘step-down’’ procedure. Highly skewed residence time
distributions were observed with the PDF biased strongly
toward long residence times. First- through fourth-order
statistics of residence time distributions were calculated
and discussed in the context of NOx emissions. The long
time average of the residence time was shown to be a
misleading quantity when strongly skewed distributions
were observed. This is particularly true if the tail of the
PDF has timescales associated with it that are signiﬁcantly
longer than the chemical kinetic timescales when the
average or global residence time is not. However, these
methods can be questioned due to the differences between
the equations governing the transport of momentum and of
a conserved scalar: The former is inﬂuenced by the pres-
sure ﬁeld, while the latter is not; turbulent diffusion rates of
the two quantities will therefore be different (Pantano et al.
2003). The estimation of residence time from conserved
scalar tracking, on the other hand, has also been reported.
For example, Arai et al. (1998), followed by similar work
of van der Lans et al. (1997), used helium as a tracer and
injected it into a swirl-stabilized combustion chamber with
and without reaction. The helium injection was stopped
suddenly, and the attenuation curves (helium concentration
decay) at various locations were studied in response. The
authors observed slightly shorter residence times due to
heat release as would be expected due to ﬂow acceleration
caused by density reduction. Accuracy of the absolute
concentration measurement was relatively poor in absolute
terms (*20%), but it is the rate of concentration change,
which was found to be of importance to the technique.
Despite these ﬁndings, the two aforementioned techniques
were single-point-based measurements that do not help
identify the source of emissions without extensive mea-
surement traversing campaigns.
A simple and efﬁcient technique is reported here to
provide spatially resolved estimates of residence time using
temporally resolved planar-induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF).
This measurement approach, applied to a representative
high-swirl combustor ﬂow, examines the dynamic response
of non-reacting and isothermal fuel concentration after the
injection of fuel is suddenly switched off. It is believed that
this is the ﬁrst time that planar LIF has been used in this
step-down approach, particularly for a combustion-related
ﬂow. Previous work that has been reported has utilized
point measurements, non-simultaneously and at low spatial
resolution.
2 Experimental setup
Measurements were taken in water under isothermal con-
ditions. Using water as the working ﬂuid has many
advantages. First, seeding particles are prone to slippage in
air while they are neutrally buoyant in water. Second, water
allows gravity to be utilized as the stable driving force,
thereby eliminating ﬂuctuations in the pump delivery rate
by the use of a constant head tank with an overﬂow branch.
Finally, if geometrical scale (d) and Reynolds number
(Urefd/m) are matched (along with careful considerations of
the momentum ﬂux ratio between the swirl stream and the
central jet stream), then the water test reference velocity
will be in the opposite ratio to the kinematic viscosity (m) of
air and water, which is 14.6 at standard laboratory condi-
tions. Thus, for a ﬂow feature of a particular Strouhal
number (fd/Uref), the actual frequency in water will be
lower than that in air by this same factor. This is beneﬁcial
to measurement devices of low temporal resolution relative
to typical timescales in air ﬂows: The 500 Hz data capture
rate used here is approximately equivalent to 7.3 kHz in air
ﬂow at the same Reynolds number and geometrical scale.
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 3 ---

2.1 Test rig
The test rig is an isothermal, vertically ﬂowing, closed-
loop, 5-m-tall constant head water rig capable of delivering
up to 15 kg/s to the test section. A full description of the
facility can be found in Spencer (1998) or more brieﬂy in
Spencer et al. (2008). For concentration measurements, a
dye injection system is required to simulate the fuel feed.
Details of the dye system and its performance have been
documented in Midgley (2005). Brieﬂy, the system consists
of a header tank that contains up to 30 l of dye solution of a
ﬁxed, well-mixed Rhodamine B concentration. A pump is
used to overcome pressure loss in the pipe work and to
deliver the solution to the test section. Dyed water mass
ﬂow rate is monitored via a ﬂow meter calibrated against
PIV and direct collection of the delivered ﬂow. An elec-
trical switch allows instantaneous opening and closing of
the solenoid valve that controls the ﬂow in the fuel feed
hose pipe.
2.2 Fuel injector test cases
The test case is a partially premixed fuel injector for the
combustor of an industrial gas turbine based on the Tur-
bomeca lean premix design, as shown in Fig. 1a. The ﬂow
streams indicated show fuel injected into the annular swirl
stream with a central air jet that can be stopped to produce
the no-jet case. The fuel and air streams are found to be not
fully premixed at the annulus exit, exhibiting some radially
biased unmixedness. The injector geometry is modiﬁed
only slightly to accommodate high optical access for the
PIV/LIF measurements and also provides a well-deﬁned
exit ﬂow separation point, as shown in Fig. 1b. The ori-
ginal measurements were motivated by a need to provide
validation data for Large Eddy Simulation studies; thus,
this geometrical change also eased the computational
expense of modeling the exit ﬂow separation point using
LES. The fuel injector has been tested previously in the
non-premixed mode where fuel is introduced via the cen-
tral jet only. Here, a simple modiﬁcation was made to
inject the dye solution into the premixing cavity via a
single pipe. After ﬁlling up the cavity, the dye exits through
the 12 premixing ports into the radial entry slots, such that
some premixing takes place with an air-to-fuel mass ﬂow
ratio of 20.1–1.
Two test conﬁgurations have been studied: with central
jet (with-jet) and without central jet (no-jet). The mass ﬂow
split (central jet to swirl stream) in the with-jet case was
determined by matching the momentum ﬂux ratio of a
combusting ﬂow as reported in Janus et al. (2007). Meier
et al. (2007) have also investigated the reacting no-jet case.
The radially fed swirler has an annular swirl stream outer
diameter Ds = 37.63 mm at the fuel injector exit, which
for convenience was at 1.35:1 scale compared to the
experiments of Janus and Meier. The inner diameter of the
annulus was formed by the outer wall of a central jet nozzle
inner diameter Dj = 5.4 mm. The test conditions corre-
sponded to swirler and jet exit Reynolds numbers of
7.48 9 104 and 2.63 9 104, respectively. Re is here
deﬁned using Ds and Dj and the bulk mean axial velocities
based
on
geometrical
exit
areas:
Vx,j = 4.88 m/s,
Vx,s = 1.99 m/s. Note, however, that the discharge coefﬁ-
cient of the swirl passage was measured to be 0.5, so the
peak velocity in the swirl stream is about 1.5Vx,s. It can be
seen in Table 1 that because the axial momentum ﬂux ratio
(Mx,j/Mx,s) has been matched, the velocity ratio and mass
ﬂow rate ratios (mj/ms) for the with-jet condition are
slightly different to the engine condition because the
engine condition has a density difference between the jet
and swirl streams not present in the water ﬂow rig. This
also means that there is some Re number discrepancy, but
additional tests at  and  Re showed no discernable
Annulus Pipe
Feed pipe for central jet  
Premixing ports (x12)
Radial entry swirl slots (x12)
Spigotted flange
Swirler passage
Central jet passage
Core Pipe
Feed holes for premixing ports (x6)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1 Fuel injector geometry: a partial premixed engine conﬁguration b test section
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 4 ---

effect on the resultant velocity ﬁeld. A higher Re was
chosen, and desirable, to ensure that the rig inlet ﬂow
conditions were suitably away from transitional effects to
aid with inlet condition deﬁnition for subsequent CFD
predictions. See Midgley (2005) for a detailed description
of these scaling issues. No correction is made for the fuel/
dye shutoff which could reduce the swirl stream mass ﬂow
by 5%: Once the jets in cross-ﬂow are removed from the
swirl slots, their blockage effect is also removed, and the
PIV measurements indicate a smaller change in mean
velocity of less than 3%. The fuel/dye injection momentum
ratio is approximately 5:1 based on bulk average velocities,
though the velocity distribution in the swirl slots is
unknown. The level of swirl that a ﬂow contains can be
assessed via the Swirl number, which is deﬁned as the axial
ﬂux of swirl momentum divided by the axial ﬂux of axial
momentum times a characteristic radius, (Ds/2), Chigier
and Beer (1972). Extensive PIV measurements have shown
that the resultant swirl number for this injector is 0.74.
2.3 Optical arrangement and instrumentation
Combined 2C-PIV/PLIF was carried out in the x-r plane
with two cameras placed perpendicular to each other, and
their distances from the dichroic image splitter were
adjusted so that they both viewed the same area on the
calibration plate, as shown in Fig. 2. The ﬁelds of views
(FoVs) of the two HighSpeedStar 6 cameras were mapped
using the calibration algorithm provided by LaVision
DaVis 7.2. Thus, the FoV of around 60 9 60 mm was
resolved by 1,024 9 1,024 pixels at 10-bit resolution,
giving 1024 grayscales. The area of interest was illumi-
nated by a pulsed laser, generated by the Quantronix
Darwin Duo Nd-YLF 30 mJ laser system. The Depth of
Focus (DoF) was maintained to be just larger than the laser
sheet thickness of 1 mm. Thus, the minimum measurement
volume
for
scalar
measurements
was
approximately
0.06mm2 9 1 mm. The PIV was carried out simulta-
neously with PLIF to check that the sudden fuel cutoff does
not have a pronounced effect on the velocity time history.
Polyamide spheres of 20 lm in diameter were used as
seeding particles.
2.4 PIV and PLIF processing
To minimize errors in the PIV-deduced velocity, parame-
ters such as particle image diameter and inter-frame time
were optimized using an established guideline (Adrian
1991) for error reduction. A multipass (64 9 64 pixels
interrogation cell size in the ﬁrst pass and 32 9 32 in the
second) was applied with a 50% overlap along with other
optimization parameters in the DaVis 7.2 software. The
velocity ﬁelds presented here and the PIV methods used to
obtain them have previously been well documented, see
Midgley (2005) for further details.
Rhodamine B (C27H31ClN2O3), abbreviated as Rh-B, is
well suited for concentration measurements due to its high
solubility in water and its ﬂuorescence stability. Several
steps were performed on the raw intensity ﬁeld. First, the
background intensity, time averaged over 20 images, was
subtracted to eliminate the camera’s dark image intensity,
background noise, and non-ﬂuorescent light that leaked
through the ﬁlter lens. To correct for spatial variation of
light sheet energy (due to Gaussian beam intensity and
sheet spreading), DaVis’ sheet correction algorithm was
applied. The Rh-B concentration used was low enough
(*20 lg/l) such that the intensity decay in the sheet
propagation direction was within 8% with the test section
completely ﬁlled with the reference dye solution (the
concentration in the ﬁnal test is expected to be much lower
due to mixing with water in the swirl stream). Hence, no
absorption correction was required or applied. Finally, a
Table 1 Comparison of isothermal experimental test conditions with reacting cases
Condition
Vx,s (m/s)
Vx,j/Vx,s
Res 9 104
Rej
mj/ms
Mx,j/Mx,s
Janus et al. (2007)
37.9
2.24
2.9
3.3 9 104
0.053
0.124
Meier et al. (2007)
*24
0
3.5
0
0
0
With-Jet
1.99
2.41
7.48
2.63 9 104
0.0514
0.124
No-Jet
1.99
0
7.48
0
0
0
Fig. 2 Combined 2-component-PIV/PLIF optical arrangement
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 5 ---

3 9 3 pixel averaging with uniform weighting was used as
a spatial ﬁlter to reduce contamination by light sheet
streaks (caused by variations in Perspex wall optical
quality) and pixel sensitivity noise. This results in a
0.18 mm2 9 1 mm measurement volume. The concentra-
tion calibration consisted of measuring intensity in the
central region of the FoV when the test section was ﬁlled
with dyed ﬂuid at 10 concentration levels. A linear rela-
tionship between the resulting 10 intensity levels (photon
counts) and concentration was obtained. Fluctuation in the
light sheet energy was measured by recording 100 images
and calculating its rms, which was found to be around 2%
of the mean.
3 Measurement technique
For a near one-dimensional ﬂow with gradual area
increase, it may be expected that the arrival time at point B
of the impulse of a tracer released at point A would have a
near Gaussian distribution, as shown on the right of Fig. 3,
with mixing happening equally in the upstream and
downstream directions. If the ﬂow deceleration is instead
performed suddenly, then recirculations will be formed as
in Fig. 4. Now, the impulse released at A may become
entrained into the recirculations, and the transport time to
the exit plane of some of the tracer will be considerably
increased, particularly at C where the streamlines interact
strongly within the recirculation shear layer. This will skew
the arrival time distribution at the exit plane as shown. If a
steady input followed by a step reduction of trace gas is
used at A rather than an impulse, then the response at the
exit plane will be (one minus) the cumulative arrival time
distribution derived from the impulse. Thus, at B and C, the
tracer concentration will remain high until the step has
been transported to that location. Because of mixing,
however, there will be a characteristic decay curve
dependent upon how the history of the ﬂow has affected its
transit time. By calculating the normalized gradient of the
cumulative arrival distribution in Fig. 4c, the arrival or
residence time distribution (RTD) can be derived corre-
sponding to the curve in Fig. 4b, see van der Lans et al.
(1997) for example.
For typical combustor swirling ﬂows, it would be
expected that recirculations feature strongly. Here, scalar
responses were found to be well approximated by an
exponential decay for most of the measurement points:
supported by the ﬁndings of Ozdemir and Peters (2001) and
others as discussed in the introduction. Ozdemir and Peters
(2001) described his point measurements of residence
times in terms of nth order statistics. The ﬁrst being
equivalent to a mean convection time, the second a rms of
the residence time distribution, and the third being the
skewness of this distribution. The ﬁrst- and second-order
statistics were found to be of similar importance to
understanding NOx formation in the mild combustor. The
skewness indicated that the residence time distributions
were far from Gaussian; thus, the (second order) rms value
had a vague relevance to the distribution curve. van der
Lans et al. (1997) employed a similar point-based step-
down procedure using a helium tracer applied to a geom-
etry not dissimilar to the one employed here involving
swirl-induced vortex breakdown and associated recircula-
tion zones. Their helium concentration decay curves were
similar to curve C of Fig. 3c, and they attempted to
determine the residence time distribution curve with some
success by differentiating the normalized (by the initial
value) decay curve, which appeared close to exponential in
nature. Because of ﬂow turbulence, the repeatability was
poor when differentiating the decay signal that contains
steep gradients so some temporal ﬁltering was required.
Stability behind ﬂame holders has received attention in the
Fig. 3 Flow without
recirculation; scalar response at
B to impulse at A
Fig. 4 Two-dimensional ﬂow with recirculation; conserved scalar response
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 6 ---

past by Winterﬁeld (1965), among others, who have also
shown that exponential decay is a reasonable model for the
rate at which a tracer concentration reduces from a recir-
culation trapped behind a triangular ﬂame holder. To avoid
the problems of repeatability, it is thus attempted here to
parameterize the decay curve as a ‘‘convection time’’ over
which the scalar concentration remains statistically con-
stant after the tracer injection has been stopped, followed
by a ‘‘decay time’’ or ‘‘half-life’’ as determined from an
exponential ﬁt to the decaying curve after the convection
time period has ended. When measuring a combustor
global residence time using a probe at the combustor exit
plane, the usual deﬁnition is the time delay from stopping
the injection of the tracer at inlet to the point at which the
concentration at the exit probe has reached half its initial
value. It can be seen that this will correspond to the sum of
the convection time and the half-life for the parameterized
curve proposed here. There should be good, near linear,
agreement between the measured value and a ‘‘global’’
combustor residence time based on suitable reference
velocity and length scale that is often used to correlate
emissions performance as in Eq. 1.
Thus, the technique used here is essentially represented
by Fig. 4c. The rig is set running with the required test
conditions for a few seconds until steady condition is
reached, after which the recording sequence was started
with the pulsed laser and cameras operating at 500 Hz
(allowing a total recording time of 6.144 s for 3,072 image
pairs). Then, the electrical switch connected to the solenoid
valve described is used to shut the fuel feed. A switch-
triggered laser pointer then turns on and projects a beam
into the ﬁeld of view, causing a slight brightening in a spot
near the edge of the FOV, marking the time instant at
which the dye was shut. After the dye shut signal is reg-
istered, there is a characteristic response time of the
injection and pre-mixing system. This depends on the valve
response time and ﬂow paths from the fuel injection point
to the exit of the swirler. These aspects are not investigated
here, and this characteristic delay time is subtracted from
the results presented. In this way, the residence times will
refer to the period from which the air is directly exposed to
high temperatures, with the time origin starting as the ﬂuid
exits the premixing duct.
3.1 Characteristic times
After the response period, the concentration ﬁeld starts to
decay very rapidly near the fuel injector exit until a near-
zero concentration is reached throughout majority of the
FoV. The time at which the response period ends (i.e., the
starting point of concentration decay at the swirl stream
exit) is taken to be the reference value. The difference
between the time for concentration to begin falling at
another location and that at the reference point is then
interpreted as the convection time, as shown in Fig. 5. The
reference starting point of decay, td,ref, is determined by
examining the time histories of scalar concentration at the
exit. For other downstream points in the FoV (e.g., the corner
recirculation also shown in Fig. 5), td is detected using an
algorithm. It ﬁrst identiﬁes when the concentration last
drops–and remains–below one standard deviation of the
mean value after td,ref, and then, an exponential ﬁt is applied
to the data after this point. The ﬁt coefﬁcients of this expo-
nential curve provide the location in time at which the model
curve intercepts the steady time average intensity. The curve
originating from this crossing point is then ﬁtted again to the
concentration decay signal, producing a second set of curve
ﬁt coefﬁcients. This step is iterated until the location of the
intercept point of the time mean and exponential curve
converges, typically in less than 10 iterations.
As shown in Fig. 5, the rates of decay for the two points
are also signiﬁcantly different. An exponential function has
therefore been ﬁtted to describe the rate of decay for all
locations:
IðtÞ ¼ I0ebðttdÞ
ð3Þ
where I0 is the initial time mean intensity (concentration)
before decay occurs, the time td coincides with the inter-
cept point found, and b is the decay coefﬁcient. The
exponential decay coefﬁcient, b, is converted to a half-life
time using t1/2 = ln(2)/b, which gives the time interval
required for the concentration, once started, to decay to half
of its original value.
The two timescales characterized here, namely convec-
tion time and half-life time, can then be normalized to give a
dimensionless values using s = Vx,s.t/Ds, which allows the
results to be scaled from the experiment onto various com-
bustor conditions using a reference velocity and dimension.
For the present work, Vxs and Ds are the swirl stream axial
velocity and swirler diameter, respectively, as given in
the test conditions. Thus, the non-dimensionalized times
Fig. 5 Illustration of characteristic times
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 7 ---

presented are the convection time sconv, the half-life time
s1/2, and the sum of these two, the residence time, sres. This
terminology is used because this will correspond to the
maximum point on the equivalent residence time distribu-
tion. Referring back to Fig. 4(b), this is the time difference in
time between the peaks of the two scalar concentration
curves at A and C.
4 Results
A detailed description of the mean velocity and turbulence
intensity ﬁelds of the with-jet and the no-jet cases can be
found in Midgley and Spencer (2005), Spencer et al.
(2008), Dunham et al. (2009) and of the steady-state scalar
mixing in Cheng et al. (2010). Key ﬁndings from this
previous work will be mentioned brieﬂy here, but it is
worth noting that the velocity ﬁeld results from the non-
reacting isothermal water tests of this work were in very
close agreement with those of the combusting air test
(Janus et al. 2007) in terms of both time-averaged and
unsteady ﬂow features, including the spectral content. Two
instantaneous PIV velocity ﬁelds for the with-jet case are
shown in Fig. 6 taken from Midgley and Spencer (2005).
These are from two perpendicular planes: a plane con-
taining the axial centerline and a radial axis and the other is
coincident with the injector exit plane containing the radial
and circumferential directions. These authors have identi-
ﬁed two vortex pairs that originate from inside the swirler
passage, the stronger pair of which can be clearly seen in
cross-section in Fig. 6b. These follow helical paths as they
travel downstream, entrained in the inner shear layer of the
conical jet issuing from the swirl stream, evident as peri-
odic structures in Fig. 6a. This vortex pair is best
visualized in 3-dimensions, shown here in Fig. 6c as an
isosurface of correlation in the radial velocity taken from
LES predictions of Dunham et al. (2009). The extent over
which velocities correlate to a reference point in the
injector exit signiﬁes the level of coherence and periodicity
present. A much weaker pair of vortices also exists 90o out
of phase with those identiﬁed here, and this ﬂow ﬁeld
rotates about the centerline at a frequency consistent with
the mean tangential velocity. It was identiﬁed that the
central jet pushes the central recirculation zone down and
stabilizes it, damping the precessing vortex core that is
otherwise present without the central jet.
The residence times measured via scalar tracking are
only valid under the condition that the sudden upstream
impulse does not alter the downstream velocity ﬁeld and
the dominant ﬂow features identiﬁed which contribute
signiﬁcantly to scalar transport. Therefore, the velocity
time histories at multiple points in the ﬂow have been
inspected, and no signiﬁcant step change in terms of both
the mean and RMS velocities was found after the dye
shutoff point. In addition, it is also important to check
whether the step change alters the spectral content of the
vortex pairs. An example of this check is shown in Fig. 7
for the no-jet and with-jet conditions, just at the exit of the
annulus at a point through which the helical vortices pass.
The resolution of the spectra changes in these plots
depending upon the number of samples available before
and after dye shutoff. For both cases, it can be seen that the
dominant frequencies are not altered due to the transient in
dye injection. Both with- and without-jet conditions are
shown in Fig. 7 to highlight an important difference in the
two ﬂow ﬁelds, (other than the reduced upstream penetra-
tion of the central recirculation zone with the central jet). It
is clear that the no-jet condition has a fundamental
Fig. 6 Unsteady ﬂow structures in fuel injector ﬂowﬁelds (Spencer et al. (2008))
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 8 ---

frequency close to a half of that with the central jet. This
happens because the central jet stabilizes the ﬂow ﬁeld and
makes it more symmetrical. This can be demonstrated using
Fig. 8, which shows the spatial correlation ﬁelds of tangen-
tial velocity with respect to the velocity at the highlighted
reference point which is located at the center of one of the
strong vortices. In the no-jet case, there is little mirror
symmetry of the 2 vortex pairs (about a vertical or horizontal
line though the center point of Fig. 8a); thus, a periodic
signal is only picked up once per revolution of this ﬂow. With
the central jet, symmetry of the left- and right-hand vortices
and the top and bottom weaker vortices is evident, and a
periodic signal is picked up twice per revolution. The pos-
sible interaction between these coherent structures and
thermo-acoustic excitations makes this fuel injector an
interesting test case from an instability point of view. Meier
et al. (2007) present reacting data for the no-jet case at
different fuel air ratios. It is found that at lower fuel injection
rates, a self-generated combustion oscillation occurs at
290 Hz. Correcting for scale (Ds = 27.8 mm) and Reynolds
number differences between experiments, this corresponds
to a Strouhal number of 0.71 here, which is slightly higher
than the isothermally deduced one of 0.63. This may be
expected due to the acceleration effect that the heat release
will have on velocity as the density reduces. At higher fuel
injection rates, the ﬂame stability improves because it moves
away from the weak extinction but also possibly because the
fuel injection jets are at a higher velocity, penetrate further
into the swirl stream, and improved premixing occurs.
4.1 Time mean and RMS scalar ﬁelds
In Fig. 9, the mean velocity and RMS scalar ﬁelds are
shown for the two cases. To indicate the locations of the
St
m
2s
2/Hz
10
-1
10
0
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
Before cut-off
After cut-off
5/3
St-0.63
St=1.21
St
m
2s
2/Hz
10
-1
10
0
10
1
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
Before cut-off
After cut-off
5/3
St=1.20
St=2.38
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7 PSD of axial velocity at (x/Ds, r/Ds) = (0.04, 0.27)
Fig. 8 Spatial correlation in tangential velocity at injector exit plane
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 9 ---

swirl streams, as well as the central jet stream for the with-
jet case, streamlines are shown on the left hand side of the
mean scalar plots and RMS plots. The scalar has been non-
dimensionalized in each case by the peak value in the FoV.
For the with-jet case shown in Fig. 9b, regions of high
mean concentration are found just beneath the exit plane,
bound by the inner shear layer (r/Ds * 0.35) of the swirl
stream and the jet stream (r/Ds * 0.07) of undyed water. A
slight backﬂow in the time mean is seen in this region,
implying that localized high-temperature fuel-concentration
ﬂuid could be transported back into the swirl passage—a
condition that could lead to ﬂashback (Huang and Yang
2005). In addition, signiﬁcant variation in scalar across the
swirler exit also indicates incomplete mixing in the swirler
passage, which is also seen in instantaneous images. The
no-jet case as shown in Fig. 9a also shows high-concen-
tration ﬂuid bound by inner swirl cone and unmixedness at
the swirler exit, though clearly the lack of the central jet
does not wash the high scalar concentration away from the
centerline, and the concentration is uniform in the radial
direction below the central body. It may be noted that the
high level of unmixedness at the swirler exit, which has also
been observed in the CH4 combustion data of Meier et al.
(2007), is probably due to a short mixing distance from the
premixing port to the swirler exit along with insufﬁciently
penetrating fuel jets in the swirl slots as previously men-
tioned. The strong inner-radial bias of the fuel distribution is
also seen in exit plane measurements (r-h plane, taken at
x/Ds = 0.13 not shown), but these demonstrated a good axis
symmetry in the long time mean and were consistent with a
cross-section at the same axial distance through all of the
x–r plane measurements shown in Fig. 9.
High scalar ﬂuctuations are found in the swirl stream
shear layer for both cases as shown in Fig. 9c and d. These
localized regions of high scalar ﬂuctuation (larger than
20% of the mean) at the immediate swirler exit indicate the
region where the helical vortex structures rapidly mix out
the radial bias in scalar concentration such that the dye is
more or less fully mixed at between 1 and 1.5 injector
diameters downstream, where the scalar concentration
values approach 0.5. In the with-jet case, the scalar RMS
values are also increased along the centerline down to the
Fig. 9 Scalar statistics normalized by maximum value
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 10 ---

free stagnation point. This is important because the mag-
nitude of ﬂuctuations compared to the local mean value is
around 20–25%, whereas ﬂuctuations in the no-jet case in
the central recirculation zone are much smaller.
4.2 Characteristic residence times
The characteristic times evaluated for the two test cases are
shown in Fig. 10. The convection time, sconv, for no-jet and
with-jet are in Fig. 10a and b, respectively. For the with-jet
case, the region along the centerline where the highest
gradient of convection time is found (x/Ds * 0.7) is
midway within the free stagnation region (x/Ds * 0.5 to
1.0) between forward ﬂowing central jet and backward
central recirculation zone (CRZ). The convection time of
the with-jet case is markedly longer than that of the no-jet
case because the central jet damps the PVC and stabilizes
the CRZ, resulting in a steadier convective path, which
Fig. 10 Normalized characteristic times
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 11 ---

involves the swirl stream recirculating back into the FoV
from downstream locations (x/Ds [ 1.5). The convection
path for the no-jet case, on the other hand, is subject to
signiﬁcant variation over time associated with a strong
low-frequency PVC. The center of ﬂow rotation orbits the
geometrical centerline at a radius of around r/Ds of 0.1–0.2,
and the swirling conical ﬂow exiting the fuel injector is
quickly entrained into the central recirculation zone.
Hence, the no-jet case shorter convection time implies that
disturbances that originate from inside the fuel injector are
likely to be transported into the CRZ through large-scale
turbulent features more quickly than the with-jet case. This
difference may be exaggerated by the deﬁnition for sconv,
which requires the scalar to fall by one standard deviation
below the steady mean. It was seen in Fig. 9 that the with-
jet case has higher scalar RMS values along the centerline
than the no-jet case; thus, it will take longer at a given
decay rate to exceed this condition. This is further dis-
cussed in the next section when looking at examples of
decay curves. Supplementary videos are available of the
scalar decay, which also demonstrates this behavior. The
outer shear layer of the swirl stream (between it and
the corner recirculation) also shows some differences
between the two test cases, with the no-jet case having a
longer convection time. This demonstrates that the corner
recirculation regions have a different dynamic. This is
explained because it is found that the reverse ﬂow on the
outer wall of the test section extends to x/Ds of 1.5 for the
no-jet case, whereas the with-jet case corner recirculation
is smaller, extending to x/Ds of 1.25 and is more stable in
location.
The half-life times shown in Fig. 10c and d reveal two
major differences, which are highlighted in the regions
bounded by the dashed lines. First, the with-jet convection
time in region (A) is up to 40% higher than the no-jet one.
Region (A) falls within the swirl shear layer, featuring the
vortex pairs, in which high scalar concentration ﬂuid could
be trapped. Indeed, the longer half-life time there in the
with-jet case is consistent with the fact that the vortex pairs
in this case are more coherent than those in the no-jet case
as discussed earlier. The less coherent structures of the no-
jet case dissipate and mix out more quickly and are
entrained into the central recirculation zone, whereas for
the with-jet case, the mixing between the coherent struc-
tures and the central recirculation zone is reduced. This is
also consistent with the convection times discussed above,
where scalar disturbances take longer to be entrained into
the central recirculation zone. The second most striking
difference is located in the region marked by (B), where the
half-life times of the no-jet case are about 20–30% higher
than the with-jet. This is believed to be due to the presence
of a stronger PVC, as dye appears trapped in its low-
pressure and velocity center, which precesses about the
geometric centerline at a low-frequency as described
above. This highest contour level on the centerline of
Fig. 10c highlights the region over which the helical swirl
center associated with a PVC is seen to exist through ﬂow
visualization. The central jet in the with-jet case helps to
quickly dilute the scalar trapped in the top of the CRZ, but
in both cases, the rest of the CRZ is relatively stagnant, and
thus, the decay rates are relatively long.
Given the above differences in convective and half-life
times, the residence times shown in Fig. 10e and f are
found to be not too dissimilar. In general, the CRZ of the
with-jet case is dominated by long convection times and
short half-life times, while the no-jet case exhibits an
opposite phenomenon. Both test conditions have essen-
tially the same global timescale Ds/Uref as deﬁned in the
introduction. An experimentally determined residence time
distribution derived global timescale, sres, would therefore
perhaps be expected to be similar. Although that happens
to be the case here, the breakdown into a convective and
decay component indicates a very dissimilar ﬂow history.
The combustion chamber sees inlet disturbances relatively
quickly in the case of the no-jet case compared to the with-
jet case, but then, the effect of the disturbance takes longer
to decay from the chamber. It is interesting to note that the
reacting no-jet case exhibits pulsating behavior under cer-
tain operating conditions as identiﬁed by Meier et al.
(2007). This is not found to be the case when operating in
the with-jet case, though both conditions have strong spikes
in the ﬂow spectra of near equal magnitude as seen in
Fig. 7 (but no-jet frequencies are half of those in the with-
jet case).
In the introduction, it is indicated that NOx production is
dependent on residence time and also temperature. Thus,
the difference in ﬂow history—in particular how ﬂow
enters the central recirculation zone—could be quite
important to the emissions in each case. In the with-jet
case, the evidence suggests that the CRZ is predominantly
ﬁlled from downstream which could be at reduced tem-
peratures (due to wall cooling for example) compared to
the near-ﬁeld reaction zone. Thus, to fully understand
emission production, an idea of the temperature ﬁeld is also
required. Some evidence of this is provided by Meier et al.
(2007), but combining these measurement techniques for a
reacting case is therefore potentially a valuable exercise to
help determine where maximum production rates of
emissions are in a given combustor geometry.
4.3 Examples of exponential ﬁts
The single exponential function has been identiﬁed as the
most suitable for describing the decay trend in swirl-sta-
bilized ﬂows and has been employed by a number of
authors (Arai et al. 1998; Spencer and Cheng 2010; Read
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 12 ---

and Hochgreb 2010). Examples of reasonably good expo-
nential ﬁts are shown in Fig. 11. Within the FoV explored
for this ﬂow conﬁguration, the model decay function is a
good estimate for around 60–70% of the region. However,
due to strong localized turbulence, coherent vortex struc-
tures, and some unmixedness of the mixture at the swirler
exit, the concentration decay can feature strong ﬂuctuations
in some regions which make the exponential best-ﬁt seem
crude. Figure 12 shows three examples of such crude ﬁts.
High scalar ﬂuctuation in the free stagnation region is due
to temporal variation of the jet penetration length; thus, the
decay rate may be under predicted while the convection
time over predicted. A crude ﬁt is also seen at the swirler
exit (r/Ds = 0.43), where the RMS scalar is at its peak (see
Fig. 9). In these regions, bimodal distributions of the
concentration have been found, and it can be seen that two
separate exponential curves could better describe these
data. This is consistent with the radial gradient in scalar at
the swirler exit being started to be stirred by the emerging
vortex pairs, which would cause intermittent high then low
values of scalar. Further downstream in the swirl stream the
bimodal distribution is mixed out, and the scatter in vari-
ation becomes more normal in nature.
4.4 Repeatability
Repeat measurements have been conducted for the no-jet
case, and the timescales evaluated for these measurements
are compared in Fig. 13 for a proﬁle taken along the cen-
terline. This direction has been chosen since it contains
both the near ﬁeld, dominated by high exit velocities (and
therefore short timescales), and also the central recircula-
tion zone, with low-velocity reverse ﬂow (and associated
long timescales). A good level of repeatability is seen,
despite very high turbulence levels, particularly in the
combined residence time. Discrepancy does occur in con-
vection time and half-life. This appears to be due to a
difference in the shape of the initial decay curve for the two
measurements within the central recirculation zone. The
low PVC precession frequency (St * 0.014 using the
deﬁnition in Sect. 2, see Spencer et al. (2008)) corresponds
to a non-dimensional period of around 70 on these ﬁgures,
so the phase angle of the precession is probably becoming
important to the measurement and affecting where the
algorithm determines the intercept point that deﬁnes the
start of the decay. This region is where the largest dis-
crepancies have occurred in all measurements reported
t (s)
φ/φmean
0
0.04
0.08
0.12
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
data
exp. fit
(x/Ds, r/Ds)=(0.16,0.03)
inner swirl near exit
t (s)
φ/φmean
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
data
exp. fit
(x/Ds, r/Ds)=(0.88,0.13)
corner recirculation zone
t (s)
φ/φmean
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
data
exp. fit
(x/Ds, r/Ds)=(0.21, 0.21)
swirl inner shear
Fig. 11 Examples of reasonably good exponential ﬁts to decay data (With-jet)
φ
t (s)
/φmean
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
data
exp. fit
(x/Ds, r/Ds)=(0.02, 0.74)
free stagnation region
φ
t (s)
/φmean
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
data
exp. fit
(x/Ds, r/Ds)=(0.43, 0.05)
outer swirl near exit
φ
t (s)
/φmean
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
data
exp. fit
(x/Ds, r/Ds)=(0.80, 0.80)
downstream swirl penetration
Fig. 12 Examples of poor exponential ﬁts to decay data (With-jet)
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 13 ---

here and demonstrates that with a low number of param-
eters describing the decay (sconv, s1/2) single measurements
are probably acceptable providing the model decay curve is
representative and that the derived parameters are longer or
at least the same order of magnitude when compared to the
ﬂow timescales being investigated.
The level of circumferential variation is also a good test
of repeatability in the sense that over a long time average,
the velocity and scalar ﬁelds are found to be axis sym-
metric; thus, it would also be expected of the scalar time-
scales. Looking close to the exit plane of the injector
(x/Ds = 0.13) on an r–h plane is now a rotating vortex
pattern that has a non-dimensional rotation period of about
1.6 (see Fig. 6b). In general, it can be seen from Fig. 14
that the circumferential variation in timescales does not
exceed ±5% in the swirl stream exit (r/Ds \ 0.5). In the
corner recirculation region for r/Ds [ 0.5, the variation is
typically less than 10%, but here, the ﬂow timescales are an
order of magnitude larger than for the swirl stream exit.
The data in Fig. 14 have been circumferentially aver-
aged to produce the radial proﬁle of characteristic times in
Fig. 15. This process allows for the best estimate of the
average of multiple measurements in order to remove
variations due to the ﬂow structure rotational phase angle.
The near-zero convection times in Fig. 15a and c indicates
the region around the time reference point at the swirl
stream exit has uniform values and is a reliable base time
for the time at which the dye shutoff enters the combustion
chamber. The circumferentially averaged proﬁles are
compared to an equivalent proﬁle extracted from the
x–r plane measurement at x/Ds = 0.13 (which can contain
no circumferential averaging). There is good agreement
between the two with-jet tests on perpendicular planes,
demonstrating good repeatability of the technique. The
agreement in the no-jet case is also reasonable, but the very
long timescale PVC that exists in this condition has
reduced the level of agreement that is seen in the with-jet
case. This could of course be improved by performing
multiple realizations if the additional accuracy is required.
5 Conclusion
This paper describes an experimental technique using
combined PIV/PLIF that has been used here to quantify
residence time distribution in a swirling ﬂow representative
x/Ds
τconv
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
main test
repeat
x/Ds
τ1/2
0
0.5
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
main test
repeat
x/Ds
τtotal
0
0.5
1
0
20
40
60
80
main test
repeat
Fig. 13 Repeatability: Characteristic times along centerline (No-jet)
Fig. 14 Measurements of
residence times in the r–h plane
at x/Ds = 0.13 (with-jet case)
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 14 ---

of that found in partially premixed combustors. The tech-
nique has only been performed in isothermal ﬂows in
water, but it could be adapted for reacting ﬂows in air in the
future. It relies on looking at the temporal response to the
cessation of the injection of a conserved scalar at the inlet
to a particular region of interest. This has been described in
literature previously for point-based measurements, but
here, planar measurements are performed providing good
spatial resolution of timescales within a region of interest.
The measured decay curves are characterized using a
model decay function consisting of a convection time and
half-life time: The former describes the shortest time span
by which a disturbance at the fuel injector exit can be
transported to the point of interest, and the latter describes
the rate of exponential decay after the reduction in con-
centration due to fuel shut is transported to the point of
interest. The residence time (time to reach half of the initial
value) can be considered to be the sum of these two
quantities. Residence timescales are important in deter-
mining NOx emissions, for example, and many correlations
exist which relate emission index to residence time and
temperature. With a spatially resolved statistical descrip-
tion of the residence time, along with some knowledge of
the temperature distribution, it may be possible to identify
the main regions of emission production. The technique has
been applied to the study of the ﬂow ﬁeld downstream of a
radially fed swirl fuel injector in the vortex breakdown
region, and a comparison was provided between the with-
jet and no-jet cases.
It was found that for the no-jet case, ﬂuid is likely to be
transported to the center recirculation zone (x/Ds * 0.5 to
1.2) much more quickly than the with-jet case due to the
former’s relatively unstable nature. The with-jet case
contains two pairs of very coherent helical vortices along
with a more stable central recirculation zone, and the rate
of mixing between these two regions is seen to be reduced.
Thus, in the with-jet case, the CRZ is ﬁlled more from the
downstream direction rather than direct turbulent transport
through the shear layer between it and the swirl cone that
surrounds it. In the same region, it was also found that the
half-life times of the no-jet case are signiﬁcantly higher,
associated with the presence of the PVC that appears to
trap ﬂuid in the swirl center.
Once inlet disturbances had been convected to a location
of interest, it was found that an exponential decay function
was a good model to the actual decay for around two-thirds
of the locations investigated. Demonstrating the technique
in a high-swirl combustor ﬂow is the motivation of this
work, but there are wider potential combustion-related
applications of the method. Bluff body ﬂame stabilization
for example requires the determination of wake charac-
teristic timescales. This has previously been demonstrated
by ﬁlling wakes with smoke and using whole-ﬁeld, non-
calibrated
light
attenuation
techniques
(Winterﬁeld
1965)—a
measurement
which
could
be
signiﬁcantly
improved using the techniques described here.
References
Adrian RJ (1991) Particle-imaging techniques for experimental ﬂuid
mechanics. Ann Rev Fluid Mech 23:261–304
Arai M, Nomura T, Hiroyasu H (1998) Residence time measurement
in a swirl type combustor with helium tracer. Jap Soc Mech Eng
86(1302A):2619–2625
Cheng L, Dianat M, Spencer A, McGuirk JJ (2010) SPIV/PLIF
validation of LES predictions of scalar mixing in high-swirl fuel
injector ﬂows. In: ETMM8: 8th Int. ERCOFTAC Symp.
Marseille, France. (Invited to Jnl Flow Turb. And Comb.)
Chigier NA, Beer JM (1972) Combustion aerodynamics. Applied
Science, England
Di Nardo A, Calchetti G, Mongiello C, Giammartini S, Rufoloni M
(2009) CFD Modelling of an experimental scaled model of a
trapped vortex combustor. In: Proceedings of the European
combustion meeting
Driscoll J, Chen RH, Yoon Y (1992) Nitric oxide levels of turbulent
jet diffusion ﬂames: effects of residence time and Damkohler
number. Comb Flame 88:37–49
Dunham D, Spencer A, McGuirk JJ, Dianat M (2009) Comparison of
unsteady reynolds averaged navier–stokes and large eddy
simulation computational ﬂuid dynamics methodologies for air
swirl fuel injectors. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 131:011502. doi:
10.1115/1.2969096
Giordano D, Giammartini S, Manfredi F, Guj G (2001) Non
dimensional numbers dependency on a Dry Low NOx Annular
r/Ds
τconv
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
5
10
15
20
x-r extract
r-θ
r/Ds
τ1/2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x-r extract
r-θ
r/Ds
τconv
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
5
10
15
20
x-r extract
r-θ
r/Ds
τ1/2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
x-r extract
r-θ
Fig. 15 Convection and half-life times on x–r and r–h plane measurements at x/Ds = 0.13
Exp Fluids
123


--- Page 15 ---

Burner Analysed with PIV technique. In: 9th National Confer-
ence AIVELA, Ancona, 2001
Heywood JB, Fay JA, Lindern LH (1970) Jet aircraft air pollutant
production and dispersion. AIAA 70-115
Huang Y, Yang V (2005) Effect of swirl on combustion dynamics in a
lean-premixed swirl-stabilized combustor. Proc Comb Inst
30:1775–1782
Janus B, Dreizler A, Janicka J (2007) Experiments on swirl stabilized
non-premixed natural gas ﬂames in a model gasturbine combus-
tor. Proc Comb Inst 31:3091–3098
LieuwenT(2006)Thegasturbinehandbook.DepartmentofEnergy,USA
Meier W, Weigand P, Duan XR, Giezendanner-Thoben R (2007)
Detailed characterization of the dynamics of thermoacoustic
pulsations in a lean premixed swirl ﬂame. Comb Flame 150
Midgley KK (2005) An isothermal experimental study of the unsteady
ﬂuid mechanics of gas turbine fuel injector ﬂowﬁelds. Ph.D.
thesis, Loughborough University, UK
Midgley K, Spencer A (2005) Unsteady ﬂow structures in radial
swirler fed fuel injectors. ASME J Eng Gas Turbine Power
127:755–764
Noble D, Zhang Q, Shareef A, Tootle J, Meyers A, Lieuwen T (2006)
Syngas mixture composition effects upon ﬂashback and blowout.
ASME 2006-90470
Ozdemir IB, Peters N (2001) Characteristics of the reaction zone in a
combustor operating at mild combustion. Exp Fluids 30:683–695
Pantano C, Sarkar S, Williams FA (2003) Mixing of a conserved
scalar in a turbulent reacting shear layer. J Fluid Mech
481:291–328
Read R, Hochgreb S (2010) Isothermal ﬂow measurements in a gas
turbine combustor using a fast ﬂame ionization detector. Meas
Sci Technol 21:1–10
Roffe GK, Venkataramani KS (1978) Emissions measurements for
lean premixed propane/air systems at pressures up to 30
atmospheres. NASA CR-159421
Spencer A (1998) Gas turbine combustor port ﬂows. Ph.D. thesis,
Loughborough University, UK
Spencer A, Cheng L (2010) Combustor residence time measurement
using planar laser induced ﬂuorescence. In: Proc ASME Turbo
Expo GT2010-22573
Spencer A, McGuirk J, Midgley K (2008) Vortex breakdown in
swirling fuel injector ﬂows. ASME J Eng Gas Turbines Power
130:021503.1–021503.8
van der Lans RP, Glarborg P, Dam-Johansen K, Larsen PS (1997)
Residence time distributions in a cold, conﬁned swirl ﬂow:
implications for chemical engineering combustion modeling.
Chem Eng Sci 52:2743–2756
Winterﬁeld G (1965) On processes of turbulent exchange behind
ﬂame holders, The Combustion Institute, pp 1265–1275
Exp Fluids
123
