
--- Page 1 ---

Christian Lenherr
Department of Mechanical and Process
Engineering,
Laboratory for Energy Conversion,
ETH Zurich,
Sonneggstr.3,
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
e-mail: lenherr@lec.mavt.ethz.ch
Anestis I. Kalfas
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
School of Engineering,
54124 Thessaloniki, Greece
Reza S. Abhari
Department of Mechanical and Process
Engineering,
Laboratory for Energy Conversion,
ETH Zurich,
Switzerland
High Temperature Fast Response
Aerodynamic Probe
In order to advance the technology for measurements in higher temperature ﬂows, a
novel miniature (diameter 2.5 mm) fast response probe that can be applied in ﬂows with
temperatures of up to 533 K 500°F has been developed. The primary elements of the
probe are two piezoresistive pressure transducers that are used to measure the unsteady
pressure and unsteady velocity ﬁeld, as well as the steady temperature. Additional tem-
perature and strain gauge sensors are embedded in the shaft to allow a much higher
degree of robustness in the use of this probe. The additional temperature sensor in the
shaft is used to monitor and correct the heat ﬂux through the probe shaft, facilitating
thermal management of the probe. The strain gauge sensor is used to monitor and control
probe shaft vibration. Entirely new packaging technology had to be developed to make
possible the use of this probe at such high temperatures. Extensive calibration and ther-
mal cycling of the probe used to bind the accuracy and the robustness of the probe. This
novel probe is applied in the one-and-1/2-stage, unshrouded axial turbine at ETH Zurich;
this turbine conﬁguration is representative of a high work aero-engine. The ﬂow condi-
tioning stretch upstream of the ﬁrst stator is equipped with a recently designed hot streak
generator. Several parameters of the hot streak, including temperature, radial and cir-
cumferential position, and shape and size can be independently controlled. The interac-
tions between the hot streak and the secondary ﬂow present a perfect scenario to verify
the probe’s capability to measure under real engine conditions. Therefore, measurements
with the novel probe have been made in order to prove the principle and to detail the
interaction effects with blade row pressure gradients and secondary ﬂows.
DOI: 10.1115/1.4001824
1
Introduction
Measurement systems are not only used to investigate the op-
eration of gas turbines, but are also of major importance in the
development of control and diagnostics of modern turbomachin-
ery. Therefore, the drive in recent years has been toward the ac-
curate measurement of time dependent ﬂow properties, such as
pressure to gain more insight into phenomena, which vary over
time and to feed back the gathered knowledge into new design
processes 1–3. But it is not only the design process that has been
improved in recent decades. As predicted by several authors
4–8, signiﬁcant progress has been made in areas such as the
development of new materials and the improvement of cooling
techniques, as well as in computational tools for the analysis and
design of more powerful and efﬁcient turbines. One of the main
drivers for those improvements is related to the trend in higher
inlet temperatures leading to a larger amount of work per unit
mass ﬂow and improvements in the weight-to-power ratio of gas
turbines. Due to severe ﬂow conditions at higher temperature lev-
els, time-resolved measurements of ﬂow properties such as pres-
sure or temperature are still a major challenge.
Fast response aerodynamic probe FRAP technology has been
developed at ETH Zurich and utilized extensively in the past for
unsteady measurements of turbomachinery ﬂow ﬁelds in a wide
range of turbomachinery applications. Fast response pressure
probes allow measurements of the ﬂow angles, the Mach number,
and the velocity and unlike complementary techniques, such as
hotwire anemometry or laser techniques, it can also measure time-
resolved static and total pressure. FRAP technology is based on
piezoresistive miniature silicon sensors. The working principle of
such sensors has been discussed in detail by several authors
3,9–14.
To date, however, FRAP technology has been limited to ﬂow
temperatures not exceeding 393 K 13,15,16. The main limiting
factors in terms of temperature are related to sensor limits, re-
duced signal to noise ratios, packaging issues, material issues, and
electrical connections to the sensor.
This paper presents a newly developed miniature high tempera-
ture fast response aerodynamic probe FRAP-HT, which can be
applied in ﬂows with temperatures up to 533 K 500°F, and
demonstrates the use and the proof of the concept of the unsteady
probe. The probe’s robustness and ability to produce high fre-
quency measurements in harsh environments are demonstrated
with a hot streak generator equipped axial 1.5 stage turbine in the
Axial Turbine Research Facility LISA facility.
2
High Temperature FRAP (F2S-HT)
First generation FRAP have been developed within the last 2
decades 2,15–18 in order to investigate unsteady ﬂow phenom-
ena such as secondary ﬂows or rotor-stator interactions in turbo-
machinery 1,19–23. Fast response aerodynamic probes satisfy
all the given criteria for turbomachinery, such as a high measure-
ment bandwidth of typically 5–12 kHz, a large Mach number
range typically between 0.1 up to transonic, high spatial reso-
lution, as well as a high measurement accuracy and easy access to
the test section. The main challenges related to the development of
a new high temperature FRAP probe are related to the sensor
technology, signal conditioning, packaging technology, and elec-
tronic connections of the sensor within the probe.
Piezoresistive silicon pressure sensors are well-established and
often used for fast response pressure applications. Their ability to
measure the average component of pressure is one main advan-
tage compared with piezoelectric sensors, which measure only the
ﬂuctuating component. The standard piezoresistive silicon sensors
used for FRAP applications work as a Wheatstone bridge and are
based on silicon strain gauge technology. The sensors used for the
new probe are used in a differential mode with a linear pressure
range of 900 mbar Fig. 5. Their dimensions are length 2.2 mm
Contributed by International Gas Turbine Institute IGTI of ASME for publica-
tion in the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript re-
ceived April 8, 2010; ﬁnal manuscript received April 13, 2010; published online
September 17, 2010. Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 011603-1
Copyright © 2011 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

by width 1.3 mm and a thickness of 0.4 mm. Due to their con-
struction, full linearity is expected at least up to 473 K. Above
that, the Wheatstone bridge still works, but some repeatable, non-
linear behavior is expected due to leakage current ﬂowing from
p-type silicon elements into the n-type diaphragm material.
AlSi alloy bonding pads embedded on the sensor are the inter-
face for the electronic connection to any power supply and signal
conditioning device. The use of the classical gold wire bonding to
the aluminum sensor pads is known to be critical for high tem-
perature applications due to the formation of gold-aluminum in-
termetallic compounds and associated Kirkendall voids. The com-
pounds are typically referred to as “purple plague.” This term
comes from the characteristic color of the AuAl2 intermetallic
compound that often occurs around the perimeter of Au bonded on
an Al pad 24. In general, such compounds occur if the time-
temperature product is large enough typically 448 K for 5–6 h
and grows at any time when high temperatures are encountered
during the life of the device. The temporal change in the interface
area due to further formation of the intermetallic compounds not
only makes the connection more brittle but also inﬂuences the
local resistance. In the worst case, this leads to a loss of connec-
tion. In order to avoid the formation of intermetallic compounds,
the probe was designed so that aluminum ultrasonic wedge bond-
ing is used to electrically connect the sensors.
In terms of packaging, the piezoresistive miniature silicon pres-
sure sensors are directly embedded into the probe shaft. For a high
temperature range of application it is very important to mechani-
cally decouple the sensor from the base substrate to reduce me-
chanical stresses on the sensor membrane caused by the different
thermal coefﬁcients of expansions of the materials. Therefore, a
dual component room-temperature-vulcanizing RTV silicon
elastomer able to withstand temperatures up to 533 K is used as a
soft bonding agent.
The cylindrical FRAP-HT probe head has a diameter of 2.5
mm. The pressure tap related to the yaw angle is 3.5 mm from the
probe tip at an angle of 0 deg. The pitch sensitive tap is located
0.8 mm from the probe tip and at an angle of 45 deg from the
probe axis on a shaped probe head Fig. 1. The pitch sensitive as
well as the yaw sensitive pressure tap hole diameter is 0.35 mm.
The primary elements of the probe are two piezoresistive pres-
sure transducers that are used to measure the unsteady pressure
and unsteady velocity ﬁeld, as well as the steady temperature.
Additional temperature and strain gauge sensors are embedded in
the shaft to allow a much higher degree of robustness in the use of
this probe. A protection shield is designed in the cavity of the
probe pressure taps in order to further increase the probe robust-
ness in harsh turbomachinery environments. This is even more
important for industrial applications in order to prevent any dam-
age to the probe tip and the sensors due to particle impacts. The
two piezoresistive pressure transducers enable the measurement of
the unsteady angles  and , as well as Ptot, Pstat, and M, using the
virtual four-sensor technique Fig. 2. Furthermore, the ﬂow tem-
perature is measured on a steady way 10 Hz.
In the virtual four-sensor mode, the tap related to the yaw angle
is used to measure the actual tap pressures in three consecutive
steps p1, p2, and p3 at the three different probe set-up angles 0
deg, −42 deg, +42 deg relative to the probe stem central posi-
tion, p1. The tap related to pitch angle is only used at the ﬁrst step
resulting in pressure, p4 Fig. 2. These four consecutively mea-
sured independent pressure values are ﬁnally combined, refer-
enced to a blade trigger, and used for the calculations of the dif-
ferent ﬂow calibration coefﬁcients for ﬂow yaw and pitch angles,
static, and total pressure, respectively.
2.1
Piezoresistive Sensor Calibration. The pressure sensor’s
working principle is the Wheatstone bridge Fig. 5, which is fed
by a constant current source of 1 mA. The excitation voltage Ue is
mainly a measure of the membrane temperature and the signal
voltage U is strongly proportional to the differential pressure
across the membrane Fig. 3. The raw signals are ampliﬁed in the
probe box at the back end of the probe shaft by a factor of 100.
The calibration procedure described in Kupferschmied 25 is ap-
plied to derive a sensor calibration model.
This work presents the ﬁrst measurements conducted with the
newly developed probe. The expected maximum temperature to
phase during the measurements does not exceed 473 K. Therefore,
the piezoresistive sensors behave dominantly linearly and the tem-
perature window of 303 K to up to 473 K was used to deﬁne the
sensor calibration coefﬁcients. This results in a mean pressure
sensitivity of 4.35 mV/mbar mA for both sensors and a mean
temperature sensitivity of 0.38 mV/K for both sensors.
2.2
Steady Aerodynamic Probe Calibration. The steady
aerodynamic calibration is based on traditional methods 15,26.
A set of four dimensionless calibration coefﬁcients Eq. 1 is
determined out of a freejet calibration, whereas ptot and pstat are
values resulting out of operational information from the calibra-
tion tunnel. The spatial distribution of the calibration coefﬁcients
is presented in Fig. 4 for a calibration Mach number of 0.5.
K = p2 −p3
p1 −pm
;
K = p1 −p4
p1 −pm
;
Kt = ptot −p1
p1 −pm
;
Ks = p1 −pstat
p1 −pm
1
where pm=p2+p3/2.
The resulting coefﬁcient distribution is modeled by a two-
dimensional polynomial. In the case of the FRAP-HT probe, this
model is of the sixth order for both dimensions. The derived cali-
bration model accuracy is given in Table 1 for a calibration range
of 24 deg in yaw and 20 deg in pitch angles, respectively.
The model accuracy is given in absolute values for the ﬂow
angles, as well as for total and static pressure. The accuracy for
the Mach number is given as a percentage of the freejet calibra-
tion Mach number. Additionally, for total and static pressure, the
accuracy is presented as a percentage of the real dynamic head at
the freejet Mach number of 0.5.
Fig. 1
FRAP-HT probe presented with a match for scale
comparison
Fig. 2
Yaw and pitch angle deﬁnition, including explanation of
FRAP virtual four-sensor mode „stemwise rotation of the probe
±42 deg from the central position, p1…
011603-2 / Vol. 133, JANUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

2.3
Dynamic Frequency Response. The dynamic behavior
of FRAP probes is investigated through the transfer characteristics
of each different component of interest. The sensor diaphragm and
the sensor’s position relative to the pressure tap are the main
components inﬂuencing the dynamic response of the probe. The
investigations of the sensor membrane response are carried out
analytically, whereas the investigations related to the pressure tap
and cavity size are experimental.
2.3.1
Piezoresistive Miniature Silicon Chip. Due to design is-
sues, the work of piezoresistive miniature silicon chips Fig. 5 is
almost lossless and typically shows very high natural frequencies
second order spring-mass system.
The natural frequency of the sensor membrane used is calcu-
lated by assuming an all-round clamped rectangular plate Harris
27, p.7.36. This results in a natural frequency of the sensor
membrane of 710 kHz. This very high value is explained by the
small membrane thickness and width, as well as by the high as-
pect ratio between the modulus of elasticity and the mass density
for silicon.
2.3.2
Pneumatic Cavity. The frequency response of a sensor
usually deteriorates when assembled inside a probe and can vary
slightly for every probe due to the complexity of the sensor as-
sembly. The deterioration of the frequency response is related to
the pneumatic cavity that occurs if the membrane is not ﬂush-
mounted. Numerous analytical approaches, for example, the organ
pipe equation, have been applied in the past in order to calculate
the frequency response of the pneumatic cavity 25. These inves-
tigations showed that due to the complex cavity geometry, the
simpliﬁed analytical models lead to deviations in the real eigen-
frequencies of up to 30%.
Therefore, in order to validate the dynamic behavior of the
probe, the sensor pressure signal of both sensors yaw and pitch
has been measured in the freejet facility 25, equipped with a ﬁne
turbulent mesh grid. The resulting ﬂow turbulence has constant
amplitude over relatively low frequencies and then decays with a
characteristic slope of −5/3 at higher frequencies. The normalized
amplitude response f5/3PSDf versus frequency is shown in
Fig. 3
Typical output signals, U „left… and Ue „right… in voltage „V…, as a
function of temperature and pressure, resulting from the probe sensor
calibration
Fig. 4
Aerodynamic calibration coefﬁcient curves for ﬂow
angles, K and K, and for total and static pressure, Kt and Ks;
calibration range: yaw is ±24 deg and pitch is ±20 deg
Table 1
FRAP-HT calibration model accuracy for Ma=0.5 and
calibration range ±24 deg for yaw and ±20 deg for pitch
Parameter
FRAP-HT accuracy
% of dynamic head

0.06 deg

0.13 deg
Ptot
41 Pa
0.25
Pstat
39 Pa
0.23
M
0.18%
Fig. 5
Piezoresistive miniature silicon chip including electrical
schematic of Wheatstone bridge working principle
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 011603-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

Fig. 6. The normalization is achieved by the mean of the ampli-
tude response f0
5/3PSD0 over a frequency range of 8–18 kHz.
Both yaw and pitch sensors show similar dynamic behavior.
The peaks at 36 kHz correspond to the eigenfrequency of the
pneumatic cavity of the yaw and the pitch pressure tap, respec-
tively. For both sensors the amplitude is ﬂat up to a frequency of
25 kHz above which the amplitudes are in excess of 3 dB. Thus,
the cut-off frequency of 25 kHz determines the measurement
bandwidth of this probe.
2.4
Probe Shaft Temperature and Strain Gauge Sensor.
An additional two sensors are installed on the 6 mm probe shaft,
100 mm behind the probe tip. The sensors are embedded in a slot
around the circumference of the probe shaft. The slot depth is 0.5
mm and the circumference is separated into two areas in order to
embed a strain gauge sensor on one of the semicylindrical planes
and a PT100 temperature sensor on the other semicylindrical
plane. The strain gauge sensor is used to monitor and control
probe shaft vibration Fig. 7, top. The temperature sensor in the
shaft is used to monitor the heat ﬂux through the probe shaft,
allowing us to thermally manage the probe Fig. 7, bottom.
3
Further Instrumentation
In order to prove the concept of the newly developed FRAP,
comparisons of measurements between the new probe and the
standard measurement equipment, such as traditional FRAP
probes and pneumatic four-hole probes, are made. A short over-
view shall, therefore, be given about the measurement technolo-
gies applied in order to make the comparisons.
3.1
Standard Two-Sensor FRAP. The standard two-sensor
FRAP technology has been used in recent years and a series of
publications resulted from measurements conducted with that
probe type for instance, Refs. 28–31. The probe has a similar
head shape to the newly developed FRAP-HT but differs in its
dimensions. The probe head has a diameter of 1.8 mm. The pres-
sure tap related to the yaw angle is 2.8 mm from the probe tip at
an angle of 0 deg. The pitch sensitive tap is located 0.6 mm from
the probe tip and at an angle of 45 deg from the probe axis on a
shaped probe head.
3.2
Pneumatic Four-Hole Probes. The cylindrical four-hole
probe has a calibration range of 30 deg in yaw and 24 deg in
pitch angles. The probe head shape is similar to the standard
FRAP probes and the diameter of the probe is 1.8 mm Fig. 8.
The steady ﬂow properties, , , Ptot, Pstat, and M are measured
with the 4HP. Information about measurement uncertainties of
4HP are given in the next chapter of this paper.
4
Probe Measurement Uncertainties
Unlike previously used methods, the guide to the expression of
uncertainty in measurement GUM 32 describes a standardized
method, which ﬁrst converts all uncertainty information into prob-
ability distributions. Based on this, it is consistent to use only the
Gaussian error propagation formula to derive the overall uncer-
tainty of the result, which represents a level of conﬁdence of 67%.
In the case of correlated parameters, cross-correlation coefﬁcients
are used to evaluate their combined uncertainty contribution.
Consequently, the ﬁnal statement of uncertainty of the measure-
ment result contains the limits and the distribution of the expected
values. The GUM method uses a term called “expanded” uncer-
tainty, deﬁned as a multiple of the uncertainty distribution and the
coverage factor k. In this case, we deﬁne k=2. This value repre-
sents a level of conﬁdence of 95% if the result is normally dis-
tributed and is, therefore, rather conservative.
The GUM-based measurement uncertainties for FRAP-HT,
FRAP, and 4HP are given in Table 2. The concept was discussed
by Behr 33 and is applied to the range of dynamic head of the
axial turbine measurements presented here. The values for the
yaw and pitch angles are given as relative uncertainties to the
calibration range of 24 deg in yaw and 20 deg in pitch. The
pressure uncertainties are presented relative to the dynamic head.
Fig. 6
Amplitude response of both sensors of the FRAP-HT
probe: the measured response results from grid-generated
turbulence
Fig. 7
Two views onto the same 6 mm FRAP-HT probe shaft
presented with a match for scale comparison. The bottom view
„PT100… shows the same shaft position as the top view „strain
gauge… after a 180 deg stemwise rotation.
Fig. 8
Cylindrical four-hole probe „FRAP shape… presented
with a match for scale comparison
011603-4 / Vol. 133, JANUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

5
Experimental Facility and Hot Streak Generator
The experiments for the current investigation have been con-
ducted in the 1.5 stage unshrouded axial turbine test rig at the
Laboratory for Energy Conversion of ETH Zurich. A cross sec-
tional view of the turbine module is presented in Fig. 9. A detailed
description of the turbine design is given by Behr et al. 28.
Global parameters of the turbine at the design operating point are
shown in Table 3 and the characteristics of each blade row are
presented in Table 4.
The test rig is equipped with an internally designed hot streak
generator Jenny et al. 34. The single passage hot streak gen-
erator has an inlet duct diameter of 22 mm with an exit wall
thickness of 0.5 mm and is operated in equal Ma number mode
compared with the main ﬂow. In order to reduce main ﬂow
disturbance, the conical outer shaped injection tube is installed on
a vane-shaped support strut. The injection plan is approximately
3.5 stator axial chords upstream of the ﬁrst nozzle guide vane.
Both the turbine and the hot streak generator are designed such
that a variety of parameters can be adapted in order to invest their
inﬂuence on the ﬂow ﬁeld. The most interesting parameters are
the hot streak temperature, the spanwise position of the hot streak,
the shape and size of the hot streak interface exchange, the pres-
sure of the hot streak, the clocking angle of the stator, and the
temperature of the main ﬂow.
The turbine pressure ratio, as well as the main ﬂow entry tem-
perature and the hot streak temperature are kept constant during
operation. Daily variations in ambient pressure are considered by
nondimensionalizing the measured pressures by the respective to-
tal inlet pressure and static outlet pressure. In order to represent
real engine conditions, the hot streak mass ﬂow is controlled, such
that its stagnation pressure and Mach number are equal to the free
stream level.
6
Results and Discussion
In order to prove the concept of the newly developed probe and
to allow qualitative and quantitative comparisons to other well-
established probes, measurements were performed using a uni-
form data point grid. One measurement plane consists of 41
traverses for the stator 1 exit plane and the rotor exit plane and
due to access issues, 33 traverses for the stator 1 inlet plane. For
all measurement planes one traverse contains 45 measurement
points. In the case of the stator 1 exit and rotor exit plane, this
leads to an overall measurement point density of 1845 points per
stator pitch of 10 deg. In the radial direction, the measurement
locations range from 5.7% span to the near tip end wall region,
located at 99.3% span. Based on the virtual four-sensor probe
concept, one measurement point consists of three records, all
sampled for 2 s with a data acquisition frequency of 200 kHz.
Before and after each radial traverse an offset and gain measure-
ment is performed in the tower position outside the ﬂow by ap-
plying two different probe back pressure levels. One measurement
plane, therefore, consists of 5699 records, which results in 71.3
GB of raw data per measurement plane and lasts for approxi-
mately 10 h.
In the ﬁrst step of the data processing, the raw data are phase-
locked based on one speciﬁc trigger position on the rotor circum-
ference. Each resulting data set covers three consecutive passages,
containing 82 samples per passage. The previously discussed sen-
sor calibration procedures are applied to the reduced data set. The
received pressure signals are then phase-lock-averaged and the
aerodynamic calibration model is applied to derive the unsteady
ﬂow angles as well as unsteady total and static pressure, Mach
number and based on the steady temperature 10 Hz, the velocity
components.
Measurements are conducted at the inlet of the ﬁrst stator, the
exit of stator one, as well as on the exit of the rotor Fig. 9. Three
different test conﬁgurations will be presented within this paper
Table 5.
Table 2
Typical error bandwidth of ﬂow parameters for the
three different probes with the same calibration range
Flow property
FRAP-HT
%
FRAP
%
4HP
%

1.1
1.0
0.9

2.0
1.7
1.6
Ptot
1.1
1.0
0.9
Pstat
1.3
1.2
1.1
Fig. 9
Close-up view of the one-and-a-half stage unshrouded
axial research turbine equipped with a hot streak generator „in-
let duct and vane-shaped support strut…
Table 3
Main parameters of LISA 1.5 stage axial turbine re-
search facility at design operating point „measured…
Turbine
Rotor speed RPM
2700
Pressure ratio 1.5 stage, total-to-static
1.65
Turbine entry temperature K
314
Total inlet pressure bar abs norm
1.4
Mass ﬂow kg/s
11.8
Hub/tip diameter mm
660/800
Table 4
Characteristic geometry and performance parameters
of the 1.5 stage turbine conﬁguration „performance values are
derived from pneumatic probe measurements at the design op-
erating point…
Stator 1
Rotor
Stator 2
No. of blades
36
54
36
Inlet ﬂow angle deg midspan
0
54
−42
Exit ﬂow angle deg midspan
73
−67
64
Aspect ratio span/chord
0.87
1.17
0.82
Blade row relative exit Mach numbers
average
0.54
0.50
0.48
Reynolds number based on true chord
and blade row relative exit velocity
7.1105
3.8105
5.1105
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 011603-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

The hot streak generator was positioned at two different radial
locations: at 50% span and at 20% span. Circumferentially, the
HSG was positioned at midpitch, in order to avoid a direct im-
pingement onto the blades of the ﬁrst stator. The measured span-
wise distribution of the pitchwise mass-averaged stagnation to
main ﬂow temperature ratio Ttot,mav/TMF is presented in Fig. 10
for test conﬁgurations 2 and 3. The variation in the maxima for the
two cases is related to the variation in the HS due to the wall
proximity.
6.1
Steady Hot Streak Inlet Conditions. At the inlet of the
ﬁrst stator, the focus of the FRAP-HT measurements is to demon-
strate the capability to measure the steady temperature.
Figure 11 represents the steady temperature normalized by the
main ﬂow temperature. Measurements performed at the stator in-
let with the FRAP-HT probe for conﬁgurations 2 and 3 are com-
pared with ideal case simulations at the HS injection plane further
upstream. In the simulation of the ideal case, the HS was posi-
tioned midpitch of the ﬁrst stator. However, the measured tem-
perature proﬁles at the ﬁrst stator inlet plane show a slight shift of
the HS core −0.05 stator pitch position compared with the target
position of zero pitch. The proﬁles are circularly shaped for con-
ﬁguration 2 and slightly squeezed in the measurement for conﬁgu-
ration 3. The difference in shape is related to wall proximity ef-
fects. Another reason for the squeezed shape of the hot spot at
20% span could be related to a slight misalignment of the HS inlet
duct compared with the main ﬂow streamlines. The inlet duct is
positioned from outside of the turbine casing. The vane-shaped
support strut gives guidance for accurate positioning. However,
the high thermal gradients could lead to some warping of the duct
structure. Any misalignment of the duct compared with the free
stream would then lead to a jet in crossﬂow, resulting in a deﬂec-
tion of the jet in the direction of the crossﬂow.
For both conﬁgurations, the HS core to free stream stagnation
temperature ratio is at the same level as at the injection plane
Ttot/TMF=1.36. This, as well as the squeezed and, therefore,
wider temperature proﬁle of the 20% span HS position, is further
illustrated in Fig. 12a, where a pitchwise cut through the area
plots of Fig. 11b and 11d is represented for Ttot/TMF at the
respective HS span position.
As shown in the measurements presented in Fig. 11, the tem-
perature at the boundary regions of the HS is reduced. The dissi-
pation of the hot jet is related to mixing effects in the shear layer
and to the turbulent temperature proﬁle in the injection pipe ﬂow.
An identiﬁcation of the jet dissipation and the entrainment of the
cold ﬂow by the jet is done by a pitchwise cut through the jet
cores in Fig. 12b, showing the typical change in sign of the yaw
angle in the core of the respective jet.
6.2
Comparison Between Various Probe Measurement
Techniques. Four parameters deﬁne the ﬂow: total and static pres-
sures and the yaw and pitch ﬂow angles. In Fig. 13 the pitchwise
averaged difference between the results measured with a 4HP, a
standard FRAP and the FRAP-HT are brought together for test
case conﬁguration 1 at the exit of stator 1. The 4HP measurements
are used as a baseline and for both fast response aerodynamic
probe measurements the differences are deﬁned with respect to the
pneumatic baseline measurements. The presented combined error
bandwidth for the respective property is deﬁned out of the sum of
the error bandwidth for the 4HP and the FRAP-HT.
All results for the ﬂow angles are within the error bandwidth
Fig. 13a. Comparing Ptot and Pstat, except for a small region at
around 10% span, the FRAP-HT results are within the error band-
width Fig. 13b. Figure 13a shows differences of yaw angle
for the FRAP ranging from −0.65 deg to 0.5 deg and for the
FRAP-HT in the range of −0.55 deg to 0.4 deg. This is consid-
ered to be a good agreement. The pitch angle difference for the
FRAP ranges from −1.2 deg to −0.25 deg and for the FRAP-HT
from −0.8 deg to 0.25 deg. This is consistent with Table 2, which
shows that errors in pitch angle are expected to be larger than
those for the yaw angle. Focusing on the FRAP-HT measure-
ments, both ﬂow angles show a change in difference close to the
tip radius, where the shear layer is located. A combination of end
wall proximity effects, blockage effects due to the difference in
the probe diameter, and high total pressure gradients located near
the end walls might be reasons for this.
The difference in nondimensional total and static pressure mea-
surements is presented in Fig. 13b. All measurement technolo-
gies presented measure the pressures as being in good agreement.
The level of deviation is small and ranges around 0.003 in Ptot and
0.007 in Pstat for most parts of the span. Concerning the average
static pressure level, the FRAP-HT shows slightly higher span-
wise variations compared with the standard FRAP.
In order to show the capability to resolve unsteady ﬂow struc-
tures, the unsteady results are compared between FRAP and
FRAP-HT. A Cpt time snapshot at t/T=0.41 over one stator pitch
measured with FRAP-HT is presented in Fig. 14a for test con-
ﬁguration 1. It shows the interaction between the stator exit ﬂow
ﬁeld and the potential ﬁeld of the passing rotor zones of in-
creased Cpt, as well as the secondary ﬂow features that leave the
stator blade row areas of reduced Cpt. The core of the stator hub
passage vortex reaches from the hub casing wall up to 10% span.
The stator passage vortex can be found at between 80% and 90%
span. Both vortices are connected by the stator wake, which ex-
hibits a straight shape and is almost perfectly aligned in the radial
direction.
Generally, the ﬂow ﬁeld out of the stator shows a clear two-
dimensional character over a range of 10–70% span. Figure 14a
further shows that the left-hand stator pitch secondary ﬂows van-
ish almost completely due to the vicinity of a rotor leading edge,
whereas the wake and both vortices are fully developed and ap-
proach the midpitch region of two rotor blades in an undisturbed
manner on the right-hand stator blade. In this case the total pres-
sure in these areas reaches its minimum value. No direct impact
Table 5
Invested test cases for different hot streak tempera-
tures and different spanwise injection positions
Conf.
TMF
K
THS
K
THS/TMF
HSG span position
%
1
314
378
1.21
50
2
314
429
1.36
50
3
314
429
1.36
20
Fig. 10
Normalized total temperature Ttot,mav/TMF measured
with FRAP-HT at the inlet of stator 1 „pitchwise mass-averaged…
for conﬁgurations 2 and 3
011603-6 / Vol. 133, JANUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

off the HS can be found in the Cpt distribution around midspan.
As already stated by Munk and Prim 35, the measurements ob-
tained show that the secondary ﬂows at the vane exit are not
affected by the HS.
Figure 14b shows the same area but compares rms of the
difference in Cpt between FRAP and FRAP-HT for the same
sample time t/T. The average of the difference between the two
probe technologies scales the result and allows a better compari-
son between them. Zones of complete agreement between the two
measurements, therefore, have an rms of zero. Figure 14b shows
a dominant area of complete agreement. Some small deviations
are identiﬁed near the tip end wall, in the wake between 60% and
75% span and within the passage vortex regions between 5% and
10% span, and 80% to 95% span, respectively. As previously
stated for the mass-averaged differences, a combination of end
wall proximity effects, blockage effects due to the difference in
the probe diameter and relative sensor position, as well as high
total pressure gradients located near the end walls might be rea-
sons for these variations.
Another zone with slight differences is identiﬁed between 30%
span and 60% span at midpitch. This is the location of the HS and
a lower signal to noise ratio of the standard FRAP for elevated
ﬂow temperatures could, therefore, be an explanation for the ap-
pearance of the deviation zone.
6.3
Unsteady Flow Analysis. The HS-related thermally
driven effects on the rotor ﬂow are more complex. In a rotor-
relative frame of reference, the HS has a higher relative momen-
tum and thus a higher relative stagnation pressure. As has been
shown by Kerrebrock and Mikolajc 36, this leads to additional
sources of secondary ﬂows with the hot gases tending to migrate
toward the pressure side and then the end walls. Figure 15 shows
the steady Ttot/TMF measured with FRAP-HT for the test case
conﬁgurations 2 and 3 at the rotor exit. The data are presented
over one stator pitch and help to identify the time-averaged main
location of the HS for later time-resolved area plots at the rotor
exit. The span position of the HS core can clearly be identiﬁed.
Furthermore, the tendency toward an increasingly spanwise distri-
bution of the hot gases on the right-hand side direction of rotor
PS is identiﬁed. A strong shape difference between the steady
temperature distributions for the two test cases is shown. The
shape for the lower HS span position is much more distorted,
which could be related the complex interactions of the hot gas
particles with the hub passage vortex and be further inﬂuenced by
wall proximity effects.
In order to track both the hot streak effects, as well as ﬂow-
related unsteady effects such as the wake and vortical structures at
the rotor exit, the root mean square value of the random part of the
total pressure is presented in Fig. 16 for the HS cases 2 and 3
Ptot,rms. Regions of high Ptot,rms are indicative of eddy shedding
or regions of high turbulence. Rotor exit ﬂow measurements are
presented over one complete stator pitch. Due to the stator to rotor
Fig. 11
Steady normalized total temperature „Ttot/TMF… over one stator
pitch. Ideal case simulation at the HS injection plane for conﬁgurations 2 „a…
and 3 „c…; FRAP-HT results at the inlet of stator 1 for conﬁgurations 2 „b…
and 3 „d….
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 011603-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

blade count ratio of 2:3, two rotors and their dominating effects
are presented within one stator pitch.
Similar Ptot,rms levels occur in the areas of the tip leakage
vortex 1, in the area of the upper passage vortex 2 and in the
core of the rotor wake 4 for both test cases. The rms level for the
hub passage vortex shows an increase in size and intensity for the
second test case 3 Fig. 16b. This is mainly related to the hot
gas area 5 being located at around 20% span for measurement
conﬁguration 3, inﬂuencing the secondary ﬂows and, therefore,
the hub passage vortex located at the same span position. Further-
more, the migration of the HS toward the PS of the rotor and
subsequently toward the end walls is recognizable in zone 5 for
both test cases.
7
Concluding Remarks
A novel high temperature fast response aerodynamic probe has
been developed, built and tested. The FRAP-HT probe is based on
the virtual four-sensor probe measurement concept. The probe can
be applied in ﬂows with temperatures up to 533 K 500°F and
can measure three-dimensional and unsteady ﬂows up to the cut-
off frequency of 25 kHz, covering ﬂow angles of 24 deg in yaw
and 20 deg in pitch direction. Furthermore, the probe is able to
capture the steady ﬂow temperature.
The probe robustness and capability to provide steady tempera-
ture and high frequency ﬂow measurements in harsh environments
is demonstrated within the hot streak generator equipped axial 1.5
stage turbine facility, LISA. The combination of that high work
aero-engine and hot gas spots leads to sharp temperature gradients
within the ﬂow and to interactions with the blade row pressure
gradients and secondary ﬂows and, therefore, presents a perfect
scenario to verify the probe’s ability to measure under real condi-
tions.
The steady hot streak inlet conditions show equal HS core tem-
peratures compared with the temperatures at the injection plan.
The trends of the hot jet dissipation and the entrainment of the
cold ﬂow by the jet are shown by the reduced gradients at the HS
boundary area upstream of the ﬁrst stator.
A comparison between measurements using the newly devel-
oped high temperature probe against various well-established
steady and unsteady measurement techniques is performed.
Agreement between all the techniques has been found and, there-
fore, the new probe concept was proven to be applicable. The
minor variations between the results for the different probe tech-
niques might be related to combinations of different effects such
as, wall proximity effects, blockage effects due to the difference in
the probe diameter and relative sensor position, high total pressure
gradients near the end walls and a lower signal to noise ratio of
the standard FRAP for elevated ﬂow temperatures compared with
the new FRAP-HT.
In terms of the unsteady ﬂow analysis, the Munk and Prim
principle 35, stating that the HS does not affect the secondary
ﬂows at the vane exit, is veriﬁed for the measurements performed.
The ﬂow analysis at the rotor exit further shows the interactions
between the HS-related thermally driven effects and the unsteady
Fig. 12
FRAP-HT pitchwise distribution of time-averaged
Ttot/TMF „a… and ﬂow yaw angle  „b… at the span positions of
the respective HS core for conﬁgurations 2 and 3
Fig. 13
Pitchwise mass-averaged differences of FRAP, FRAP-
HT, and 4HP „including error bars…. „a… Deviation in ﬂow angles
 and  and „b… nondimensional pressures. All measured for
conﬁguration 1 at the exit of stator 1.
011603-8 / Vol. 133, JANUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 9 ---

Fig. 14
Time resolved „t/T=0.41… area plot at the exit of stator
1 measured for conﬁguration 1 „absolute frame of reference…;
„a… Cpt measured with FRAP-HT. „b… Difference in Cpt FRAP and
FRAP-HT, expressed by the rms at the same sample time.
Fig. 15
Steady normalized total temperature „Ttot/TMF… over one stator
pitch measured with FRAP-HT at the exit of the rotor for conﬁgurations 2 „a…
and 3 „b….
Fig. 16
Time resolved „t/T=0.85… area plot at the exit of the
rotor measured with FRAP-HT and presented over one stator
pitch „absolute frame of reference…. „a… rms of the random part
of Ptot for conﬁguration 2 and „b… rms of the random part of Ptot
for conﬁguration 3.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
JANUARY 2011, Vol. 133 / 011603-9
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 10 ---

ﬂow. Kerrebrock and Mikolajc 36 observed the migration of the
hot gases toward the rotor pressure side and subsequently toward
the end walls. These effects are identiﬁed and visualized in the
FRAP-HT measurements by time-resolved area plots of the turbu-
lent ﬂuctuating part of the total pressure.
Acknowledgment
The authors acknowledge the support of Philipp Jenny in de-
signing the hot streak generator and helping to conduct the mea-
surements in LISA. The authors also thank Cornel Reshef for his
work in developing the additional electronic instrumentation and
data acquisition system for the high temperature fast response
aerodynamic probe. Furthermore, we would like to express our
gratitude to Prof. Ndaona Chokani for his support during the de-
velopment process of the new probe.
Nomenclature
Cpt  total pressure coefﬁcient
Cpt=ptot−pstat,3/ptot,0−pstat,3
f  frequency Hz
P, p  pressure Pa
Ttot/TMF  stagnation to main ﬂow temperature ratio
THS  hot streak core temperature K
t/T  time over blade period
U  sensor signal voltage V
Ue  sensor excitation voltage V
Greek
  ﬂow pitch angle deg
  ﬂow yaw angle deg
Abbreviations
conf  conﬁguration
rms  root mean square
HS  hot streak
HSG  hot streak generator
PS  pressure side
SS  suction side
4HP  pneumatic four-hole probe
Subscripts
0  turbine inlet
3  turbine exit
HS  hot streak
mav  mass-averaged
MF  main ﬂow
stat  static
tot  total
Superscripts
  turbulent ﬂuctuation
  mean value
References
1 Ainsworth, R. W., Miller, R. J., Moss, R. W., and Thorpe, S. J., 2000, “Un-
steady Pressure Measurement,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 117, pp. 1055–1076.
2 Kupferschmied, P., Koppel, P., Gizzi, W., Roduner, C., and Gyarmathy, G.,
2000, “Time-Resolved Flow Measurements With Fast-Response Aerodynamic
Probes in Turbomachines,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 117, pp. 1036–1054.
3 Sieverding, C. H., Arts, T., Denos, R., and Brouckaert, J. F., 2000, “Measure-
ment Techniques for Unsteady Flows in Turbomachines,” Exp. Fluids, 284,
pp. 285–321.
4 Rohlik, H., 1983, Current and Future Technology in Radial and Axial Gas
Turbines, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, DC.
5 Hauser, C., Haas, J., Reid, L., and Stepka, F., 1979, “Turbomachinery Tech-
nology,” Aeropropulsion SEE N 80-10205 01-07, pp. 231–272.
6 Tanaka, H., 1983, “A Survey on Gas Turbine Technology and Research Work
in Japan,” Proceedings of the International Gas Turbine Congress.
7 Swihart, J., 1987, “U. S. Aeronautical R & D Goals-SST: Bridge to the Next
Century,” Eighth International Symposium on Air Breathing Engines, pp. 55–
65.
8 Rosen, R., and Facey, J., 1987, “Civil Propulsion Technology for the Next
Twenty-Five Years,” Eighth International Symposium on Air Breathing En-
gines, pp. 3–13.
9 Cook, S. C. P., 1989, “The Development of a High Response Aerodynamic
Wedge Probe and Use on a High-Speed Research Compressor,” Ninth Inter-
national Symposium on Air Breathing Engines.
10 Epstein, A. H., 1985, “High Frequency Response Measurements in Turboma-
chines,” Measurement Techniques in Turbomachines, von Karman Institute
Lectures Series, von Karman Institute, Belgium.
11 Heneka, A., 1983, Entwicklung und Erprobung einer Keilsonde für instation-
äre dreidimensionale Strömungsmessungen in Turbomaschinen, University of
Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
12 Kerrebrock, J., Epstein, A., and Thompkins, W., Jr., 1980, “A Miniature High
Frequency Sphere Probe,” Proceedings of ASME Symposium in Measurement
Methods in Rotating Components of Turbomachinery, pp. 91–97.
13 Kupferschmied, P., Koppel, P., Roduner, C., and Gyarmathy, G., 2000, “On the
Development and Application of the Fast-Response Aerodynamic Probe Sys-
tem in Turbomachines—Part 1: The Measurement System,” ASME J. Turbom-
ach., 1223, pp. 505–516.
14 Larguier, R., 1981, “Experimental-Analysis Methods for Unsteady Flows in
Turbomachines,” ASME J. Eng. Power, 1032, pp. 415–423.
15 Gossweiler, C. R., Kupferschmied, P., and Gyarmathy, G., 1995, “On Fast-
Response Probes. Part 1: Technology, Calibration, and Application to Turbo-
machinery,” ASME J. Turbomach., 1174, pp. 611–617.
16 Humm, H. J., Gossweiler, C. R., and Gyarmathy, G., 1995, “On Fast-Response
Probes: Part 2: Aerodynamic Probe Design Studies,” ASME J. Turbomach.,
1174, pp. 618–624.
17 Persico, G., Gaetani, P., and Guardone, A., 2005, “Design and Analysis of New
Concept Fast-Response Pressure Probes,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 169, pp.
1741–1750.
18 Ainsworth, R. W., Allen, J. L., and Batt, J. J. M., 1995, “The Development of
Fast Response Aerodynamic Probes for Flow Measurements in Turbomachin-
ery,” ASME J. Turbomach., 1174, pp. 625–634.
19 Denton, J. D., 1993, “The 1993 IGTI Scholar Lecture—Loss Mechanisms in
Turbomachines,” ASME J. Turbomach., 1154, pp. 621–656.
20 Binder, A., and Romey, R., 1983, “Secondary Flow Effects and Mixing of the
Wake Behind a Turbine Stator,” ASME J. Eng. Power, 1051, pp. 40–46.
21 Schlienger, J., Kalfas, A. I., and Abhari, R. S., 2005, “Vortex-Wake-Blade
Interaction in a Shrouded Axial Turbine,” ASME J. Turbomach., 1274, pp.
699–707.
22 Doorly, D., 1988, “Modeling the Unsteady Flow in a Turbine Rotor Passage,”
ASME J. Turbomach., 1101, pp. 27–37.
23 Sharma, O. P., Pickett, G. F., and Ni, R. H., 1992, “Assessment of Unsteady
Flows in Turbines,” ASME J. Turbomach., 1141, pp. 79–90.
24 Philofsky, E., 1970, “Intermetallic Formation in Gold-Aluminum Systems,”
Solid-State Electron., 13, pp. 1391–1394.
25 Kupferschmied, P., 1998, “Zur Methodik zeitaufgeloester Messungen mit Stro-
emungssonden in Verdichtern und Turbinen,” Ph.D. dissertation, ETH Zurich.
26 Johansen, E. S., and Rediniotis, O. K., 2002, “Development of Unsteady Cali-
bration Facilities and Techniques for Fast-Response Pressure Probes,” Fortieth
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Jan. 14–17.
27 Harris, C. M., 2002, Harris’ Shock and Vibration Handbook, McGraw-Hill,
New York.
28 Behr, T., Kalfas, A. I., and Abhari, R. S., 2007, “Unsteady Flow Physics and
Performance of a One-and-1/2-Stage Unshrouded High Work Turbine,” ASME
J. Turbomach., 1292, pp. 348–359.
29 Behr, T., Porreca, L., Mokulys, T., Kalfas, A. I., and Abhari, R. S., 2006,
“Multistage Aspects and Unsteady Effects of Stator and Rotor Clocking in an
Axial Turbine With Low Aspect Ratio Blading,” ASME J. Turbomach.,
1281, pp. 11–22.
30 Schuepbach, P., Abhari, R. S., Rose, M. G., Germain, T., Raab, I., and Gier, J.,
2008,
“Improving
Efﬁciency
of
a
High
Work
Turbine
Using
Non-
Axisymmetric Endwalls. Part Ii: Time-Resolved Flow Physics,” Proceedings
of the ASME Turbo Expo 2008, Vol. 6, Part A, pp. 1121–1133.
31 Schuepbach, P., Abhari, R. S., Rose, M. G., Germain, T., Raab, I., and Gier, J.,
2008, “Effects of Suction and Injection Purge-Flow on the Secondary Flow
Structures of a High-Work Turbine,” Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo
2008, Vol. 6, Part A, pp. 1135–1145.
32 International Organisation for Standardisation, 1993, ISO: Guide to the Ex-
pression of Uncertainty in Measurement (GUM), 1st ed., Geneva, Switzerland.
33 Behr, T., 2007, “Control of Rotor Tip Leakage and Secondary Flow by Casing
Air Injection in Unshrouded Axial Turbines,” Ph.D. dissertation, ETH Zurich.
34 Jenny, P., Lenherr, C., Kalfas, A. I., and Abhari, R. S., 2010, “Effect of Un-
steady Blade Row Interaction on Hot Streak Migration in an Axial Turbine,”
ASME Paper No. GT2010-23034.
35 Munk, M., and Prim, R., 1947, “On the Multiplicity of Steady Gas Flows
Having the Same Streamline Pattern,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 335,
pp. 137–141.
36 Kerrebrock, J., and Mikolajc, A., 1970, “Intra-Stator Transport of Rotor Wakes
and Its Effect on Compressor Performance,” ASME J. Eng. Power, 924, pp.
359–368.
011603-10 / Vol. 133, JANUARY 2011
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
