
--- Page 1 ---

Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
www.elsevier.com/locate/jnlabr/cnf
Control of combustion instability with
a high-momentum air-jet
Jong Ho Uhm, Sumanta Acharya ∗
Mechanical Engineering Department, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
Received 16 October 2003; received in revised form 20 May 2004; accepted 20 July 2004
Available online 15 September 2004
Abstract
An improved strategy for controlling combustion oscillations using a high-momentum air-jet that changes the
reactant mixing process is presented in this paper. The oscillations in the swirl-stabilized spray combustor of
interest are dominated by an acoustic mode (235 Hz) with a low-frequency (13 Hz) bulk mode (of the upstream
cavity) oscillation superimposed. The bulk mode gives rise to an axial movement of the ﬂame and leads to cyclic
variations of the dominant mode time period. These cyclic variations lead to phase jitter and make control more
difﬁcult. The most effective strategy for maintaining control is shown to be achieved through the use of a new
concept which utilizes a high-momentum air-jet injected directly into the regions of positive Rayleigh Index from
where the instability originates. Improvements with this new strategy relative to the traditional fuel-modulation-
based control are demonstrated.
2004 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of The Combustion Institute.
Keywords: Combustion oscillations; High-momentum air-jet; Active control for low-frequency oscillation (13 Hz)
1. Introduction
Large-amplitude combustion oscillations, driven
by a coupling of the longitudinal acoustic mode of
the combustion system with the unsteady heat release
ﬂuctuations, leads to performance degradation, unac-
ceptable noise levels, and structural damage [1–3].
All ducted combustion devices including propulsion
systems, aero-engines, and industrial gas turbines are
susceptible to such combustion oscillations. There-
fore, feedback control has been suggested as a means
for providing robust operation of combustors operat-
ing over a wide range of equivalence ratio. In this
* Corresponding author. Fax: +1-225-578-5924.
E-mail address: acharya@alpha2.eng.lsu.edu
(S. Acharya).
paper, attention is focused on control of combustion
oscillations in a nonpremixed swirl-stabilized spray
combustor, with the intent of ﬁnding strategies that
provide the most effective control. To support this
goal, detailed heat release measurements (chemilumi-
nescence and CH imaging), Mie scattering imaging
from the fuel spray, and pressure measurements have
been made to identify the basic mechanisms and to
utilize this information for effective control.
Control of longitudinal or bulk mode combustion
oscillations have been studied by many investigators,
but in these studies attention has been primarily fo-
cused on controlling the dominant instability mode.
However, in many situations, the combustion oscilla-
tions are characterized by a dominant acoustic mode
modulated by a low-frequency mode of less than
50 Hz. The presence of a low-frequency mode can
0010-2180/$ – see front matter 2004 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of The Combustion Institute.
doi:10.1016/j.combustﬂame.2004.07.007


--- Page 2 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
107
give rise to an axial movement of the ﬂame, which,
in turn, can lead to spatiotemporal modulations in the
heat release dynamics driving the instability. Such sit-
uations exist in practical combustors and have been
reported [4–10] but have received little attention es-
pecially in relation to combustion instabilities. Pres-
ence of two modes (e.g., an acoustic mode around
300 Hz and a bulk mode of less than 50 Hz) have
been reported by Cohen et al. [4] in a lean premixed
single-nozzle combustor and at realistic engine oper-
ating conditions, Poinsot et al. [5] in a nonpremixed
multiple-ﬂame combustor, Isella et al. [6] in a pre-
mixed dump combustor, Langhorne [7] in ethylene/air
premixed ﬂame stabilized in the wake of a conical
gutter, and De Zilwa et al. [8] in ducted round dump
combustors with different sizes of the upstream cav-
ities. Both Bradley et al. [9] and Gutmark et al. [10]
reported ﬂame movement, and even detachment and
reattachment, in a swirl burner due to the presence
of low-frequency oscillations. In all these studies, the
primary emphasis has been on active control directed
at suppressing the dominant mode oscillations, and
little attention has been paid to the low-frequency
mode.
Recently the mechanism of combustion oscilla-
tions associated with the operation of lean-premixed
combustion close to the extinction limit was investi-
gated by De Zilwa et al. [11,12] and Uhm [13]. These
studies described in detail the ﬂame movement at a
frequency much lower than the acoustic mode fre-
quency. The oscillations close to the extinction limits
were observed to be related to the local extinction of
the ﬂame due to high strain rates close to the expan-
sion plane followed by relight at downstream loca-
tions where the strain rate was smaller. These oscil-
lations were greatly ampliﬁed when the duct exit was
constricted with a nozzle, due to the coupling between
the bulk mode and the low-frequency oscillations.
Combustion oscillations, close to stoichiometry, with
acoustic or bulk modes modulated by low-frequency
were also investigated by Uhm [13], but efforts di-
rected at active control were not successful. The in-
ability to effectively control the instability is partly
related to the coupling of the low-frequency and the
dominant mode. This issue is speciﬁcally examined in
this paper, and strategies to control oscillations under
conditions where the acoustic mode is modulated by
a low-frequency mode over a range of equivalence ra-
tio are explored. Under such conditions, as shown by
Uhm [13], traditional feedback control strategies are
not as effective, and improved concepts for feedback
control need to be explored.
The literature on feedback control of combustion
instabilities is extensive and documented in the re-
views by Culick [14], Schadow and Gutmark [15],
Candel [16], and McManus et al. [17]. Active con-
trol has traditionally been implemented by acoustic
drivers [18,19] and by pulsed fuel injection [20,21].
Sivasegaram and Whitelaw [22] and Sivasegaram et
al. [23] showed that the suppression of the domi-
nant frequency in ﬂows with competing frequency
modes led to the excitation of a rival frequency.
Yu [24], Fleiﬁl et al. [25], Wilson et al. [26], and
Bhidayasiri et al. [27] found that control can be in-
effective at high ﬂow rates, due to bimodal combus-
tion instabilities and a shift in the position of the
ﬂame.
The present experiments were performed in a
swirl-stabilized spray combustor where a dominant
acoustic mode was accompanied by a low-frequency
oscillation that corresponds to the bulk mode of the
upstream air-injection cavity. Under certain ﬂow con-
ditions, active control of the dominant combustion
instability is shown to be relatively ineffective in this
combustor with fuel modulations using an automo-
tive fuel injector or a proportional-drive injector. In
this paper, a new strategy using a modulated high-
momentum air-jet (with a proportional-drive valve) is
demonstrated and shown to be considerably more ef-
fective than the traditional fuel-modulation strategies.
Detailed measurements to identify the heat release
and droplet distribution patterns and to parametrically
explore the effectiveness of the high-momentum air-
jet were performed.
2. Experimental setup
The experiments were carried out in a multi-fuel-
feed combustor operating at nearly 150 kW heat re-
lease. The combustor conﬁguration, shown in Fig. 1,
consists of two concentric large-area-ratio nozzles.
Swirl vanes with 45◦angles are placed in the in-
ner and outer air streams at the exit of each nozzle.
Each nozzle can be acoustically forced by an array
of eight 75-W loudspeakers mounted at equal polar
angles about the circumference of the nozzles. Eight
liquid fuel atomizers (Arizona Mist; 0.3-mm oriﬁces),
equally spaced circumferentially and located between
the coaxial jet streams, are provided. A fuel nozzle
coupled to an automotive fuel injector is located at
the geometric center of the inner air stream and used
for fuel-modulation control. For the high-momentum
control air-jet, the central fuel nozzle is replaced by
a nozzle with straight-through holes of different sizes
(1.5, 3, and 6 mm). For modulating the air stream,
the air delivery tube is connected to a proportional-
drive valve located outside the combustor (Fig. 1).
The length of the tube between the nozzle and the
proportional-drive valve is about 1 m. The valve re-
sponds to the input signal proportionally with a ﬂat re-
sponse up to a maximum frequency of 300 Hz. Com-


--- Page 3 ---

108
J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
Fig. 1. Coaxial jet spray combustor.
pressed air is introduced upstream of the valve and
adjusted with an air ﬂow meter. Independent fuel sup-
ply lines are provided to the central injector and the
two pairs of four unmodulated circumferential fuel
nozzles. Ethanol is used as the liquid fuel and pres-
surized to a maximum of 18 bar in three fuel tanks by
high-pressure nitrogen.
The combustor is equipped with a square shell
with 19.5-cm sides and windows that are either
stainless steel or quartz for optical access. A high-
sensitivity water-cooled pressure transducer (Kistler
6061B) is mounted at an axial distance of 6 cm from
the expansion plane to measure pressure oscillation
and to provide the feedback signal for control. Light
emission is recorded at the CH radical wavelength
using a photodiode with a 430-nm centered-optical
ﬁlter, and these measurements are assumed to be rep-
resentative of the heat release ﬂuctuations from the
ﬂame. The pressure and CH signals are processed in
real time using a digital signal processor (DS1103;
DSPACE; 333-MHz Motorola power PC) used in ac-
tive control. The spatial and temporal variations in
the CH chemiluminescence (heat release) are also
visualized using a Princeton Instruments PI-MAX
512 × 512 ICCD camera with a UV lens (Electro-
physics) and a bandpass ﬁlter (DIOP) at 430 nm.
The images are triggered with respect to the pres-
sure oscillations in the combustor to determine the
phase-averaged distributions of the heat release at
different instances of the pressure oscillation cycle.
The distribution of fuel droplets is visualized using a
SharpVISION 1300-DE 1280 × 1024 charge-coupled
device (CCD) camera and a pulsed laser sheet light
(New Wave Nd:Yag laser) synchronized together by
a laser timing interface from Integrated Design Tech-
nologies.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Characteristics of combustion oscillations
Fig. 2 shows the pressure signal at two locations
(in the combustor and 10 cm upstream of the dump
plane) and the CH light signal for ﬂow conditions
(1.76 m3/min of air and 3.4 g/s of fuel; overall equiv-
alence ratio of 0.89) leading to combustion instability.
The spectra in Fig. 2b show a dominant frequency of
230 Hz modulated by a low-frequency of 13 Hz. The
low-frequency modulation is due to the bulk mode
of the air delivery chamber, and this mode and its
harmonics are clearly evident in the pressure spectra
recorded in the delivery chamber and the CH spectra
recorded in the combustor. It can also be seen in the
time traces of the pressure and CH signals (Fig. 2a)
and plays a key role in the effectiveness of the control
strategy. The bulk mode frequency of the upstream
air delivery chamber is calculated by assuming it to
be the resonant frequency of a Helmholtz resonator
(f = 1/2π

c2S/V l, where f , c, S, V , and l are the
resonant frequency, sound speed, cross-sectional area,
volume, and length of the resonator). For the annular
air delivery chamber, the resonant frequency is calcu-
lated to be about 16 Hz. Given the uncertainties in the
estimates of the volume and the exact air temperature
in the delivery chamber, the estimated bulk mode fre-
quency is considered to be close to the measured bulk
mode frequency of 13 Hz. For the inner chamber the


--- Page 4 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
109
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. Pressure signals in the combustor (black) and delivery
chamber (blue-dash) and CH light emissions (red dot) under
conditions of instability. Inner and annular airﬂow rates, 0.51
and 1.25 m3/min, respectively. Primary and secondary fuel
ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. Overall equivalence ratio, 0.89.
bulk mode frequency is 28 Hz. The dominant mode
also has associated side bands (Fig. 2b), and as will
be seen later, the amplitude of these side bands are
linked to the ﬂow conditions in the combustor.
Pressure measurements at different locations in
the air delivery chamber (Fig. 3) indicate a half-
wave mode, while in the combustor (exit open to the
atmosphere) a quarter-wave mode is obtained (not
shown). Thus, a three-quarter-wave mode in the en-
tire system is established, but the dominant mode is
strongly inﬂuenced by bulk mode in the air deliv-
ery chamber, showing a clearly discrete peak (13 Hz)
compared to that in the combustor in Fig. 2b. This is
clearly seen in Fig. 2 and can be deduced from the
amplitude of the rms of the total pressure ﬂuctuation
and the rms of the locus of the pressure peaks (or the
rms of the low-frequency component of the pressure
signal) at the pressure antinode near the dump plane,
which are 0.8 kPa (Figs. 3 and 19a) and 0.35 kPa
(Fig. 19b), respectively. This difference implies the
existence of a second mode in the system.
Fig. 3. Waveform of the dominant acoustic mode (230 Hz)
and bulk mode (13 Hz) in the annular air stream delivery
chamber. Same ﬂow conditions as those in Fig. 2. Dump
plane located at approximately 100 cm.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. Dominant frequency of combustion oscillation and
its amplitude in ﬂow conditions. (a)–(c) (marked on part b)
0.65, 1.25, and 1.87 m3/min annular airﬂow rates, respec-
tively. (d) and (e) (marked on part b) 0.51 and 0.59 m3/min
inner ﬂow rates, respectively. Primary and secondary fuel
ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s.
Fig. 4 shows the frequency and the amplitude of
the large-amplitude combustion oscillations (greater
than 1 kPa) as a function of the annular airﬂow
rate for three different values of the inner-stream air-
ﬂow rate. When the instability is greater than 1 kPa,
the dominant frequency ranges from 227 to 235 Hz
and is almost invariant with the ﬂow rate or equiva-
lence ratio. For unstable conditions, the pressure os-


--- Page 5 ---

110
J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
cillation amplitude increases with the annular airﬂow
rate (Fig. 4b). Note that for an inner airﬂow rate of
0.59 m3/min, stable conditions are achieved for an-
nular airﬂow rates in the range of 1.9–2.6 m3/min,
beyond which the instability levels rapidly rise.
Figs. 5a–5c show the pressure spectra in the com-
bustor, the pressure spectra in the air delivery cham-
ber, and the CH spectra in the combustor, respectively,
for three different values of the annular airﬂow rates
or overall equivalence ratios (in the range of 1 to
0.79). For clarity, the spectra in the lower-frequency
range (0–50 Hz) are shown separately. In all cases, the
spectra show a dominant mode around 230 Hz with
signiﬁcant side band modes of 230 ± 13 Hz in either
direction and a low-frequency mode around 13 Hz.
The low-frequency 13-Hz mode is clearly evident
in the delivery chamber pressure spectra in Fig. 5b
and in the CH spectra in Fig. 5c. The latter may be
indicative of low-frequency ﬂame movement as ob-
served in De Zilwa et al. [11,12] and Uhm [13]. The
side band mode is believed to be an outcome of the
interaction between the dominant acoustic mode in
the combustor and the bulk mode in the air delivery
chamber. As the annular airﬂow rate is increased to
1.44 m3/min, it alters the acoustic boundary condi-
tion at the exit of the delivery chamber and enhances
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5. Pressure and CH light spectra. Primary and secondary fuel ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. (a)–(c) Pressure at the combustor and
annular air delivery chamber and CH light. Inner airﬂow rate of 0.45 m3/min and different annular ﬂow rates of 1.04, 1.25,
and 1.44 m3/min (equivalence: 1.05, 0.92, and 0.81). (d) and (e) Pressure at the combustor and annular air delivery chamber,
respectively. Annular airﬂow rate of 1.87 m3/min and different inner ﬂow rates of 0.45, 0.51, and 0.59 m3/min (equivalence:
0.64, 0.63, and 0.61).


--- Page 6 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
111
(d)
(e)
Fig. 5. (Continued.)
the bulk mode (Fig. 5b), leading to an increase in
the peak in the amplitude of the side band instabil-
ity frequency. This can also be seen in the time traces
of the pressure signal at two different annular air-
ﬂow rates (Figs. 6a and 6b). At lower annular air-
ﬂow rates (1.25 m3/min; condition (b) in Fig. 4b),
the low-frequency 13-Hz modulation is clearly evi-
dent (Fig. 6a), and with higher annular airﬂow rate
of 1.44 m3/min (with the same inner airﬂow rate)
the low-frequency 13-Hz modulation is even larger
(Fig. 6b). However, as the annular airﬂow rate is in-
creased beyond 1.44 to 1.87 m3/min and the overall
equivalence ratios move toward the lean limit, there
are increases in the overall pressure rms for inner air-
ﬂow rates of 0.45 and 0.51 m3/min (see Figs. 4b
and 6c) and a decrease in the amplitude of the low-
frequency mode (seen clearly by comparing Fig. 5e
with Fig. 5b). This reduction in the low-frequency
mode is also accompanied by a reduction in the side
bands (Fig. 5d). Further increase of the inner air-
ﬂow rate to 0.59 m3/min produces a decrease in
the pressure oscillation levels as seen in Figs. 4b
and 6d.
3.2. CH imaging and Mie scattering from droplets
Fig. 7 shows the time-averaged CH intensity
distributions for increasing airﬂow rate conditions
marked as (a)–(e) in Fig. 4b. As the annular airﬂow
rate is increased (Figs. 7a–7c), the CH intensity lev-
els are increased, leading to higher instability levels
(Fig. 4b). Increasing the inner airﬂow rate (Figs. 7c–
7e) results in an increase of the heat release intensity
in Fig. 7d (and an increase in the pressure oscillation
amplitude in Fig. 4b), but increasing the inner airﬂow
rate further in Fig. 7e leads to a smaller reaction or
a high-CH emission zone. The latter effect is likely
to be linked to the local extinction due to straining of
the ﬂame or larger droplet dispersion at higher inner
ﬂow rates and leads to the reduction of the amplitude
of the pressure ﬂuctuations (Fig. 4b). Thus, local sup-
pression of the ﬂame (due to larger droplet spreading
or higher straining) can lead to a reduction of the os-
cillations, and this observation can be utilized as a
concept for achieving combustion control.
To better understand the dispersion characteristics
of the fuel spray and how these are inﬂuenced by the
inner and annular airﬂow rates, Mie-scattering images
from a Nd:Yag pulsed-laser sheet (pulses separated
by 10 ns) were obtained for different ﬂow conditions
and are shown in Figs. 8a–8f. These ﬁgures show the
spray images on only one side of the circumferentially
distributed spray injection pattern. These images re-
sult from the accumulation of 10 images during a
2-s window, with each image acquired with 0.2 s
CCD camera exposure time. Fig. 8a shows the fuel
spray without any air supply and shows roughly a 45◦
cone angle. Fig. 8b shows the fuel spray with inner


--- Page 7 ---

112
J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 6. Pressure signals at combustor. Primary and secondary fuel ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. (a) and (b) Annular airﬂow rates of 1.25 and
1.44 m3/min (equivalence: 0.89 and 0.79), respectively, and same inner airﬂow rate of 0.45 m3/min. (c) and (d) Inner airﬂow
rates of 0.45 and 0.59 m3/min (equivalence: 0.64 and 0.61), respectively, and same annular airﬂow rate of 1.87 m3/min.
Fig. 7. Time-averaged distribution of CH radical intensity. (a)–(e) Same ﬂow conditions as those shown in Fig. 4b where different
ﬂow conditions are marked by (a)–(e), respectively. Exposure time, 5 ms.
and annular supply of 0.45 and 0.65 m3/min (corre-
sponding to the condition marked (a) in Fig. 4b with
low-amplitude pressure oscillations). For improved
clarity and resolution in the images, the gray scale
range 0 to 255 was reduced to 50 to 80 in Figs. 8b–
8f, with all values below 50 set to 0, and all values
above 80 set to 80. The dark region in Figs. 8b–8f
indicates that the gray level is larger than 80 in this
region and is due to the liquid phase close to the noz-
zle tip, while the bright region around its periphery
reﬂects a high density of fuel droplets, indicating liq-
uid fuel atomization and droplet breakup. Note that
the inner and outer air ﬂow rates are different in all
cases, have swirl, and therefore generate droplets that
are mostly inclined away from the centerline (right-
hand boundary in each ﬁgure). In Fig. 8b, the fuel
droplets are generally directed vertically upward, but
a signiﬁcant concentration of the droplets is also ob-
served in the vicinity of the centerline. This case cor-
responds to the lowest inner and annular ﬂow rates
and has the largest spatial distribution of droplets but
the weakest heat release (Fig. 7a) and pressure os-
cillation (Fig. 4b). The CH distributions in Fig. 7
indicate that the regions with high heat release (and


--- Page 8 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
113
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 8. Fuel spray visualization. (a) Without air. (b)–(f) Same ﬂow conditions as those shown in Figs. 7a–7e, respectively.
combustion dynamics) are radially displaced from the
centerline, and the centerline region itself has lower
levels of heat release. Therefore, the droplet distri-
bution pattern shown in Fig. 8b, where a signiﬁcant
concentration of the droplets is around the centerline,
has lower heat release levels in the regions where the
instability originates. With increasing annular airﬂow
rates (Figs. 8c and 8d), the atomization region (the
bright region directly above the upper end of the dark
region where droplet breakup is occurring) appears
to be closer to the dump plane, and the droplets are
pushed radially outward to a greater extent. This im-
plies greater concentration of droplets in the regions
radially displaced from the centerline, and this corre-
lates well with the CH images in Fig. 7 which show
higher levels of CH distributions and greater radial
spreading at the higher annular airﬂow rates. This is
associated with increased amplitude of the pressure
oscillations. With the annular ﬂow rate held constant,
increasing the inner ﬂow rate (Figs. 8e and 8f) appears
to decrease the presence of the droplets closer to the
center and to decrease the vertical spreading of the
droplets. This observation is consistent with the CH
images in Figs. 7d and 7e where a reduction in the in-
tensity and spatial extent (in the axial direction) of CH
emission is observed at the highest inner airﬂow rates.
As noted earlier, the reduction in CH levels and spa-
tial extent leads to a corresponding reduction in the
pressure oscillation amplitude (Fig. 4b).
Phase-locked images of CH are shown in Fig. 9
at phase angles of 10 and 175◦of the pressure cy-
cle for time periods with high-amplitude pressure
oscillations (Figs. 9a and 9b) and for time periods
with lower-amplitude pressure oscillations (Figs. 9c
and 9d). High- and low-amplitude oscillations of the
pressure are due to the low-frequency modulation, as
clearly evident in the pressure time traces of Fig. 2.
Thus, phase-averaging of the CH images can be per-
formed separately for time periods with high ampli-
tudes (Figs. 9a and 9b) and time periods with lower
oscillation amplitudes (Figs. 9c and 9d). It is clearly
evident that there is a strong correlation between the
pressure and the CH variations, and the peaks in the
pressure amplitudes are associated with the peaks in
the CH levels. Furthermore, the variation in the CH
amplitude is greater during the high-amplitude pres-
sure oscillation cycles. The peak CH levels occur
close to the dump plane, which corresponds to a pres-
sure antinode.
Phase-locked images of CH are shown in Fig. 9 at
two phase angles of 10◦(close to the occurrence of
the peak pressure) and 175◦(close to the minimum
pressure instance) during two instability time periods
of the combustor operation. The ﬁrst time interval cor-
responds to time instances in the vicinity of the low-
frequency peak. In Fig. 2a the low-frequency mode
superposed on the dominant instability easily can be
seen where the pressure amplitude and oscillations are


--- Page 9 ---

114
J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
Fig. 9. Inﬂuence of low-frequency on the distribution of the CH radical intensity. Inner and annular air ﬂow rates, 0.51 and
1.25 m3/min, respectively. Primary and secondary fuel ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. Overall equivalence ratio, 0.89. Exposure time, 0.1 ms.
Solid and open symbols, pressure points at high and low amplitudes during instability cycle.
the strongest. One cycle of the pressure oscillation
during this time range is shown in Fig. 9 (top) with
the solid symbols representing time instances during
which phase-locked CH images (averages of 50 im-
ages) were taken. Figs. 9a and 9b show the CH images
at phase angles of 10◦(marked (a) in the pressure cy-
cle shown at top) and 175◦(marked (b) in the pressure
cycle). It is clearly evident that there is a strong corre-
lation between the pressure and the CH variations; the
high-pressure amplitude at 10◦phase angle is associ-
ated with high CH levels and a more compact ﬂame,
while at 175◦phase angle, both the pressure and the
CH levels are low and the ﬂame is more distributed.
The second time interval where phase-locked images
are shown (Figs. 9c and 9d) corresponds to time in-
stances where the low-frequency pressure component
is a minimum and the pressure oscillation amplitudes
are the lowest. One instability cycle, marked by open
symbols, is shown in Fig. 9 (top). Again, higher pres-
sures (at 10◦phase angle) have higher CH levels and a
more compact ﬂame region (Fig. 9c). One should note
that the near-minimum pressure levels, observed at
175◦phase angle, are lower during the high-pressure
oscillation amplitude time periods (marked (b) in
Fig. 9, top) than the corresponding value during the
low-pressure oscillation period (marked (d) in Fig. 9,
top), and therefore the CH levels in Fig. 9d are some-
what higher than those in Fig. 9b. The peak CH levels
occur close to the dump plane (bottom line of the im-
age), which corresponds to a pressure antinode.
3.3. Control of the combustion oscillations by fuel
modulations
In this section, feedback control studies using the
traditional approach of time-delay fuel modulation
are presented. The centrally located fuel nozzle is
used for control purposes. Fuel modulation is ex-
plored using both a traditional “on–off” automotive
fuel injector valve and a proportional-drive Moog


--- Page 10 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
115
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10. Phase-delay control with fuel modulation. (a) In-
ner airﬂow rates of 0.45 m3/min (black square) and 0.51
m3/min (red circle) at same annular airﬂow rate of 1.25
m3/min and overall equivalence ratios of 0.92 and 0.89,
respectively. (b) Phase-delay control at 0 ms with different
inner and annular airﬂow rates.
valve that permits control of modulation frequency
and amplitude. Both valves have frequency responses
that exceed the instability frequency range of interest
in this study. Typically 10% of the total fuel injected
is used for control purposes. These control studies
show that under certain conditions such a traditional
approach is ineffective.
3.3.1. Liquid fuel modulation with automotive fuel
injector
Fig. 10 shows the results of phase-delay control,
and at an inner airﬂow rate of 0.45 m3/min effec-
tive control of the oscillations are achieved (square
symbols) for speciﬁc time-delay ranges. This behav-
ior is consistent with that reported in the literature.
However, when the inner airﬂow rate is increased to
0.51 m3/min, no control can be achieved (circular
symbols) over the entire range of possible time-delay
values. Instead, ampliﬁcation with nearly a 25% in-
crease in the amplitude over the baseline is observed.
This inability to achieve effective control at higher
values of the inner airﬂow rates is due to the con-
trol fuel not having enough control authority. Insuf-
ﬁcient authority can be related to weak modulation
amplitude of the fuel or to the control fuel not reach-
ing the regions of high Rayleigh Index. As shown in
Figs. 8d–8f, higher values of the inner airﬂow rate re-
sult in main fuel droplets that are closer to the dump
plane and radially displaced outward. Under these
conditions, the magnitude of the heat release is con-
siderably higher (as evidenced in Fig. 7d), requiring
higher control authority for effective control. It is also
likely that the centrally injected control fuel is un-
able to reach the regions with the strongest heat re-
lease dynamics. Both of these factors may play roles
in the failure of feedback control with fuel modula-
tions.
To better understand the reasons that make con-
trol ineffective at higher inner airﬂow rates, Fig. 11 is
plotted to show the inﬂuence of inner airﬂow rate on
the pressure amplitude and heat release intensity. The
pressure is measured 5 cm downstream of the com-
bustor dump plane, and the CH chemiluminescence
is collected from the region close to the dump plane.
Both the rms of the total pressure oscillation and
the rms of the bulk mode pressure oscillation (low-
frequency modulation) are plotted (Figs. 11a and 11b)
in addition to the corresponding CH chemilumines-
cence values (Figs. 11d and 11e). It is clear that there
is a signiﬁcant increase in the heat release (a factor of
2 or greater in the total heat release ﬂuctuations, and
a factor of about 1.4 in the low-frequency heat release
ﬂuctuations) as the inner airﬂow rate is increased from
0.45 to about 0.49 m3/min, beyond which the CH lev-
els appear to plateau. The low-frequency pressure os-
cillations also show a sharp increase over this range of
inner airﬂow rates, while the total pressure rms shows
a more uniform increase over the entire range of in-
ner airﬂow rates considered. Fuel-modulation control
is essentially ineffective beyond an inner airﬂow rate
of about 0.49 m3/min, and this coincides with the
range where CH ﬂuctuations are very high. Thus, fuel
modulation essentially loses control authority in the
presence of strong heat release dynamics. It is inter-
esting to note that the trends in the bulk mode oscilla-
tions mimic those of the total oscillations, indicating
that the oscillations in the combustor are the source
that drives the bulk mode in the air delivery chamber.
The spectra of the pressure and heat release (Figs. 11c
and 11f) show that the oscillation frequencies are
unaffected by the inner airﬂow rates, while the am-
plitudes reproduce the behavior shown in Figs. 11a
and 11d.
A second source for the loss of control authority at
the higher inner airﬂow rate is illustrated in the Mie-
scattering images of Fig. 12 where it is shown that the
penetration of the control fuel at the higher inner air-
ﬂow rates is considerably reduced. Thus, the control
fuel potentially does not reach the regions of strong
heat release dynamics and therefore does not have the
requisite control authority.


--- Page 11 ---

116
J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
(a)
(d)
(b)
(e)
(c)
(f)
Fig. 11. Variation of amplitude with different inner airﬂow rates. Annular airﬂow rate, 1.25 m3/min. Primary and secondary fuel
ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. (a) and (d) rms pressure and heat release ﬂuctuations with the variation of inner ﬂow rate. (b) and (e) rms
maximum peak pressure and heat release ﬂuctuations. (c) and (f) Pressure and heat release spectra.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 12. Fuel spray visualization. (a)–(c) Control fuel spray. Same annular ﬂow rate, 1.25 m3/min. Inner air supply of 0.45, 0.51,
and 0.54 m3/min, respectively.


--- Page 12 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
117
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13. Characteristics of Moog proportional-drive valve at
forcing frequency of 200 Hz. (a) Velocity and valve spool
position signals. (b) Modulation rate with valve spool gain.
3.3.2. Liquid fuel modulation with
proportional-drive fuel injector
To overcome the limitations of the automotive fuel
injector, a proportional-drive valve manufactured by
Moog Inc. was utilized. The proportional-drive valve
embodies both gain and phase information and is ex-
pected to provide improved control authority through
stronger modulation amplitudes.
The proportional-drive valve was ﬁrst character-
ized with hot-wire velocity measurements for various
preset spool positions that deﬁne the gain or ampli-
tude of modulation. These measurements were done
at a driving frequency of 200 Hz, which is close to
the dominant instability frequency of interest here.
The valve gain was adjusted to 60% of the maxi-
mum gain and, as shown in Fig. 13a, this gives rise
to high-amplitude air modulation rate, with the veloc-
ity correlating well with the spool position. Fig. 13b
shows the rms of the velocity ﬂuctuation as a function
of the spool position, and it is seen that a proportional
increase in the gain is achieved with increasing spool
position.
Fig. 14 shows that only a modest reduction in
the amplitude of the instability was achieved, and
the control effectiveness was still poor. There was a
maximum of 20% reduction in the amplitude of the
pressure oscillations. The poor effectiveness is again
Fig. 14. Phase-delay control by liquid fuel modulation us-
ing proportional-drive valve. Inner and annular airﬂow rates,
0.51 and 1.25 m3/min, respectively. Primary and secondary
fuel ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. Overall equivalence ratio, 0.89.
linked to the inability to drive the control fuel to the
regions with large Rayleigh Index where the instabil-
ity originates and to poor control authority.
3.3.3. Gaseous fuel modulation with
proportional-drive fuel injector
To improve control effectiveness, it was decided to
explore the use of propane gas (instead of liquid fuel)
as the control fuel. The motivation for using propane
gas was based on both the fact that time delays associ-
ated with liquid fuel vaporization would not compli-
cate the control process and the empirical observation
that the modulation amplitude with the proportional-
drive injector was stronger for gas than for liquid.
The propane gas was injected from the central noz-
zle, and different nozzle sizes (1.5, 3, and 6 mm)
were used. Fig. 15a shows that feedback control was
again relatively ineffective with only marginal reduc-
tions in the amplitude of pressure oscillations. Mea-
surements of the CH chemiluminescence at different
forcing frequencies at 100 and 300 Hz showed rela-
tively complex CH light spectra, with broadband fre-
quency close to instability and several peaks in the
higher frequency ranges (Figs. 15b and 15c). The in-
jected gases are presumably dispersed close to the
injection plane, changing the ﬂame structure and an-
choring points.
3.4. Control of combustion oscillations with a
high-momentum air-jet
Based on the results shown in Figs. 10, 14, and 15,
it was concluded that a key reason for not achieving
control was linked to the inability to deliver the con-
trol fuel to the region where the heat release dynamics
was generating the instability. The Mie-scattering im-
ages in Fig. 12 clearly indicated that the momentum
of the inner air-jet played a key role in the dispersion
of the injected control fuel. It was also observed that,
by controlling the inner airﬂow rate, the heat release


--- Page 13 ---

118
J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 15. (a) Phase-delay control by propane gas modulation
using proportional-drive valve. (b) Open-loop propane gas
modulation at 100 Hz. (c) Open-loop propane gas modu-
lation at 300 Hz. Inner and annular airﬂow rates, 0.51 and
1.25 m3/min, respectively. Primary and secondary fuel ﬂow
rate, 3.4 g/s. Overall equivalence ratio, 0.89.
could be controlled (Fig. 7) to reduce the amplitude
of the pressure oscillations (Fig. 4b). Based on these
observations, it was hypothesized that, to achieve ef-
fective control for conditions with strong dynamics
and/or high inner airﬂow rates, sufﬁciently high mo-
mentum of the control feed is necessary to penetrate
to the appropriate regions and that the control feed
could be either fuel or air so long as it is able to dis-
rupt the heat release dynamics driving the instability.
From a practical perspective, in a real combustor, it
is much more feasible to utilize a high-momentum
air-jet for control purposes than a high-momentum
fuel-jet, and therefore in the present study a centrally
located air-jet was used for control purposes. It should
be noted that this approach is different from earlier
studies involving acoustic modulation of the entire
combustion air stream. With the present approach, a
high-momentum control air stream is introduced, and
the momentum and location of this jet is tailored to
reach the regions in the ﬂow with strong heat release
dynamics. As will be shown, only a small amount of
air is required to achieve control.
The control air-jet was introduced through the cen-
tral nozzle used to deliver the control fuel described
above. Thus, there is no change in the basic geome-
try. As examined with propane gas modulation, three
nozzle sizes with different airﬂow rates were explored
to determine the appropriate momentum range where
control can be achieved. All initial studies were done
with a steady air-jet to explore its role in altering the
heat release dynamics and thus the combustion insta-
bility. This was followed by air-jet modulation studies
with the proportional-drive valve.
3.4.1. Steady air-jet blowing
The rms of the pressure ﬂuctuations and the
mean of the maximum peak pressure are shown in
Figs. 16a–16c as a function of the control air-jet ﬂow
rate for air-jet nozzle diameters of 1.5, 3, and 6 mm,
respectively. With 1.5- and 3-mm nozzle diameters,
the pressure oscillations decreased sharply beyond an
air-jet ﬂow rate of 12 L/min. However, at these ﬂow
rates the velocity exiting the smaller air-jet nozzle di-
ameters is quite high, and any further increases in the
air-jet velocity leads to high strain rates, ﬂame lift-off,
and local ﬂame quenching. Thus, despite the signif-
icant reduction in the pressure oscillation with the
air-jet, the window of stable combustion was rather
limited with the 1.5- and 3-mm nozzles. With the
6-mm nozzles (Fig. 16c), the reduction in the pres-
sure oscillations is not as dramatic (about 25%), but
no ﬂame lift-off or ﬂame quenching is observed due
to the lower jet velocities for the same mass ﬂow
rates. Fig. 16c also shows the corresponding rms and
peak values at the same overall equivalence ratio but
without any air-jet (open symbols). Thus, a consid-
erable reduction in pressure oscillations is achieved
with only a small amount of air (15 L/min, less than
1% of total air supply for main combusting air) and
is required to achieve control. With the addition of
this small amount of air, the change in the overall
equivalence ratio, for the ﬂow conditions correspond-
ing to Fig. 16, is only 0.007, and therefore the control
achieved is not a consequence of the operating con-
ditions (overall equivalence ratio) shifting beyond the
instability range. The range of the control air supply
ﬂow rates needed to favorably inﬂuence the com-
bustion dynamics is determined experimentally by


--- Page 14 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
119
(a)
(d)
(b)
(e)
(c)
(f)
Fig. 16. Inﬂuence of nozzle diameter for different air-jet ﬂow on the combustion oscillations. Inner and annular airﬂow rates,
0.51 and 1.25 m3/min, respectively. Primary and secondary fuel ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. (a)–(c) rms pressure ﬂuctuations and means
of maximum peak pressure with nozzle diameters of 1.5, 3, and 6 mm, respectively. (d)–(f) rms maximum peak pressures with
nozzle diameters of 1.5, 3, and 6 mm, respectively. Overall equivalence ratios with air-jet ﬂow rates of 0, 3, 6, 9, 12, and
15 L/min: 0.886, 0.885, 0.883, 0.882, 0.880, and 0.879, respectively.
varying the control air-jet supply rates (Fig. 16). Ar-
guably, lower control ﬂow rates would be needed with
modulation.
Figs. 16d–16f show the rms of the low-frequency
pressure oscillation associated with the bulk mode of
the air delivery nozzle. The higher-frequency domi-
nant instability mode is ﬁltered out of the pressure sig-
nal before computing the low-frequency pressure rms.
It is seen that the steady air-jet signiﬁcantly reduces
(by a factor of two to ﬁve) the low-frequency oscilla-
tion, and this reduction is a major factor in the reduc-
tions observed in the total rms pressure oscillations.
Mie-scattering images of the fuel droplets for dif-
ferent air-jet nozzle sizes (1.5, 3, and 6 mm) with
and without the control air-jet injection are shown in
Fig. 17. The control air-jet is located along the center-
line, which corresponds to the right-hand boundary
of the image. As seen earlier in Fig. 8, the atomized
droplets are directed radially outward and upward.
With decreasing nozzle sizes and increasing velocity
of the control air-jet, there appears to be increased en-
trainment of the droplets toward the centerline. This
can potentially disperse the fuel droplets more uni-
formly and alter the heat release dynamics in a ben-


--- Page 15 ---

120
J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 17. Fuel spray visualization with air-jet supply from different sizes of nozzles. Inner and annular airﬂow rates, 0.51 and
1.25 m3/min, respectively. Air-jet ﬂow rate, 15 L/min. (a) Without air-jet supply. (b)–(d) 1.5, 3, and 6 mm, respectively.
eﬁcial manner. However, as noted earlier, the high
velocities of the control air-jet inﬂuence the ﬂame an-
choring adversely, and ﬂame lift-off occurs beyond
15 L/min of control air. With the largest air-jet noz-
zle (Fig. 17d), the air-jet momentum is lower but its
initial width is greater, relative to the 1.5- and 3-
mm-diameter nozzles. Therefore, the control air-jet,
instead of entraining droplets inward, penetrates con-
ically outward into the region occupied by the primary
fuel droplets. This again alters the ﬂame and heat re-
lease dynamics to reduce oscillations; furthermore,
there is no adverse impact on ﬂame lift-off. There-
(a)
(b)
Fig. 18. Inﬂuence of air-jet on the combustion oscillations of low- and acoustic-frequency modes. Inner and annular airﬂow rates,
0.51 and 1.25 m3/min, respectively (overall equivalence ratio, 0.886). Primary and secondary fuel ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. Air-jet ﬂow
rate, 15 L/min (overall equivalence ratio, 0.879). (a)–(d) and (e)–(h) Without and with air-jet supply, respectively. (a) and (e)
Signals of pressure at the combustor and the upstream end of annular air stream duct and of CH light at the combustor. (b) and (f)
Maximum and minimum peaks of pressure and CH light. (c) and (g) Cycle variation of the instability. (d) and (e) Time variation
of the instability between the combustor and the upstream end of annular air stream duct.


--- Page 16 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
121
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Fig. 18. (Continued.)
fore the nozzle size has to be tailored to achieve the
optimal momentum ratio, which in turn will favorably
alter the droplet/heat release distributions to decrease
the combustion dynamics.
Figs. 18a–18d show the pressure signal in the
combustor and in the air delivery chamber without
control air-jet injection. Also shown in the ﬁgures
are the CH intensity variations with time. The cor-
responding plots with steady control air-jet injection
are shown in Figs. 18e–18h. The air-jet interferes with
the combustion oscillations and leads to signiﬁcant
reductions from 5 to 3 kPa in the maximum peak-
to-peak amplitude of the pressure in the combustor
(compare Figs. 18a and 18b with Figs. 18e and 18f)
and a corresponding reduction in CH emission from
9 to 4 (arbitrary units). Figs. 18c and 18g plot the
low-frequency variation of the pressure peaks and the
cycle-to-cycle variation in the time period of the dom-
inant instability. It can be seen that the cycle-to-cycle
variation in the instability cycle time period is nearly
0.5 ms (associated with 42◦of the period of the in-
stability in Fig. 18c), which provides a measure of
the phase jitter or spectral broadening in the domi-
nant instability. This phase jitter is driven by the low-
frequency ﬂame movement induced by the bulk mode
of the air delivery chamber. Fig. 18g shows that with
the introduction of the air-jet, both the low-frequency
mode and the cycle-to-cycle variation in the instabil-
ity cycle time period are considerably reduced. Thus,
with the steady control air-jet, both the pressure os-


--- Page 17 ---

122
J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
cillations and the spectral broadening are reduced.
Figs. 18d and 18h show the low-frequency variations
in the pressure peak in the combustor and in the up-
stream air delivery chamber and the time difference
between these signals. The time difference between
the signals is a measure of the suitability of using
a transducer located in the air delivery chamber for
control purposes. A maximum 5.25 ms delay between
the two pressure signals is observed, reﬂecting a time
delay that exceeds a full period of the dominant insta-
bility. Thus the existence of the low-frequency mode
introduces signiﬁcant time delays between measure-
ments made in the combustor and those made up-
stream in the air delivery chamber. With control air
injection, since the low-frequency mode is consider-
ably reduced, the time delay between the two pres-
sure signals is reduced by an order of magnitude to
0.5 ms.
As shown earlier in Fig. 3, a half-wave longitudi-
nal mode is established in the air delivery chamber,
which combined with the quarter-wave in the com-
bustor results in a three-quarter-wave acoustic mode
in the system. The half-wave mode in the air deliv-
ery chamber is shown in Figs. 19a and 19b. Air-jet
blowing leads to reductions of the rms pressure ﬂuc-
tuations of 30 and 66% in the dominant instability and
low-frequency modes, respectively. Fig. 19c shows
the phase relationship of the dominant frequency be-
tween combustor and various locations along the air
delivery chamber. These results are consistent with
those shown in Figs. 18d and 18h and show a factor
of four reduction in the time delay between the two
signals.
Fig. 20 shows the pressure and CH emission val-
ues without and with air-jet injection. Also shown are
phase-locked images at different time instances iden-
tiﬁed as Figs. 20a–20e in the time traces. Figs. 20a–
20c correspond to the baseline case with no air-jet,
while Figs. 20d and 20e represent cases with air-
jet injection. The time-averaged images without and
with air-jet injection are shown in Figs. 20f and 20g,
respectively. With air-jet injection, subtle structural
changes in the CH patterns can be observed: (1) the
intensity levels (and the associated dynamics) have
lower amplitudes and (2) the distribution of CH inten-
sity is more uniform with a narrower spatial extent.
3.4.2. Modulated high-momentum air-jet
The discussions in the previous section identi-
ﬁed the potential beneﬁts of using a steady high-
momentum air-jet. Signiﬁcant reductions in the low-
frequency oscillations were observed with this ap-
proach. In this section, feedback loop control us-
ing a modulated high-momentum air-jet is explored.
The air-jet is modulated using the proportional-drive
Moog valve described earlier. Control studies were
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 19. Waveform of the dominant acoustic mode (230 Hz)
and bulk mode (13 Hz) in the annular air stream duct
with (red circle) and without (black square) air-jet injec-
tion. Inner and annular airﬂow rates, 0.51 and 1.25 m3/min,
respectively (overall equivalence ratio, 0.886). Primary
and secondary fuel ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. Air-jet ﬂow rate,
15 L/min (overall equivalence ratio, 0.879). (a) Waveform
with dominant mode. (b) Waveform with low-frequency
mode. (c) Phase relationship between the combustor and the
locations along annular air stream duct.
done for ﬂow conditions of inner and annular air-
ﬂow rates of 0.51 and 1.25 m3/min, respectively, for
which, as described earlier, effective control was not
achieved (no reduction or less than 10% reduction in
the pressure rms values) using fuel-modulation strate-
gies.
Fig. 21 shows that the baseline (deﬁned as con-
ditions with steady air-jet blowing; comparisons with
no-blowing conditions would be even more favorable)
rms pressure levels were reduced to 0.78 kPa, 70%
of that observed with fuel modulations. This is a di-
rect consequence of local injection of air with sufﬁ-


--- Page 18 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
123
Fig. 20. CH image with and without air-jet supply. Inner and annular airﬂow rates, 0.51 and 1.25 m3/min, respectively. Primary
and secondary fuel ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. Air-jet ﬂow rate, 15 L/min. (Top) Pressure and CH values synchronized on the pressure
maximum without (left) and with (right) air-jet supply. (a)–(e) Instantaneous CH images indicated on top graphs. Exposure time,
0.1 ms. (f) and (g) Time-averaged CH images synchronized on the 50 points of top graphs. Exposure time, 4 ms.
cient momentum through the control nozzle to change
the reactant mixing process in the regions of positive
Rayleigh Index, so that the turbulent ﬂame structure
and heat release dynamics are completely changed.
With time-delay feedback control, the instability was
essentially completely suppressed with pressure rms
levels in the range of 0.1 kPa (Fig. 21a). This is nearly
a 90% reduction (eightfold) in the instability ampli-
tude as opposed to less than a 10% reduction with the
traditional fuel-modulation control. Figs. 21b and 21c
show the pressure and CH spectra and the signiﬁcant
reduction in the amplitude of the dominant instabil-
ity. The CH spectrum with air-jet modulation shows
several peaks in the range from 200 to 350 Hz and is
a reﬂection of the changes in the heat release dynam-
ics introduced by the air-jet. However, no signiﬁcant
peak is observed at the dominant instability mode of
230 Hz, which explains the signiﬁcant reduction in
the acoustic instability amplitudes.
4. Concluding remarks
The characteristics of large-amplitude combustion
oscillations in a swirl-stabilized spray combustor are
investigated through measurements of wall pressure,
CH chemiluminescence, and CH imaging. The com-
bustion oscillations are dominated by an acoustic


--- Page 19 ---

124
J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 21. Phase-delay control by air-jet modulation. Inner
and annular airﬂow rates, 0.51 and 1.25 m3/min, respec-
tively. Primary and secondary fuel ﬂow rate, 3.4 g/s. Air-
jet ﬂow rate, 15 L/min. Overall equivalence ratio, 0.879.
(a) Phase-delay control. (b) Pressure spectra with and with-
out control. (c) CH light spectra with and without control.
three-quarter-wave mode in the range of 225–235 Hz
depending on ﬂow conditions that occurred in the en-
tire system including the combustor and the air de-
livery chamber. A low-frequency bulk mode (13 Hz)
associated with the upstream air delivery chamber is
also established. The low-frequency oscillations are
likely to be associated with periodic ﬂame movement.
This low-frequency mode leads to a cycle-to-cycle
variation or phase jitter in the time period of the dom-
inant instability mode, which makes feedback control
of the instability more difﬁcult.
The inner airﬂow rate is shown to control the heat
release dynamics, and when the inner airﬂow rate is
increased beyond 0.49 m3/min, the heat release dy-
namics become sufﬁciently strong to make control au-
thority with fuel modulation ineffective. Under these
conditions, no signiﬁcant reduction in the pressure
oscillations can be achieved with either liquid fuel
or gaseous fuel modulation. Mie-scattering images of
the fuel droplets show that, at the higher values of the
inner airﬂow rate, the control fuel dispersion is lim-
ited and does not penetrate to the regions where the
heat release dynamics are strong. This is believed to
be a reason for poor control authority.
An improved strategy of using a high-momentum
control air-jet is shown to be effective in reducing
both the bulk mode and the longitudinal mode pres-
sure oscillations. The control air-jet is injected cen-
trally, and suitable selection of the jet diameter and
momentum are shown to be important for effective
control. Only a small amount of control air-jet (with a
corresponding change in equivalence ratio of 0.007)
is needed for effective control. The control air-jet
is shown to interfere with the droplet and the heat
release distributions to beneﬁcially impact the com-
bustion dynamics. Even with steady air-jet blowing,
reductions in the pressure oscillations are observed,
particularly in the magnitude of the bulk mode com-
ponent. Air-jet injection is also shown to reduce both
the phase jitter in the dominant instability and the
phase lag between the pressure signals in the com-
bustor and the air delivery chamber. With a modulated
control air-jet, nearly an eightfold (or 90%) reduction
in the peak pressure oscillation amplitude is achieved.
This is in contrast to a maximum reduction by 10% of
the pressure oscillations with fuel modulation control.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Propulsion pro-
gram of the Ofﬁce of Naval Research under Con-
tract N00014-97-1-0957. Support was also received
through the Clean Power and Energy Research Con-
sortium funded by the Louisiana Board of Regents.
Their support is gratefully acknowledged. Help from
Mr. Y.S. Goh and Dr. Diarong Gao is also acknowl-
edged.
References
[1] J.A. Austin, J.R. Tilson, I.R.I. McKenzie, in: Proc. RTO
AVT Symposium on Active Control Technology for
Enhanced Performance Operation Capabilities of Mil-
itary Aircraft, Land Vehicles and Sea Vehicles, Braun-
schweig, 2000.
[2] G.A. Richards, M.C. Janus, ASME J. Eng. Gas Tur-
bines Power 120 (1998) 294–302.


--- Page 20 ---

J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya / Combustion and Flame 139 (2004) 106–125
125
[3] J.O. Keller, L. Vaneveld, D. Korschelt, G.L. Hubbard,
A.F. Ghoniem, J.W. Daily, A.K. Oppenheim, AIAA
J. 20 (1981) 254–262.
[4] J.M. Cohen, N.M. Rey, Jacobson, C.A. Anderson, T.J.
Rosfjord, in: Proc. RTO AVT Symposium on Gas Tur-
bine Engine Combustion, Emissions and Alternative
Fuels, Lisbon, 1998, Paper No. 38.
[5] T. Poinsot, D. Veynante, F. Bourienne, S. Candel, E. Es-
posito, J. Surget, Proc. Combust. Inst. 22 (1988) 1363–
1370.
[6] G. Isella, C. Seywert, F.E.C. Culick, E.E. Zukoski,
Combust. Sci. Technol. 126 (1997) 381–388.
[7] P.J. Langhorne, J. Fluid Mech. 193 (1988) 417–443.
[8] S.R.N. De Zilwa, S. Sivasegaram, J.H. Whitelaw, Flow
Turbulence Combust. 63 (1999) 395–414.
[9] D. Bradley, P.H. Gaskell, X.J. Gu, M. Lawes, M.J.
Scott, Combust. Flame 115 (1998) 515–538.
[10] E. Gutmark, T.P. Parr, D.M. Hanson-Parr, K.C.
Schadow, AIAA J. 29 (12) (1991) 2155–2162.
[11] S.R.N. De Zilwa, J.H. Uhm, J.H. Whitelaw, Combust.
Sci. Technol. 160 (2000) 231–258.
[12] S.R.N. De Zilwa, I. Emiris, J.H. Uhm, J.H. Whitelaw,
Proc. R. Soc. London A 457 (2001) 1915–1949.
[13] J.H. Uhm, Nature and Control of Combustion Oscilla-
tions in Sudden-Expansion Flows, Ph.D. thesis, Imper-
ial College London, 2001.
[14] F.E.C. Culick, in: AGARD Conference on Combus-
tion Instabilities in Liquid-Fuelled Propulsion System,
Neuilly Sur Seine, 1988, Proc. No. 450 (1).
[15] K.C. Schadow, E. Gutmark, Prog. Energy Combust.
Sci. 18 (1992) 117–132.
[16] S.M. Candel, Proc. Combust. Inst. 24 (1992) 1277–
1296.
[17] K.R. McManus, T. Poinsot, S.M. Candel, Prog. Energy
Combust. Sci. 19 (1993) 1–29.
[18] W. Lang, T. Poinsot, S. Candel, Combust. Flame 70
(1987) 281–289.
[19] S. Hoffmann, G. Weber, H. Judith, J. Hermann, A. Or-
thmann, in: Proc. RTO AVT Symposium on Gas Tur-
bine Engine Combustion, Emissions and Alternative
Fuels, 1998, Paper No. 40.
[20] D.U. Dampos-Delgado, K. Zhou, D. Allgood, S.
Acharya, Combust. Sci. Technol. 175 (1) (2003) 1–27.
[21] J.H. Uhm, S. Acharya, AIAA-2003-0339, Reno, NV,
USA, Jan. 6–9, 2003.
[22] S. Sivasegaram, J.H. Whitelaw, ASME Active Control
Noise Vibrat. DSC-38 (1992) 69–74.
[23] S. Sivasegaram, R.-F. Tsai, J.H. Whitelaw, Combust.
Sci. Technol. 105 (1995) 67–83.
[24] K.H. Yu, in: Proc. RTO AVT Course on Active Control
of Engine Dynamics, Brussels, Belgium, May, 2001.
[25] M. Fleiﬁl, A.M. Annaswamy, J.P. Hathout, A.F.
Ghoniem, Combust. Sci. Technol. 133 (1998) 227–260.
[26] K.J. Wilson, E. Gutmark, K.C. Schadow, AIAA Paper
91-0368, Reno, NV, Jan. 7–10, 1991.
[27] R. Bhidayasiri, S. Sivasegaram, J.H. Whitelaw, Ther-
moﬂuids Section Report TF/98/08, Imperial College of
Science Technology and Medicine, London, 1998.
