
--- Page 1 ---



Citation: Faqih, M.; Omar, M.B.;
Rosdiazli, I.; Omar, B.A.A. Dry-Low
Emission Gas Turbine Technology:
Recent Trends and Challenges. Appl.
Sci. 2022, 12, 10922. https://doi.org/
10.3390/app122110922
Academic Editor: Satoru Okamoto
Received: 20 September 2022
Accepted: 15 October 2022
Published: 27 October 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences
Article
Dry-Low Emission Gas Turbine Technology: Recent Trends
and Challenges
Mochammad Faqih 1,*
, Madiah Binti Omar 1
, Rosdiazli Ibrahim 2
and Bahaswan A. A. Omar 2
1
Department of Chemical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS, Seri Iskandar 32610, Malaysia
2
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS,
Seri Iskandar 32610, Malaysia
*
Correspondence: mochammad_22000035@utp.edu.my
Abstract: Dry-low emission (DLE) is one of the cleanest combustion types used in a gas turbine. DLE
gas turbines have become popular due to their ability to reduce emissions by operating in lean-burn
operation. However, this technology leads to challenges that sometimes interrupt regular operations.
Therefore, this paper extensively reviews the development of the DLE gas turbine and its challenges.
Numerous online publications from various databases, including IEEE Xplore, Scopus, and Web of
Science, are compiled to describe the evolution of gas turbine technology based on emissions, fuel
ﬂexibility, and drawbacks. Various gas turbine models, including physical and black box models, are
further discussed in detail. Working principles, fuel staging mechanisms, and advantages of DLE gas
turbines followed by common faults that lead to gas turbine tripping are speciﬁcally discussed. A
detailed evaluation of lean blow-out (LBO) as the major fault is subsequently highlighted, followed
by the current methods in LBO prediction. The literature conﬁrms that the DLE gas turbine has
the most proﬁtable features against other clean combustion methods. Simulation using Rowen’s
model signiﬁcantly imitates the actual behavior of the DLE gas turbine that can be used to develop
a control strategy to maintain combustion stability. Lastly, the data-driven LBO prediction method
helps minimize the ﬂame’s probability of a blow-out.
Keywords: DLE gas turbine; modern gas turbine models; lean blow-out; prediction technique
1. Introduction
A gas turbine is commonly used as a prime-mover in energy production, utilizing
natural gas as primary energy for greener combustion and emission. There are six primary
energies used worldwide, reported by British Petroleum in “BP Statistical Review of World
Energy 2020”, as depicted in Figure 1. According to the report, oil and coal are the most
consumed energies. The percentages, among others, are 31% and 27%, respectively. How-
ever, oil and coal are not suitable for long-term use due to the metal, sulfur, nitrogen oxide,
and airborne particle emissions that pollute the environment and threaten human health.
Researchers are therefore investing in renewable energies for a greener future, but the
resources are unstable and isolated, which increases the transmission and distribution cost
in power generation. Hence, this study focuses on natural gas and gas turbines as the
prime-mover in energy production.
In power generation, 80% of the energy production is produced by the combustion
process, which releases emissions due to an incomplete reaction [1]. Hence, many countries
are promoting the clean energy goal as a priority in nations’ development [2]. For this
reason, natural gas is selected as a potential solution to meet energy needs and environ-
mental health. According to [3], natural gas consumption is projected to increase almost
everywhere and reach 203 cubic feet in 2040. In Europe, natural gas consumption has
rapidly grown in the last decades. As reported by International Energy Agency in 2021,
the European Union imported 155 billion m3 from the Russian Federation, indicating this
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922. https://doi.org/10.3390/app122110922
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci


--- Page 2 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
2 of 30
country as the largest gas producer and exporter [4]. Similarly, the growth of natural gas
consumption in Asia-Paciﬁc countries has inﬂated since 1990 and is thrice higher than the
global gas consumption [5]. For example, China has the highest gas consumption among
all Asia-Paciﬁc countries with a rapid growth rate of 6–7% from 2016–2020, as documented
in [6]. Therefore, the opportunity to diversify natural gas is enormous and sustainable,
especially for industrial and power generation. Further, natural gas consumption increases
as more systems are integrated with gas turbines in various applications. The technology
is widely applied as the third-largest energy contribution with various advantages. Some
advantages include high accessibility, high reliability and the ability to produce fewer
emissions in dry-low emission (DLE) mode [7].
 Coal 
27%
 Nuclear 
4%
 Hydroelectricity 
7%
 Natural Gas 
25%
 Oil 
31%
Renewable Energy
6%
Figure 1. Global primary energy consumption in 2020.
The gas turbine is frequently used as the leading equipment in power plants, aero-
engines, marine propulsion, and mechanical drive systems [8]. The gas turbine is intensively
worn in power generation due to its high overall efﬁciencies of approximately 58% in com-
bined cycle arrangement [9]. For the time being, improving gas turbines becomes necessary
to achieve better performance and environmental impacts. Therefore, various studies in
the gas turbine area have been conducted. In this comprehensive review, a bibliometric
analysis is performed to gather publications related to the gas turbine area from 2011 to
2021. The documents contain journals, conferences, and book chapters gathered from
several reputable databases such as Scopus, Web of Science (WOS), and IEEE Xplore [10].
The documents were collected using “gas turbine” as the keyword to harvest publications
in a broad range. Based on the gathered data, the total published work has increased con-
sistently, showing that the study of a gas turbine is relevant to the current research trend,
as illustrated in Figure 2. The studies were primarily conducted to improve a gas turbine’s
efﬁciency, operation, and low-emission combustion. Various attempts were proposed to en-
hance the performance of gas turbines through modeling and prediction techniques. Thus,
the search domain is subsequently narrowed down to retrieve publications containing
the phrases “gas turbine” or “combustion”; “Fault Detection, Identiﬁcation, and Isolation
(FDII) and prediction”; “dynamic model”; and “condition monitoring” in the title.
Figure 3 shows the total number of studies in percentages for each area of interest.
The combustion area dominates the studies, covering almost half of the graph for all
databases. Based on the retrieved documents, the discussion mainly lies in developing
the technique to reduce the emissions, particularly NOx and CO, which are considered
the most dangerous pollutants emitted from the gas turbine combustion process [11].
As the emissions issue from gas turbine combustion is concerned, various combustor
technologies have been developed to perform cleaner combustion. DLE is one of the


--- Page 3 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
3 of 30
most used combustors due to its high emission reduction ability and stability. However,
since the DLE combustor reduces emissions by lowering the operating temperature, some
challenges and problems are faced. The major problem found in DLE gas turbines is the
lean blow-out (LBO). LBO is a phenomenon of ﬂame-out in a gas turbine that leads to a
tripping problem. Accordingly, the preceding studies investigated the LBO phenomenon
to observe the proper preventive actions to solve LBO in DLE gas turbines. Hence, FDII
and prediction techniques are extensively developed to minimize the probability of a LBO
error. Furthermore, the dynamic models, including physical-based and data-driven, are
established to learn and characterize the LBO phenomenon in the gas turbine.
Figure 2. Research produced in gas turbine area from IEEE, Scopus, and WOS Database.
IEEE
Scopus
WOS
60 
40 
20 
0 
%number of work
Combustion
FDII & 
Prediction
Dynamic
Model
Condition
Monitoring
Figure 3. Various ﬁelds of work published in Scopus, WOS, and IEEE Database.
This paper aims to provide an overview of the DLE gas turbine as one of the top
clean gas turbine technology. The ﬂow of paper organization is represented by Figure 4.


--- Page 4 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
4 of 30
Firstly, the progress of modern gas turbines is described, beginning with single ﬂame
combustion as the conventional burner until the latest low NOx burners, which are DLE
and NanoSTAR. The gas turbine models, including the physical and black box models, are
discussed in detail. The working principle of the DLE burner according to the combustion
range and fuel staging followed by common faults are subsequently discussed. The LBO
phenomenon is further addressed by evaluating its causes, effects, and behavior. Lastly,
various prediction techniques are identiﬁed, covering the semi-empirical, numerical, hybrid
model, and data-driven methods to predict LBO. This review is expected to be helpful for
the gas turbine industry or community and the engineers currently dealing with DLE gas
turbine challenges. Furthermore, it can be applied by theorists interested in the gas turbine
model and lean-burn combustion. Additionally, some contributions to the gas turbine
ﬁelds that can be found in this paper are listed as follows:
1.
Advantages and drawbacks of various combustors based on the emissions, combus-
tion method, efﬁciency, fuel, and stability.
2.
Comparison of numerous models that can be used to study the dynamics of a gas
turbine based on the equation, parameter assumption, and their application.
3.
DLE gas turbine working principle covering the allowable operating range and the
difference of fuel system conﬁguration with the conventional one.
4.
Various combustion challenges in DLE and conventional gas turbine including the
causes and the prevention actions.
5.
Characteristics of LBO according to emission and ﬁring temperature, and some pre-
cursor events.
6.
Possible techniques to predict LBO, which can be used to avoid the event and its
future implementation.
Paper Outline
1. Introduction
2. Gas Turbine
3. DLE Gas Turbine
4. Lean Blow-out
5. Conclusion
Global Energy
Consumption
Key Terms for Gas
Turbine Survey
Objectives and
Contributions of
Paper
Combustion
Technology
Gas Turbine 
       Models for 
       stability study
DLE Combustor
and Its Technical
Aspects
DLE Challenges 
Case Study
       and Preventive    
      Actions
Causes and Effects
of LBO
Prediction
Techniques
Precursor Events
       of LBO 
Conclusion
Future Trends
Figure 4. Outline of article.
The paper’s remaining sections are organized as follows: the evolution of burner
technology and various models to study the dynamics of the gas turbine are described
in Section 2. Section 3 delivers the working principle and potential faults in the DLE gas
turbine. Subsequently, the discussion of the LBO phenomenon and various LBO prediction
techniques are presented in Section 4. Finally, a summary of the discussion is given in
Section 5.
2. Gas Turbine
A brief introduction of various combustion technologies used in a gas turbine is con-
tained in this section. The characteristics of each combustor, starting from the conventional


--- Page 5 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
5 of 30
to the latest clean combustor, are extensively explained. Furthermore, numerous models of
gas turbine dynamics will be discussed.
2.1. Evolution of Combustion Technology in Modern Gas Turbine
The evolution of the combustion technology in a modern gas turbine is illustrated in
Figure 5.
SINGLE FLAME COMBUSTION
TRAPPED VORTEX
COMBUSTION (TVC)
MILD COMBUSTION
(MILD)
RICH-QUENCH-LEAN
COMBUSTION (RQL)
CONTINUOUS STAGED 
AIR (COSTAIR)
DRY-LOW EMISSION 
(DLE)
NanoSTAR
CONVENTIONAL
LOW NOx BURNER
First Generation
Second Generation
Third Generation
Fourth Generation
Figure 5. Evolution of gas turbine combustion technology.


--- Page 6 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
6 of 30
2.1.1. Single Flame Combustion
In the ﬁrst generation, a single ﬂame combustor is utilized for the air and fuel diffusion
in the chamber. This diffusional type of combustion is very stable and ﬂexible to any kind of
fuel for energy production. However, the high temperature in the primary zone produces a
high emission, which is more signiﬁcant than 70 ppm and becomes a major drawback of
the operation. Hence, the trade-off between NOx - CO production and power efﬁciency
has become challenging. Thus, low NOx burner technology to overcome the trade-off limit
with an absolute goal to reduce emissions without compromising the power efﬁciency of
the turbine is introduced.
2.1.2. Trapped Vortex and Mild Combustion
The ﬁrst strategy to overcome the trade-off is optimizing the fuel turbulence to pro-
duce stable combustion in the second generation. The system includes trapped vortex
combustion (TVC) and mild combustion (MILD) or ﬂameless combustion. TVC’s working
principle is based on cavity stabilization. The cavity inside the TVC combustor provides a
recirculation zone to trap the vortex pilot ﬂame and produces a constant source of ignition
at a high rate [12,13]. The continuous ignition or pilot ﬂame offers better mixing inside the
cavity that helps to increase the efﬁciency of the combustion process and reduce greenhouse
gas emissions [14]. As reported by Mishra in [15], the technology can achieve from 10 to
40% of NOx emission reduction due to the high inlet velocity for the vortex, which reduces
the combustion temperature and improves ﬂame stabilization [16]. The trapped turbulent
vortex also provides some signiﬁcant pressure drop reduction, as reported by Zhang in [17].
The TVC combustor with the most ﬂexibility in fuel operation and application using biofuel
is investigated in [18]. Despite the promising performances, the major drawback of the
technology is the dependency on the geometric design, especially the cavity area, to attain
efﬁciency. Only proper design and adjustment produce a stable vortex and combustion.
Moreover, the continuous ﬁring in the area leads to severe cavitation, further complicating
the material selection process [19].
Therefore, the cavitation problem is addressed in the MILD burner. The cavitation
area is converted into a constant hot stream of gas to preheat the air before entering the
combustor. Then, the hot product gases and the oxygen-rich mixture are formed from
the process [20,21]. Therefore, the controlled oxygen-rich mixture oxidizes the fuel in the
combustor, producing ﬂameless uniform burning. The biggest advantages of this system are
the high combustion ﬂame stability [22,23] and about 90% of NOx emission reduction [24].
Additionally, the system offers high fuel ﬂexibility and low acoustic oscillation for better
operation [25]. This technology, however, portrays challenges such as high-pressure loss
from the injection nozzle [26], the economic disadvantage of preheating and a relatively
high concentration of COx gas from the mild combustion ﬂame. Then, the combustion
technology is progressed into the third generation to address previous constraints.
2.1.3. Rich-burn, Quench-Mix, Lean-burn and Continuous Staged Air
The continuous gas stream is upgraded with a quick mix air in rich-burn, quench-mix,
lean-burn (RQL), and continuous staged air in COntinuous STaged Air (COSTAIR) in
the third generation. In RQL, the higher energetic hydrogen concentration minimizes the
production of nitrogen oxides to 72% due to low temperature and low oxygen concentration
as reported in [27]. The mixture then travelled to the quick-quench stage to rapidly
complete the transition from rich-burn to lean-burn, introducing a large amount of air.
The secondary zone, as in the diagram, prevents the NOx production from going through
the high route near the stoichiometric ratio. Meanwhile, the mixture is operated according
to the equivalence ratio for temperature rise, and all parameters are selected to control
other emission gases, such as COx in the lean zone. The excellent advantage of the RQL
combustor lies in the fuel ﬂexibility [28], and other criteria for pressure drop and ﬂame
stability are still average compared to other technologies [29]. Apart from the noticeably
considerable reduction in NOx emission, the RQL system faces hardware complexity due


--- Page 7 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
7 of 30
to the various control strategies to maintain the three zones, especially quick-quench [30].
Without the proper arrangement, the emission of COx may be higher than the conventional
gas turbine due to the unburned products from the primary zone.
Therefore, the COSTAIR combustion type is introduced later to overcome the chal-
lenges. The combustion chamber consists of a staged air distributor, which ﬂows through
the air inlet through numerous openings at three and is continually distributed throughout
the chamber in a staged manner. The uniform heat release across the chamber provides cav-
itation stabilization without the design. Thus, the NOx and COx emission can be achieved
up to 2–4 ppm compared to the conventional combustor, which is 70 ppm. Moreover,
the combustor’s pressure drop is relatively lower than RQL due to the uniform mixing.
However, the challenge of maintaining a uniform temperature from the mixing creates
ﬂame instability and leads to lean blow-out [31].
2.1.4. Dry-Low Emission and NanoSTAR
In the fourth generation, the DLE gas turbine and NanoSTAR are introduced. The
DLE gas turbine combines all the good aspects in the previous combustion system to
reduce NOx without increasing the bottleneck COx and unburned hydrocarbon. A DLE gas
turbine combustion technology operates a clean operation based on lean pre-mixed (LPM),
which adapts the RQL “rich-burn” method and MILD to reduce NOx [32]. As reported
in [33], the emission can be reduced up to 97% using this technique. The pilot fuel valve
introduction is based on the TVC system as a cavity stabilizer for the ﬂame. The DLE
turbine temperature lies in the desired range that is not too low, as this will increase the
COx formation, and not too high, as this will increase NOx production [34,35]. The turbine
is also ﬂexible in fuel selection, either gas or liquid. The last advanced technology is
NanoSTAR. Since all reviewed combustion technologies are based on turbulent ﬂow and
non-premixed/premixed, combustion instabilities are inevitable. Thus, the technology
utilized the high thermal intensity laminar surface stabilizer from a porous-metal ﬁber
for the injection. The full-scale test of NanoSTAR exhibited high emission reduction,
robust ignition and signiﬁcantly less pressure drop (2–4%) from the system pressure.
However, the system is still in the proof-of-concept stage, which is limited to the natural
gas application and holds complexity in manufacturing.
The comparison between features of the combustion systems is summarized in Table 1.
The factors considered here are the performance of these technologies for emission re-
duction and power efﬁciency. The table shows that the three combustion technologies,
COSTAIR, NanoSTAR and DLE, share an essential feature of very low COx and NOx
emission. However, only NanoSTAR and DLE gas turbines exhibit high power efﬁciency
(signiﬁcantly less pressure drop), but NanoSTAR is still in the proof-of-concept stages.
Thus, the DLE combustion technology selection for this study is justiﬁed after considering
all the turbine features.
Even though the DLE gas turbine meets emission and pressure drop requirements, it is
still susceptible to frequent trips, especially LBO faults, during disturbances. The plant trips
release unplanned exhaust gas during faults and further increase the pollutants emission.
Table 1. Summary of combustor technologies in modern gas turbines.
TVC
RQL
COSTAIR
MILD/Flameless
NanoSTAR
DLE
NOx Emission
Medium (60%
reduction)
Low (72%
reduction)
Very Low
Low (90%
reduction)
Very Low
Very Low (97%
reduction)
CO Emission
Medium [15]
Medium [27]
Very Low [31]
Medium [24]
Very Low [33]
Very Low [36]


--- Page 8 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
8 of 30
Table 1. Cont.
TVC
RQL
COSTAIR
MILD/Flameless
NanoSTAR
DLE
Technology
Recirculation
zone
introduction to
trap turbulence
Three section of
front rich
burnmiddle
quick
quenchlast lean
burn
Continuously
staged air
Oxygen
dilution at very
high
temperature
Introduction of
porous
metal-ﬁber mat
to stabilize
thermal
intensity
Introduction of
pilot valve and
LPM area for
rich-burn
Pressure Drop
Low [17]
Moderate [29]
Low
Medium
Very Low (2 4%
reduction)
Very Low
Fuel
Liquid/Gas [18]
Liquid/Gas [28]
Liquid/Gas
Liquid/Gas [25]
Natural Gas
Liquid/Gas
Stability
High [16]
Moderate
Low [31]
High [22,23]
Very High
High
Drawbacks
Too dependant
on geometric
design [19]
Increase
hardware and
complexity [30]
Flame
instability to
maintain
uniform
temperature
Economic dis-
advantage [26]
Design
manufacturing
and economic
value [32]
Prone to distur-
bances [20,37]
2.2. Gas Turbine Model
Numerous works have highlighted and overcome those challenges in DLE gas turbines
over the past years. Various studies focus on ﬂame static stability as in [32,38], combustion
performance [39,40], fuel injection ﬂexibility [41,42], turbine burner [43], fuel ﬂow aerody-
namic [44], fuel combustion [45] and fuel mixing [46]. Upon analysis, most of the works are
focused on either combustor design, combustion fuels or the combustion process. Limited
studies combine the system as a whole, including the control strategy. Furthermore, most
of the works are performed on a laboratory scale only. Therefore, a model that reﬂects
the actual behavior of the DLE gas turbine is needed to represent the dynamic stability of
the system.
Thus, this section reviews the existing gas turbine models in power generation for the
stability study . This section is divided into two subsections. The ﬁrst subsection presents
the physical model covering gas turbine component design and mathematical model. Then,
the review of the black-box model is presented.
2.2.1. Physical Model
The physical model has been applied for the speciﬁc mechanical study in gas turbine
components (compressor [47], turbines [48], combustors [49]) and thermodynamic behavior
as in [50,51]. It implies the application of Brayton cycle thermodynamic laws as in Figure 6.
Entropy in the ﬁgure is the unavailability of a system’s thermal energy for mechanical
work conversion. In an irreversible cycle, the air is drawn at point 1 and compressed by
the compressor to point 2 at constant entropy (isentropic). Then, the combustor raises
the air temperature to point 3 and the heat of combustion, Qin, from the burned fuel is
obtained. The compressed air and combustor fuel mixture are expanded to point 4 in
the isentropic process. Lastly, the released heat, Qout, from 4 to 1 is utilized to generate
power. The process at 2-3 and 4-1 is assumed as isobaric or equal in barometric pressure.
These optimal conditions are implemented into differential equations of total mass balance
conservation in Equation (1) and conservation energy in Equation (2).
dm
dt = ˙min −˙mout
(1)
dE
dt = ˙mini∗
in −˙mouti∗
out + Q + W
(2)
where ˙m refers to the mass ﬂow and E represents the total energy, i represents the speciﬁc
enthalpy, Q refers to the heat input into the system, and W is the work produced. The phys-


--- Page 9 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
9 of 30
ical model uses thermodynamic equations, which calculate any process inputs into an
output. This method aims for the model to be robust to different sets of data without any
modiﬁcations. The problem with this method is that the derivation is very extensive and
challenging, especially for a larger system. Moreover, mechanical engineering backgrounds
are needed in deriving the parameter [52,53]. Thus, the physical model is not heuristic
enough to aid the personnel in the decision-making process for the gas turbine operation.
Figure 6. Brayton cycle temperature-entropy diagram.
Rowen’s model is the ﬁrst developed physical model for gas turbine dynamics, as il-
lustrated in Figure 7. The model established by Rowen in [54] is based on the simpliﬁed
mathematical model to overcome the physical model complexity. A few assumptions were
made for the model, which are; (i) the model is for simple cycle, single-shaft, and generator
drive only, (ii) the speed of the turbine must be constant and maintained at 97–100%,
(iii) the ambient temperature and pressure are at 15 ◦C and 1 atm, respectively, and (iv)
no heat recovery is considered in the model. The input and output signals are generated
per unit (p.u), where the operation signal is divided by the rotor speed nominal signal, N,
for standardization. However, the temperature signal unit remains.
The model consists of three main control components. The ﬁrst component is the
speed governor. It governs the speed of a system and maneuvers the frequency, exhaust
temperature and compressor output as necessary as demanded from the load. The second
component is fuel temperature control. It regulates the output temperature, TM, to be lower
than the constant maximum or increased for more energy when the demand increases.
The third component is the Inlet Guide Vane (IGV) temperature control, which plays a
major role in balancing the temperature by opening or closing the air intake. These three
control functions are the inputs for the low-value selection, determining the least fuel
control actions for the gas turbine operation. The inputs of the model are the load change
and ambient temperature. The outputs are represented by the three function blocks, f1, f2
and f3.
Function block f1 as in Equation (3) represents the exhaust temperature of the turbine
by incorporating the fuel ﬂow, Wf , rated exhaust temperature, TR, IGV and rotor speed,
N. The parameter D and E in the equation is the unknown values, which can be obtained
from the operating curves.
f1 = TR + DWf + E(1 −N) + 3.5(MaxIGV −IGV)
(3)


--- Page 10 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
10 of 30
The turbine torque output of the gas turbine with the signals from the fuel ﬂow and
the rotor speed is obtained from f2 as in Equation (4).
f2 =
1.15(Wf −0.133)
N
(4)
The additional block of f3 as expressed in Equation (5) represents the exhaust gas ﬂow,
which is commonly necessary for the heat recovery stages in the combined cycle.
f3 = N × Ligv
0.257h
288
Ta + 273
i
(5)
where Ta refers to the ambient temperature, Ligv represents the IGV output and N is the
rotor speed signal in the model.
Figure 7. Rowen’s gas turbine dynamic model.
The Rowen’s model application is further modiﬁed by the IEEE task force by splitting
the model into the controls of the gas turbine (the airﬂow control loop, the temperature
control loop and the fuel ﬂow control loop) and the thermodynamics equation properties.
The main comparison of IEEE to Rowen’s model is the torque and speed calculation as
in Figure 8 and the control scheme remained the same. A ﬁxed compression ratio in gas
turbine operation is assumed in the derivation.
In the structure, A control block is added as a nonlinear function of the thermodynamic
properties, which schedules the airﬂow. The main equation for the model as depicted in
the diagrams is expressed in Equation (6). The parameter needs to be solved by the
Newton–Raphson method due to the non-linear nature of Equations (7) and (8).
TR = Tf
h
1 −

1 −1
x

ηT
i
(6)
where TR is the reference exhaust temperature, x is the cycle pressure ratio and ηT represents
the turbine’s efﬁciency.
x = [PR0W]
γ−1
γ
(7)
where PR0 refers to the design cycle pressure ratio, γ is the ratio of speciﬁc heat capacities,
w represents the air ﬂow and ηC is the compressor’s efﬁciency.
W =
PGK0
Tf (1 −1
x)ηT −Ti
(x−1)
ηC
(8)


--- Page 11 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
11 of 30
PG refers to the rated power output, Ti is the inlet temperature of the compressor,
and K0 is the ratio of net power output and inlet heat capacity. The parameter of Tf equals
the ﬁring temperature and is expressed in Equation (9).
Tf = TD +
Wf
W K2 = Ta

1 + x −1
ηc

+
Wf
W K2
(9)
where TD is for compressor discharge temperature, K2 is the design combustor temperature
rise, and Wf is the fuel ﬂow.
Figure 8. IEEE Gas turbine model for stability studies [55].
The equations and connection of the diagram are based on the isentropic efﬁciency
equations together with the power balance in the physical model [56]. This model is
applied to represent both the dynamic and physical models as in [37] for the overall
airﬂow study to cool down the turbine blades. The IEEE model and Rowen’s model are
commonly compared in power system stability since both models are derived from the
nominal conditions provided by the manufacturers. However, the IEEE model equations are
relatively complicated and require high computational time, especially for a large system.
A later extension of Rowen’s model, aero-derivative, is introduced for the smaller
machine ratings in the network connection. The model is derived from the jet engines for
two-shaft gas turbines and utilized for better efﬁciency in part-load operation. As shown in
Figure 9, the format of the block diagram is similar to Rowen’s model. However, the model
is split into two sections; control functions and turbine dynamics. Apart from that, one
additional speed signal is introduced, making it two signals instead of one signaling into the
low-value selector. First is the speed of the engine (High Power Turbine), which determines
the speed of the compressor, and the second signal is the speed of the low power turbine of
the generator. From the ﬁgure, the turbine characteristics f1 −f4 follow Rowen’s model
equation, which is also easily extracted from the operating curves. The extracted parameters
include exhaust temperature versus fuel ﬂow, the electrical power versus fuel ﬂow and
various other parameters. However, the ultimate model parameters are still obtained
through a trial and error approach until the simulated responses are perfectly matched to
the actual gas turbine responses.


--- Page 12 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
12 of 30
Figure 9. Aero-derivative model [57].
As the utilization of the gas turbine is increased, and higher efﬁciency in the operation
is desirable, the combined cycle power plant is introduced in later studies. However,
numerous trips from the combined-cycle generating plants are observed by CIGRE Task-
force, which leads to further investigation into the error. From the analysis, the improper
modeling of governor response and exclusion of thermal unit inﬂuence in the network are
the principal reasons for the trips. Thus, the CIGRE model is introduced as illustrated in
Figure 10 for gas and steam turbines in combined-cycle power plants [58]. As with the pro-
posed Rowen’s model, three control loops are fed into the low-value selector: speed/load
governor, temperature, and acceleration control loop. However, the main differences are
the governor transfer function substitution to the additional control loop for MW and
the torque calculation represented by the second-order transfer function. The exhaust
temperature is not explicitly calculated, but provided via the F(x) function, as shown in
the ﬁgure. Thus, no derivations are involved in this model. However, the operating curves
must determine the constant parameters, and the trial and error approach is still employed.
Hence, the model is still prone to error and is time-consuming.
Most of the mentioned models in the previous section are insufﬁcient for evaluating the
gas turbine’s frequency dependency. Hence, a frequency-dependent model is introduced to
clarify the effects of shaft speed and ambient temperature on the power output. Changes in
frequency are equivalent to the change in shaft speed, and the airﬂow ﬂuctuation directly
affects the maximum power output. Thus, the phenomenon is studied from the model
as shown in Figure 11 for the overall block diagram. The control scheme for the model
follows Rowen’s model with additional thermodynamic equations to represent the dynamic
behavior of the gas turbine. Unlike Rowen’s model, where the main calculations are the
output power and exhaust temperature, this model includes the compressor pressure
ratio in addition to the available outputs. The frequency-dependent model is based on
similar equations in the IEEE models. However, as in the IEEE model, the frequency-
dependent model assumed a generic form of the pressure ratio dependence on frequency


--- Page 13 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
13 of 30
deviations instead of a ﬁxed compressor ratio with small deviation assumptions. There are
nine equations for the models with more than 10 unknowns that need to be extracted from
the actual data.
Figure 10. CIGRE model for combine-cycle gas turbine operation [58].
Figure 11. Frequency-dependent model for gas turbine operation [59].
2.2.2. Black-Box Model
Few works are reported utilizing the black-box model in gas turbine modeling. Nev-
ertheless, two studies are reported by Asgari in [60] using Artiﬁcial Neural Network and


--- Page 14 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
14 of 30
Non-linear Autoregressive Exogenous (NARX). The NARX structure, as in Figure 12, is
applied to model the gas turbine operation. The output signals are compared with the
mathematical signals, and the black box and the mathematical model performance are
almost identical. However, this area is not favorable since the gas turbine is a complex
system, and the black-box method cannot represent the operational dynamics.
Figure 12. A schematic of NARX structure for gas turbine model [60].
Rowen’s model is widely adopted due to the capability to imitate an actual gas turbine
operation from the functional derivation of the operating curves [55,61]. It has various
applications in the dynamic study and is extensively used in present works. It offers a stable
model for gas turbine modiﬁcation in temperature control and stability, load frequency
control [59,62] and PID control [57]. In [63], an integration of Bayesian and Dempster–
Shafer theory into Rowen’s model serves as a performance monitoring tool for gas turbines.
The well-known model also extended into a fault characterization study during frequency
excursion. Thus, Rowen’s model is widely applied in dynamic studies. Hence, Rowen’s
model is suitable to be used to represent DLE gas turbine operation. Moreover, Rowen’s
model only consists of two unknown parameters, which are easily derived compared to
other methods as summarized in Table 2. Furthermore, the detail of dynamic models for
gas turbine stability study is depicted in Figure 13.
Air Blades
Compressor
Combustor
Rowen
AeroD
Frequency
Gas Turbine Dynamic Models for System Stability
Physical
Black Box
Gas Turbine
Component Design
Dynamic Model
Ducting
IEEE
CIGRE
Artifical
Neural 
Networks
MODELS
COMPONENTS
APPLICATIONS
Figure 13. Gas turbine dynamic models for system stability.


--- Page 15 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
15 of 30
Table 2. Summary of gas turbine models.
Gas Turbine
Component Design
Rowen’s Model
IEEE Model
Aeroderivative Model
CIGRE Model
Frequency Dependant
Derivation
Base
Dynamic and physical
thermodynamic
properties and laws
(Brayton)
Simpliﬁed mathematical
representation
Rowen’s model and
thermodynamic equations
Derived from jet engines
and Rowen’s model
Additional outer loop for
MW control.
Frequency dependency on
gas turbine
Parameter
Assumption
1. Pressure loss is
negligible.
2. Compressor and turbine
are irreversible.
3. Process 2-3 and 4-1 is
isobaric.
4. Process 1-2 and 3-4 is
isentropic.
5. Turbine efﬁciency is
linear.
6. Combustor efﬁciency
is assumed to be 1.
1. For simple cycle,
single-shaft,
generator drive only
2. Constant speed is
maintained at 95%-107%
3. Operates at ambient
15oC and 101.325kPa
4. No heat recovery
Fixed compression ratio
Ultimate parameters are
based on the trial and error
approach until the outputs
match the actual turbine
responses
Second order transfer
function for torque
calculation
Generic form of the
pressure ratio dependence
on frequency deviations
Main
Equation
2 main equations with
8 unknowns parameters.
3 main equations with
2 unknowns parameters.
4 main equations with
more than 10 unknowns
parameters
6 main equations with
more than 10 unknowns
parameters
All transfer functions.
more than 10 unknown
parameters
9 main equations with
more than 10
unknowns parameters
Application
Components modelling
(ducting, compressors,
combustors and air blades)
Open cycle, close cycle,
combined cycle
gas turbine operation
Overall airﬂow to cool
down the
turbine blades
Aeroderivative engines,
two-shaft engines
Combined cycle power
plant, heat recovery
unit
Incidents with abnormal
frequency behaviour
References
[47–50]
[37,54,56,61,62]
[55]
[57]
[58]
[59]


--- Page 16 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
16 of 30
3. Dry-Low Emission Gas Turbine
In this section, the working principle of the DLE gas turbine is presented along with
the details of combustor design. Subsequently, DLE gas turbine problems are evaluated to
discover the drawbacks and challenges.
3.1. Dry-Low Emission Gas Turbine Working Principle
The DLE gas turbine has been popular since the 1970s, as the regulation of NOx
reduction was tightened. Its working principle follows the Brayton cycle as deﬁned in
Section 2.2.1. The combustor performs the heating process in an isobaric condition from
point 2, delivering heat to increase the temperature of high-pressure gas until the turbine
inlet temperature is at point 3. In the combustion process, emission production is the func-
tion of temperature. Therefore, the DLE gas turbine operates at a lower temperature than
the conventional one to produce lower emissions. Commonly, a conventional combustion
occurs at operating temperature range from 3400 °F (1871 °C) to 3599 °F (1927 °C) [64].
Meanwhile, the DLE gas turbine operates under 2800 °F (1538 °C) to trim the emissions to
a single digit of NOx [65]. The combustion can be controlled by adjusting the air and fuel
composition, as illustrated in Figure 14.
Figure 14. Air/fuel ratio effect to ﬂame temperature and NOx emission.
Refer to Figure 14, DLE gas turbine operates in fuel-lean conditions by implementing
the lean-premixed (LPM) technique, mixing the fuel and air at the baseload to produce
a lean mixture before entering the combustion chamber. The premixing prevents local
“hot spots” that can accelerate a signiﬁcant formation of the NOx [66,67]. Commonly,
the stoichiometric mixture of gas turbine varies between 1.4 and 3.0 [64]. The reason is
that when the mixture of air and fuel is below a factor of 1.4, it will produce an intensely
hot ﬂame that will rapidly increase NOx formation. In contrast, the combustion becomes
unstable when the mixture exceeds 3.0. For this reason, the air supplied is twice higher as
the actual air needed to produce a lean condition that can lower the combustion temperature.
Hence, the production of thermal NOx can be limited. Even though the DLE gas turbine
signiﬁcantly reduces the NOx, it is difﬁcult to maintain the CO production that increases
with the decreasing ﬁring temperature. Therefore, controlling the air and fuel ratio is crucial
in DLE application.
The DLE combustor has a different air and fuel system conﬁguration compared to
the conventional type, as shown in Figure 15. The main fuel valve injects approximately
97% of the total fuel in the premixing chamber. A pilot fuel valve is added to inject fuel
directly into the combustion chamber to maintain stability in rich burn conditions [68].
Therefore, the combustor’s size is more prominent because of the additional pilot valve


--- Page 17 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
17 of 30
and the premixing chamber that contains a large quantity of air supplied of approximately
50–60% of the combustion airﬂow.
Figure 15. DLE and conventional combustor.
Since the lean-burn operation is adopted in DLE gas turbines, the tendency to ﬂame
out is sometimes unavoidable. Therefore, the DLE gas turbine has a speciﬁc operating
region to maintain healthy operating conditions. The combustion that is too lean will
affect the chemical reaction to spend longer than the residence time. Hence, the burner
fails to maintain the ﬂame, which leads to LBO occurrence. Avoiding ﬂame extinction can
be achieved through the air or fuel staging [69]. Performing air staging can be done by
reducing the airﬂow and decreasing the mixture strength in the combustion chamber to
stabilize the combustion. On the other hand, the fuel staging approach can be carried out by
axial or radial methods. For the axial approach, the fuel is injected into two zones, utilizing
the products from the ﬁrst combustion zone to be mixed with the air and fuel to the next
combustion zone to maintain the lean operation. The use of pilot light or fuel reduction
can be implemented for the radial approach. The number of fuel staging depends on the
operating range; the common number of the stages used is two or three, as illustrated in
Figure 16.
Figure 16. DLE combustor fuel staging.
For example, the implementation of fuel staging was used in a typical DLE combustor
by General Electric named Dry Low NOx-1 (DLN-1). This type of turbine implements
a two-stage premixed combustor with four modes of operations, as shown in Figure 17.
The four operating modes are primary (fuel is injected fully into the primary nozzle; hence


--- Page 18 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
18 of 30
the ﬂame is in the primary zone only), lean-lean (fuel is injected into the primary and
secondary nozzle), secondary (fuel is injected into the secondary nozzle only), and pre-
load (fuel is injected to both primary and secondary nozzles, however, the ﬂame is in the
secondary zone only, optimizing the emissions produced). In the pre-load or premix mode,
the emission produced is very low by using natural gas at the base load. The concentration
for NOx and CO that can be achieved is lower than 25 ppmv and 9 ppmv, respectively [31].
It can be concluded that the determination of air and fuel staging is essential to improve
the operation of the DLE gas turbine.
Figure 17. DLN-1 staging.
3.2. Faults in DLE Gas Turbine
The conversion of the combustion system from the non-premixed type in a conven-
tional gas turbine to the lean premixed in DLE type results in different major faults of
each combustion mode, creating challenges for the manufacturers. Various severe faults
that possibly induce the gas turbine tripping problems for both conventional and DLE gas
turbines are summarized in Table 3. Subsequently, the causes and prevention activities of
the faults will be analyzed in detail.
One of the gas turbine failures that cause the plant to shut down is the turbine blade
fault. According to [70], there are various causes of blade fault, such as creep, oxidation,
and fatigue due to high mechanical and thermal stresses. Statistics indicate that fatigue
failure contributes to almost 50% of all component damages in gas turbines [71]. Similarly,
the fatigue failure also causes problems in the compressor blade, as reported in [72]. The
damage experienced in blades and nozzles (stationary blades) will be hard to cure since
they have complicated conﬁgurations. Further, the root cause of this fault is distinctive de-
pending on the material used, operation conditions, and the component’s reliability, which
leads to incorrect sensor readings. A faulty sensor creates an uncontrolled combustion
system, leading to improper operating temperature and pressure. Hence, the system pro-
duces undesired emissions that turn the trip alarm on and contribute to the trip event [73].
Therefore, it is crucial to identify the malfunctioning part in instrumentation to ensure
the precision of operational parameter readings. Another problem with the gas turbine
is vibration. According to [74], this fault happens because of various sources, including
misalignment, shaft unbalance, and bearing problems. In the worst case, extremely high
vibrations cause catastrophic failure that is dangerous to the environment and humans.


--- Page 19 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
19 of 30
Aside from it, Liu in [75] mentioned an error that usually occurs during start-up called
compressor surge. This fault occurs when the inside pressure is lower than the incoming
air pressure. Thus, the airﬂow to the compressor is blocked. At the same time, there is a
possibility of ﬂow rate oscillation that might result in powerful vibrations, causing damage
to the system [76]. The effective way to prevent the surge is through active surge control,
expanding the operating range of the compressor using a feedback controller. The fault
in the igniter also contributes to the gas turbine tripping problem, as reported in [77].
Eroded tips at the igniter produce a weak ignition during starting that interrupts the early
combustion stage. It is usually caused by substance removal due to excessive discharge.
This error requires expensive downtime to diagnose, resulting in component replacement.
The following fault is a shaft locked in the compressor rotor [78]. This fault is caused by
rotor blades rubbing against the compressor case, resulting in a coast-down below the limit.
Since rubs are common due to physical contact between materials, the effective technique
to eliminate this problem is by conducting shaft alignment.
In DLE operation, the tight operating region is the challenge that sometimes disturbs
the combustion stability and creates problems due to a lean burning operation. The com-
bustion that signiﬁcantly leans further eventually causes the ﬂame to blow out. This
phenomenon is widely known as the LBO fault, which will be thoroughly discussed in
the next section. In many cases, as reported in [79–84], LBO fault is considered the most
common problem in DLE systems, which leads the gas turbine to trip. Other problems are
observed before the blowout, such as auto-ignition, ﬂashback, and combustion instability.
Auto-ignition is an event in which gas ignites spontaneously without any external ignition
sources. As reported by Sims in [85], a DLE gas turbine experiences auto-ignition at a partic-
ular temperature and pressure that may result in a rapid loss of power as a consequence of
a malfunction being detected by the engine control system, which then causes the machine
to be shut down. A self-ignition occurs after a speciﬁc delay time called auto-ignition delay
time (ADT) is reached. This fault can affect the repair or replacement of components in the
premix module. In order to prevent auto-ignition, the fuel residence time in the premix tube
should be less than the ADT. Therefore, the fuel residence time must be correctly calculated,
and the fuel composition should be carefully analyzed to estimate the correct ADT.
Similarly, the ﬂashback is an issue that presents itself much like the auto-ignition.
Flashback is a phenomenon of ﬂame feeding back from the combustor into the premixing
tube. It occurs when the speed of the local ﬂame is faster than the velocity of the air and
fuel mixture leaving the duct. As reported in [86], ﬂashbacks are generally caused by high
burning velocity instead of the short ADT. It usually happens during the transient time,
such as compressor surge. Some cooling techniques can be implemented in response to
performing protection towards ﬂashback events. Further, a well-designed ﬂame detection
and fuel controller system can be provided to minimize the effect of a ﬂashback. Another
problem in the lean premixed system is the instability of combustion. Commonly, the LPM
technique implements swirling to stabilize the combustion. However, the premixing of the
fuel and air increases the temperature’s homogeneity, which makes the combustor more
responsive to the swirl-induced oscillation at any given equivalence ratio [69]. According
to [87], the oscillations might happen under lean conditions because the creation of positive
feedback of temperature combined with negative feedback of fuel concentration on the
reaction rate had occurred. This undesirable oscillatory burning can reduce the combus-
tor’s reliability and durability. Moreover, it can decrease the lifetime and damage of the
combustor due to high acoustic noise levels at its natural frequency when the resonance
occurs. The modes of oscillation may be axial, radial, circumferential, or all three concur-
rently. In order to guarantee the combustor stability, a dynamic pressure transducer can be
applied, ensuring the combustor burns uniformly. Hence, it helps control the ﬂow to create
a proper mix of fuel and air, producing uniform combustion. However, a deeper analysis,
i.e., Computational Fluid Dynamic modeling, is sometimes required to establish the mixing
process by investigating the interaction of ﬂows.


--- Page 20 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
20 of 30
Table 3. Gas Turbine Faults.
Trip Faults
Causes
Prevention
Ref.
DLE gas turbine
Lean Blowout
Too lean zone
that exceed the
blowout limit
Controlling the air and
fuel ratio to keep the
gas turbine in its
operating region
[79–84]
Auto-ignition
Combustion reaches
the auto-ignition
temperature
Well designed premix
ducts to accomplish enough
mixing at periods less
than the typical ADT
[85]
Flashback
High burning
velocity
Advanced cooling techniques
[86,87]
Instability
Pressure oscillations
at low equivalence ratio
of combustion
Utilization of dynamic pressure
transducer to control the ﬂow
of air and fuel
[69]
Conventional gas turbine
Blades Fault
Fatigue failure
Application of coatings
resistant to oxidation
and corrosion at high
temperatures
[70,72]
Sensor Fault
Mechanical failure
or improper calibration
Routine calibration and
instrumentation checking
to ensure the reading ability
[73]
High Vibration
Dynamic forces
Continuous monitoring and
spectrum analysis
to detect the vibration sources
[74]
Compressor Surge
Inside pressure is
lower than incoming
air pressure
Implementing surge active
control
[75]
Igniter Fault
Eroded tips
Component replacement
[77]
Shaft Locked
Physical contact
between rotor blades
and compressor casing
Shaft alignment
[78]
3.3. Case Study in DLE Gas Turbine
A case study reported the tripping problem of 6 years that was faced by a 4.4 MW
single-shaft DLE gas turbine at the Gas District Cooling plant. As per the documentation,
the trip is frequent during the ﬁrst or second year of the installation and reduced in the
following year. As the gas turbine was installed in 2010, the highest recorded trips were
in the second year, 2011. As the year progressed, fewer trips were recorded, with the
minimum in 2014.
Of the total trips, 77% are critical trips where the equipment is shut down abruptly
without any allowable period for personnel to bring the operation back into a normal
state. The trip report was analyzed and summarized in the pie chart as illustrated in
Figure 18. It is found that 25% of the trips are rooted from LBO error during DLE mode
that is implemented to reduce NOx and COx emission. This severe fault might lead to high
maintenance costs due to unplanned downtime. Therefore, LBO is considered the superior
problem faced in DLE gas turbines, which will be discussed in detail in the next section.


--- Page 21 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
21 of 30
Figure 18. Gas turbine trips cause in GDC plant.
4. Lean Blowout
This section is divided into two parts, which cover a comprehensive description of the
LBO phenomenon and preceding techniques of LBO prediction. Firstly, the details of its
behavior are deﬁned. Various techniques to predict the LBO are subsequently discussed.
4.1. Lean Blowout Behaviour
Lean blowout (LBO) is a phenomenon of ﬂame extinguishment when the combustion
occurs in very lean conditions and exceeds the LBO limit. The LBO limit is considered
the lowest equivalence ratio that can carry on the ﬂame [88]. The ﬂame-out will occur
accordingly once the combustion reaches that limit. The characteristic of LBO can be
clearly explained by NOx and CO trend over the combustion temperature corresponding
to the equivalence ratio as depicted in Figure 19. The red zone in the graph shows the
LBO limit, which falls into a particular range. The blue zone represents the operating
range of lean-burn combustion, which is applied in the DLE gas turbine to maintain a
healthy operation.
Figure 19. NOx and CO emission to characterize LBO behavior.


--- Page 22 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
22 of 30
The equivalence ratio, where the LBO limit is located, is not a ﬁxed number, and
keeps changing due to various factors related to the operating conditions, such as the
velocity ﬁeld that inﬂuences the turbulence levels, ambient air, and the temperature and
pressure of the combustion chamber as reported in [89]. The ﬂame becomes unstable when
the air velocity is high as the turbulence level corresponding to the Reynolds number
also increases, as represented in Figure 20. This graph shows the stability loop of the gas
turbine combustion for a given inlet pressure and temperature. The limit between the
operability region and blow-out varies due to the amount of air mass ﬂow and fuel–air ratio.
The equivalence ratio at LBO will increase along with the air mass ﬂow as reported in [90].
Similarly, increasing the fuel ﬂow rate will shorten the residence time of the droplets inside
the ﬂame preheat zone, which increases the blow-out limit [91]. The fuel composition also
signiﬁcantly affects the LBO limit. According to [92], fuel with high hydrogen content
produces a lower equivalence ratio. Hence, it will extend the lean stability limit and
lower the possibility of ﬂame to blow-out. A study by [90] evaluated the effect of the
composition ratio in blended fuel of methane and ethane to LBO limit. The result showed
that the LBO occurs at a higher equivalence ratio when the ratio of propane in the fuel
increases. Further, methane dilution with carbon dioxide and nitrogen increases the LBO
equivalence ratio. The percentage of pilot fuel also signiﬁcantly impacts the LBO limit
changes. According to [90], the increase in pilot fuel percentage decreases the equivalence
ratio of LBO. Furthermore, the swirl strength and physical mixing of fuel and air will also
inﬂuence the LBO limit [82,88,93]. The LBO limit increases with the rise of swirl intensity,
as reported in [94]. Similarly, the swirl cup’s geometry also signiﬁcantly affects the limits,
and the limits will decrease with the airﬂow of swirlers for dual-axial swirl cups. In contrast,
the opposite happens for dual-radial swirl cups.
Figure 20. Combustion operability for gas turbine based on air fuel ratio over the air mass ﬂow.
The risk of the ﬂame blowing out is also affected by the ﬂuctuation of power de-
mand [95]. During deceleration, power reduction is achieved by decreasing the fuel ﬂow,
affecting the turbine’s lower gas temperature and velocity. The shaft rotational speed
subsequently turns slower, which results in the compressor not rotating at a similar speed
to the turbine. Hence, the mass ﬂow rate of incoming air drops gradually, decreasing the
equivalence ratio that gains the LBO occurrence. Further, the decrease in the equivalence
ratio reduces the resistance of ﬂame turbulence, raising the level of turbulence [96]. Hence,
the ﬂame is quenching, and a local blowout might happen. The high turbulence ﬂame is


--- Page 23 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
23 of 30
generally found near the fuel nozzle and the shear layers at the Inner Recirculation Zone
(IRZ). Following that, the ﬂame is driven towards the low-turbulence locations, which
increases the residence time. Thus, the ﬂame might reignite the exhausted non-burnt gases
along the shear layers. The periodic existence of such events can lead to complete blow-out.
Therefore, those are called precursor events of LBO [90].
The detection of the LBO precursor has been developed non-intrusively by monitoring
the ﬂame OH* chemiluminescence emissions as done by Muruganandam [97]. Stable
combustion is characterized by evenly distributed ﬂame and clear IRZ. As the equiva-
lence ratio is reduced, the ﬂame turns to local extinction, followed by reignition events.
The reignition occurs when the ﬂame moves from the exit upstream towards the inlet as the
operation gets closer to LBO. When the equivalence ratio is further reduced, the ﬂame that
comes downwards becomes very weak. Thus, the ﬂame cannot restore regular combustion,
and the ﬂame experiences a blowout.
In DLE gas turbine application, lower emission is the principal drive to implement
lean-burn combustion while maintaining operational stability. Therefore, predicting the
LBO event before it happens is necessary to avoid unwanted downtime that can gradually
reduce the lifetime of the DLE gas turbine.
4.2. Prediction Techniques of Lean Blowout
Lean blowout has various harmful effects that can lead to unplanned trips that increase
costs because of unscheduled maintenance. Further, some following effects that occur
before LBO, such as large pressure oscillations, can reduce the reliability and availability,
decreasing the durability of the DLE gas turbine [83,98]. Hence, the prevention of LBO is
required to keep the operation of the DLE gas turbine safe. Various prediction techniques
have been developed to prevent LBO events. The early detection of LBO is generally
predicted using three methods, which are semi-empirical models, numerical simulation,
and hybrid models [99].
In the early stage, semi-empirical techniques were adopted to study the LBO phe-
nomenon using two different models, namely Characteristic Time (CT) and Perfect Stirred
Reactor (PSR). The CT model considered the LBO would occur when the residence time is
lesser than the total evaporating time and chemical reaction time as implemented by Plee
and Mellor in [100]. Meanwhile, the PSR model considered the LBO would occur when
the heat release rate is less than the heat loss rate [99]. One of the most used PSR models
is developed by Lefebvre [101,102], improving Longwell’s PSR model for swirl-stabilized
combustors. A semi-empirical model is also proposed by [103] according to ﬂame volume;
however, the study is limited to analysis only. The basis of the CT and PSR models lies in
energy balance and time balance, respectively. Hu later challenged the previous method
in [104] by proposing the hybrid empirical method for prediction instead of just analysis. Yi
also proposed the other method for LBO prediction. Furthermore, Gutmark [105] suggested
utilizing the ﬂame statistical characteristic. However, two major challenges in the study are
the operating conditions of an engine that may gradually change and the chemiluminescent
interferences from neighboring nozzles that may complicate LBO detection. Mukhopad-
hyay in [106] uses symbolic time series analysis that is converted to a symbol string and
computed based on the number of occurrences of each symbol over a given period, while
Sarkar in [98] proposed the prediction via Generalized D-Markov machine construction
and using fuel iterative approximation in [107].
In numerical prediction methods, Unsteady Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes and
Large Eddy Simulation are mainly implemented to visualize the ﬂame behaviors and
predict the LBO. Smith in [108] implemented LES to experimentally predict the LBO of
premixed ﬂow past the V-gutter ﬂame holder. While Wang in [109] uses the technology of
a Damkohler number extracted from RANS CFD results. The result shows a distinctive
transition between stable and unstable ﬂames by decreasing the fuel–air ratio or increasing
the inlet velocity at atmospheric pressure and inlet temperature. Nevertheless, the listed
approach is conducted on a laboratory scale using an ideal combustor with only the air


--- Page 24 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
24 of 30
and fuel ﬂow. Thus, it exhibits limitations in associating the LBO error with the gas
turbine operation. Moreover, the physical sensors and cameras in the study are also not
suitable for the gas turbine’s extreme temperature application in the ﬁeld. Therefore,
further improvements are needed to predict the LBO that will be able to capture the actual
plant conditions.
Nowadays, data-driven predictive analysis is more prevalent, where we can directly
develop a predictive model through either simulated or actual plant data. Thus, this type
of predictive approach has an excellent potential to predict the LBO that can represent the
actual condition in the ﬁeld. However, limited studies are available in the literature. A study
by [110] implemented machine learning using a Support Vector Machine to early detect
the LBO. The model successfully predicted the LBO approximately 20 ms before the event.
Gangopadhyay in [111] further proposed a deep learning-based framework to predict LBO.
The developed Long Short Term Memory based deep learning achieved high accuracy that
outperforms Hidden Markov Model and Translational Error. Further, the computation time
is also faster than both other methods. The following study implemented data-driven was
performed by Iannitelli as documented in [82]. Iannitelli used a classiﬁcation approach
to detect LBO from the exhaust gas temperature proﬁle. The model was developed into
three classiﬁers: principal component analysis (PCA) with linear regression, PCA with a
decision tree, and Linear Discriminant Analysis with a given threshold. The result shows a
promising result by achieving an accuracy of approximately 97%. Based on the literature,
all the data-driven techniques agreed with the actual data, proving that high accuracy is
achieved. It has shown signiﬁcant promise for using the data-driven technique in LBO
prognostics. Therefore, future work can use the data-driven method to predict the LBO
early and eliminate the potency of tripping in DLE gas turbines.
5. Conclusions
Gas turbines must operate efﬁciently to achieve the target output as a prime-mover in
energy production. Since the primary process should go through combustion, the emission
becomes a new challenge that should be controlled. However, controlling the emission
sometimes inﬂuences the combustion stability. Hence, the combustor technology is essential
to improve combustion quality in the gas turbine.
Improvement of clean combustion technology has been enhanced to minimize the
emission produced by the gas turbine. Trapped vortex combustion (TVC) and ﬂameless
or mild combustion (MILD) were introduced to improve conventional combustion. Rich-
burn, quench-mix, lean-burn (RQL) and continuous staged air (COSTAR) were applied for
higher emissions reduction in the next generation. Lastly, the DLE and NanoSTAR were
subsequently proposed to perform combustion with very low emissions. The comparison
of the combustor technologies based on emission reduction and stability shows that the
DLE gas turbine has the most proﬁtable features against the others.
In order to support the advancement of technology, various gas turbine models have
been developed, which can be classiﬁed by the physical and black-box models. The physical
model uses Rowen’s, IEEE, Aero-derivative, CIGRE, and frequency-dependent models.
In contrast, the black-box model is developed by using an Artiﬁcial Neural Network.
In dynamic gas turbine modeling, Rowen’s model has excellent suitability to represent the
actual DLE gas turbine due to the functional derivation of the operating curves.
Even though the DLE gas turbine has an excellent capability to reduce the emission, it
is prone to frequent tripping due to some faults in a lean operation. According to a 4.4 MW
DLE gas turbine case study, LBO reached the highest percentage of total trip causes, leading
to high maintenance costs. Thus, this fault should be prevented to keep the DLE mode
operating normally. On the other hand, other problems disturbing the DLE operation are
auto-ignition, ﬂashback, and instability.
In order to prevent LBO, several aspects can be learned through various methods.
The conventional one uses physical sensors and cameras, which are usually used on
laboratory scales. In contrast, the predictive approach is usually performed statistically.


--- Page 25 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
25 of 30
The standard methods are semi-empirical models, numerical simulations, and hybrid
models. Currently, the data-driven model caught the interest for early prediction of LBO.
The advantage of the data-driven model, which predicts the event by learning from the
real plant data, can capture the actual condition of such a case. Hence, the LBO can be
accurately predicted based on related parameters from its actual data. However, a deeper
analysis of the data’s important features is also required to develop a good model with
high accuracy.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.B.O. and M.F.; methodology, M.B.O.; software, M.F.;
validation, R.I. and B.A.A.O.; formal analysis, M.B.O.; investigation, M.F.; resources, R.I.; data
curation, M.F.; writing—original draft preparation, M.F. and M.B.O.; writing—review and editing,
M.F.; visualization, M.F.; supervision, M.B.O.; project administration, R.I.; funding acquisition, R.I.
and M.B.O. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS and Ministry of Higher Educa-
tion Malaysia (MOHE) through grant YUTP (015LC0-382) and PRGS (PRGS/1/2020/TK09/UTP/02/2).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors are thankful to Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS and Ministry of
Higher Education Malaysia (MOHE) for the support in carrying this research.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
E
Total Energy
Ligv
IGV output
i
Speciﬁc Enthalphy
K0
ratio of net power output and inlet heat capacity
˙m
Mass Flow
N
Rotor Speed
PR
Design Pressure Ration
Q
Heat Input into System
Qin
Heat of Combustion
Qout
Released Heat
Ta
Ambient Temperature
TD
Compressor Discharge Temperature
Tf
Firing Temperature
TM
Output Temperature
TR
Rated Exhaust Temperature
W
Work Produced from System
w
Air Flow
Wf
Fuel FLow
x
Cycle Pressure Ratio
γ
Ratio of Speciﬁc Heat Capacities
ηC
Compressor’s Efﬁiency
ηT
Turbine’s Efﬁciency
ADT
Auto-ignition Delay Time
CO
Carbon Monoxide
COSTAIR
COntinuous STaged Air
CT
Characteristic Time
DLE
Dry-Low Emission
IGV
Inlet Guide Vane


--- Page 26 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
26 of 30
IRZ
Inner Recirculation Zone
LBO
Lean Blow-out
LPM
Lean Pre-mixed
MILD
MILD Combustion
NARX
Non-linear Autoregressive Exogenous
NOx
Nitrogen Oxides
PSR
Perfect Stirred Reactor
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
RQL
Rich-burn, Quench-mix, Lean-burn
TVC
Trapped Vortex Combustion
References
1.
Stefanizzi, M.; Capurso, T.; Filomeno, G.; Torresi, M.; Pascazio, G. Recent Combustion Strategies in Gas Turbines for Propulsion
and Power Generation toward a Zero-Emissions Future: Fuels, Burners, and Combustion Techniques. Energies 2021, 14, 6694.
[CrossRef]
2.
Leather, D.T.; Bahadori, A.; Nwaoha, C.; Wood, D.A. A review of Australia’s natural gas resources and their exploitation. J. Nat.
Gas Sci. Eng. 2013, 10, 68–88. [CrossRef]
3.
Šebalj, D.; Mesari´c, J.; Dujak, D. Analysis of methods and techniques for prediction of natural gas consumption: A literature
review. J. Inf. Organ. Sci. 2019, 43, 99–117. [CrossRef]
4.
Arman, N. M.; GÜrsoy, B. Challenges in the regional energy complex of Russia, Ukraine, Turkey, and the European Union. Int. J.
Humanit. Soc. Dev. Res. 2022, 6, 7–21.
5.
Engerer, H.; Horn, M. Natural gas vehicles: An option for Europe. Energy Policy 2010, 38, 1017–1029. [CrossRef]
6.
Liang, T.; Chai, J.; Zhang, Y.J.; Zhang, Z.G. Reﬁned analysis and prediction of natural gas consumption in China. J. Manag. Sci.
Eng. 2019, 4, 91–104. [CrossRef]
7.
Strantzali, E.; Aravossis, K.; Livanos, G.A. Evaluation of future sustainable electricity generation alternatives: The case of a Greek
island. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 76, 775–787. [CrossRef]
8.
Soares, C. Gas Turbines: A Handbook of Air, Land and Sea Applications; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2011.
9.
Pareek, U.; Kar, I.N. Estimating compressor discharge pressure of gas turbine power plant using type-2 fuzzy logic systems. In
Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 16–21 July 2006; pp. 649–654.
10.
Szum, K. IoT-based smart cities: A bibliometric analysis and literature review. Eng. Manag. Prod. Serv. 2021, 13, 115–136.
[CrossRef]
11.
Nozari, M.; Tabejamaat, S.; Sadeghizade, H.; Aghayari, M. Experimental investigation of the effect of gaseous fuel injector
geometry on the pollutant formation and thermal characteristics of a micro gas turbine combustor. Energy 2021, 235, 121372.
[CrossRef]
12.
Khosravy el_Hossaini, M. Review of the New Combustion Technologies in Modern Gas Turbines; InTech Open: London, UK, 2013.
13.
Jiang, P.; He, X. Experimental investigation of ﬂow ﬁeld characteristics in a mixed-ﬂow trapped vortex combustor. Aerosp. Sci.
Technol. 2020, 96, 105533. [CrossRef]
14.
Jiang, P.; He, X. Ignition characteristics of a novel mixed-ﬂow trapped vortex combustor for turboshaft engine. Fuel 2020,
261, 116430. [CrossRef]
15.
Mishra, D. Fundamentals of Combustion; PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.: New Delhi, India 2007.
16.
Zhao, D.; Gutmark, E.; de Goey, P. A review of cavity-based trapped vortex, ultra-compact, high-g, inter-turbine combustors.
Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 2018, 66, 42–82. [CrossRef]
17.
Zhang, R.; Bai, N.; Fan, W.; Huang, X.; Fan, X. Inﬂuence of ﬂame stabilization and fuel injection modes on the ﬂow and
combustion characteristics of gas turbine combustor with cavity. Energy 2019, 189, 116216. [CrossRef]
18.
Ghenai, C. Combustion of sustainable and renewable biohythane fuel in trapped vortex combustor. Case Stud. Therm. Eng. 2019,
14, 100498. [CrossRef]
19.
Zhu, Y.; Jin, Y.; He, X. Effects of location and angle of primary injection on the cavity ﬂow structure of a trapped vortex combustor
model. Optik 2019, 180, 699–712. [CrossRef]
20.
Bagheri, G.; Ranzi, E.; Pelucchi, M.; Parente, A.; Frassoldati, A.; Faravelli, T. Comprehensive kinetic study of combustion
technologies for low environmental impact: MILD and OXY-fuel combustion of methane. Combust. Flame 2020, 212, 142–155.
[CrossRef]
21.
Cha, C.L.; Lee, H.Y.; Hwang, S.S. The effect of diluted hot oxidant and fuel on NO formation in oxy-fuel ﬂameless combustion
using opposite jet. J. Mech. Sci. Technol. 2019, 33, 3709–3716. [CrossRef]
22.
Khalil, H.M.; Eldrainy, Y.A.; Abdelghaffar, W.A.; Abdel-Rahman, A.A. Increased heat transfer to sustain ﬂameless combustion
under elevated pressure conditions–a numerical study. Eng. Appl. Comput. Fluid Mech. 2019, 13, 782–803. [CrossRef]
23.
Doan, N.A.K.; Swaminathan, N. Autoignition and ﬂame propagation in non-premixed MILD combustion. Combust. Flame 2019,
201, 234–243. [CrossRef]
24.
Sharma, S.; Chowdhury, A.; Kumar, S. A novel air injection scheme to achieve MILD combustion in a can-type gas turbine
combustor. Energy 2020, 194, 116819. [CrossRef]


--- Page 27 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
27 of 30
25.
Khanlari, A.; Salavati-Zadeh, A.; Mohammadi, M.; Najaﬁ, S.B.N.; Esfahanian, V. Effect of Hydrogen Enrichment on Pollutant and
Greenhouse Gases Formation and Exergy Efﬁciency of Methane MILD Combustion. In Environmentally-Benign Energy Solutions;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020; pp. 403–429.
26.
Jozaalizadeh, T.; Toghraie, D. Numerical investigation behavior of reacting ﬂow for ﬂameless oxidation technology of MILD
combustion: Effect of ﬂuctuating temperature of inlet co-ﬂow. Energy 2019, 178, 530–537. [CrossRef]
27.
Chen, J.; Li, J.; Yuan, L.; Hu, G. Flow and ﬂame characteristics of a RP-3 fuelled high temperature rise combustor based on RQL.
Fuel 2019, 235, 1159–1171. [CrossRef]
28.
Wey, C.T. Fuel Sensitivity of Lean Blowout in a RQL Gas Turbine Combustor. In Proceedings of the AIAA Propulsion and Energy
2019 Forum, Indianapolis, India, 19–22 August 2019; p. 4035.
29.
Liu, Y.; Sun, X.; Sethi, V.; Nalianda, D.; Li, Y.G.; Wang, L. Review of modern low emissions combustion technologies for aero gas
turbine engines. Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 2017, 94, 12–45. [CrossRef]
30.
Milcarek, R.J.; Ahn, J. Rich-burn, ﬂame-assisted fuel cell, quick-mix, lean-burn (RFQL) combustor and power generation. J. Power
Sources 2018, 381, 18–25. [CrossRef]
31.
Lefebvre, A.H.; Ballal, D.R. Gas Turbine Combustion: Alternative Fuels and Emissions; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2010.
32.
Abdelhafez, A.; Rashwan, S.S.; Nemitallah, M.A.; Habib, M.A. Stability map and shape of premixed CH4/O2/CO2 ﬂames in a
model gas-turbine combustor. Appl. Energy 2018, 215, 63–74.
33.
Nemitallah, M.A.; Rashwan, S.S.; Mansir, I.B.; Abdelhafez, A.A.; Habib, M.A. Review of novel combustion techniques for clean
power production in gas turbines. Energy Fuels 2018, 32, 979–1004. [CrossRef]
34.
Hazel, T.; Peck, G.; Mattsson, H. Industrial Power Systems Using Dry Low Emission Turbines. IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 2014,
50, 4369–4378. [CrossRef]
35.
Ayed, A.H.; Kusterer, K.; Funke, H.W.; Keinz, J.; Bohn, D. CFD based exploration of the dry-low-NOx hydrogen micromix
combustion technology at increased energy densities. Propuls. Power Res. 2017, 6, 15–24. [CrossRef]
36.
Serbin, S.I.; Kozlovskyi, A.V.; Burunsuz, K.S. Investigations of Nonstationary Processes in Low Emissive Gas Turbine Combustor
With Plasma Assistance. IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 2016, 44, 2960–2964. [CrossRef]
37.
Suzaki, S.; Kawata, K.; Sekoguchi, M.; Goto, M. Mathematical model for a combined cycle plant and its implementation in an
analogue power system simulator. In Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE Power Engineering Society Winter Meeting. Conference
Proceedings (Cat. No. 00CH37077), Singapore, Singapore, 23–27 January 2000; Volume 1, pp. 416–421.
38.
Ali, A.; Nemitallah, M.A.; Abdelhafez, A.; Alsakhawy, I.G.; Kamal, M.M.; Habib, M.A. Static Stability and Combustion
Characteristics of Oxy-Propane Flames in a Premixed Fuel-Flexible Swirl Combustor.
Energy Fuels 2019, 33, 11996–12007.
[CrossRef]
39.
Ge, B.; Ji, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Zang, S.; Tian, Y.; Yu, H.; Chen, M.; Jiao, G.; Zhang, D. Experiment study on the combustion performance
of hydrogen-enriched natural gas in a DLE burner. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44, 14023–14031. [CrossRef]
40.
Lörstad, D.; Ljung, A.; Abou-Taouk, A. Investigation of Siemens SGT-800 industrial gas turbine combustor using different
combustion and turbulence models. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo 2016: Turbomachinery Technical Conference and
Exposition, Seoul, Korea, 13–17 June 2016.
41.
Asgari, B.; Amani, E. A multi-objective CFD optimization of liquid fuel spray injection in dry-low-emission gas-turbine
combustors. Appl. Energy 2017, 203, 696–710. [CrossRef]
42.
Liu, K.; Hubbard, P.; Sadasivuni, S.; Bulat, G. Extension of Fuel Flexibility by Combining Intelligent Control Methods for Siemens
SGT-400 Dry Low Emission Combustion System. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 2019, 141, 011003. [CrossRef]
43.
Subash, A.A.; Collin, R.; Aldén, M.; Kundu, A.; Klingmann, J. Laser-Based Investigation on a Dry Low Emission Industrial
Prototype Burner at Atmospheric Pressure Conditions. In Proceedings of the ASME Turbo Expo 2016: Turbomachinery Technical
Conference and Exposition, Seoul, South Korea, 13–17 June 2016.
44.
Agbonzikilo, F.E.; Owen, I.; Sadasivuni, S.K.; Bickerton, R.A. Investigation of ﬂow aerodynamics for optimal fuel placement
and mixing in the radial swirler slot of a dry low emission gas turbine combustion chamber. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 2016,
138, 051505. [CrossRef]
45.
Bulysova, L.; Vasil’ev, V.; Berne, A. Low-Emission combustion of fuel in aeroderivative gas turbines. Therm. Eng. 2017, 64, 891–897.
[CrossRef]
46.
Agbonzikilo, F.E.; Owen, I.; Stewart, J.; Sadasivuni, S.K.; Riley, M.; Sanderson, V. Experimental and Numerical Investigation
of Fuel–Air Mixing in a Radial Swirler Slot of a Dry Low Emission Gas Turbine Combustor. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 2016,
138, 061502. [CrossRef]
47.
Liu, Z.; Karimi, I.A. Simulating combined cycle gas turbine power plants in Aspen HYSYS. Energy Convers. Manag. 2018,
171, 1213–1225. [CrossRef]
48.
Kim, T.S. Model-based performance diagnostics of heavy-duty gas turbines using compressor map adaptation. Appl. Energy
2018, 212, 1345–1359.
49.
Pires, T.S.; Cruz, M.E.; Colaço, M.J.; Alves, M.A. Application of nonlinear multivariable model predictive control to transient
operation of a gas turbine and NOX emissions reduction. Energy 2018, 149, 341–353. [CrossRef]
50.
Montazeri-Gh, M.; Fashandi, S.A.M.; Abyaneh, S. Real-time simulation test-bed for an industrial gas turbine engine’s controller.
Mech. Ind. 2018, 19, 311. [CrossRef]


--- Page 28 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
28 of 30
51.
Rahman, M.; Zaccaria, V.; Zhao, X.; Kyprianidis, K. Diagnostics-Oriented Modelling of Micro Gas Turbines for Fleet Monitoring
and Maintenance Optimization. Processes 2018, 6, 216. [CrossRef]
52.
Cáceres, I.E.; Montañés, R.M.; Nord, L.O. Flexible operation of combined cycle gas turbine power plants with supplementary
ﬁring. J. Power Technol. 2018, 98, 188–197.
53.
Chaibakhsh, A.; Amirkhani, S. A simulation model for transient behaviour of heavy-duty gas turbines. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2018,
132, 115–127. [CrossRef]
54.
Rowen, W.I. Simpliﬁed mathematical representations of heavy-duty gas turbines. J. Eng. Power 1983, 105, 865–869. [CrossRef]
55.
Yee, S.K.; Milanovic, J.V.; Hughes, F.M. Overview and comparative analysis of gas turbine models for system stability studies.
IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2008, 23, 108–118. [CrossRef]
56.
Gómez, F.J.; Chaves, M.A.; Vanfretti, L.; Olsen, S.H. Multi-Domain Semantic Information and Physical Behavior Modeling of
Power Systems and Gas Turbines Expanding the Common Information Model. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 72663–72674. [CrossRef]
57.
Eslami, M.; Shayesteh, M.R.; Pourahmadi, M. Optimal design of PID-based low-pass ﬁlter for gas turbine using intelligent
method. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 15335–15345. [CrossRef]
58.
Kim, D.J.; Moon, Y.H.; Choi, B.S.; Ryu, H.S.; Nam, H.K. Impact of a Heavy-Duty Gas Turbine Operating Under Temperature
Control on System Stability. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2018, 33, 4543–4552. [CrossRef]
59.
Kumar, S.S.; Xavier, R.J.; Balamurugan, S. Small signal modelling of gas turbine plant for load frequency control. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Biennial International Conference on Power and Energy Systems: Towards Sustainable Energy (PESTSE), Bengaluru,
India, 21–23 January 2016; pp. 1–5.
60.
Asgari, H.; Venturini, M.; Chen, X.; Sainudiin, R. Modeling and simulation of the transient behavior of an industrial power plant
gas turbine. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 2014, 136, 061601. [CrossRef]
61.
Pondini, M.; Signorini, A.; Colla, V.; Barsali, S. Analysis of a simpliﬁed Steam Turbine governor model for power system stability
studies. Energy Procedia 2019, 158, 2928–2933. [CrossRef]
62.
Balamurugan, S.; Janarthanan, N.; Chandrakala, K.V. Small and large signal modeling of heavy duty gas turbine plant for load
frequency control. Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 2016, 79, 84–88. [CrossRef]
63.
Khamseh, S.A.; Fatehi, A. Performance monitoring of heavy duty gas turbines based on Bayesian and Dempster-Shafer
theory. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Electrical and Information Technologies (ICEIT), Rabat, Morocco,
15–18 November 2017; pp. 1–7.
64.
Boyce, M.P. Gas Turbine Engineering Handbook; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2011.
65.
Moore, M. NOx emission control in gas turbines for combined cycle gas turbine plant. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part A J. Power
Energy 1997, 211, 43–52. [CrossRef]
66.
Funke, H.W.; Beckmann, N.; Abanteriba, S. An overview on dry low NOx micromix combustor development for hydrogen-rich
gas turbine applications. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44, 6978–6990. [CrossRef]
67.
Tarik, M.; Omar, M.; Abdullah, M.; Ibrahim, R. Modelling of dry low emission gas turbine using black-box approach.
In
Proceedings of the TENCON 2017-2017 IEEE Region 10 Conference, Penang, Malaysia, 5–8 November 2017; pp. 1902–1906.
68.
Omar, M.B.; Ibrahim, R.; Abdullah, M.F.; Tarik, M.H.M. Modelling of Dry-Low Emission Gas Turbine Fuel System using First
Principle Data-Driven Method. J. Power Technol. 2020, 100, 1.
69.
Nemitallah, M.A.; Abdelhafez, A.A.; Ali, A.; Mansir, I.; Habib, M.A. Frontiers in combustion techniques and burner designs for
emissions control and CO2 capture: A review. Int. J. Energy Res. 2019, 43, 7790–7822.
70.
Mishra, R.; Thomas, J.; Srinivasan, K.; Nandi, V.; Bhat, R. Failure analysis of nozzle guide vane of a low pressure turbine in an
aero gas turbine engine. J. Fail. Anal. Prev. 2014, 14, 578–587. [CrossRef]
71.
Mishra, R.; Thomas, J.; Srinivasan, K.; Nandi, V.; Bhatt, R.R. Failure analysis of an un-cooled turbine blade in an aero gas turbine
engine. Eng. Fail. Anal. 2017, 79, 836–844. [CrossRef]
72.
Biswas, S.; Ganeshachar, M.; Kumar, J.; Kumar, V.S. Failure analysis of a compressor blade of gas turbine engine. Procedia Eng.
2014, 86, 933–939. [CrossRef]
73.
Parrella, I.; Bardi, F.; Salerno, G.; Gronchi, D.; Cannavò, M.; Sparacino, E. Using Analytics to Assess Health Status of DLE
Combustion Gas Turbines. In Proceedings of the Abu Dhabi International Petroleum Exhibition & Conference, Abu Dhabi, UAE,
11–14 November 2019.
74.
Rahmoune, M.B.; Hafaifa, A.; Guemana, M. Neural network monitoring system used for the frequency vibration prediction in
gas turbine. In Proceedings of the 2015 3rd International Conference on Control, Engineering & Information Technology (CEIT),
Tlemcen, Algeria, 25–27 May 2015; pp. 1–5.
75.
Liu, X.; Zhao, L. Modeling of gas turbine engine compressor surge based on equilibrium manifold. In Proceedings of the
2012 International Conference on Control Engineering and Communication Technology, Shenyang, China, 7–9 December 2012;
pp. 300–306.
76.
Sheng, H.; Chen, Q.; Li, J.; Li, Z.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, T. Robust adaptive backstepping active control of compressor surge based on
wavelet neural network. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2020, 106, 106139. [CrossRef]
77.
Hamed Ghasemian, Q.Z. Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) of Aeronautical Gas Turbine using the Fuzzy Risk Priority
Ranking (FRPR) Approach. Int. J. Soft Comput. Eng. 2017, 7, 81–92.
78.
Righi, M.; Ferrer-Vidal, L.E.; Pachidis, V. Body-force and mean-line models for the generation of axial compressor sub-idle
characteristics. Aeronaut. J. 2020, 124, 1683–1701. [CrossRef]


--- Page 29 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
29 of 30
79.
Bulat, G.; Liu, K.; Brickwood, G.; Sanderson, V.; Igoe, B. Intelligent operation of Siemens (SGT-300) DLE gas turbine combustion
system over an extended fuel range with low emissions. Turbo Expo: Power Land Sea Air 2011, 54624, 917–925.
80.
Nassini, P.C.; Pampaloni, D.; Meloni, R.; Andreini, A. Lean blow-out prediction in an industrial gas turbine combustor through a
LES-based CFD analysis. Combust. Flame 2021, 229, 111391. [CrossRef]
81.
Cerutti, M.; Giannini, N.; Ceccherini, G.; Meloni, R.; Matoni, E.; Romano, C.; Riccio, G. Dry low NOx emissions operability
enhancement of a heavy-duty gas turbine by means of fuel burner design development and testing. Turbo Expo: Power for Land,
Sea, and Air. Am. Soc. Mech. Eng. 2018, 51067, V04BT04A029.
82.
Iannitelli, M.; Allegorico, C.; Garau, F.; Capanni, M. A hybrid model for on-line detection of gas turbine lean blowout events.
Phm Soc. Eur. Conf. 2018, 4. [CrossRef]
83.
Kaluri, A.; Malte, P.; Novosselov, I. Real-time prediction of lean blowout using chemical reactor network. Fuel 2018, 234, 797–808.
[CrossRef]
84.
Lei, S.; Huang, Y.; Xiwei, W.; Zheng, Z.; Ruixiang, W.; Xiang, F. Hybrid method based on ﬂame volume concept for lean blowout
limits prediction of aero engine combustors. Chin. J. Aeronaut. 2021, 34, 425–437.
85.
Sims, G.; Mistry, S.; Wood, J.; Bowen, P.; Crayford, A. A study into the auto-ignition characteristics of hydrocarbon fuels with
application to gas turbines. Turbo Expo Power Land Sea Air 2008, 43130, 625–634.
86.
Andersson, M.; Larsson, A.; Carrera, A.M. Pentane rich fuels for standard Siemens DLE gas turbines. Turbo Expo: Power Land Sea
Air 2011, 54624, 905–916.
87.
Di Benedetto, A.; Marra, F.; Russo, G. Spontaneous oscillations inlean premixed combustion. Combust. Sci. Technol. 2002,
174, 1–18. [CrossRef]
88.
Sigfrid, I.R.; Whiddon, R.; Collin, R.; Klingmann, J. Inﬂuence of reactive species on the lean blowout limit of an industrial DLE
gas turbine burner. Combust. Flame 2014, 161, 1365–1373. [CrossRef]
89.
Muruganandam, T.; Nair, S.; Scarborough, D.; Neumeier, Y.; Jagoda, J.; Lieuwen, T.; Seitzman, J.; Zinn, B. Active control of lean
blowout for turbine engine combustors. J. Propuls. Power 2005, 21, 807–814. [CrossRef]
90.
Gadiraju, S. Study of Lean Blowout Limits and Effects of Near Blowout Oscillations on Flow Field and Heat Transfer on Gas
Turbine Combustor. Ph.D. Thesis, Virginia Tech, Riva San Vitale, Switzerland, 2018.
91.
Alsulami, R.A.; Windell, B.; Bartholet, D.; Windom, B. Exploring the role of physical and chemical properties on the ignition
and ﬂame stability of liquid fuels with a spray burner and fuel ignition tester (FIT). In Proceedings of the 2018 AIAA Aerospace
Sciences Meeting, Kissimmee, FL, USA, 8–12 January 2018; p. 0673.
92.
Delattin, F.; Di Lorenzo, G.; Rizzo, S.; Bram, S.; De Ruyck, J. Combustion of syngas in a pressurized microturbine-like combustor:
Experimental results. Appl. Energy 2010, 87, 1441–1452. [CrossRef]
93.
Griebel, P.; Boschek, E.; Jansohn, P. Lean blowout limits and NO x emissions of turbulent, lean premixed, hydrogen-enriched
methane/air ﬂames at high pressure. Asme Turbo Expo 2006 Power Land Sea Air 2007. [CrossRef]
94.
Xiao, W.; Huang, Y. Lean blowout limits of a gas turbine combustor operated with aviation fuel and methane. Heat Mass Transf.
2016, 52, 1015–1024. [CrossRef]
95.
Bompelly, R.K. Lean Blowout and Its Robust Sensing in Swirl Combustors. Ph.D. Thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA, USA, 2013.
96.
Zhu, S. Experimental Study of Lean Blowout with Hydrogen Addition in a Swirl-stabilized Premixed Combustor. Doctoral
Dissertations, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, 2012.
97.
Muruganandam, T.; Seitzman, J. Fluid mechanics of lean blowout precursors in gas turbine combustors. Int. J. Spray Combust.
Dyn. 2012, 4, 29–60. [CrossRef]
98.
Sarkar, S.; Ray, A.; Mukhopadhyay, A.; Chaudhari, R.R.; Sen, S. Early detection of lean blow out (lbo) via generalized d-
markov machine construction. In Proceedings of the American Control Conference (ACC), Portland, OR, USA, 4–6 June 2014;
pp. 3041–3046.
99.
Lei, S.; Yong, H. An overview of methodologies to predict lean blowout limits for gas turbine combustors.
In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 16th International Bhurban Conference on Applied Sciences and Technology (IBCAST), Islamabad, Pakistan,
8–12 January 2019; pp. 709–718.
100. Plee, S.; Mellor, A. Characteristic time correlation for lean blowoff of bluff-body-stabilized ﬂames. Combust. Flame 1979, 35, 61–80.
[CrossRef]
101. Ballal, D.R.; Lefebvre, A.H. Weak extinction limits of turbulent ﬂowing mixtures. J. Eng. Power 1979, 101, 343–348 [CrossRef]
102. Ballal, D.; Lefebvre, A. Weak extinction limits of turbulent heterogeneous fuel/air mixtures J. Eng. Power 1980, 102, 416–421.
[CrossRef]
103. Xie, F.; Huang, Y.; Hu, B.; Wang, F. Investigation of the relation between ﬂame volume and LBO limits for a swirl-stabilized
combustor. In Proceedings of the Materials for Renewable Energy & Environment (ICMREE), 2011 International Conference,
Shanghai, China 20–22 May 2011; Volume 2, pp. 2049–2053.
104. Hu, B.; Huang, Y.; Xu, J. A hybrid semi-empirical model for lean blow-out limit predictions of aero-engine combustors. J. Eng.
Gas Turbines Power 2015, 137, 031502. [CrossRef]
105. Yi, T.; Gutmark, E.J. Real-time prediction of incipient lean blowout in gas turbine combustors. AIAA J. 2007, 45, 1734–1739.
[CrossRef]


--- Page 30 ---

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 10922
30 of 30
106. Mukhopadhyay, A.; Chaudhari, R.R.; Paul, T.; Sen, S.; Ray, A. Lean blow-out prediction in gas turbine combustors using symbolic
time series analysis. J. Propuls. Power 2013, 29, 950–960. [CrossRef]
107. Hu, B.; Huang, Y.; Wang, F.; Xie, F. CFD predictions of LBO limits for aero-engine combustors using fuel iterative approximation.
Chin. J. Aeronaut. 2013, 26, 74–84. [CrossRef]
108. Smith, C.; Nickolaus, D.; Leach, T.; Kiel, B.; Garwick, K. LES blowout analysis of premixed ﬂow past V-gutter ﬂameholder. In
Proceedings of the 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 8–11 January 2007; p. 170.
109. Wang, H.r.; Jin, J. Lean blowout predictions of a non-premixed V-Gutter stabilized ﬂame using a Damkohler number methodology.
ASME 2011 Turbo Expo: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition. Am. Soc. Mech. Eng. 2011, 847–858. [CrossRef]
110. Hasti, V.R.; Navarkar, A.; Gore, J.P. A data-driven approach using machine learning for early detection of the lean blowout.
Energy AI 2021, 5, 100099. [CrossRef]
111. Gangopadhyay, T.; De, S.; Liu, Q.; Mukhopadhyay, A.; Sen, S.; Sarkar, S. A Deep Learning Approach to Detect Lean Blowout in
Combustion Systems. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2208.01871.
