
--- Page 1 ---

1273
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Volume 28, 2000/pp. 1273–1280
SHORT-FLAME/QUICK-QUENCH: A UNIQUE ULTRALOW EMISSIONS
COMBUSTION CONCEPT FOR GAS TURBINE COMBUSTORS
SHIGERU HAYASHI, HIDESHI YAMADA and MITSUMASA MAKIDA
National Aerospace Laboratory, Aeropropulsion Center
7-44-1 Jindaiji Higashi-Machi
Chofu Tokyo 182-8522, Japan
This paper describes the emission characteristics of model combustors employing a uniquelow-emissions
gas turbine combustion concept named short-ﬂame/quick-quench combustion. Its potential for ultralow
NOx emissions and complete combustion has previously been successfully demonstrated by testing in an
engine. This concept combines lean premixed combustion in a short reaction zone generated by many
small ﬂames stabilized on a perforated plate ﬂame holder, and quick quenching of NOx formation by
injecting dilution air immediately downstream of the reaction zone. Multiple tubes penetrate through the
ﬂame holder and extend into the combustion chamber, and dilution air is injected from holes on the tubes
at an axial position where major combustion reactions have been completed, to achieve both ultralow NOx
emissions and complete combustion. Measurements of gaseous emissions from the model combustors
were made for natural gas at combustor inlet air temperatures ranging from 300 to 900 C and pressures
of 0.1 to 0.7 MPa. Modulation of combustion and dilution air split resulted in NOx emissions of 3–4 ppm
(corrected at 15% O2) or 0.3–0.4 EINOx (g NO2/kg fuel) over the range of overall equivalence ratios
required in simple- and regenerative-cycle gas turbine operations. The NOx concentrations in parts per
million correlated well by the Arrhenius expression with the adiabatic ﬂame temperature in the reaction
zone, Tp, over a wide range of pressure, temperature, and air split between combustion and dilution. It is
shown that NOx  exp((50  2)  103/RTp), where R is the universal gas constant in cal/mol K.
Introduction
Lean premixed combustion has the potential to
reduce NOx emissions from various combustion de-
vices to levels 2 orders of magnitude lower than
those of diffusion ﬂame combustion. One of the in-
herent problems associated with the application of
the low-NOx combustion concept to gas turbine
combustors is the difﬁculty in the trade-off between
CO and NOx emissions. The magnitude of NOx re-
duction achieved just by decreasing the mixture
equivalence ratio is limited by an unacceptable in-
crease of CO emissions at the lean end of operations.
Because of the three-dimensional, complicated ﬂow
ﬁelds in the combustor, the residence time in the
reaction zone varies widely in space: it is too short
for CO oxidation in some regions, while it is too long
for suppressing NOx formation in other regions,
which results in the difﬁcult trade-off between CO
and NOx emissions.
In order to achieve single-digit parts per million
NOx emissions from gas-fueled stationary gas tur-
bines and a better NOx-CO trade-off, a unique com-
bustion concept, short-ﬂame/quick-quench low-
NOx combustion, has been developed. In the
preliminarily stage of the development, NOx for-
mation and CO destruction were investigated in the
postﬂame region of a quasi-one-dimensional pre-
mixed reaction zone consisting of many tiny ﬂames
stabilized on a ceramic honeycomb ﬂame holder
placed in a ceramic ﬂame tube. The CO concentra-
tion decreased steeply to an acceptable level at a very
short distance from the ﬂame holder, while the NOx
concentration continued to increase with axial dis-
tance, especially when the burned gas temperature
was high. It was found that the introduction of air in
the postﬂame region close to the end of the reaction
zone resulted in complete quenching of NOx for-
mation, as well as complete combustion. Proper in-
jection of dilution air into the postﬂame hot burned
gas in a gas turbine combustor, if possible, would
make it easier to reduce CO and NOx emissions si-
multaneously. The spatial heat release rate in the
premixed reaction zone of this new combustion con-
cept is much higher than that of conventional com-
bustors.
In-engine testing of the concept was successfully
conducted by using a 300 kW simple-cycle gas tur-
bine with a pressure ratio of 8 to demonstrate 5 ppm
(15% O2) NOx emissions near and at full load [1].
This paper describes the emission characteristics of
model combustors tested, before the in-engine test-
ing, over a range of representative operating condi-
tions, including inlet air temperature, pressure, and
equivalence ratios, of simple- and regenerative-cycle
gas turbines.


--- Page 2 ---

1274
GAS TURBINES AND FURNACE COMBUSTORS
Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of model combustor used for elevated pressure tests.
Low-NOx Combustion Concept
In the short-ﬂame/quick-quench combustion con-
cept, lean premixed combustion and quick quench-
ing of NO formation by injection of dilution air in
the postﬂame burned gas are combined to achieve
both ultralow NOx emissions and complete combus-
tion. As is seen from the schematic illustration of the
model combustor in Fig. 1, a perforated plate ﬂame
holder was used to stabilize a large number of small
premixed ﬂames so that these ﬂames, as a whole,
made a short reaction zone. Multiple cylindrical
tubes with closed ends penetrated through the per-
forated ﬂame holder, extending into the combustion
chamber, and dilution air was injected into the
burned gas to quench further NOx formation as well
as to limit the residence time in the higher-tem-
perature reaction zone. The mixture equivalence ra-
tio was selected depending on the combustor inlet
conditions so that combustion could be completed
in the reaction zone. The gas temperature after di-
lution was controlled in the preferred range of 1200–
1400 C to promote continuing CO oxidation down-
stream without producing NOx. The residence time
in the reaction zone could be optimized by changing
the length of the dilution air tubes.
Burner and Combustor Test Rig
A part of the present research was conducted in
the Ceramic Gas Turbine Development Program
sponsored by the Ministry of International Trade
and Industry Japan, where technologies for 300 kW
regenerative-cycle gas turbines with a thermal efﬁ-
ciency greater than 42% were being developed. The
model combustor shown in Fig. 1 was used in high-
pressure tests, while another model combustor of a
similar conﬁguration was used in the atmospheric-
pressure tests. The ﬂame holders and quenching air
tubes of these model combustors were made of re-
action-bonded silicon nitride. Fig. 2 shows a photo
of the burner assembly prepared for the elevated
pressure tests; it was composed of a ﬂame holder 120
mm in diameter and 37 quenching air tubes with 8
mm outer diameter and 5.8 mm inner diameter. The
ﬂame holder had 300 holes 3.4 mm in diameter and
37 holes 9 mm in diameter through which quenching
air tubes penetrated. The blockage was 65.9%. Each
quenching air tube had a total of eight dilution air
injection holes 2 mm in diameter in two rows of 4
and 7 mm from the tip. The combustor for atmo-
spheric pressure tests consisted of a 110 mm diam-
eter ﬂame holder with 282 holes 3.2 mm in diameter


--- Page 3 ---

UNIQUE ULTRA-LOW EMISSIONS COMBUSTION CONCEPT
1275
Fig. 2. Photo of burner assembly for combustor used at
elevated pressurs, consisting of a perforated ﬂame holder
and quenching air tubes made of silicon nitride.
Fig. 3. NOx and CO concentrations and combustion ef-
ﬁciency as a function of overall equivalence ratio o for
reaction zone length L  50 mm at atmospheric pressure.
(63.1% blockage) and 37 quenching air tubes with 8
mm outer diameter and 7 mm inner diameter.
Both combustors had independent ﬂow passages
and ﬂow control valves for modulating combustion
air and quenching air ﬂow rates. A cylindrical
straight ﬂame tube 120 mm in diameter was used at
elevated pressures, while a 110 mm diameter ﬂame
tube with a converging exit 80 mm in diameter was
used at atmospheric pressure.
The natural gas fuel (98% methane) was supplied
from pressurized cylinders to the burner through a
mass ﬂow controller and injected from holes con-
nected to a common fuel manifold in the ﬂange plate
to facilitate mixture preparation before the plenum
chamber. Measurements of pitot pressure and fuel/
air ratio of the mixture jets from the holes on the
ﬂame holder showed that the velocity and fuel/air
ratio distributions were uniform across the surface.
Electric heaters were used to supply non-vitiated air
at temperatures ranging from 300 to 900 C.
Experimental Procedure and Emissions
Measurements
Gaseous emissions were measured at pressures
between 1 and 7 atm in two inlet air temperature
ranges, 300–400 C and 700–900 C. The lower tem-
perature range covers typical inlet air temperatures
of simple-cycle stationary gas turbines, and the other
one represents those of regenerative gas turbine ap-
plications.
Exhaust gas was sampled using an X-shaped, wa-
ter-cooled stainless steel gas sampling probe placed
at 90 mm from the surface of the ﬂame holder in
the atmospheric-pressure tests, and at 85 mm in the
elevated-pressure tests. Heated water was used for
gas sampling probe cooling to prevent water vapor
from condensing in the probes. Otherwise, some
NO2 may be lost into the condensed liquid phase.
The gas temperature detected by a thin thermocou-
ple placed in the gas passage in the probe was moni-
tored throughout the measurements. Standard gas
analysis procedures were employed to determine the
composition of burned gas: NO was measured by
chemiluminescence, O2 was measured by paramag-
netic pressure difference, and CO and CO2 were
measured by non-dispersed infrared absorption.The
efﬁciency of the NO2-NO converter was veriﬁed to
be appropriate.
Results
Atmospheric Pressure Data
Figure 3 shows CO and NOx concentrations (cor-
rected to 15% O2) and combustion efﬁciency for a
quenching air tube length L  50 mm, at inlet air
temperatures, Tin  300 and 400 C. The overall
equivalence ratio, o; is estimated from the carbon
balance of gas compositions determined by the gas
analysis. The reference velocity, U, is deﬁned as the
ratio of the volumetric ﬂow rate of air at inlet pres-
sure and temperature conditions divided by the
cross-sectional area of the ﬂame tube. The parame-
ter RD is used to denote the ratio of mass of quench-
ing air to the total air ﬂow rates. Data for unburned
hydrocarbons emissions are not shown in this report
since their concentrations were in several parts per
million. General trends of emissions and combustion
efﬁciency at these two inlet temperatures are con-
sistent. NOx emissions increase more steeply with


--- Page 4 ---

1276
GAS TURBINES AND FURNACE COMBUSTORS
Fig. 4. NOx and CO concentrations and combustion ef-
ﬁciency as a function of overall equivalence ratio o for L
 35 mm at atmospheric pressure.
Fig. 5. Effects of reaction zone length and air split on
NOx emissions at atmospheric pressure.
Fig. 6. NOx and CO emissions and combustion efﬁ-
ciency as a function of overall equivalence ratio o for L
 35 mm at 800 C inlet air temperature and atmospheric
pressure.
the overall equivalence ratio at larger RD. Complete
combustion or very low CO emission is achieved
when the overall equivalence ratio is greater than a
certain critical value for each value of RD. The
change in the dependence of all emissions on overall
equivalence ratio with RD is, as a matter of fact,
explained not by the overall equivalence ratio but by
the equivalence ratio of the mixtures.
Emissions measurements were also made for L 
35 mm to investigate the effects of the residence
time in the reaction zone on the emissions levels.
Typical data for this shorter residence time are
shown in Fig. 4. The variation in emissions with
overall equivalence ratio exhibits qualitatively the
same trends as observed for L  50 mm (Fig. 3).
The quantitative difference in NOx emissions for the
two reaction zone lengths is more clearly shown in
Fig. 5, where NOx concentrations (15% O2) are plot-
ted as a function of reaction zone gas temperature,
Tp, the adiabatic gas temperature calculated from
the inlet air temperature and equivalence ratio of the
mixture. Each set of data points for the same RD
and L are well represented by a straight line, [NOx]
 exp(5  103 Tp), over a wide range of Tp, show-
ing that the NOx, emissions index (EINOx) is actually
an exponentially increasing function of reaction tem-
perature. Higher NOx emissions at increased RD for
L  50 mm are due to the longer residence time
associated with the reduced mixture ﬂow rate in the
reaction zone. The observation that the effects of RD
on NOx emissions are smaller for L  35 mm is
attributable to the fact that the postﬂame NOx for-
mation is relatively less and NOx produced in the
ﬂame front contributes to the major part of the mea-
sured NOx emissions. A decrease of L from 50 mm
to 35 mm resulted in reductions of NOx emissions
ranging from about 1/2 to 2/3, depending on RD.
Judging from the low CO emissions shown in Fig.
4, L  35 mm is a better choice for the NOx-CO
emissions trade-off at an inlet air temperature of 400
C and atmospheric pressure. The proposed concept
is advantageous in achieving low emissions: single-
digit parts per million NOx emissions can be
achieved at Tp as high as 2000 K without any increase
in CO emission.
The concept is also very effective for high air tem-
perature applications in regenerative-cycle gas tur-
bines. Fig. 6 shows the results for L  35 mm at
800 C inlet air temperature. Minimum NOx emis-
sions levels achieved at complete combustion are


--- Page 5 ---

UNIQUE ULTRA-LOW EMISSIONS COMBUSTION CONCEPT
1277
Fig. 7. NOx emissions versus CO emission for different
air splits at 800 C inlet air temperature and atmospheric
pressure.
Fig. 8. Effects of reaction zone length and air split on
NOx emissions at 800 C inlet air temperature and atmo-
spheric pressure.
Fig. 9. NOx and CO emissions and combustion efﬁ-
ciency as a function of overall equivalence ratio o for L
 35 mm at 400 C inlet air temperature and elevated
pressures.
3 ppm, which do not exceed the levels obtained in
the 300–400 C inlet air temperature range (Figs. 3
and 4). Additionally, very low CO emissions (i.e.,
complete combustion) were achieved over a wide
range of overall equivalence ratios, in spite of an in-
crease in U from 10 m/s to 15 m/s. A correlation of
NOx with CO emissions is shown in Fig. 7. Both NOx
and CO emissions can be reduced simultaneously
with decreasing overall equivalence ratio at smaller
values of RD, and the minimum NO level is as low
as 2.5 ppm for all values of RD.
The NOx concentrations (15% O2) at 800 C inlet
air temperature are shown in Fig. 8 as a function of
Tp for different quenching tube lengths. The levels
of NOx at 900 C inlet air temperature, not shown
here, were found to be higher by a small degree than
those measured at 800 C inlet temperature at cor-
responding conditions. A comparison with the data
at 400 C inlet air temperature, shown in Fig. 5,
shows that the difference in NOx concentration be-
comes smaller at 800 C inlet air temperature. An
increase in reference velocity from 10 m/s to 15 m/
s, however, had a fairly small effect on EINOx (not
shown here). The levels of NOx emissions in the
700–900 C inlet air temperature range are also well
correlated by Tp and agree with those in the 300–
400 C inlet air temperature range. These results
show that the concept can be very effective in
achieving ultralow NOx emissions and complete
combustion at inlet air temperatures as high as
900 C.
Elevated Pressure Tests
Following the atmospheric emissions measure-
ments, elevated pressure emissions measurements
were conducted at pressures (Pin) of 0.3, 0.5, and 0.7
MPa and at inlet air temperatures of 400, 700, 800,
and 900 C for L  35 mm. Fig. 9 shows CO and
NOx emissions and combustion efﬁciency measured
at pressures of 0.3 and 0.5 MPa and an inlet air tem-
perature of 400 C. As with the data at atmospheric
pressure (Fig. 4), CO levels became lower and hence
high combustion efﬁciencies were achieved over a
wider range of equivalence ratios. NOx emissions
smaller than 10 ppm were measured at elevated


--- Page 6 ---

1278
GAS TURBINES AND FURNACE COMBUSTORS
Fig. 10. Effects of pressure and air split on NOx emis-
sions at 800 C inlet air temperature.
Fig. 11. NOx and CO emissions and combustion efﬁ-
ciency as a function of overall equivalence ratio o for L
 35 mm at 800 C inlet air temperature and 0.7 MPa
pressure.
Fig. 12. Effects of inlet air temperature and air split on
NOx emissions at 0.3 MPa pressure.
Fig. 13. Effects of pressure and air split on NOx emis-
sions at 800 C inlet air temperature.
pressures while maintaining combustion efﬁciency
greater than 99.5%. The NOx emissions data are
plotted as a function of Tp in Fig. 10.
Figure 11 shows CO and NOx concentrations and
combustion efﬁciency measured at 800 C inlet air
temperature, showing a typical trend for these emis-
sions and combustion efﬁciency in the higher inlet
temperature region. The general trend of the de-
pendence of NOx emissions on the overall equiva-
lence ratio is similar to that in the lower inlet air
temperature range. Qualitatively, CO emissions are
very low and combustion is complete even at equiv-
alence ratios as small as 0.13. It is worth mentioning
that a better NOx and CO trade-off can be more
easily achieved at higher inlet air temperatures. The
minimum NOx emissions under complete combus-
tion is about 3 ppm at 800 C inlet air temperature.
NOx concentrations measured for different inlet air
temperatures of 700 to 900 C at 0.3 MPa are cor-
related with Tp in Fig. 12. The comparison suggests
that NOx emissions are generally higher at higher
inlet air temperatures.
The effects of pressure on EINOx are shown in
Fig. 13. The effect of pressure on NOx emissions is
not simple. It is not possible to derive a unique pres-
sure index for expressing pressure effects on EINOx
(EINOx;  pn) over the range of Tp tested, even


--- Page 7 ---

UNIQUE ULTRA-LOW EMISSIONS COMBUSTION CONCEPT
1279
Fig. 14. Arrehenius plots of actual NOx concentration in the reaction zone at different operating conditions.
though NOx levels at pressures of 0.3–0.7 MPa were
quite a lot higher than those at atmospheric pres-
sure. This trend generally agrees with the chemical
kinetic computations for NOx formation in a model
combustor composed of a well-stirred reactor, a one-
dimensional quenching air injection zone, and a plug
ﬂow reactor [2]. The slope is the steepest at 0.7 MPa.
The Arrhenius plot of actual NOx concentrations in
the reaction zone, estimated from the measured
NOx concentration in the sampled gas is shown in
Fig. 14, where NOx concentration in parts per mil-
lion is plotted against the inverse of the reaction
temperature. Data for the same inlet air tempera-
tures are well correlated by single lines which are
expressed by NOx  exp(50  2)  103/RTp).
Xie and Hayashi [3] investigated NOx formation in
an impinging jet methane combustor with minimum
heat losses and reported a value of 63  103 cal/
mol for overall activation energy, E, for Tp  1700
K. The reaction N2  O →NO  N, the rate con-
trolling reaction for NOx formation by the Zeldovich
mechanism, has an activation energy of 75  103
cal/mol [4]. The similarity of the values for overall
activation energy shows that thermal NOx is the pre-
dominant mechanism of NOx formation in the pres-
ent low-emissions combustion concept, short-ﬂame/
quick-quench combustion.
Conclusions
A unique low-NOx combustion concept for gas-
fueled gas turbine combustor applications was suc-
cessfully tested, demonstrating ultralow NOx emis-
sions of a few parts per million without any
compromise of combustion efﬁciency or CO emis-
sion in the temperature and pressure range of simple
and regenerative gas turbines. Higher inlet air tem-
perature was favorable for simultaneous achieve-
ment of ultraﬂow NOx emissions and complete com-
bustion. The overall activation energy for NOx in
parts per million plotted as a function of 1/Tp was
estimated as (50  2)  103 cal/mol.
REFERENCES
1. Yamada, H., Makida, M., and Hayashi, S., “Ultra-Short
Flame Burner for Low-NOx Gas Turbine Combustors,”


--- Page 8 ---

1280
GAS TURBINES AND FURNACE COMBUSTORS
in Environmental Research in Japan 1997, Environ-
mental Agency, Tokyo, 1998, pp. 5–6.
2. Xu, Z., Hayashi, S., Yamada, H., and Takagi, T., “NOx
Formation Characteristics and Its Intrinsic Processes in
Premixed Flame and Well-Stirred Staged Combustion,”
AIAA paper 98-0251, Thirty-Sixth Aerospace Sciences
Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 12–15, 1998.
3. Xie, L., and Hayashi, S., Proc. Combust. Inst. 26:2155–
2160 (1998).
4. Miller, J. A., and Bowman, C. T., Prog. Energy Combust.
Sci. 15:287–338 (1989).
COMMENTS
C. H. Priddin, Rolls Royce plc., UK. Do you have any
evidence how long the projecting dilution tubes will survive
in the gas turbine environment?
Author’s Reply. The tubes of the combustor for on-en-
gine testing were made of Inconel, whereas those of the
combustor used for the study presented here were made
of silicon nitride. We have no data to estimate how long
these ceramic tubes survive in the actual gas turbine en-
vironment. An inspection of the color of the metal tubes
after on-engine testing shows that the metal tubes can sur-
vive for a reasonable period in the gas turbine environment,
300 K inlet air temperature and 8 bar pressure.
●
Jerald A. Cole, GE Energy & Environmental Research,
USA. As the fuel input to the burner is varied over a normal
engine turndown cycle, the dilution ratio, Ro, must be con-
tinually adjusted to maintain the optimal NOx perfor-
mance. It is not clear, however, that optimal NOx is
achieved through a constant total air ﬂow rate, or whether
better performance would be achieved if the air ﬂow rate
changed with engine load. Could the authors comment on
whether it is necessary to vary the total air ﬂow rate to
maintain optimal combustor performance throughout
turndown, and what impact that might have on engine per-
formance efﬁciency?
Author’s Reply. The dilution ratio has to be continually
adjusted to maintain the mixture equivalence ratio to
achieve the optimum performance over an engine cycle. It
is not necessary to keep the total air ﬂow rate in engine
applications, although the experiments were conducted at
constant air ﬂow rates. If the total air ﬂow rate to the com-
bustor increases with power or fuel ﬂow rate, the range of
modulation of the air split between combustion and dilu-
tion can be smaller as compared with a constant air ﬂow
rate case.
