
--- Page 1 ---

Technical Note
CFD Study of Merging Turbulent Plane Jets
A. Karimpour, S.M.ASCE1; N. B. Kaye, A.M.ASCE2; and A. A. Khan, M.ASCE3
Abstract: A series of two-dimensional computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations of merging turbulent plane jets were conducted to
establish the point at which the jets can be regarded as having merged to form a single jet. Simulations were conducted to quantify the
influence of the nozzle width, jet axis separation, Reynolds number, and the relative jet strength on the distance from the source to
the merger point. The simulation results were then compared with experimental results published in literature. As the jet fluid exited
the two nozzles, the shear layer between the jet and the ambient fluid drove the ambient fluid entrainment into the jets. However, a finite
volume of fluid trapped was between the two jets, and a recirculation zone with two counterrotating vortices was established. This vortex pair
reduced the pressure between the jets, drawing them together more rapidly than theoretical models predicted. The simulation results indicated
that equal-strength jets merged at a distance downstream of 1.4 times the initial nozzle centerline separation provided that the nozzle-
separation-to-nozzle-width ratio was greater than 18. As the source momentum flux of one jet decreased relative to the other, the relative
distance to merger also decreased. However, for source momentum flux ratios between 0.2 and 0.9, the merger distance was only a very weak
function of the momentum flux ratio. The CFD-measured merging distance was significantly closer to the jet nozzles than current models
predict. Therefore, the mixing of pollutants by using parallel plane jets is less efficient than currently thought. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)HY
.1943-7900.0000308. © 2011 American Society of Civil Engineers.
CE Database subject headings: Computational fluid dynamics technique; Jets, fluid; Simulation.
Author keywords: Turbulent jet; Plane jet; Merging jets; Computational fluid dynamics.
Introduction
Turbulent jets play a significant role in both industrial and environ-
mental flows in a broad range of applications from the outlet of
air-conditioning vents (Sandberg et al. 1992) to volcanic eruptions
(Woods 1988). Turbulent jets are also regarded as a canonical tur-
bulent shear flow and have been the subject of much research (List
1982). Jet interaction is also a common occurrence, particularly in
industrial contexts in which multiple jets form in close proximity
such as lines of diffusers at wastewater treatment plants (Davidson
et al. 1994) and at lines of fuel nozzles in gas-fired furnaces (Szegö
et al. 2009).
Despite these practical applications, there has been minimal
research on how turbulent jets interact with one another. The inter-
action of two round turbulent jets has been studied experimentally
(Yin et al. 2007; Rathakrishnan et al. 1989). Yin et al. (2007) found
that the jets merged closer to the jet nozzle as the nozzles were
brought closer together, though few quantitative results were pre-
sented. Rathakrishnan et al. (1989) also examined round twin jets
and concluded that the merging distance is independent of the
nozzle separation; however, the low resolution and narrow param-
eter range and the extremely low spatial resolution of their mea-
surements calls in to question their conclusions.
Merging plane jets were examined experimentally by Miller and
Comings (1960) and others (Anderson and Spall 2001; Murai et al.
1976; Lin and Sheu 1990; Nasr and Lai 1997; Fujisawa et al. 2004).
These studies measured the velocity and pressure in the flow field
downstream of two long thin nozzles focusing exclusively on
equally turbulent plane jets and typically covering only a small
number of slot widths and nozzle separation distances. For exam-
ple, Miller and Comings (1960) conducted a single experiment at a
Reynolds number of 17,800 by using two 1.3 cm wide nozzles with
a centerline-to-centerline separation of 7.6 cm. These experimental
studies have been complemented by computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) studies (Anderson and Spall 2001; Lai and Nasr 1998) that
again focused only on equal jets and for only a small number of
nozzle-width-to-centerline separation ratios.
Of all the papers listed previously, no comprehensive study of
the merging of equal and unequal turbulent jets exists that fully
examines the role of the nozzle width, nozzle-centerline separation,
or the ratio of the two jets source momentum fluxes. It is the goal of
this study to use CFD simulations to fully explore these parameters.
This paper builds on the previously published studies (Miller and
Comings 1960; Anderson and Spall 2001; Murai et al. 1976; Lin
and Sheu 1990; Nasr and Lai 1997) and compares their results with
the simulations performed for this study. This study was conducted
by using the ANSYS FLUENT software package (http://www.ansys
.com/products/fluid-dynamics/fluent/).
Problem Definition
This study considers the flow field formed by two parallel plane jets
issuing from slot nozzles of infinite length set into a vertical wall.
The jets enter into a stationary ambient of the same fluid. The
density of all fluids is identical so that no gravitational effects
are present. The two jets have slot widths D1 and D2 and source
velocities u1 and u2, respectively. The jet inlet velocity is assumed
1Dept. of Civil Engineering, Clemson Univ., Clemson, SC 29634
(corresponding author). E-mail: akarimp@g.clemson.edu
2Assistant Professor, Dept. of Civil Engineering, Clemson Univ.,
Clemson, SC 29634.
3Associate Professor, Dept. of Civil Engineering, Clemson University,
Clemson, SC 29634.
Note. This manuscript was submitted on August 11, 2009; approved on
July 29, 2010; published online on February 15, 2011. Discussion period
open until August 1, 2011; separate discussions must be submitted for in-
dividual papers. This technical note is part of the Journal of Hydraulic
Engineering, Vol. 137, No. 3, March 1, 2011. ©ASCE, ISSN 0733-
9429/2011/3-381–385/$25.00.
JOURNAL OF HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING © ASCE / MARCH 2011 / 381
Downloaded 06 Jun 2011 to 129.137.88.251. Redistribution subject to ASCE license or copyright. Visithttp://www.ascelibrary.org


--- Page 2 ---

to be uniform across the width of the nozzle. The jet axes are
separated by a distance Z. The jets are assumed to be fully turbulent
so that viscous forces can be ignored. Fig. 1 represents the problem
considered.
As the jet fluid moves away from the nozzles, a shear layer
forms and ambient fluid is entrained into the jets; the centerline
velocity decreases and a bell-shaped velocity profile develops.
The finite volume of fluid trapped between the two jets causes a
recirculation zone, and the jets are drawn toward each other. Further
downstream, the jet-velocity profiles merge such that only a single
peak in the velocity profile exists. At this stage, the jets can be
considered merged and the flow behaves as a single jet. The goal
of this study is to establish the distance (Xm) from jet nozzles to the
merging point.
The distance (Xm) from the nozzle to the point where the
velocity profiles merge (i.e., where only a single velocity peak is)
is a function of each jet’s source conditions and the distance between
the jets’ axes. That is
Xm ¼ f ðD1; M1;D2; M2; μ; ρ; ZÞ
ð1Þ
where Mi ¼ u2
i Di denotes the specific momentum flux per unit
width at the source. Dimensional analysis allows Eq. (1) to be
reduced to
χm ¼ Xm
Z ¼ f ðζ; ψ; R1; R2Þ
ð2Þ
where R = Reynolds number; ψ ¼ M2=M1 is the ratio of the source
momentum fluxes; and ζ ¼ z=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
D1=D2
p
is the scaled nozzle separa-
tion. Without a loss of generality, we assume that Jet 1 has the higher
momentum flux so that ψ < 1.
As stated earlier, we assume that the Reynolds number of each
jet is sufficiently high such that viscous forces can be ignored and
the flow is Reynolds number independent. Further, provided that
the separation between the nozzles is considerably larger than
the nozzle widths, the jets can be assumed to be issuing from point
sources and the merging distance is independent of ζ. Therefore,
for large nozzle separations, the merging distance is given by
χm ¼ f ðψÞ
ð3Þ
The only theoretical model for such jet merger is that attributable to
Reichardt (Maxwell 1970; Wang and Davidson 2003). This model
demonstrates that the addition of the local specific momentum flux
profiles of the individual jets gives the specific momentum flux
profile of the combined jet flow. However, the model assumes that
the jets interact through the superposition of their specific momen-
tum flux profiles but that no dynamic interaction is between the jets
attributable to their entrainment velocities. Clearly, for the case of
two-dimensional (2D) plane jets, the assumption that there is no
dynamic jet interaction will not hold because of the trapped fluid
between the jets and the low pressure circulation zone near the noz-
zles. The Reichardt prediction is presented because it provides a
useful introduction to the definition of the merging distance and
further allows a comparison between the 2D and the three-
dimensional (3D) cases in which the Reichardt model is more
appropriate.
Approximating the jet velocity profile as a Gaussian curve, the
velocity at any point, for two jets with negligible nozzle width, is
given by
uðx; zÞ2 ¼ u2
c1fe½2ðzZ=2Þ2=bðxÞ2 þ ψe½2ðzþZ=2Þ2=bðxÞ2g
ð4Þ
where bðxÞ = local jet width, z = transverse coordinate and uc1 =
local centerline velocity jet one would have in the absence of Jet 2.
For a fully developed turbulent plane jet, the local jet width is a
linear function of the distance from the source and is given by
(Lee and Chu 2003)
bðxÞ ¼ 0:12x
ð5Þ
The merging distance is defined as the distance in the x-direction in
which the velocity profile has only a single peak. This is the point at
which the trough between the two peaks on the velocity profile dis-
appears. Therefore, their axial velocity gradient in the transverse
direction is zero (i.e., local maxima or minima) and the curvature
is zero (i.e., transition from minima to maxima). That is
∂u
∂z ¼ ∂zu
∂z2 ¼ 0
ð6Þ
This is the same definition suggested in a study of round turbulent
plume merger (Kaye and Linden 2004), though in that case, the
buoyancy profile, rather than the specific momentum profile,
was used. In Kaye and Linden (2004), the buoyancy profile, as
opposed to the velocity profile, was chosen because the plume flow
is driven by its buoyancy. By using the same reasoning, the specific
momentum profile is the appropriate profile to measure for jets
because they are driven by momentum, though we note that other
writers (Anderson and Spall 2001) define the merging point as
coincident with the stagnation point.
For equal jets, that is ψ ¼ 1, it is possible to establish an analytic
solution to Eq. (6) given Eq. (5). However, for unequal jets, this is
not possible because the symmetry of the problem is broken.
Instead, analytic expressions were established for du=dz and
d2u=dz2 and these were evaluated by using a grid with 500 points
between the jet centerlines and twice this resolution in the stream-
wise direction. A numerical search was then conducted by using the
grid until the points that satisfy Eq. (6) were found for 1,001 differ-
ent values of ψ. The results of this search are shown in Fig. 5 along
with the CFD simulation results.
CFD Simulations
To model the merging of two turbulent plane jets as described pre-
viously, the CFD software package ANSYS FLUENT version 6.3.26
was used. The flow was modeled as a two-phase flow, i.e., water and
Fig. 1. Problem definition showing two unequal slot jets; dashed lines
are approximate velocity profiles and the distance to merger where the
velocity profile has a single peak is shown as Xm
382 / JOURNAL OF HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING © ASCE / MARCH 2011
Downloaded 06 Jun 2011 to 129.137.88.251. Redistribution subject to ASCE license or copyright. Visithttp://www.ascelibrary.org


--- Page 3 ---

air on top of the water. For the initial condition, the virtual tank was
filled with water to 1.5 m above the tank’s bed and the remainder of
thedomainwasfilledwithair.Hydrostaticpressurewasappliedtothe
entire domain as the initial pressure condition and the volume of
fluid method was used to model the free surface between air and
water. The standard k  ε model was used for modeling the
turbulence in the domain. This is consistent with previous studies
of merging turbulent plane jets that found k  ε models to produce
realistic simulation results (Lai and Nasr 1998). The SIMPLE
algorithm was used to model the pressure and the velocity field.
GAMBIT
version
2.4.6
(http://www.fluent.com/software/
gambit/index) was used to define the geometry and the mesh.
Unstructured 2D triangular mesh elements were used to generate
the mesh. A total of 107,386 cells were used for discretizing the
equations. To test for grid independence, the ζ ¼ 6 case was
repeated by using a finer mesh with 386,126 cells. The finer mesh
gave the same results as the coarser mesh so the remaining simu-
lations were computed with 107,386 cells.
The virtual two-dimensional domain was 2 × 2 m. The vertical
distance between the jet axes was considerably smaller than the
distance from the jets to any horizontal surface. The two jets
were located on the left vertical wall of the tank, 1  Z=2 m above
the base of the tank where Z = distance between the centerlines of the
two jets. Unlike round turbulent jets, the entrainment field does not
decay with distance from the jet center line. Therefore, ensuring that
the entrainment flow is normal to the jet axis can be problematic. The
introduction of the jets into any size virtual domain will result in a
large-scale circulation. Provided the domain is large enough, the
large-scale circulation will have a much larger scale than the jet axis
separation. Our simulations indicated that this produces the desired
entrainment flow normal to the jet axis. [See Fig. 2(a).]
To validate the CFD model, our results were compared to the
previously published experimental and computational results
(Miller and Comings 1960; Anderson and Spall 2001; Murai et al.
1976; Lin and Sheu 1990; Nasr and Lai 1997). For all simulations,
the jet entrance Reynolds number was R ¼ 17;400 as used by
Miller and Comings (1960) except for two simulations performed
to examine the potential role of the Reynolds number on the
merging distance.
Equal Jet Results
A total of 27 dual jet simulations were performed for different
nozzle-separation-to-nozzle-width ratio (ζ), Reynolds number
(R), and momentum flux ratios (ψ). First, simulations for equal
dual-plane jets were performed with different values of ζ to estab-
lish the separation distance required such that the nozzle width no
longer influenced the merging distance. Second, two simulations
were performed with different Reynolds numbers to verify that
the merging distance was independent of R. Third, a series of sim-
ulations were performed at large ζ for a range of ψ to understand
how the relative strength of the jets (i.e., their momentum flux ratio)
influenced the merging distance.
Sample data for two equal plane jets is shown in Fig. 2(a).
Shown in this figure are the recirculation zone that is established
between the two jets and the drawing together of the two jets
around this zone. A stagnation point exists at the right-hand end
of the recirculation zone. From the velocity field calculated by
the simulations, a series of horizontal velocity profiles, at different
distances from the nozzles, were extracted to measure the distance
to the point at which the jets can be considered merged, as defined
in Eq. (6). A sample velocity profile is shown in Fig. 2(b). The
typical bell-shaped velocity profile near the source is shown in
this figure. At greater downstream distances, the velocity profiles
merge into each other until only a single peak is in the velocity
profile.
A series of simulations were performed in which the Reynolds
number was constant and the nozzle-centerline separation and the
nozzle width were varied. The goal of this series of simulations was
to establish the relationship between the relative merging distance
xm and the relative nozzle separation ζ. As the relative separation
increased (i.e., ζ increases), the influence of the nozzle width
decreased until a limit was reached in which the merging distance
was independent of ζ.
Two locations were used to identify the distance at which the jets
could be regarded as having merged into a single plane jet; the dis-
tance to the stagnation point called the merge point in Anderson and
Spall (2001), and the distance at which only a single peak is in the
velocity profile called the combined point in Anderson and Spall
(2001). These two points represent the upper and lower bounds
on the “merging” region as defined in Fig. 1 of Anderson and
Spall (2001). Both measures indicated that the nozzle width did
not significantly influence the jet merger distance, provided ζ ¼ z=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
D1=D2
p
> 18. This is more clearly shown in Figs. 3 and 4, which
show the merging distances scaled on the nozzle separation as a
function of ζ. Also shown are previously published experimental
results (Miller and Comings 1960; Anderson and Spall 2001; Murai
et al. 1976; Lin and Sheu 1990; Nasr and Lai 1997). Clearly, good
agreement exists between the CFD simulations and the previously
published experimental data. Further, as expected, the relative merg-
ing distance χm approached a constant for a large nozzle separation ζ
For relatively small separations, the relative merging distance
increased with increasing nozzle separation and peaked at a relative
separation of ζ ≈5. For larger ζ the merger distance decreased
with decreasing nozzle width and approached a constant value of
χm ¼ 1:4 for ζ > 18.
A slightly different behavior is shown in the location of the
stagnation point; see Fig. 4. The distance to the stagnation point
increased monotonically and tended toward a scaled distance χs ¼
Xs=Z ¼ 0:75 for ζ > 18. The stagnation point results showed
Fig. 2. (a) Streamlines for the flow attributable to two equal slot jets
showing the recirculation zone between the two jets; (b) velocity pro-
files for two equal turbulent slot jets at a different distance downstream
of the nozzles
JOURNAL OF HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING © ASCE / MARCH 2011 / 383
Downloaded 06 Jun 2011 to 129.137.88.251. Redistribution subject to ASCE license or copyright. Visithttp://www.ascelibrary.org


--- Page 4 ---

poorer agreement with the experimental results of Miller and Com-
ings (1960), Anderson and Spall (2001), Lin and Sheu (1990), and
Nasr and Lai (1997) for smaller values of ζ though the agreement
was better for larger relative nozzle separations. The poorer
agreement is possibly attributable to the difficulty in accurately
measuring the location of a stagnation point by using intrusive
measurement probes (Khan 1989). Further, it should also be noted
that far fewer experimental measurements of the stagnation point
location have been reported, again likely attributable to the diffi-
culty in measuring it.
To verify that the flow was Reynolds number independent, a
series of tests were performed for a range of Reynolds numbers
(i.e., R ¼ 12;500, 17,400, and 25,000) and a separation-to-nozzle-
width ratio of ζ ¼ 6. The measured variation in the merging dis-
tance was less than 2% indicating that the merging distance is
Reynolds number independent.
The equal dual jet study established that:
a. The simulations agree well with published experimental results,
b. The flow is Reynolds number independent for the range of Rey-
nolds numbers used, and
c. The merging distance is independent of the nozzle width
provided ζ > 18.
Unequal Jet Results
The goal of this portion of the study was to understand the role of
the jet momentum flux ratio ψ on the merging distance when the
nozzle width was small enough that it did not influence the flow,
that is, for ζ > 18. To that end, a series of simulations were per-
formed in which the momentum flux ratio was varied by varying
the nozzle width and the source velocity of one jet while keeping
the second jet constant. Both the jet width and the source velocity
were varied to adjust the momentum flux while keeping the Reyn-
olds number of the jets constant. For all simulations, the nozzle-
separation-to-nozzle-width ratio was large (ζ ¼ z=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
D1=D2
p
> 18).
The distance to the merger point as a function of the momentum
flux ratio, that is χm ¼ f ðψÞ, for large ζ, is shown in Fig. 5 along
with the model prediction of Reichardt (Maxwell 1970; Wang and
Davidson 2003). As expected, there was a significant disagreement
between the simulation results and the Reichardt model prediction
because the model assumed that the two jets did not interact and
were free to grow independently of each other. This was not the
case for dual plane jets for two reasons. First, each jet entrained
ambient fluid from its surroundings creating an entrainment veloc-
ity field that tended to draw the jets together (Kaye and Linden
2004). Second, and more importantly, there was a finite volume
of fluid trapped between the jets. The shear generated by the jets
drove a recirculation flow between the jets [see Fig. 2(a)].
As the momentum flux ratio ψ was reduced from one, the
merger distance dropped slightly from approximately 1.4 at
ψ ¼ 1 to 1.1 at ψ ¼ 0:9. It then remained relatively constant as
ψ was reduced further until dipping again for ψ < 0:2. This trend
was qualitatively similar to that observed in an experimental study
of merging round turbulent plumes in which the merging distance
was found to be relatively constant for a broad range of buoyancy
flux ratios (Kaye and Linden 2004).
For both equal and unequal plane jets, the merger point was
very close to the jet source. Therefore, only a small region existed
in which the ambient fluid was entrained into two jets rather than
one jet. The flow rate in a single jet scaled on the square root of the
momentum flux, Q ∼M1=2. Therefore, two jets with half the mo-
mentum flux had a larger volume flux as Q ∼2ðM=2Þ1=2 > M1=2.
As the concentration of any pollutant in the jet was inversely pro-
portional to the volume flux, two jets would result in more mixing
and lower concentrations. However, as the two jets merged close to
Fig. 4. Scaled distance to the stagnation point χs as a function of the
relative nozzle separation ζ; squares represent the CFD simulations
from this study, and other shapes, as described subsequently, represent
the previously published experimental results extracted from Fig. 7(a)
of Anderson and Spall (2001); triangles (Miller and Commings 1959),
diamonds (Anderson and Spall 2001), circles (Lin and Sheu 1990),
stars (Nasr and Lai 1997)
Fig. 5. Scaled merging distance χm as a function of the momentum
flux ratio ψ; the line represents the Reichardt prediction assuming
no jet interaction and the symbols represent the CFD simulation results
Fig. 3. Scaled merging distance χm as a function of the relative nozzle
separation ζ; squares represent the CFD simulations from this study,
and other shapes, as described subsequently, represent the previously
published experimental results extracted from Fig. 7(a) of Anderson
and Spall (2001); triangles (Miller and Commings 1959), diamonds
(Anderson and Spall 2001), pluses (Murai et al. 1976), circles
(Lin and Sheu 1990), stars (Nasr and Lai 1997)
384 / JOURNAL OF HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING © ASCE / MARCH 2011
Downloaded 06 Jun 2011 to 129.137.88.251. Redistribution subject to ASCE license or copyright. Visithttp://www.ascelibrary.org


--- Page 5 ---

their source, the benefit of having two plane jets was minimized,
and a single-jet model may provide a better guide to downstream
pollutant concentrations.
Conclusions
A series of CFD simulations were performed to investigate the
downstream distance at which two parallel turbulent plane jets
could be regarded as merged. The results of the simulations showed
good agreement with previously published experimental measure-
ments of the distance to the merging point. The agreement between
simulation and experiment for the location of the stagnation point
was poorer for smaller ratios of the centerline separation-to-
nozzle width. Both measurement criteria showed that the mer-
ging distance was independent of the nozzle width provided that
the centerline separation-to-nozzle-width ratio was large (i.e.,
ζ ¼ z=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
D1=D2
p
> 18).
A series of unequal jet simulations was performed to examine
the effect of varying the ratio of the source momentum fluxes of the
two jets. The results of the simulated merging distance were com-
pared to the theoretical prediction of Reichardt. The agreement with
theory was very poor because the jets did not grow independently
of each other as assumed by Reichardt, but rather were drawn
together because of the low-pressure recirculation zone that
formed between the jets. Further, the merging distance was found
to be relatively independent of the momentum flux ratio in the
range 0:2 < ψ < 0:9.
Notation
The following symbols are used in this paper:
bðxÞ = local jet width;
D1;2 = slot width;
M1;2 = specific momentum flux-per-unit-width at the
source;
R1;2 = nozzle Reynolds number;
u1;2 = source velocities;
uc1 = local centerline velocity Jet 1 in the absence of
Jet 2;
Xm = distance from jet nozzles to the merging point;
x = distance from jet;
xm = dimensionless distance from jet nozzles to the merging
point;
xs = dimensionless distance from jet to stagnation point;
Z = distance between jet axes;
z = transverse coordinate;
ζ = scaled nozzle separation;
μ = dynamic viscosity;
ρ = density; and
ψ = fluxes ratio.
References
Anderson, E. A., and Spall, R. A. (2001). “Experimental and numerical
investigation of two-dimensional parallel jets.” J. Fluids Eng., 123(2),
401–406.
Davidson, M. J., Papps, D. A., and Wood, I. R. (1994). “The behaviour of
merging buoyant jets.” Recent research advances in the fluid mechanics
of jets and plumes, P. A. Davies and M. J. Valente Neves, eds.,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 465–478.
Fujisawa, N., Nakamura, K., and Srinivas, K. (2004). “Interaction of two
parallel plane jets of different velocities.” J. Visualization, 7(2), 135–142.
Kaye, N. B., and Linden, P. F. (2004). “Coalescing axisymmetric turbulent
plumes.” J. Fluid Mech., 502, 41–63.
Khan, A. A. (1989). “A study of intersecting circular turbulent jets.” M.S.
thesis, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta.
Lai, J. C. S., and Nasr, A. (1998). “Two parallel plane jets: Comparison of
the performance of three turbulence models.” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng.,
Part G, 212(6), 379–391.
Lee, J. H. W., and Chu, V. H. (2003). Turbulent jets and plumes—
A Lagrangian approach. Kluwer Academic, Norwell, MA.
Lin, Y. F., and Sheu, M. J. (1990). “Investigation of two plane parallel
unventilated jets.” Exp. Fluids, 10(1), 17–22.
List, E. J. (1982). “Turbulent jets and plumes.” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 14,
189–212.
Maxwell, W. H. C. (1970). “Flux development region in submerged jets.”
J. Engrg. Mech. Div, 96(6), 1061–1079.
Miller, D. R., and Comings, E. W. (1960). “Force-momentum fields in a
dual-jet flow.” J. Fluid Mech., 7(02), 237–256.
Murai, K., Taga, M., and Akagawa, K. (1976). “An experimental study on
confluence of two-dimensional jets.” Bull. JSME, 19(134), 958–964.
Nasr, A., and Lai, J. C. S. (1997). “Comparison of flow characteristics in the
near field of two parallel plane jets and an offset plane jet.” Phys. Fluids,
9(10), 2919–2931.
Rathakrishnan, E., Vijayabhaskar-Reedy, P., and Pabmanaban, K. (1989).
“Some studies of twin jet propagation.” Mech. Res. Commun., 16(5),
279–287.
Sandberg, M., Wiren, B., and Claesson, L. (1992). “Attachment of a cold
plane jet to the ceiling; length of recirculation and separation distance.”
Proc., ROOMVENT ’92, 3rd International Conf. on Air Distribution in
Rooms, Scandinavian Federation of Heating, Ventilating and Sanitary
Engineering Associations (SCANVAC), Aalborg, Denmark, 487–499.
Szegö, G. G., Dally, B. B., and Nathan, G. J. (2009). “Operational char-
acteristics of a parallel jet MILD combustion burner system.” Combust.
Flame, 156(2), 429–438.
Wang, H. J., and Davidson, M. J. (2003). “Jet interaction in a still ambient
fluid.” J. Hydraul. Eng., 129(5), 349–357.
Woods, A. W. (1988). “The fluid dynamics and thermodynamics of
eruption columns.” Bull. Volcanol., 50(3), 169–193.
Yin, Z., Zhang, H., and Lin, J. (2007). “Experimental study on the flow
field characteristics in the mixing region of twin jets.” J. Hydrodyn.,
19(3), 309–313.
JOURNAL OF HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING © ASCE / MARCH 2011 / 385
Downloaded 06 Jun 2011 to 129.137.88.251. Redistribution subject to ASCE license or copyright. Visithttp://www.ascelibrary.org
