
--- Page 1 ---

Antoine Durocher1
National Research Council Canada,  
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada
Luming Fan
National Research Council Canada,  
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada
Marc F€uri
Siemens Energy Canada Limited,  
Dorval, QC H8T 3H1, Canada
Julien Sirois
Siemens Energy Canada Limited,  
Dorval, QC H8T 3H1, Canada
David May
Siemens Energy Canada Limited,  
Dorval, QC H9P 1A5, Canada
Gilles Bourque
Department of Mechanical Engineering,  
McGill University,  
Montreal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada
Jeffrey M. Bergthorson
Department of Mechanical Engineering,  
McGill University,  
Montreal, QC H3A 2K6, Canada
Sean Yun
National Research Council Canada,  
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada
Patrizio Vena
National Research Council Canada,  
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada;  
Polytechnique Montreal,  
Montreal, QC H3T 0A3, Canada  
e-mail: Patrizio.Vena@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
OH-PLIF Measurements for 
Micromixed Flames in a  
Multi-Injector Burner at Elevated 
Pressures and Temperatures
A multi-injector combustion system consisting of seven premix/micromix injectors is studied 
in the high-pressure optically accessible combustion rig (OACR), which is commissioned for 
the first time at the National Research Council Canada (NRC). The clustered design mimics 
the packaging expected in industrial applications where hundreds of such injectors will be 
needed to provide the desired power output. The pressure vessel and test facility allow for an 
investigation of the combustion system up to 922 K and 20 bar inlet temperature and 
pressure, respectively. It provides conditions closer to gas turbine operation to investigate 
the impact of pressure on micromixed flames and provide pressure scaling, such as for 
emissions and flame characteristics, to be used for extrapolating to full gas turbine load. 
Three of the five optical windows of the OACR are used in the current experimental 
configuration to monitor the flames with direct imaging and perform nonintrusive OH- 
planar laser-induced fluorescence (OH-PLIF), for the first time in this rig. The current work 
focuses on the combustion of pure hydrogen in micromixed flames to commission the added 
hydrogen capabilities of the test cell and the laser diagnostics. Globally-lean hydrogen 
flames operating at the same preheated air temperature, target flame temperature, and 
pressure drop across the injectors are investigated at pressures of 2.5, 5, 7, 10, and 15 bar to 
isolate the impact of pressure on combustion. Increasing pressure is found to significantly 
deteriorate the quality of raw OH-PLIF images, down to a mean signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) 
of 1.7 at 15 bar. Spatial filtering corrects for horizontal intensity striations believed to be 
caused by combustor cooling in the high-pressure environment, before a qualitative 
exponential relationship is used to correct for laser attenuation in the high-pressure 
environment and through multiple flames. The laser sheet slicing across the centerline axis of 
three inline nozzles mostly captures the main flame body in the turbulent wake of the 
micromix jets of the complex tridimensional structures. Little changes in flame structures are 
observed with increasing pressure, with the 15 bar condition moving slightly downstream 
from the nozzle exit. The results suggest that injector concept screening at lower pressure 
while maintaining the other operating conditions similar may be possible before pursuing 
additional elevated-pressure testing. [DOI: 10.1115/1.4069788] 
Keywords: micromix, fuel flexibility, hydrogen, high-pressure, multi-injector array 
1 Introduction
Hydrogen is a promising carbon-free alternative to decarbonize 
the energy and aviation sectors. In an effort to mitigate their 
environmental footprint, engine manufacturers are actively devel­
oping novel technology to safely and reliably burn hydrogen. While 
it offers high energy density, hydrogen cannot be used as a drop-in 
replacement for current hydrocarbon fuels in traditional, large, 
premixed combustion systems. Its high reactivity and preferential 
diffusion in premixed mixtures pose significant risks of flashback 
that may result in hardware damage or failure [1]. Technical 
innovations are therefore required to develop novel combustion 
systems, outside of the established design rules for hydrocarbon 
combustion, to enable the combustion of hydrogen in a safe and 
sustainable approach.
Micromix combustion technology is one avenue considered for 
the combustion of high-hydrogen-content and pure hydrogen fuels 
[2–4]. The micromix fueling strategy relies on multiple, mini­
aturized fuel injection orifices located close to the injector exit. This 
Turbo Expo: Turbomachinery Technical Conference & Exposition (GT2025) June 
16–20, 2025. GT2025.
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received August 1, 2025; final manuscript received August 26, 2025; 
published online November 27, 2025. Editor: Jerzy T. Sawicki. 
This work was prepared while under employment by the Government of (Canada) as 
part of the official duties of the author(s) indicated above, as such copyright is owned by 
that Government, which reserves its own copyright under national law.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
MAY 2026, Vol. 148 / 051010-1 
Copyright V
C 2026 National Research Council Canada and Siemens Energy Canada Limited
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 2 ---

approach is intrinsically resistant to flashback as no reactive mixture 
flows through the injector body. If designed adequately, then the 
injected fuel, often introduced via jets-in-crossflow, rapidly mixes 
with the air and can help mitigate NOx emissions through the 
miniaturized flames [3,5] and dampen the thermoacoustic response 
for high-hydrogen flames. Since micromixing is generally limited to 
high-hydrogen-content fuels only, recent developments aim to 
combine premixed and micromixed fuel injection strategies into a 
single compact injector body to offer fuel-flexible combustion 
systems able to stabilize flames from pure methane to pure hydrogen 
[4,6]. These geometries, demonstrated at atmospheric conditions, 
rely on complex internal fuel passages that have become possible 
thanks to recent advances in additive manufacturing (AM) [7].
Premixed/micromixed designs require multiple injectors, up to a 
few hundred in practical applications, to deliver the desired power 
output. Multinozzle configurations allow the study of flame-flame 
interactions in a geometry one step closer to that of practical systems. 
Few studies focus on confined clustered combustion systems [4,8–10] 
as these provide challenging environments to perform advanced 
laser-based diagnostics that often require unobstructed optical access 
to the flame bodies. Nonetheless, such experiments can provide key 
information on flame-flame interactions to be used for practical 
design optimization and combustion model validation. In previous 
design iterations of the injectors investigated in this work, significant 
flame coupling was observed not only between micromix jet-flames 
(i.e., the multiple fuel streams within a single injector tube), but also 
between neighboring injectors, leading to longitudinal pulsations in a 
confined environment, and also some rotational motion in the 
complex tridimensional flame topologies [10].
While atmospheric combustion rigs provide accessible platforms 
to perform fundamental research and preliminary design exploration 
for practical combustion systems, industrial gas turbines operate in 
preheat and high-pressure conditions. Better understanding the 
impact of boundary conditions on flame stabilization and dynamics 
is a necessary step to reach mature designs. That is especially crucial 
for hydrogen technology, which cannot rely on empirical design rules 
developed for hydrocarbon lean-premixed combustion. Such experi­
ments often require significant engineering work where scientific 
investigations in high-pressure, optically accessible rigs are often 
limited by either operating pressures below 10 bar, preheating, or flow 
rates [11–13]. Optically-accessible, preheated, and high-pressure 
combustion rigs that can deliver industrial flow rates are seldom found 
and require significant investment to build and operate [14,15]. These 
can accelerate the development of novel technology by providing 
insight into combustion phenomena that are otherwise inaccessible.
The current work presents the high-pressure, optically accessible 
combustion rig (OACR) in the Test Cell #2 facility that was recently 
upgraded for hydrogen combustion at the National Research Council 
Canada (NRC). Nonintrusive laser diagnostics were implemented in 
the OACR for the first time to perform OH-planar laser-induced 
fluorescence (PLIF) measurements at elevated pressures. A 7-injector 
premix/micromix combustion system, improved via testing of 
various prototypes at atmospheric pressure [4,6,10,16,17], was 
installed in the pressure vessel for pure hydrogen experiments with 
preheated air from 2.5 to 15 bar. This first investigation at preheated 
and high-pressure conditions was primarily focused on the commis­
sioning of the hydrogen facility and laser diagnostics. Stable 100% 
micromix H2 flames were obtained for all the pressures studied. This 
work confirmed the operability of the upgraded hydrogen combustion 
facility and demonstrated the feasibility of the premix/micromix 
combustion strategy at operating conditions relevant for gas turbine 
operations. The dataset obtained provides insight into the micromix 
combustion strategy toward gas turbine implementation and the 
geometrical optimization of these unique injector features for 
practical applications.
2 Methodology
2.1 Optically Accessible Combustion Rig. The capabilities of 
the OACR are presented in Table 1, and its geometry is shown in Fig. 
1. It is installed in the Class 1 div. 2 high-pressure, hydrogen 
combustion test cell #2 at the NRC Canada. The installation meets 
the ISO 9001:2015 standard for quality management. The rig 
consists of a high-pressure vessel in which optically accessible 
combustors can be installed. The OACR provides a flexible platform 
to perform nonintrusive diagnostics for single- and multi-injector 
combustion systems where the geometry under investigation only 
needs to mate with the mounting flanges of the pressure vessel.
The OACR consists of three distinct casings: air inlet section, 
cooling air section, and exhaust section, highlighted in Fig. 1(a). The 
air inlet receives the preheated air delivered at maximum conditions 
of 14.5 kg/s and 922 K. This air section is used for both combustion 
air and “hot” cooling air for the combustion system and liner to 
mimic the cooling found in industrial systems. The cooling, or 
medium temperature, section houses the combustion system. It 
provides low-temperature air up to 373 K, at a slightly higher 
pressure than the main air section (DPmid ¼ 0:3%), to cool the 
external components of the combustor and the exhaust tube. This 
section has an internal diameter of 0.45 m and a usable length of 
1.2 m, providing a flexible platform to mount combustors of varying 
sizes. It is equipped with four optical access ports located at 0 deg, 
90 deg, 150 deg, and 270 deg at the same longitudinal location (z). In 
this work, the 150 deg port is blanked and used for instrumentation 
and the spark ignition system. The other three openings are equipped 
with fused-silica windows (Spectrosil 2000) to provide visual access 
to the combustion process. The combustion and cooling air then flow 
into the exhaust section which is cooled with a water jacket. The 
combustion products are spray-cooled downstream of the exhaust 
before exiting through the facility stack.
The fuel inlet flange has four ports to accommodate primary (Py) 
and secondary (Sy) fuel streams for both natural gas and hydrogen. 
Two ports are used for each fuel stage to ensure a uniform fuel feed 
to the internal fuel manifold. The different fuel components are teed- 
in and mixed inside the pressure vessel before the fuel blend is 
delivered to the combustion system, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The 
facility can deliver up to 0.10 kg/s of hydrogen and 0.68 kg/s of 
natural gas. Hydrogen is supplied via a dedicated outdoor Synthetic 
Fuel Facility that comprises four bays, each of which can each 
accommodate a compressed hydrogen jumbo tube trailer (Air 
Liquide, capacity of 4000 standard m3 and pressure of 2400 psi), and 
a regulation pad to gradually decrease the hydrogen supply pressure 
to 650 psi before delivery to the test cell.
Air and fuel flows are measured with appropriately sized orifice 
plates. Calibration of the flow measurement instruments was 
performed at the beginning of the project and validated regularly 
with a reference Coriolis mass flowmeter calibrated by the supplier. 
Although not all are listed in Fig. 1, the rig is fully instrumented 
along the pressure vessel and the combustor with dozens of 
thermocouples, differential pressure transducers, dynamic pressure 
transducers (CP211, Meggit #), and absolute pressure measure­
ments. The operation of the rig is controlled using a combination of 
LabVIEW and Lookout.
Emissions measurements are sampled by a multihole probe 
located in the exhaust section, shown in Fig. 1(b). Sampling is 
performed following the ARP1256D standards [18] when the flames 
stabilize and are averaged over 60 s for steady-state measurements. 
Table 1 Optically accessible combustion rig 
Air flow
Main air
14.5 kg/s
32 lb/s
Cooling air
6.6 kg/s
14 lb/s
Air temperature
Main air
922 K
1200 F
Cooling air
373 K
212 F
Pressure absolute
2068 kPa 20.68 bar
300 psi
Hydrogen flow
0.10 kg/s
0.22 lb/s
Natural gas flow
0.68 kg/s
1.5 lb/s
Test section
Diameter
45 cm
18 in
Length
120 cm
47 in
Optical access
Midsection
4 (0, 90, 135, 270)
Exhaust
1
051010-2 / Vol. 148, MAY 2026                                                                                                                 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 3 ---

While the system can provide measurements of unburnt hydro­
carbons, CO, and CO2, only the NOx (NO and NO2) emissions are 
relevant for the current study burning pure hydrogen.
2.2 Micromix Combustion System. The micromix combus­
tion system consists of three major components: the injector 
cassette, the optically accessible combustor, and the heat shield 
around the combustor. The cassette and combustor are components 
made of Inconel 625 through a monolithic AM approach. They were 
printed on EOS M290 machines using laser powder bed fusion. The 
AM allows for the complex integration of the fueling and cooling 
passages through the injector cassette and the cooling, especially for 
the windows, of the combustor. Conventional machining is carried 
out after printing to prepare surfaces that mate with other 
components, such as the window frames of the combustor.
The injector cassette contains the seven injectors and also acts as 
the fuel plenum for both the primary (premixed) and secondary 
(micromixed) fueling strategies. The internal fuel plenum for each 
fuel stage is fed via two pairs of inlets located in opposite corners. A 
complex system of internal channels then uniformly distributes the 
fuel to the injection points on each injector, at the respective fueling 
zones identified in Fig. 1(c). Primary fuel injections occur close to 
the injector inlet and are sufficiently far upstream to achieve 
premixed conditions at the nozzle exit. Secondary fuel injections are 
performed as jets-in-crossflow near the injector exit and correspond 
to the micromix approach. The fuel split, defined as the micromix 
fuel ratio (MFR) in (1) with volumetric flow rates ( _V), can be 
adjusted during experiments. In this work, however, conditions at 
MFR100 corresponding to 100% micromixed combustion are 
maintained across the entire dataset. 
MFR ¼
_VSy
_VPy þ _VSy
(1)  
The orientation of the injectors is shown in Fig. 2. Labeling of the 
injectors is consistent with their angular positions relative to the 
coordinate system of the OACR. The three inline nozzles I0, I00, and 
I180 are the ones investigated with laser diagnostics. The cassette is 
equipped with multiple type-N thermocouples located on the back 
side of the dump plane and embedded in the injectors to measure 
metal temperatures and capture potential flashback or flame 
anchoring that might lead to hardware damage.
The preheated air flows through four tubes from the air inlet 
section of the OACR into the combustor to provide “hot” cooling air 
for the windows and the laser beam dump of the combustor. Partial 
window cooling air paths are presented in Fig. 1(c) and mitigate the 
thermal stresses in the brittle fused-silica windows during operation. 
The combustor has optical access on three sides at 0, 90, and 270 
degrees, while the 180-degree side includes a laser beam dump, as 
shown in Fig. 2 to minimize the reflections back into the analysis 
region of interest for nonintrusive diagnostics. The windowless side 
is instrumented with six type-N thermocouples to measure metal 
temperature profiles along the combustor length, and provides space 
for the ignition system.
Five dynamic pressure transducers (CP211) are mounted on the 
combustion system. They are identified in Figs. 1(b), 1(c), and 2, 
which provide the location and orientation of each instrument. Two 
pressure sensors (PTAir,90-1and-2) are located upstream of the flames 
in the air plenum, and three in the combustion chamber(PTComb,0-1 
and PTComb,180-1and-2). Pressure signals are acquired at a 50 kHz 
sampling frequency, and the acoustics module also acquires the 
scientific camera gate to allow for phase-average imaging [10].
2.3 Laser Diagnostics. The hydrogen-rated, high-pressure test 
cell is a class 1 div. 2 hazardous location. As such, electrical 
equipment must be either intrinsically safe, sealed, or purged/ 
pressurized. The classification further complicates the diagnostics 
setup as the lasers are located outside of the test cell, producing a 
laser path 8.5 m long from the dye laser head to the experimental 
region of interest, and the camera systems have to be housed in a 
purged, positive-pressure enclosure. The photograph of the OACR 
in Fig. 3(a) highlights the end of the laser path close to the pressure 
vessel. In this configuration, an explosion-proof CCTV camera is 
mounted on one optically accessible side for safety reasons during 
the commissioning of the hydrogen and laser systems. The scientific 
cameras are installed facing the opposing window in a purged box 
(Fig. 1(b)) that is purged with dry air and maintained at a positive 
pressure of approximately 80 psig. The purge box is equipped with a 
single fused-silica window.
The second harmonic of a Spectra-Physics Nd:YAG laser 
(Quanta-Ray Pro-250-10H) pumps a wavelength-tunable dye laser 
(Sirah, Precision Scan) using a solution of rhodamine 6G. The dye 
laser is adjusted at a wavelength of 282.94 nm and produces an 
ultraviolet beam with an average output energy of 8.5 mJ/pulse at 
the exit of the laser housing. Laser line mirrors then direct the beam 
through the wall of the high-pressure test cell and above the OACR. 
Sheet forming optics are installed on the horizontal top rail crossing 
Fig. 1 High-pressure, optically-accessible combustion rig 
(OACR) with partial instrumentation: (a) external pressure vessel, 
(b) combustion rig housed in the medium temperature section, 
and (c) cross section of the combustion system at the location of 
the laser sheet used for diagnostics. Generic flow paths are 
provided for the main hot air used for combustion and cooling, 
hydrogen fuel lines, and natural gas fuel lines.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
MAY 2026, Vol. 148 / 051010-3 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 4 ---

above the OACR and adjusted such that the thin laser sheet waist is 
centered slightly downstream from the outlets of the injectors (Fig. 
1(c)). The resultant laser sheet spans 4 injector diameters, D. In 
addition to the long optical path and generally larger length scales 
than those found in atmospheric combustion rigs, the alignment is 
further complicated by the fact that it is performed when the rig is 
opened and cold. When preheated, the OACR can thermally expand 
in the longitudinal z-direction by as much as 50 mm at the exhaust 
and by approximately 1.4D at the location of the optical access. 
Therefore, the procedure for laser alignment factors in the thermal 
expansion to optimize the location of the beam relative to the dump 
plane of the cassette.
OH-Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence images are acquired 
using an sCMOS camera attached to an IRO (LaVision IRO). The 
fluorescence signal is collected by the IRO, equipped with a 
bandpass filter (320620 nm) on a UV-Nikkor lens (105 mm), with a 
gate time of 200 ns and a gain of 70% of maximum. In these 
experiments, the aperture is adjusted to f/8 to slightly increase the 
depth of field to allow for slight misalignment as the rig may shift 
over the course of an entire day of testing. The smaller aperture also 
mitigates the amount of realignment and refocusing that might 
otherwise be needed once the OACR is completely closed. Raw 
images are corrected for pulse-to-pulse laser energy variations 
measured by a photodiode close to the laser exit and background 
noise. Spatial calibration of the camera is performed with a 3D 
LaVision calibration plate (Type 20). After cropping, the experi­
mental field of view captures a region of interest spanning 
approximately 5.3D  3.5D. The camera and laser system are 
triggered synchronously at a frequency of 10 Hz using a LaVision 
timing unit (PTU-X), and 600 images are acquired per dataset.
2.4 Operating Conditions. Experiments in the current study 
maintained similar operating conditions, except for the inlet air 
pressure, which varied from 2.5 bar to 15 bar. Measurements are 
performed for 100% hydrogen fuel burning in a full micromix fuel 
injection strategy (MFR100). The same air inlet temperature and 
target adiabatic flame temperature are maintained for the different 
pressure conditions to achieve globally lean reactant mixtures. The 
target, constant, adiabatic flame temperature replicated primary 
zone temperatures of interest for gas turbine applications. Inlet flow 
rates were adjusted to maintain the same pressure drop across the 
injectors for all experiments.
Measurements of effective flow area were carried out before each 
test day to ensure the integrity of the injectors and to calculate the 
flow split, and therefore the zone temperatures. Post-test inspections 
were conducted after each test day to identify potential discoloration 
or damage to the hardware and ensure the validity of comparisons 
between different days. The data reported in this work have been 
acquired over multiple days with no discrepancies observed in 
validation metrics.
Stable micromixed flames were obtained for pure hydrogen at 
pressures of 2.5, 5, 7, 10, and 15 bar. During testing, the 7-injector 
cassette could sustain the target flame temperature up to 15 bar 
without damage to the hardware under nominal operations. Several 
high-pressure, 100% hydrogen relight tests were performed to assess 
the robustness of the combustion system and the OACR to hydrogen 
ignition events. While the ignition process generally sheds particles 
and small debris accumulated in the upstream pressure vessel and 
the airlines that can coat the windows of the combustor, no window 
failures were observed during testing.
3 Results
3.1 100% Hydrogen Micromix Combustion. The direct 
visualization of the flames investigated is shown in Fig. 4. The 
images were captured by a Nikon D750 DSLR camera using the 
same acquisition settings at all operating pressures. The thermal 
power of the combustion system increases with pressure, resulting in 
the most luminous flames being captured at 15 bar. The absence of 
light in the pressure vessel and the low-light condition in the test cell 
allow the hydrogen flames to be visualized, although it is difficult to 
distinguish the flames coming from individual injectors, given the 
angle of view of the camera relative to the orientation of the injectors 
in the cassette. In these images, the white hydrogen flames appear to 
be fully lifted from the injectors and the products in the postflame 
regions are indicated by the red/orange glow downstream of the 
hydrogen flames. As thermal power increases, the combustor also 
experiences higher operating temperatures. This is evident from the 
direct imaging as the sides of the window frames start glowing. 
During testing, the metal temperatures of the test section were 
monitored closely to ensure that they did not initiate the automated 
fuel trip sequence that shuts down fuel supply to preserve the 
combustion system integrity. Red spots can also be observed in the 
more luminous cases downstream of the flames. These correspond to 
particles that have stuck, and in some cases fused, to the windows 
during ignition. These spots were removed as best as possible 
between tests to maximize the transmissivity for optical diagnostics.
During testing, several attempts were made to transition from a 
micromixed condition to a partially micromixed condition in an 
effort to approach premixed combustion. For pure hydrogen fuel, 
these resulted in flashbacks at high micromix fuel ratios, typically 
above MFR85, even for globally leaner conditions with increased 
inlet velocity. These attempts highlight the benefits of micromixing 
for the premix/micromix design to increase the fuel flexibility of the 
injectors to safely stabilize pure hydrogen flames.
Normalized NOx emissions are shown in Fig. 5 for 100% H2 
(MFR100) conditions with increasing pressure. NOx measurements 
are obtained in concentration units and corrected to a dry, 15%O2 
standard (15%O2 ppmvd). They are then normalized by the 15 bar 
condition. The data points shown here correspond to an average of 
60 s acquired at the target condition. From these experiments 
conducted at the same target flame temperature and pressure drop 
across the injectors, it is possible to extract the pressure exponent 
needed to develop a surrogate model that can be used to predict 
emissions at higher pressure ratios. The micromix strategy provides 
promising NOx emissions for a first design iteration at elevated 
pressure, and the exponential trend achieves an R2 ¼ 0:987 to 
estimate emissions at higher operating pressures found in some 
industrial systems. Further modification and optimization of the 
design are expected to yield lower NOx emissions in future designs.
3.2 High-Pressure OH-Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence 
Correction. Raw OH-planar laser-induced fluorescence (OH- 
PLIF) images at 5, 10, and 15 bar (Fig. 6) show the flames 
Fig. 2 Upstream view of the combustion system 
051010-4 / Vol. 148, MAY 2026                                                                                                                 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 5 ---

corresponding to the three inline injectors I0, I00, and I180. In these 
images, the laser propagates from the right of the frame to the left 
(x ¼ 2D ! −2D) and subsequently traverses the three flame 
regions. For these conditions, the raw images generally show a 
compact flame downstream from each injector that exhibits higher 
laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) intensity, and unburnt and cold air 
streams between the injectors, identified by the absence of signal. 
The raw images clearly show the challenges of performing 
fluorescence at elevated pressures, as highlighted in various other 
works [11,12,19]. Three observations are made from the raw OH- 
PLIF images.
(1) The mean signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for single-shot 
decreases significantly with pressure. Including the three 
flames captured in the field of view, the SNR decreases from 
3.1, 2.1, and 1.7 as the pressure increases from 5, 10, to 15 bar.
(2) There is a significant variation in signal intensity from the 
right to the left side of the raw images. At 5 bar, the SNR 
corresponding to injectors I0, I00, and I180 has values of 4.8, 
2.7, and 1.5, respectively. This laser energy attenuation is 
generally negligible in single burners at atmospheric 
pressure. It is, however, typically present in multi-nozzle 
combustion systems, even at atmospheric conditions [4,9] 
and also in single burner experiments performed at elevated 
pressures [11,12,19].
(3) Horizontal striations become visible as pressure increases 
beyond 5 bar. These are most prominent at 15 bars and appear 
to be regularly spaced. During testing, moderate (5 bar) and 
high (10 bar) pressure conditions were sequentially inves­
tigated, and it was confirmed that the striations are negligible 
in the lower pressure condition, even if they were present in 
the previous test point. This indicates that it is not a systematic 
bias created by a damaged or dirty window.
While the first two observations are unavoidable for LIF at 
elevated pressures, it is suspected by the authors that the striations 
result from design choices in the combustor that will be explained 
later. The combination of these three phenomena in a multi-injector 
combustion system complicate the analysis of the acquired data. 
This is even more true for micromix combustion systems that have 
multiple distinct fuel orifices located near the injector outlets, as 
highlighted in the previous 3D, OH-LIF reconstruction of similar 
burners [10]. Nonetheless, in the linear-LIF regime, which is 
estimated to be the case here, signal attenuation is independent of the 
initial laser energy, contrary to saturated LIF. These effects can be 
partially corrected in instantaneous images, although they will lead 
to increased noise in the leftmost flames, whose SNR is the lowest 
among the three injectors.
Raw images are first corrected for shot-to-shot laser energy 
fluctuations before the background noise is removed to obtain the 
OH signal only. The images are then corrected for the spatial, 
longitudinal (z), fluctuations that appear as horizontal striations. The 
intensity variation appears to be fairly consistent along the three 
flames investigated, with a roughly regular spacing. While the exact 
Fig. 3 (a) OACR installed in test cell #2 at the National Research Council Canada. The partial laser path is highlighted in 
magenta. (b) Purged box containing the camera equipment used for direct visualization and laser diagnostics.
Fig. 4 Direct flame images acquired with a Nikon D750 DLSR camera. Camera settings are maintained for the different operating 
pressures at f/5.6, 1/320 s exposure time, and ISO-3200. The same pressure drop across the injectors and target adiabatic 
temperature were used for all cases. The increased luminosity results from the increased thermal power as operating pressure 
goes from (a) 2.5 bar up to (e) 15 bar.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
MAY 2026, Vol. 148 / 051010-5 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 6 ---

cause of the observed behavior has yet to be determined, the authors 
hypothesize that it is a combined effect of the elevated pressure and 
the window cooling that introduces a regular pattern in the incoming 
laser sheet. The combustor window through which the laser sheet is 
entering is cooled by impinging jets issued from the window frame 
of the combustor. While this cooling is active at all pressures, the 
authors suspect that temperature/density gradients between cooling 
air and recirculated products in the vicinity of the window where the 
laser sheet enters the combustor create a roughly structured pattern 
of flow pockets with different refractive indexes. This pattern could 
effectively act similarly to an array of beam shaping optics, with the 
hot and cold flow pockets acting as microlenses and leading to the 
horizontal pattern observed. Smaller deviations of this pattern can be 
observed through the inline flames as the laser sheet traverses 
regions that can be made of hot product, cold air, and mixes of both 
across the three injectors. Future testing is planned that will include a 
different configuration of the cooling strategy for the laser inlet 
window to validate this hypothesis. Another monolithic additively- 
manufactured combustor is currently being redesigned to mitigate 
the amount of cooling air in the region, where laser diagnostics is 
performed while maintaining material integrity at the target 
operating condition.
With the current geometry, spatial filtering is applied to correct 
the striations observed in instantaneous raw images along the laser 
path. It is demonstrated in Fig. 7, starting with the same raw image 
shown in Fig. 6(b) for the 10 bar pressure condition. A moving 
average is first performed along the x-direction with a narrow 
longitudinal window (along z) in Fig. 7(a). This further highlights 
the intensity strata observed previously. The raw image is also 
processed using a Gaussian smoothing with a narrow x window 
along the z-axis to blend, or average, the local OH-PLIF intensity in 
Fig. 7(b). This effectively not only removes the horizontal striations 
but also greatly blurs the image and removes the smaller flow 
features captured in the raw image. The ratio of these two is shown in 
Fig. 7(c) for reactive pixels in the frame identified with a wide OH 
mask. The local fluctuation mask captures the moving average 
intensity variations with respect to the smoothed image. It can be 
multiplied by the raw image (Fig. 6(b)) to correct for the horizontal 
striations. As mentioned previously, these lines of intensity 
variations appear to be very regular and mostly occur along the 
laser sheet. In a few instances, they appear to slightly deflect from the 
horizontal as the laser sheet travels through the internozzle region 
where thermal and density gradients can lead to different diffractive 
indices.
The processed image can then be corrected for the laser 
attenuation caused by OH molecules along the laser beam path in 
the high-pressure environment across the different flames. This 
correction is applied to instantaneous images, making use of the 
assumption that the different injectors are producing similar flames 
with equivalent averaged properties, for example, temperature or 
OH concentration. Compensating for the laser attenuation at high 
pressure has been an issue discussed in other work and tackled with 
various levels of complexity [11,12,19]. In this work, the attenuation 
correction remains relatively simple and does not fully correct the 
attenuation observed. It is meant to rebalance the intensity of OH- 
PLIF to provide datasets more apt for systematic analysis with 
combustion modeling. The approach is graphically represented in 
Fig. 8 for the same 10 bar pressure condition used previously. Under 
the linear LIF regime, the laser attenuation should be independent of 
the initial laser energy. The LIF intensity for each assumed identical 
flame then becomes an indirect measurement of the laser 
attenuation, and Beer-Lambert’s Law [20] can then be applied to 
estimate LIF intensity reduction along the laser path for the inline 
flames using exponential fits. As stated previously, this is not a 
rigorous approach but rather a qualitative means to partially correct 
the attenuation observed in these high-pressure flames. In Fig. 8, the 
2D OH signal intensity from an interrogation window along the z 
direction, here the segment between 0.7 and 1.4 z=D, is projected on 
the x-axis. Piecewise exponential fits are then applied over sections 
where flames are detected with an SNR threshold. The multiple fits 
from the different interrogation windows are then interpolated and 
smoothed over the entire field of view to generate a 2D map of laser 
attenuation that can be used to partially correct the image.
The results of the different image processing steps are shown in 
Fig. 9 for the 10 bar pressure condition. Each image is also processed 
using a 3  3 median filter to provide a systematic comparison 
between the intermediate steps. Filtering with a larger window 
would help remove additional speckling and noise, if needed. The 
raw image in Fig. 9(a) has an average SNR of 2.1, which is mainly 
affected by the central and left injectors. While the leftmost flame 
can hardly be distinguished in the raw image, the processing 
approach significantly improves the contrast and produces a 
Fig. 5 Normalized NOx emissions 
Fig. 6 Raw OH-PLIF images captured at (a) 5 bar, (b) 10 bar, and (c) 15 bar. Note the maximum OH intensity decreases with 
pressure.
051010-6 / Vol. 148, MAY 2026                                                                                                                 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 7 ---

corrected image that is qualitatively more representative of the 
flames and OH-PLIF intensity expected. Using the spatial filtering 
mask, the horizontal striations can be mostly removed in Fig. 9(c)
without compromising spatial resolution. Contrary to the large 
Gaussian smoothed average used to derive the mask, fine structures 
are retained in the processed images. The attenuation correction then 
increases the OH signal intensity along the laser path in Fig. 9(d). 
While this operation performs adequately for the central and right 
flames, additional noise is also being introduced in the final image 
for the left flame. More granularity, or speckling, is observed, which 
can be mitigated if a larger median filter is used to visualize the final 
OH-PLIF fields. This is expected as the last flame on the laser path 
can have SNR between 1.3 and 2, depending on pressure. That 
makes it difficult to clearly distinguish the signal from the 
background noise, especially at the weaker edges of the flames.
3.3 Flame Characterization With OH-Planar Laser- 
Induced Fluorescence. The corrected OH-PLIF images are 
presented in Fig. 10 for instantaneous shots and mean fields at 5, 
10, and 15 bar. These flames were selected initially because of their 
relatively quiet, stable condition. Phase-averaging is not performed 
as no significant dominant frequency, nor a pressure limit cycle, is 
attained. While the image processing approach does significantly 
improve the contrast from the raw images, the mean OH fields 
clearly show that the piecewise exponential fit used to correct for 
laser attenuation through the three flames only partially corrects 
laser attenuation across the flame. The left flame still exhibits lower 
intensities compared to the other elements of the multi-injector 
combustor. In addition, window fouling starts being perceptible in 
mean fields where particles have fused onto the optical access 
windows.
Interpretation of these results remains challenging as the highly 
turbulent micromixed flames have no clear structure and are 
generally not axisymmetric [10]. With the laser sheet aligned with 
the injector centerline axes, the fluorescence images capture the bulk 
of the flame body downstream of the injector core. When comparing 
the PLIF images (Fig. 10) with the direct flame images (Fig. 4), it 
appears that the distributed lee-stabilized flames from the jets-in- 
crossflow are mostly not captured by the laser plane slicing through 
the combustion system. Three distinct flames with limited flame 
merging between neighboring injectors are observed. For pure 
micromixed combustion, the localized fuel injections mitigate the 
migration of premixed fuel-air pockets, which can burn between 
injectors. In some of the frames, such as for the 10 and 15 bar 
conditions shown in Figs. 10(b) and 10(c) for the right injector, part 
of the lee-stabilized hydrogen jet flame is hooking back upstream 
toward the injector outer diameter. Given the complex tridimen­
sional flame structures and the clocking, or orientation of the 
micromix fuel injections within each injector, it appears that the 
anchored lee-stabilized part of the flames seldom appear in the field 
of view. The flame anchoring on the outer diameter of the injector 
can lead to high heat transfer to the hardware and locally creates hot 
spots on the injector heat shield, causing the hardware to be glowing 
hot. The metal temperature then becomes one operational limit at 
15 bar for this geometry. Some of those hot spots can be captured 
with the DSLR camera during testing, as shown in Fig. 4(e) for the 
15 bar condition between injectors I00, I0, and I300 on the right of the 
frame. Post-test inspection showed a discoloration of the metal, 
indicating that the hot spots were localized and firmly anchored in 
the flow for the current micromixed experiments. The pattern is 
repeated around the central injector spaced by 120 deg between the 
injector trios I00, I180, I240 and I00, I60, I120. Given the complex 
tridimensional nature of the micromixed flames, appropriate 
orientation and spacing of the injectors have to be optimized along 
with cooling strategies to mitigate the high heat flux to the hardware. 
The location of these hot spots has been confirmed numerically after 
the experiments using preliminary computational fluid dynamic 
analyses. These findings provide an example where the synergistic 
impact of optically accessible combustion rigs with combustion 
modeling can rapidly identify undesired behavior.
Fig. 7 Example of spatial filtering performed for the 10 bar 
condition. (a) Moving average performed in the x-direction further 
highlights the striations observed in the raw images. (b) Gaussian 
smoothing applied in the z-direction with a 0.4D moving window. 
(c) Local intensity fluctuations shown for a wide flame mask. The 
local intensity fluctuation mask is then used to spatially correct 
raw images.
Fig. 8 Projection of OH intensity between 0.7–1.4z=D for the 
10 bar condition. A piecewise, exponential fit is performed (–) to 
approximate the Beer-Lambert laser attenuation through the 
inline flames in the laser path. The fit obtained is then used to 
rebalance the OH intensity fields.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
MAY 2026, Vol. 148 / 051010-7 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 8 ---

The overall flame topology remains similar for the micromixed 
flames as pressure is increased. This fueling strategy does not appear 
to be experiencing thermodiffussive instabilities and flame front 
thinning that is generally expected from globally-lean premixed 
configurations. For all the pressures investigated here, the flames are 
mostly lifted and present a broad OH reaction zone. The flame liftoff 
becomes more apparent as pressure increases to 15 bar and the 
leading edge of the core of the flame moves further downstream. The 
instantaneous OH-PLIF images show the downstream displacement 
with pressure, especially for the right injector (Fig. 10(c)), where the 
core of the flame now reaches approximately 0.5D downstream from 
the injector outlet. This is captured in the average OH field (Fig. 
10(f)) as the flames more rarely move upstream the z ¼ ½0, 0:5D for 
all the nozzles. Flame centroids are also moving further downstream 
at the 15 bar condition. The overall qualitatively small changes in 
flame topology suggest that if other operating conditions can be 
reproduced at low-pressure conditions, such as inlet temperature, 
inlet velocity, and jet momentum flux ratios, promising design 
identification may be performed in atmospheric facilities at 
significantly reduced costs compared to high-pressure experiments. 
Further investigations of quantitative metrics should be performed 
to ensure that the micromix flame topology can scale to pressure.
Approaching gas turbine operating conditions offers unique 
datasets that can be used to further understand the performance of 
different injector designs toward higher technology readiness 
integration. It is a necessary milestone in new combustion system 
development to identify pressure scaling, stable operating regions, 
and emissions trends. The OACR offers optical access to leverage 
the planned high-pressure testing needed for industrial development 
to provide additional information on the flame structures that are 
otherwise typically modeled only. It offers insight into the 
combustion process that can then be used to better understand the 
hardware being tested and also provide complete validation datasets 
for combustion model development. Moving toward high-hydrogen 
combustion, industrial computational fluid dynamic best practices 
have to be modified to account for the different physical properties 
of hydrogen compared to natural gas or other hydrocarbons. This 
dataset will be used in subsequent work to provide a baseline for 
design improvement and will infer changes needed to improve the 
premix/micromix designs.
After commissioning the OACR and hydrogen facility, additional 
work is planned on this injector configuration to expand the scope of 
testing to encompass fuel blends with natural gas and to investigate 
the impact of MFR on the hybrid premix/micromix combustion 
system. The entire body of work should then be used for design 
iterations that will be tested in the OACR in upcoming experimental 
campaigns. The modular rig allows for quick turnover between 
combustion systems to do advanced screening between interesting 
geometries to better understand the stabilization mechanisms 
between promising premix/micromix injectors.
4 Conclusion
The high-pressure OACR is presented for the first time. It is used 
to commission the nonintrusive laser diagnostics and the hydrogen 
fueling upgrades recently completed in the Test Cell #2 facility at the 
National Research Council Canada. The adaptable test section of the 
pressure vessel is equipped with a new 7-injector combustion system 
relying on the combination of premixed and micromixed staged 
fueling strategies that offers wide fuel flexibility from current 
hydrocarbons to pure hydrogen. In this work, the combustion of pure 
hydrogen in the micromix combustion mode is investigated with 
preheated air at elevated pressures. The optical access is used to 
perform direct flame imaging with a Nikon DSLR camera and to 
perform OH-PLIF diagnostics at elevated pressures.
The hydrogen capability of the 7-injector cassette is confirmed at 
pressures of 2.5, 5, 7, 10, and 15 bar by achieving stable micromix 
flames at each condition. Steady-state acoustics and emissions 
measurements are acquired at each data point and confirm the 
potential of the premix/micromix approach at operating conditions 
closer to gas turbine applications. Since carbon emissions are 
nonexistent for pure hydrogen combustion, only a NOx pressure 
scaling is extracted from the emissions measurements to be used to 
estimate pollutant formation at higher operating pressures.
Laser diagnostics are performed for three inline injectors with the 
laser sheet centered above their nozzle centerline axes. The results 
Fig. 9 Image correction process applied to the 10 bar condition 
and presented with a 3 3 3 median filter for direct comparison 
between the processing steps
051010-8 / Vol. 148, MAY 2026                                                                                                                 
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 9 ---

for the 5, 10, and 15 bar pressure conditions highlight the challenges 
of performing optical diagnostics at elevated pressure conditions 
with multiple-injector clusters. Raw OH-PLIF images present 
significant SNR reduction with increasing pressure and along the 
inline injectors because of laser attenuation. In addition, striations 
appear in the images, which are suspected to be caused by a 
combination of variations in the refractive index of the hot 
combustion products and the relatively colder cooling air jets, 
combined with the impact of pressure of gas densities. Qualitative 
approaches are proposed to correct for spatial inhomogeneities in the 
laser profile and for the laser attenuation through multiple flames. 
The corrected images provide qualitatively better contrast for all the 
flames to be compared between different pressure conditions.
The OH-PLIF images mostly capture the lifted turbulent micro­
mixed flames in the wake of the fuel injection. Given the complex 
tridimensional flame topology and location of the laser sheet with 
respect to the localized micromixed fuel injection, only a portion of 
the lee-stabilized hydrogen jet flame anchored on the outer injector 
diameter is captured in a limited number of frames. The micromixed 
flame structure appears mostly unchanged with increasing pressure, 
suggesting that experiments at lower pressure might be pursued for 
preliminary characterization, if other operating conditions can be 
maintained. As pressure is increased to 15 bar, the flames lift slightly 
further downstream of the injector exit and create recirculating hot 
pockets on the injector dump plane. This leads to higher metal 
temperature that can limit the operational range.
This first investigation using the OACR shows the potential of 
high-pressure optical diagnostics to accelerate the development of 
hydrogen technology. The datasets obtained provide information to 
better understand where and how flames stabilize in the elevated 
temperature and pressure environment closer to gas turbine 
operation. They can also be used to validate combustion modeling 
with direct measurements of the combustion phenomena to help 
converge toward an optimal injector design. Leveraging already 
planned high-pressure testing necessary for novel multi-injector 
systems, individual injectors, or sector rigs, the pressure vessel can 
provide additional and complementary information to traditional rig 
measurements to streamline the design process toward higher 
technology readiness levels and fully utilize the costs of high- 
pressure testing. With the commissioning completed, further 
investigations on the effects of fuel split and fuel composition on 
the premix/micromix combustion are planned, along with the testing 
of design iterations.
Permission for Use. The content of this paper is copyrighted by 
the National Research Council Canada and Siemens Energy Canada 
Limited and is licensed to ASME for publication and distribution 
only. Any inquiries regarding permission to use the content of this 
paper, in whole or in part, for any purpose must be addressed to 
National Research Council Canada and Siemens Energy Canada 
Limited directly.
Funding Data
 National Research Council’s (Award ID: Low-Emission 
Aviation program (LEAP).
 Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada 
(NSERC) (Funder ID: 10.13039/501100000038).
 Government of Canada (Award ID: Environment and Climate 
Change Canada; Funder ID: 10.13039/501100000023).
 Siemens (Award ID: Siemens Energy Canada Limited; Funder 
ID: 10.13039/501100004830).
Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated and supporting the findings of this article 
are obtainable from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request.
Nomenclature
AM ¼ additive manufacturing
D ¼ nozzle diameter (m)
DP ¼ differential pressure
HP ¼ high pressure
Fig. 10 (a)–(c) Instantaneous OH-PLIF fields corrected for spatial variations and attenuation for increasing pressures. (d)–(f) 
Mean OH-PLIF fields. Note that the OH-PLIF intensity scale is different at increasing pressures, but consistent for instantaneous 
and mean fields.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
MAY 2026, Vol. 148 / 051010-9 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 10 ---

I ¼ injector
IRO ¼ intensified relay optics
MFR ¼ micromix-fuel ratio
NG ¼ natural gas
OACR ¼ optically-accessible combustion rig
P ¼ pressure (kPa)
PLIF ¼ planar laser-induced fluorescence
PT ¼ pressure transducer
PT ¼ pressure transducer
Py ¼ primary fuel channel
Sy ¼ secondary fuel channel
SNR ¼ signal-to-noise ratio
_V ¼ volumetric flow rate (SLPM)
References
0[1] Noble, D., Wu, D., Emerson, B., Sheppard, S., Lieuwen, T., and Angello, L., 2021, 
“Assessment of Current Capabilities and Near-Term Availability of Hydrogen- 
Fired Gas Turbines Considering a Low-Carbon Future,” ASME J. Eng. Gas 
Turbines Power, 143(4), p. 041002.
0[2] Funke, H. H.-W., Beckmann, N., Keinz, J., and Horikawa, A., 2021, “30 Years of 
Dry-Low-NOx Micromix Combustor Research for Hydrogen-Rich Fuels–An 
Overview of Past and Present Activities,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 
143(7), p. 071002.
0[3] Kroniger, D., Horikawa, A., Funke, H. H.-W., Pfaeffle, F., Kishimoto, T., and 
Okada, K., 2021, “Experimental and Numerical Investigation on the Effect of 
Pressure on Micromix Hydrogen Combustion,” ASME Paper No. GT2021-58926.
0[4] Durocher, A., Fan, L., F€uri, M., Bourque, G., Sirois, J., May, D., Bergthorson, J. M., 
Yun, S., and Vena, P., 2024, “Characterization of a 5-Nozzle Array Using Premix/ 
Micromix Injection for Hydrogen,” Appl. Energy Combust. Sci., 18, p. 100260.
0[5] Funke, H. H.-W., Beckmann, N., and Abanteriba, S., 2019, “An Overview on Dry 
Low NOx Micromix Combustor Development for Hydrogen-Rich Gas Turbine 
Applications,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 44(13), pp. 6978–6990.
0[6] Durocher, A., Fan, L., Francolini, B., Furi, M., Bourque, G., Sirois, J., May, D., 
Bergthorson, J. M., Yun, S., and Vena, P., 2024, “Characterization of a Novel 
Additive Manufacturing Micromix Nozzle Burning Methane to Hydrogen,” 
ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 146(5), p. 051009.
0[7] Moosbrugger, V., Giuliani, F., Paulitsch, N., and Andracher, L., 2019, “Progress in 
Burner Design Using Additive Manufacturing With a Monolithic Approach and 
Added Features,” ASME Paper No. GT2019-90720.
0[8] Samarasinghe, J., Peluso, S., Szedlmayer, M., De Rosa, A., Quay, B., and 
Santavicca, D., 2013, “Three-Dimensional Chemiluminescence Imaging of 
Unforced and Forced Swirl-Stabilized Flames in a Lean Premixed Multi- 
Nozzle Can Combustor,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 135(10), p. 
101503.
0[9] Kwong, W. Y., and Steinberg, A. M., 2019, “Blowoff and Reattachment Dynamics 
of a Linear Multinozzle Combustor,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 141(1), 
p. 011015.
[10] Durocher, A., Fan, L., F€uri, M., Bourque, G., Bergthorson, J. M., Yun, S., and 
Vena, P., 2024, “Phase-Averaged, 3D OH-LIF Reconstruction for Multi-Nozzle, 
Micromixed Hydrogen Combustion,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 40(1–4), p. 105561.
[11] Boxx, I., Slabaugh, C., Kutne, P., Lucht, R., and Meier, W., 2015, “3 kHz PIV/OH- 
PLIF Measurements in a Gas Turbine Combustor at Elevated Pressure,” Proc. 
Combust. Inst., 35(3), pp. 3793–3802.
[12] Strakey, P. A., Woodruff, S. D., Williams, T. C., and Schefer, R. W., 2008, “OH- 
Planar Fluorescence Measurements of Pressurized, Hydrogen Premixed Flames in 
the SimVal Combustor,” AIAA J., 46(7), pp. 1604–1613.
[13] Versailles, P., Durocher, A., Bourque, G., and Bergthorson, J. M., 2019, “Nitric 
Oxide Formation in Lean, Methane-Air Stagnation Flames at Supra-Atmospheric 
Pressures,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 37(1), pp. 711–718.
[14] Schneider, D., Meier, U., Quade, W., Koopman, J., Aumeier, T., Langfeld, A., 
Behrendt, T., Hassa, C., and Rackwitz, L., 2010, “A New Test Rig for Laser 
Optical Investigations of Lean Jet Engine Burners,” 27th International Congress of 
the Aeronautical Sciences (ICAS 2010), Nice, France, Sept., pp. 19–24.
[15] Tao, C., Zhang, C., Xue, X., Fan, X., Gao, J., Feng, X., and Gao, X., 2023, 
“Flame Dynamics and Combustion Instability Induced by Flow-Flame 
Interactions in a Centrally-Staged Combustor,” Aerosp. Sci. Technol., 142, 
p. 108635.
[16] Durocher, A., Fan, L., F€uri, M., Bourque, G., Sirois, J., May, D., Bergthorson, 
J. M., Yun, S., and Vena, P., 2025, “An Investigation of a Multi-Injector, Premix/ 
Micromix Burner Burning Pure Methane to Pure Hydrogen,” ASME J. Eng. Gas 
Turbines Power, 147(7), p. 071019.
[17] Gauthier, P., Zghal, M., Durocher, A., Vena, P., Fan, L., Francolini, B., 
Bergthorson, J. M., and Yun, S., 2024, “Combustion Computational Fluid 
Dynamics Simulations of a Range of Experimental Lean Hydrogen/Natural Gas 
Blend Flames,” ASME Paper No. GT2024-129104.
[18] SAE E-31 Technical Committee, 2011, “Procedure for the Continuous Sampling 
and Measurement of Gaseous Emissions From Aircraft Turbine Engines,” SAE 
International, SAE-ARP1256E, pp. 1–21.
[19] Ji, K., Hui, X., Tao, C., Xue, X., and An, Q., 2024, “Laser Absorption Correction 
for Hydroxyl Planar Laser Induced Fluorescence Measurements in a Centrally 
Staged Combustor at Elevated Pressures,” J. Appl. Phys., 136(11), p. 113104.
[20] Eckbreth, A. C., 2022, Laser Diagnostics for Combustion Temperature and 
Species, CRC Press, London.
051010-10 / Vol. 148, MAY 2026                                                                                                               
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/5/051010/7538116/gtp-25-1462.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025
