
--- Page 1 ---

303
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Volume 28, 2000/pp. 303–309
TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES: EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF
THE FLOW FIELD AND FORMATION OF NITROGEN OXIDE
P. SCHMITTEL, B. GU¨ NTHER, B. LENZE, W. LEUCKEL and H. BOCKHORN
Engler-Bunte-Institute, Combustion Technology
University of Karlsruhe (TH)
76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
The NO emissions of a 150 kW natural gas (with and without fuel N) burner were shown to be dependent
on the geometry of the gas nozzle and the swirl intensity of the combustion air. Numerous detailed in-
ﬂame measurements were performed in order to understand the local conditions that inﬂuence the for-
mation of NO in highly turbulent swirling ﬂames. It was found, that by controlling the axial fuel gas
momentum in combination with the swirl number, mixing of fuel and air can be inﬂuenced, thus reducing
NO formation. Using fuels with chemically ﬁxed nitrogen requires ﬂames with the main heat release under
fuel-rich conditions, leading to type I ﬂames. These ﬂames have the potential to reduce the NO emissions
up to 70% compared with premixed ﬂames. To minimize thermal NO formation, high-temperature zones
with near-stoichiometric mixtures must be avoided, which may be realized by type II ﬂames. Moreover,
swirl turned out to be a strong tool for minimizing thermal NO. Under overall fuel-lean conditions, higher
swirl led to faster mixing of fuel and air, thus lowering the temperature level of the ﬂame and reducing
thermal NO emissions. The experiments were performed in cooperation with the German Technische
Flammen (TECFLAM) joint research program, using a standardized combustion chamber and burner. By
applying identical experimental setups and different measurement techniques by the TECFLAM partners,
accurate and reliable measuring data were produced on the time-mean and on the turbulent ﬂuctuation
levels.
Introduction
Swirl-stabilized non-premixed ﬂames are common
in technical combustion devices such as industrial
furnaces, incinerators, and gas turbines. These
ﬂames offer the possibility to control the ﬂow and
mixing pattern and thus improve ignition stability
and minimize NOx emissions by adapting the aero-
dynamic inlet conditions. Furthermore, the ﬂame
shape can be adjusted to the geometry of the com-
bustion chamber.
A comprehensive understanding of the NO for-
mation in these rather complex turbulent ﬂames can
be attained by taking systematic in-ﬂame measure-
ments of chemical species, ﬂow velocities, and tem-
peratures. In-ﬂame measurements of enclosed swirl-
ing ﬂames which were reported in the literature [1–
3] typically comprise measurements of either the
ﬂow ﬁeld, the temperature, or the species concen-
trations. However, for the interpretation of NO for-
mation, all local information, including residence
time, stoichiometry, and temperature, must be ana-
lyzed. Furthermore, it is important to include or fo-
cus on the burner near ﬁeld as the main reaction
zone, with high temperatures located there. Com-
plete sets of data from semi-industrial swirling
ﬂames including inlet and boundary conditions are
also useful and necessary for validation and improve-
ment of numerical models.
This work provides detailed data from the ﬂow
ﬁeld, temperature, and chemical species of a 0.15
MW non-premixed, highly turbulent swirling ﬂame.
The experiments were performed in a joint research
project of the Technische Flammen (TECFLAM)
Group, which is a consortium with research groups
from the University of Karlsruhe, University of
Darmstadt, University of Heidelberg, University of
Stuttgart, and DLR Stuttgart.
Experimental Setup
The experiments were carried out using the TEC-
FLAM combustion chamber (see Fig. 1). This cylin-
drical, water-cooled combustion chamber (TWall 
150 C) has an inner diameter of 0.5 m and a length
of 1.7 m. To perform ﬁeld measurements, the burner
can be moved axially inside the combustion cham-
ber. The boundary and inlet conditions during the
experiments were controlled and kept constant to
guarantee reproducibility of the measurements.
The swirling ﬂow was induced by a movable-block
swirl generator [4] integrated into the burner, that
allowed a continuous adjustment of the theoretical
swirl number between S0,th  0.0 (no swirl) and 2.0
(full swirl). The diameter of the burner outlet, D,
was 60 mm. Different kinds of quarls can be


--- Page 2 ---

304
TURBULENT COMBUSTION—Non-Premixed Combustion Measurements
Fig. 1. TECFLAM combustion chamber with standard
swirl burner.
mounted onto the burner mouth. In diffusion mode,
the fuel gas was injected concentrically through ex-
changeable gas nozzles (multihole, annular channel,
and single-hole nozzles). The burner can also be op-
erated in premixed mode. For this purpose, the fuel
gas was injected either immediately downstream of
the swirl generator or preferably upstream of the
swirler through eight nozzles to provide complete
mixing in the burner exit plane. To achieve similar
inlet conditions compared with the diffusion mode,
a cylindrical bluff body was installed instead of the
nozzle.
The measurements in the near ﬁeld of the burner
were the turbulent velocity and temperature ﬁelds
and the ﬁelds of concentrations of relevant stable gas
species. Velocity measurements were carried out us-
ing a two-channel laser Doppler velocimeter. The
measurements included the determination of the
mean velocities, U, V, and W, their ﬂuctuation val-
ues, u, v, and w, and the Reynolds stresses, uv
and uw. Magnesia oxide particles (dP  1–5 lm)
brushed off from a massive cylinder served as tracer
material for the combustion gas and air. Time-mean
and ﬂuctuating temperatures were measured using
thermocouples with diameters of 50 lm. After
preampliﬁcation, the thermal inertia of the ther-
mocouples was compensated for electronically, so
that temperature ﬂuctuations up to about 1 kHz
could be detected. Concentrations of stable species
were determined by using a water-cooled probe and
analyzing the gas samples with commercial gas an-
alyzers operating on the basis of infrared absorption
(CH4, CO, CO2, H2O), paramagnetism (O2), and
thermal conductivity (H2). Fourier transform infra-
red was used to determine the concentrations of
HCN, NH3, C2H2, C2H4, and H2O. The analyzer
tube was heated electrically to minimize heat losses
and to avoid condensation effects. The probe oper-
ated isokinetically, with the probe tip oriented to-
ward the main stream direction. The comparison of
the measurements with results from other research
groups (velocities, University of Darmstadt; concen-
trations of chemical species, DLR Stuttgart and Uni-
versity of Heidelberg [5]) showed excellent agree-
ment.
Results and Discussion
Flow and Mixing Pattern
The highly turbulent ﬂames were stabilized by in-
ner recirculation zones. These zones can be induced
by a bluff body, swirl, or both. The stability of these
ﬂames is favored over the entire range of operation
by the following conditions in the ignition zone:
near-stoichiometric mixture, low mean ﬂow veloci-
ties, energy transport of heat and chemically active
species by turbulent exchange from the reverse ﬂow
to ignite the fresh mixture, and high turbulence in-
tensities. Swirl and disk stabilized ﬂames can be sub-
divided, by different mixing and reaction pattern,
into two types of ﬂames [4] (Fig. 2):
1. The central fuel jet penetrates the inner recir-
culation zone completely (compare with the ﬂow
ﬁeld in Fig. 10). Then the internal reverse ﬂow
builds a small annular recirculation zone between
the fuel jet and combustion air. This type of ﬂame
is denoted as a type I ﬂame.
2. When the internal reverse ﬂow strength prevents
the penetration of the recirculation zone by the
fuel jet, the fuel jet is bent toward the annular
shear layer. Because of the rapid mixing in the
shear layer, this ﬂame type is very stable and
short. This type of ﬂame is denoted as a type II
ﬂame (compare with the ﬂow ﬁeld in Fig. 7).
To illustrate the different ﬂow patterns, measure-
ments of the axial velocity along the axis for different
gas nozzle outlet diameters, d, are shown in Fig. 3.
For gas outlet velocities higher than 34 m/s (d 
12.5 mm), the jet is able to penetrate the inner re-
circulating zone, which has a length of x/D  1.2
(type I ﬂame). Jets with a lower outlet velocity are
not able to penetrate the inner reverse ﬂow com-
pletely (type II ﬂame). The formation of these ﬂame
types also depends on the swirl number, burner
mouth geometry (position of the gas gun), and air
outlet momentum [6].


--- Page 3 ---

TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES
305
Fig. 2. Flow and mixing ﬁelds of type I and type II
swirling ﬂames.
Fig. 3. Axial velocities along the centerline for different
gas outlet diameters, d.
Fig. 4. Recirculated mass ﬂow rates of type I and type
II swirling ﬂames.
Fig. 5. NOx emissions of type II ﬂames with different
swirl numbers (S0,th).
The inner recirculating mass ﬂow rates of type I
and type II ﬂames as a function of the axial burner
distance are given in Fig. 4; those data were obtained
by cross section integration of measured axial veloc-
ity and temperature (density) proﬁles. The recircu-
lation of heat and radicals with the central reverse
ﬂow ignited the unburned gas in the reaction zone.
Basically, higher swirl intensity led to lower pressure
at the axis and therefore to higher recirculated mass
ﬂow rates. The combination of axial gas injection and
an additional diverging burner quarl led to high re-
circulated mass ﬂow rates, with the consequence of
excellent ignition stability also of type I ﬂames.
Fields of Concentrations of Chemical Species
and Temperatures
In the following, the formation of nitrous oxides
in high-intensity type II swirling ﬂames with natural
gas as fuel is discussed. The main objectives of this
study were to answer the question where and under
which conditions (local temperature and gas com-
position) nitrous oxides are being formed in swirling
ﬂames. In Fig. 5, the total NO concentrations based
on 3.8 vol % O2 for type II ﬂames at a total air equiv-
alence ratio of k  1.2 for different thermal
throughputs and swirl numbers are illustrated. In
diffusion mode, the fuel gas injection was realized
by an annular ring nozzle. To maintain similar outlet
geometries, in premixed mode the gas nozzle was
replaced by a central blockage. The results demon-
strate that the emission of NO decreases with in-
creasing swirl number, independently of the thermal
throughput. The same tendencies exist for premixed
ﬂames, where due to lower temperatures in the main
reaction zone the overall values of NO concentra-
tions are lower. The radial proﬁles of the mean tem-
peratures at two different axial burner distances (x/


--- Page 4 ---

306
TURBULENT COMBUSTION—Non-Premixed Combustion Measurements
Fig. 6. Radial proﬁles of the mean temperature for two
axial burner distances.
D  0.5 and 1.5) displayed in Fig. 6 conﬁrm these
ﬁndings. For diffusion ﬂames, the highest tempera-
tures were obtained in the main reaction zone, lo-
cated at the boundary of the inner recirculation
zone. With increasing swirl (S  0.9 →1.4), the
entrainment of the jet also increased (see Fig. 4),
and consequently temperatures further downstream
decreased. In the inner backﬂow zone close to the
axis, where mainly burnout gases prevail, a low heat
loss (no convective heat loss to the chamber wall)
led to high temperatures. The maximaltemperatures
between premixed and diffusion ﬂames differed by
100 to 180 K, thus explaining higher thermal NO
emissions of diffusion ﬂames.
In Fig. 7, the ﬁelds of axial velocities, tempera-
tures, and mixture fraction as well as local NOx con-
centrations of two diffusion ﬂames at different swirl
numbers (S  0.7 and 1.4) are compared. The ex-
periments were performed at a total air equivalence
ratio of 1.2 and a thermal throughput of 150 kW. In
the bottom of the diagram, the burner outlet with
an annular ring gas nozzle is indicated for clarity.The
comparison of the average axial velocities, U, shows,
especially along the axis, that higher swirl led to a
higher backﬂow rate. However, an increasing back-
ﬂow velocity led to lower residence times in the re-
circulation zone and a higher recirculation of burned
gas. The level of total NOx emission of ﬂame conﬁg-
urations with high swirl numbers was much lower
than that with lower swirl numbers (S  0.7). Max-
imum NO concentrations appeared in the inner re-
circulation zone. Flames with high swirl numbers
and therefore lower residence times due to higher
backﬂow velocities tended to form less thermal NO
in the inner recirculation zone. In addition, higher
swirl caused faster mixing and therefore lower mean
temperatures in the main reaction zone, with lower
NO emissions. Measurements from the same TEC-
FLAM standard ﬂame performed at PCI Heidelberg
applying the measurement technique of laser-in-
duced ﬂuorescence delivered comparable results
[5].
Another means to affect NO emission, especially
of type I ﬂames, is the variation of the axial momen-
tum of the fuel jet. In Fig. 8, the NOx emissions for
type I ﬂames are given as a function of the air equiv-
alence ratio. In general, all curves can be divided
into two sections: overall air equivalence ratios
higher than 1 (fuel-lean conditions) and less than 1
(fuel-rich and near-stoichiometric mixture). At an air
equivalence ratio close to 1, the perfectly premixed
ﬂame exhibited the highest concentration of nitro-
gen oxides. The emission dropped signiﬁcantly to-
ward lower total air equivalence ratios. In this sec-
tion, the emissions were almost independent of the
geometry of the fuel gas supply. In contrast, under
fuel-lean conditions (air equivalence ratio higher
than 1), a strong dependency of the NO emissions
on the gas nozzle geometry could be observed. With
increasing gas nozzle diameter and thereby decreas-
ing axial momentum of the fuel jet, the emissions of
nitrous oxides decreased. Conﬁrmed detailed in-
ﬂame measurements show that small fuel outlet di-
ameters led to an intense burnout of fuel in the jet
zone of the ﬂame at long residence times at a high
temperature level. By lowering the momentum of
the fuel jet, the emissions dropped signiﬁcantly.
Type II swirl ﬂames are also illustrated in Fig. 8. At
high air equivalence ratios, the lowest values of ni-
trous oxides were being emitted from the perfectly
premixed ﬂame.
Nitrogen Fuel Conversion
The emission of nitrogen oxides from technical
combustion devices often is dominated by the con-
version of nitrogen contained in the fuel. Chemically
ﬁxed nitrogen is converted during combustion
largely to ammonia, which then is transformed to
nitrogen oxides. To investigate the conversion of
chemically ﬁxed nitrogen, therefore, the fuel was
doped with ammonia.
The formation of nitrogen oxides from chemically
ﬁxed nitrogen is highly dependent on the local stoi-
chiometry. As in type II ﬂames, the main reaction
takes place under fuel-lean conditions, the reaction
of ﬁxed nitrogen to NO instead of N2 is preferred,
and high emissions of total ﬁxed nitrogen ([TFN] 
[NO]  [NO2]  [NH3]  [HCN]) result. Flames
with internal aerodynamically staged mixing of fuel
and air and therefore large fuel-rich zones offer the
possibility to decrease NO emissions considerably.
To minimize NOx emissions from turbulent swirl-
ing ﬂames with NH3 dotted natural gas as fuel, de-
tailed in-ﬂame measurements and parametric stud-
ies for both ﬂame types were performed. Results of


--- Page 5 ---

TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES
307
Fig. 7. Fields of axial ﬂow velocity (U), temperature (T), mixture fraction (f), and NOx concentrations of two type II
ﬂames with different swirl numbers (S0,th  0.7 and 1.4); Pth  150 kW; k  1.2.
the exhaust gas analysis are given in Fig. 9. It is ob-
vious that the levels of TFN emission from premixed
and diffusion type II ﬂames were highest. NO emis-
sions from type I ﬂames were much lower over the
complete range of the air equivalence ratio tested.
The typical curve shape of [TFN] versus k of type I
ﬂames could be split into a fuel-rich and a fuel-lean
part [7]. Because of a lack of oxygen under fuel-rich
conditions, the oxidation of NH3 and HCN was not
complete, and these compounds were measured in
the exhaust. On the other hand, under fuel-lean con-
ditions, the high concentrations of oxygen favored
the formation of NO.
The fuel jet momentum was varied to try to min-
imize NOx emissions; it became obvious that the
mechanisms behind this dependence are quite com-
plex, so that ﬁeld measurements were indispensable.
As an example, the results of the ﬁeld measurements
of a type I ﬂame with a nozzle diameter of 7 mm are
discussed. The operating conditions for that run
were a thermal throughput of 150 kW, a total air
equivalence ratio of 1.2, a swirl number of 1.1, and
as fuel natural gas dotted with 3 vol % NH3. In Fig.
11, the mixture fraction calculated with the help of
the concentrations of the stable chemical species il-
lustrates fuel-rich conditions over a wide range, es-
pecially in the inner recirculation zone and in the jet
close to the axis. The ignition zone is located in the
reverse ﬂow, indicated by high temperatures (see
Fig. 10). In the fuel-lean region near the air ﬂow,
NO formation proceeds rapidly; see Fig. 11 (right
side), where calculated NO formation rates are plot-
ted. These calculations were performed with the
measured temperatures and concentrations of stable


--- Page 6 ---

308
TURBULENT COMBUSTION—Non-Premixed Combustion Measurements
Fig. 8. NOx emissions of type I ﬂames with different
axial fuel gas momentum (d  fuel gas outlet diameter).
Fig. 9. TFN emissions from swirling ﬂames with 3 vol
% NH3 mixed in natural gas.
Fig. 10. Field of temperature (T)
and NO concentrations of a type I
ﬂame (3 vol % NH3 in natural gas; k
 1.2; Pth  150 kW).
species as input conditions, using the software pack-
age SENKIN in combination with the modiﬁed Gas
Research Institute (GRI) mechanism [8]. On the
fuel-rich side in the inner recirculation zone, how-
ever, NO consumption by NO reburning can be ob-
served. The comparison between the mixture frac-
tion and the calculated NO formation rates shows
that the production and consumption of NO corre-
late directly with the local mixture [9]. Because of
insufﬁcient residence times in the jet zone, reburn-
ing effects there are negligible, and therefore the
main production of NO takes place in the jet of the
ﬂame. As a result, minimization of NOx emissions in
these ﬂames is obtained by a maximization of recir-
culated mass ﬂow in the near burner ﬁeld under
fuel-rich conditions and minimization of heat release
in the jet zone. This may be performed by a modiﬁed
burner geometry—for example, length and shape of
the quarl in combination with optimized ﬂame input
conditions of swirl intensity and axial momentum.
Conclusions
Detailed in-ﬂame measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld,
temperatures, and gas composition for type I and
type II swirling ﬂames were performed to clarify the


--- Page 7 ---

TURBULENT SWIRLING FLAMES
309
Fig. 11. Field of mixture fraction
(f) and calculated NO formation
rates of a type ﬂame (3 vol % NH3
in natural gas; k  1.2; Pth  150
kW).
mechanism of NO formation for a further minimi-
zation of NO emissions. The following conclusions
can be drawn:
1. For type-II swirling natural gas ﬂames, an in-
creasing swirl intensity leads to a higher recircu-
lated mass ﬂow rate through the inner recircula-
tion zone, with high temperatures. As the
residence time in that zone decreases, with in-
creasing recirculated mass ﬂow, NO formation is
also reduced.
2. By varying the axial momentum of the central
fuel jet, it is possible to control the ratio of heat
release between jet and inner recirculation zone.
An increasing heat release in the jet of the ﬂame
causes an increase of total NOx emissions, be-
cause of long residence times in high-tempera-
ture zones. On the other hand, the fuel-rich con-
ditions in the heat release zone of these ﬂames
signiﬁcantly reduce NOx emissions from fuels
with chemically ﬁxed nitrogen.
Acknowledgments
The investigations were conducted under the scope of
the TECFLAM research contract. The authors gratefully
acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Government of
Baden-Wu¨rttemberg and the Bundesministerium fu¨r Bil-
dung und Forschung.
REFERENCES
1. Chen, R-H., Combust. Sci. Technol. 120:321–333
(1996).
2. Claypole, T. C., and Syred, N., Proc. Combust. Inst.
18:81–89 (1981).
3. Heap, M. P., Lowes, T. M., and Walmsley, R., Proc.
Combust. Inst. 14:883–895 (1973).
4. Leuckel, W., and Fricker, N., J. Inst. Fuel 103–122
(1976).
5. Bo¨ckle, S., Kazenwadel, J., Schulz, C., and Wolfrum,
J., Proc. Combust. Inst., 28:279–286 (2000).
6. Leuckel, W., Lenze, B., and Schmittel, P., TECFLAM
Abschlußbericht 1996–1999 TP11.
7. Jansohn, P., “Bildung und Abbau N-Halﬁg verbindun-
gen, insbesondue HCN, NH3 und NO, in turbulenten
Diffusions Hammen,” Dissertation, University of
Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany, 1991.
8. Koger, S., Braun-Unkhoff, M., Stapf, D., Leuckel, W.,
and Frank, P., Fifth International Conference on Com-
bustion Technologies for a Clean Environment,Lisbon,
1999.
9. Stapf, D., and Leuckel, W., Proc. Combust. Inst.
26:2083–2090 (1996).
