
--- Page 1 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
Available online 3 July 2024
0360-3199/© 2024 Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and
similar technologies.
Applications of PLIF in fundamental research on turbulent combustion of 
hydrogen and hydrogen hybrid fuels: A brief review 
Wu Gu , Xiao Liu *, Zhiqiang Wang , Hongtao Zheng 
College of Power and Energy Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Hydrogen and hydrogen hybrid fuels 
Planar laser induced fluorescence 
Flame structures 
NOx emissions 
Combustion instability 
A B S T R A C T   
One of the important choices for achieving decarbonization goals on a large scale is the extensive use of H2. 
However, the highly reactive nature of H2 often leads to challenges such as flashback, excessive NOx emissions, 
and combustion instability when traditional combustion methods are directly applied. Therefore, developing safe 
and efficient H2 combustion technologies are currently important research directions in gas combustion. It holds 
significant importance for addressing the coordinated development of future energy and the environment. In 
recent years, hydrogen-enriched methane has been widely applied in gas turbines with the aim of reducing 
carbon emissions. Ammonia is also regarded as an important carrier of hydrogen. The blending of ammonia with 
hydrogen has been widely recognized and accepted for simultaneous use. The use of H2O as a diluent is another 
technology capable of achieving stable H2 combustion and reducing NOx emissions. Syngas, primarily composed 
of CO and H2, serves as the main fuel for Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle technology. These are 
collectively referred to as hydrogen hybrid fuels, and their combustion chemical properties are all influenced by 
hydrogen. In recent years, significant efforts have been made to deepen the understanding of flame structures of 
pure hydrogen and these hydrogen hybrid fuels through advanced numerical simulations and experimental di­
agnostics. The utilization of Planar Laser Induced Fluorescence techniques for flame structure characterization 
has significantly advanced the understanding of flame-flow-acoustic coupling mechanisms in phenomena such as 
flashback processes, NOx emission mechanisms, and combustion instability. This has also contributed to the 
development and validation of advanced numerical models. This paper categorizes hydrogen and various 
hydrogen hybrid fuels according to different combustion application scenarios and purposes. It discusses the 
application of Planar Laser Induced Fluorescence technology in flashback, NOx emissions, and combustion 
instability aspects across different hydrogen hybrid fuels. This brief review aims to provide useful references for 
researchers and engineers designing and conducting foundational experiments on flame structures and com­
bustion instability of hydrogen and hydrogen hybrid fuels.   
1. Introduction 
Providing abundant, clean, and secure sources of renewable energy 
is one of the key technological challenges facing humanity. The resur­
gence of hydrogen in its chemical and biochemical aspects, as the 
simplest closed-shell molecule in the world, has recently been driven by 
scientific and technological interest in hydrogen as an energy carrier and 
potential transportation fuel. Our current energy infrastructure is pri­
marily dominated by the use of fossil fuels, leading to greenhouse gas 
emissions. Despite being the most abundant element in the universe, 
hydrogen is not present in large quantities on Earth. To make hydrogen 
widely applicable in sustainable future energy infrastructures, 
addressing global energy issues, numerous key challenges must be 
overcome. Governments and industries, particularly in the United 
States, Japan, and Europe, have been heavily investing in research and 
development to overcome technological barriers in hydrogen produc­
tion, storage, and utilization, aiming to realize a hydrogen-based sus­
tainable future energy infrastructure. In 2019, the International Energy 
Agency (IEA) highlights in its “The Future of Hydrogen” white paper the 
crucial role hydrogen will play in the transition to clean energy [1]. The 
European Union, United Kingdom, United States, and Japan have suc­
cessively proposed overarching strategic plans for the hydrogen sector 
over the next 10 years and beyond. 
The European Union’s hydrogen roadmap report in 2019 indicates 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: liuxiao_heu@163.com (X. Liu).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/he 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2024.06.350 
Received 14 May 2024; Received in revised form 11 June 2024; Accepted 26 June 2024   


--- Page 2 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1241
that large-scale utilization of hydrogen (H2) is the only choice for the EU 
to achieve its decarbonization goals [2]. This is because hydrogen is 
currently the only scaled-up technology for end-use energy coupling and 
is an indispensable lever for large-scale utilization of renewable energy. 
It enables low-cost, long-term storage of renewable energy, as well as 
interdepartmental or interregional transfer and distribution. During 
weather conditions such as strong winds or sunny days when large 
amounts of electricity are generated, or during periods of low electricity 
demand, renewable energy that would otherwise be curtailed can be 
used to produce hydrogen, increasing the uptake of renewable energy. 
Storing surplus energy as H2 through electrolysis or other technologies 
can significantly expand the integration of renewable energy into the 
power system. Once surplus renewable energy electricity can be utilized, 
the actual utilization rate of renewable energy can be doubled or even 
higher. The H2 produced from this electricity is termed green hydrogen, 
and it will be the primary source of H2 in future markets. Large-scale 
hydrogen storage and hydrogen-based power generation help to 
address the fluctuation of renewable energy generation without 
increasing carbon emissions. The International Hydrogen Council pre­
dicts that by 2050, the hydrogen industry will reduce 6 billion tons of 
CO2 emissions, create a market size of $2.5 trillion, and account for 18% 
of global energy consumption. Therefore, hydrogen plays a crucial role 
in promoting the utilization of renewable energy and driving the 
transformation of energy systems. Hydrogen can serve as fuel storage 
and be used in fuel cells, internal combustion engines, or turbines in 
transportation and distributed combined heat and power systems. 
Hydrogen (H2) is one of the most attractive alternative fuels in tradi­
tional gas turbines and industrial burners because it contributes almost 
no pollution [3] and has zero carbon characteristics [4,5], making 
hydrogen combustion technology a hot research topic [6–8]. However, 
organizing hydrogen flames with high combustion stability in practical 
applications poses a challenge due to its high reactivity [9] and com­
bustion temperature, which may lead to issues such as flashback and 
combustion instability [10]. Therefore, there is still considerable room 
for development in hydrogen combustion technology. Understanding 
the mechanisms of hydrogen combustion flames is crucial, enabling us 
to develop robust control strategies to achieve the desired level of flame 
stability. 
A fundamental understanding of improvements in combustion 
equipment and processes requires collaboration among scientists from 
multiple disciplines. Even the most minimal numerical simulations of a 
practical combustor involve knowledge of chemistry, fluid mechanics, 
and heat transfer, and require carefully designed experiments for vali­
dation [11]. Laser-based combustion diagnostic techniques can provide 
direct answers to issues arising in combustion processes [12]. They not 
only offer instantaneous flow and thermodynamic information for 
reactive flows but also possess the necessary temporal and spatial res­
olution [13,14]. In particular, simultaneous measurements of velocity, 
temperature, and species concentration can directly determine the 
relevant terms in the conservation equations for energy and species 
concentration. At the same time, there have been significant advance­
ments in the development of non-intrusive combustion diagnostic 
techniques in recent years. The results obtained using these techniques 
have greatly enhanced our current understanding of combustion. 
Combustion diagnostics is a discipline that involves measuring param­
eters such as species concentrations, temperatures, and flow fields 
during combustion processes, providing experimental evidence for un­
derstanding the complex chemical reactions and flow processes involved 
in combustion. Its research goals include measuring temperature, ve­
locity, pressure, and the concentrations of hundreds of species during 
combustion. Over the past half-century, these combustion diagnostic 
methods have undergone further development, addressing numerous 
combustion research issues. Therefore, to a certain extent, the progress 
of combustion science is closely related to the advancement of com­
bustion diagnostics. In order to better address the cutting-edge issues in 
current combustion research, the continuous development of 
combustion diagnostics is urgently needed. Planar Laser Induced Fluo­
rescence (PLIF) combustion diagnostic technology represents the reac­
tion zone of flames in the flow field by measuring the concentration of 
OH radicals. Due to its high sensitivity, short response time, and minimal 
flow field interference, PLIF has been widely applied in combustion 
diagnostic practices. PLIF is used for imaging (but typically not for 
quantitative measurements) of species such as CO, OH, CH, and CH2O. 
The greatest value of these rapid two-dimensional techniques lies in 
visualizing important combustion scalars simultaneously at many loca­
tions of reaction and flow, allowing insights to be extracted from local 
and global extinction, as well as intermediate combustion product 
presence during extinction processes (sometimes even quantitatively). 
The latest developments in PLIF include imaging of NO, dust precursors 
similar to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), H atoms, and HCO. 
Zhen Cao et al. [15] utilized OH-PLIF with a frequency of 5 kHz to 
measure the fine flame structure and evolution process. They studied the 
effects of equivalence ratio and steam dilution rate on the instability 
characteristics of hydrogen-air flames in a micro-mixing burner. In a 
micro-mixing burner, the evolution and oscillation characteristics of 
water vapor-diluted hydrogen-air flames were investigated. Thoralf G. 
Reichel et al. [16] utilized hydrogen-technology-premixed, vortex-sta­
bilized hydrogen burners under atmospheric pressure conditions to 
conduct experiments using Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) of 
hydroxyl radicals (OH-PLIF). They studied the flame anchoring position 
and its influence on flashback tendencies. Yongseok Choi et al. [17–20] 
conducted simultaneous phase-resolved OH-PLIF and high-speed OH* 
chemiluminescence emission measurements. By comparing experi­
mental data from two different multi-element injector configurations, 
they elucidated the influence of strong flame interactions on the col­
lective dynamics of hydrogen-rich premixed flames. These experimental 
results not only provide new insights into the coupling mechanisms 
between combustion and phenomena such as flashback and combustion 
instability but also offer valuable detailed data for the development and 
validation of advanced numerical models [21–23]. 
This article aims to provide a comprehensive review of the principles 
of the latest non-intrusive combustion diagnostic techniques and their 
applications in the research fields of turbulent combustion with 
hydrogen fuel and hydrogen hybrid fuels. The remaining sections of this 
article are organized as follows: Firstly, the basic principles of the 
selected diagnostic techniques are introduced, which are capable of 
measuring crucial aspects in the turbulent domain. This section also 
includes details of common experimental setups and emerging aspects of 
relevant diagnostic techniques, aiming to provide useful information for 
researchers and engineers to design and conduct further investigations 
into turbulent combustion. Furthermore, these advanced diagnostic 
techniques will be introduced in their applications to turbulent com­
bustion research involving H2, methane-hydrogen hybrid fuel, 
ammonia-hydrogen hybrid fuel, H2O-hydrogen hybrid fuel, CO- 
hydrogen hybrid fuel, such as studies on flame-flame interactions and 
flame structure imaging. Finally, the main conclusions will be summa­
rized, and potential future research directions will be discussed. How­
ever, it should be noted that due to the large amount of literature on 
hydrogen fuel combustion, a complete survey would be beyond the 
scope of this article. These combustion diagnostics provide a compre­
hensive overview of the basic principles of the latest non-intrusive 
combustion diagnostic techniques and their applications in the 
research of turbulent combustion with hydrogen fuel and hydrogen 
hybrid fuels. By reviewing the latest non-intrusive combustion diag­
nostic techniques, useful information is provided for researchers and 
engineers to design and conduct further investigations into turbulent 
combustion. 
2. Principles and experimental setup 
In actual combustion tests, invasive combustion diagnostic methods 
are widely used, and the primary means of measuring the gas-phase 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 3 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1242
combustion system has always been through insertable probes. The 
probe method is simple, economical, and easy to use, but the accuracy 
and application range of the probe are limited by flame disturbance and 
harsh testing environments. The presence of insertable probes can alter 
the flame structure in the original measurement field, and the results 
obtained may not reflect the true state of the actual combustion field. 
Such local disturbances include aerodynamic effects, flame quenching 
effects, thermal effects, catalytic effects, and so on. The accuracy of 
measurements will sharply decrease with these disturbances, often 
yielding uncontrollable results. In contrast, spectroscopic methods offer 
many advantages. Non-contact measurements can reduce or avoid 
aerodynamic, thermal, or chemical disturbances, and they can with­
stand harsh environments with high temperatures and pressures 
[24–26]. Flow fields can be quantified using techniques such as Laser 
Doppler Velocimetry (LDV) or Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV); tem­
perature can be measured using Laser Rayleigh Scattering, Coherent 
Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering (CARS), Absorption Spectroscopy, or 
Laser-Induced Fluorescence (LIF); species concentrations can be 
measured using LIF or Raman Scattering; flame structures can be studied 
using techniques like Planar LIF (PLIF), Computed Tomography Chem­
iluminescence (CTC) [27,28], or Conditional PIV (CPIV) [29]. In the 
field of hydrogen combustion diagnostics, it’s unnecessary to provide a 
comprehensive overview of non-intrusive diagnostic techniques, nor is it 
necessary to delve deeply into the fundamental principles of laser di­
agnostics. Certainly, the focus should be on introducing the key tech­
niques for obtaining diagnostic parameters in hydrogen combustion. 
Laser-Induced Fluorescence (LIF) is particularly relevant for obtaining 
measurements of flame structure and flow field information in this 
context. Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence is highly sensitive and 
capable of detecting low concentrations of species like OH, CH, and NO 
radicals. This technique does not disturb the combustion process, 
allowing for accurate in-situ measurements. While PLIF excels in qual­
itative imaging, obtaining quantitative data can be challenging due to 
factors like laser sheet attenuation and fluorescence quenching. Both 
Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV) and Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) 
are excellent for measuring flow velocities in combustion environments, 
providing detailed information on turbulence and flow fields. There are 
some limitations. Both techniques require clear optical access to the 
combustion region, which can be difficult in practical combustion sys­
tems. Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering (CARS) is highly effective 
for precise temperature measurements in combustion environments, 
offering high accuracy and spatial resolution. Chemiluminescence is 
relatively simple to set up and less expensive compared to other laser 
diagnostics. Chemiluminescence is typically limited to detecting a few 
species like OH*, CH*, and NO*, providing less comprehensive data than 
techniques like PLIF. 
In laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) techniques, the laser wavelength 
is tuned to a specific absorption line of the target atom or molecule of 
interest. Subsequently, the component is excited to an electronic excited 
state and emits fluorescence, which is then detected as a fluorescence 
radiation signal. LIF technique, by tuning the laser wavelength, can 
depict the absorption spectrum of components, reliably identifying their 
types. It can also measure temperature by determining the distribution 
of molecular rotational or vibrational energy levels. In addition to point- 
by-point measurements, LIF can also be conveniently used for two- 
dimensional plane imaging of trace component distributions in flames. 
In principle, selecting a laser with a narrow spectral linewidth is used to 
excite the target chemical species from specific rotational-vibrational 
levels in its ground state to rotational-vibrational levels in the excited 
state. Subsequently, the excited species spontaneously returns to its 
ground electronic state, emitting fluorescence in the process. These 
fluorescence signals are typically several orders of magnitude stronger 
than the signals resulting from Rayleigh scattering and Raman scattering 
due to the excitation resonance properties, making LIF highly sensitive 
to the species being measured. A more detailed derivation of LIF signals 
can be found in Ref. [30]. So far, only three molecules are the most 
commonly used: OH, CH, and NO. This is mainly because they are 
relatively easy to detect, have well-established spectral and collisional 
databases, and play important roles in numerous flame measurements. 
In laser diagnostics, the intensity of LIF signals is directly proportional to 
the mole fraction of the detected species. For example, Gashi et al. [31] 
and Chterev et al. [32] respectively utilized lasers with wavelengths 
near 283.5 nm and 282.93 nm to measure OH-PLIF in gas turbulent 
premixed flames and turbulent spray flames, targeting the Q1(8) and Q1 
(6) transition lines of OH radicals. These transitions are both unaffected 
by temperature. With this setup, the distribution of LIF enables a more 
robust quantitative measurement of species concentration. Further 
fundamental principles of LIF methods can be found in the references 
provided [33]. In most applications, the detection system of LIF tech­
nology must be able to resolve rapid fluorescence decay processes. In 
combustion diagnostics applications, three detection devices can meet 
measurement requirements: photomultiplier tubes (PMT), microchannel 
plates (MCP), and streak cameras. Currently, fluorescence signals can be 
detected by intensified charge-coupled device (ICCD) cameras. The laser 
beam extends onto the laser sheet, and the target species located in the 
measurement plane are excited, thereby achieving two-dimensional 
(2D) imaging of species with LIF, known as planar laser-induced fluo­
rescence (PLIF). 
PLIF measurements of important combustion intermediates such as 
OH and CH are widely used in combustion diagnostics [34,35] and 
turbulent combustion [36], allowing for the representation of 
high-temperature regions and primary low-temperature reaction zones 
within combustion, respectively. The CH radical exists only within a 
narrow region, whereas the distribution of OH radicals is present 
simultaneously in both the reaction zone and the combustion zone. The 
concentration edge of OH radicals closely matches that of the CH layer, 
enabling the identification of the thin flame front by calculating the 
gradient of OH radical distribution or detecting the maximum intensity 
of CH radicals, thus distinguishing between the combustion and un­
burned zones. However, it is important to note that in highly turbulent 
flows, using OH-PLIF to determine the reaction zone is not always 
straightforward. This is because a significant amount of detectable OH 
radicals not only exist within the reaction zone but also within the 
combustion gases. Additionally, the flame front may undergo significant 
twisting and wrinkling, causing the flame front to deviate from the edge 
of OH radicals. 
In practical experimental setups, a LIF (Laser-Induced Fluorescence) 
system typically consists of three main components: 1. Excitation source, 
comprised of a laser and its associated optical transmission components. 
For PLIF measurements, optical screening optics (usually a set of 
spherical or cylindrical lenses) are also necessary components. 2. The 
signal light reception and detection subsystem, which includes 
aberration-correcting imaging lenses and a digital imaging low-light 
camera. 3. The data acquisition and processing subsystem, which can 
process images either in real-time or post-experimentally. Typically, the 
experimental setup also includes synchronization equipment between 
the test piece (such as a burner) and the laser and detector, all controlled 
by a computer throughout the entire process. PLIF images can capture 
various flow field parameters, including component concentrations, 
temperature, velocity, pressure, and density. Once 2D field measure­
ment data is obtained, these parameters can be quantified through 
calculation. Relative to both position and time, image data is quantita­
tive, allowing for detailed investigation of flow field structures such as 
flames and turbulent jets using PLIF. 
After years of development, LIF (Laser-Induced Fluorescence) has 
been successfully applied in the field of combustion diagnostics. In 
practical experimental setups, the LIF system generally consists of two 
parts: the laser system and the imaging system. To provide more useful 
guidance for combustion diagnostics using LIF technology, this section 
focuses on reviewing well-documented LIF measurement setups in the 
literature. It should be noted that LIF measurements have many suc­
cessful applications in combustion diagnostics. The work of three 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 4 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1243
research groups is selected here to demonstrate typical experimental 
setups and some of the latest advancements in LIF-based techniques. For 
example, the PLIF system at Xi’an Jiaotong University [37], as shown in 
Fig. 1(a), uses an OH-PLIF system where a 450 mJ/pulse Nd:YAG laser is 
frequency-doubled to generate a 532 nm laser beam at 10 Hz. The beam 
is then tuned to approximately 283 nm using a Rhodamine 6G dye so­
lution pumped by a tunable dye laser. The pulse energy of the 283 nm 
laser beam is about 20 mJ. The laser beam is expanded to form a laser 
sheet with a thickness of approximately 0.5 mm using optical devices. 
An ICCD camera equipped with a UV lens and an OH bandpass filter 
centered at 310 nm (±10 nm) is used to capture the OH-LIF signal. The 
PIV system mainly consists of a dual-cavity 300 mJ/pulse Nd:YAG laser 
and a dual-shutter CCD camera. TiO2 particles (approximately 0.5 μm in 
diameter) are used as seeding particles introduced into the airflow. The 
532 nm beam is expanded into a laser sheet with a thickness of 
approximately 1 mm and is used to illuminate the seeded particles at a 
repetition rate of 10 Hz. The Mie scattering signal is then captured using 
a CCD camera equipped with a macro lens and a 532 nm bandpass filter. 
The time interval between the two laser pulses is approximately 40 μs. 
The work of the research team from Lund University [38] is selected 
here to showcase typical experimental setup and some of the latest ad­
vancements based on LIF technology, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The system 
is capable of simultaneously measuring four components. Multiple Nd: 
YAG lasers are arranged in a Multi-YAG cluster, aimed at generating 
Fig. 1. (a) OH-PLIF and PIV laser diagnostics systems at Xi’an Jiaotong University [37]. (b) Sketch of the optics-setup at Lund University [38]. (c) VLIF projections 
from different angular position [40]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 5 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1244
multiple wavelengths instead of a typical single output wavelength 
recombination [39]. The fuel-tracer toluene is excited by the first laser, 
while formaldehyde (CH2O) is excited by the second laser. The third 
laser generates another 355 nm laser beam, which pumps a mid-range 
OPO (Optical Parametric Oscillator) unit, emitting 431 nm radiation 
to excite CH. The fourth laser emits 532 nm and pumps a Sirah 
Cobra-Stretch dye laser (2400 l/mm grating), which is doped with 
Rhodamine 610 and Rhodamine 640 dissolved in ethanol. The output 
beam undergoes frequency doubling (KDP* crystal) to 309.24 nm to 
excite OH. Indeed, it’s a clever implementation enabling simultaneous 
measurement of four substances. Three PI-MAX II cameras (1024 × 1024 
pixels) and one PI-MAX I camera (512 × 512 pixels) were used as de­
tectors. The cameras were vertically positioned on the laser sheet using 
two beam splitters (see Fig. 1). Simultaneous multi-species measurement 
allows for the simultaneous capture of species distribution in space, 
providing an intuitive understanding of flame propagation and chemical 
reaction processes. This offers new insights into the characteristics of 
mixing, reactions, and turbulent-flame-chemistry interactions in turbu­
lent combustion processes. Volumetric Laser-Induced Fluorescence 
(VLIF) can be extended to three dimensions. For example, Ma et al. [40] 
utilized the CH-VLIF method to conduct single-shot 3D flame structure 
measurements of turbulent premixed flames, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The 
laser system consists of a 10 Hz pump laser and a dye laser. The laser 
system produces a pulse energy of approximately 10 mJ/pulse at the 
target excitation wavelength of 314.415 nm, with a pulse duration of 
~10 ns. Cameras 1, 3, and 5 are Photron SAZs (CMOS), and camera 4 is a 
Photron SA-5 (CMOS), all equipped with the same intensifier. Camera 2 
is a PI-Max intensified (CCD) camera. All cameras are aligned in the X–Y 
plane, so their orientation is entirely specified by θ, defined as the angle 
between each camera’s optical axis and the positive X-axis in the 
counterclockwise direction. All five cameras are equipped with identical 
UV lenses. Close-up lenses are applied in front of the UV lenses of each 
camera (with focal lengths of 200 mm, 300 mm, 200 mm, 250 mm, and 
250 mm for cameras 1 to 5, respectively) to optimize the field of view 
and signal levels. All cameras and intensifiers are synchronized with the 
laser at a frame rate of 10 Hz and an intensifier gating time of 100 ns. 
A brief summary of the main scope, advantages, and disadvantages 
of diagnostic techniques is provided here to facilitate the following 
discussion, as shown in Table 1. 
3. Hydrogen and hydrogen hybrid fuel turbulent combustion 
3.1. Hydrogen combustion 
The increase in greenhouse gas emissions has strengthened people’s 
determination to reduce carbon emissions. Hydrogen fuel is not only 
recognized as the cleanest fuel in gas turbine operations, but its 
outstanding “carbon-neutral ability” is also widely favored. In recent 
years, the overall consumption of hydrogen fuel has exhibited an 
explosive growth trend, thanks to its contribution to carbon emissions 
reduction [41–45]. Influenced by previous experiences with combustion 
of other fuels, lean-premixed hydrogen combustion is currently 
receiving widespread attention due to its potential as a carbon-neutral 
power generation method [46–49]. However, just as with the initial 
development of lean-premixed systems, the use of hydrogen fuel in gas 
turbine 
combustion 
chambers 
has 
sparked 
a 
series 
of 
yet-to-be-fully-resolved technical challenges. Many combustion-related 
issues that remain unresolved have also been encountered in the 
development of hydrogen fuel combustion. For example, flashback is a 
typical challenging issue with rapidly premixed hydrogen flames, which 
is crucial throughout the operation of the entire combustion chamber 
[50–55]. Furthermore, when fuel is switched to hydrogen, the emissions 
of nitrogen oxides produced after combustion can vary due to changes in 
the physicochemical properties of the fuel. Because the fixed thermal 
power remains constant, the temperature of hydrogen flames increases, 
resulting in higher emissions of nitrogen oxides. The localized peak 
temperatures generated by hydrogen combustion can lead to a sharp 
increase in the production of thermal NOx in high-temperature regions. 
Simultaneously, there is a frequent occurrence of combustion instability 
risks triggered by the higher flame propagation speed of hydrogen gas 
[56]. Flashback in hydrogen combustion can occur due to various rea­
sons. One of the factors contributing to flashback is the high laminar 
burning velocity of hydrogen flames, which can lead to flame propa­
gation upstream into the premixing zone of the burner. Additionally, the 
presence of hydrogen in the fuel mixture can increase the flame speed 
and heat release rate, making the flame more prone to flashback. The 
high reactivity of hydrogen can also lead to autoignition and flame 
propagation under certain conditions, contributing to the risk of flash­
back. Furthermore, the combustion characteristics of hydrogen, such as 
its high flame speed and reactivity, can result in a higher tendency for 
flashback compared to other fuels. 
To address these issues, improvements in structural design are 
Table 1 
Summary of the non-intrusive diagnostic techniques.  
Technique 
Primary 
Applications 
Advantages 
Disadvantage 
PLIF (Planar 
Laser-Induced 
Fluorescence) 
Measurement of 
flow field and 
concentration 
distribution 
High spatial 
resolution, can 
measure 
instantaneous 
concentration and 
temperature fields 
Requires 
fluorescent dye, 
may affect fluid 
dynamics, 
complex data 
processing 
VLIF 
(Volumetric 
Laser-Induced 
Fluorescence) 
3D temperature 
and concentration 
distribution in 
flow fields, 3D 
imaging of 
combustion 
processes 
3D imaging 
capability, 
detailed spatial 
distribution, high 
resolution 
Complex optical 
system, large 
computational 
load, expensive 
instruments 
PIV (Particle 
Image 
Velocimetry) 
Fluid velocity field 
measurement, 
turbulence studies, 
aerodynamic 
experiments 
Non-intrusive, 
high precision 
velocity 
measurement, 
applicable to a 
wide range of 
fluid dynamics 
applications 
Requires particle 
tracers, complex 
imaging system, 
certain 
environmental 
requirements 
Tomo-PIV 
(Tomographic 
PIV) 
3D fluid velocity 
field 
measurement, 
analysis of 
complex flows, 3D 
structure of 
turbulence 
Provides 3D 
velocity 
information, 
suitable for 
complex and 
turbulent flows, 
high temporal 
resolution 
Complex data 
processing, 
difficult system 
calibration, 
expensive 
equipment 
Laser Raman 
Scattering 
Measurement of 
chemical 
composition and 
temperature, 
combustion 
process analysis, 
gas composition 
detection 
Non-intrusive, 
high selectivity 
and high 
resolution, 
suitable for multi- 
component 
analysis 
Weak signal, 
requires high- 
power laser, 
complex data 
processing and 
interpretation 
TDLAS (Tunable 
Diode Laser 
Absorption 
Spectroscopy) 
Measurement of 
gas composition 
and concentration, 
pollution 
monitoring, 
industrial process 
control 
High sensitivity 
and selectivity, 
real-time 
measurement, 
suitable for 
quantitative 
analysis of various 
gas components 
Sensitive to flow 
velocity and 
temperature, 
limited laser 
tuning range, 
significant 
environmental 
interference 
TDLAT (Tunable 
Diode Laser 
Absorption 
Tomography) 
3D distribution 
measurement of 
gas composition 
and temperature, 
combustion 
studies, pollution 
source tracking 
3D imaging 
capability, high 
sensitivity and 
selectivity, real- 
time monitoring 
Complex system, 
large 
computational 
load for data 
processing and 
imaging, difficult 
optical alignment 
and calibration  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 6 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1245
typically required, such as enhancing the nozzle structure of traditional 
combustion chambers. The large-scale swirling stabilized flow configu­
ration commonly used in traditional natural gas combustion systems is 
redesigned into a small-scale multiple injection points structure [57,58]. 
By analyzing the design concepts of other modern premixers, much work 
has been done to study the use of centerless mixers and lean-premixed, 
swirl-stabilized burners [59]. One reason for this configuration is to 
enhance mixing efficiency and generate a central recirculation zone 
(CRZ) in the downstream flow field. This zone provides locally lower 
flow velocities, allowing hot gases to recirculate, thus stabilizing the 
flame in the recirculation zone to form a stable flame. Research indicates 
that the tendency for lean-premixed combustion to experience flashback 
varies with the reactivity of the fuel. As the reactivity of the fuel in­
creases, the combustion limits of the fuel extend, resulting in an 
increased tendency for flashback. To mitigate the risk of flashback, a 
common approach is to increase the overall air flow velocity. Alterna­
tively, reducing swirl intensity can also address the flashback issue [60]. 
The burner employs axial air injection. Research reveals that on the 
central axis of the radial rotating generator of this injector, a 
non-rotating air jet forms. Its intended application is to create a 
stagnation-like axial velocity distribution at the nozzle outlet, causing 
the stagnation point to migrate downstream. The study of this technique 
has expanded the operational range of current burners. For hydrogen 
fuel, due to the higher volumetric flow rates associated with hydrogen, 
the premix section will require a significant additional amount of mo­
mentum. Thoralf G. et al. [16] utilized planar laser-induced fluorescence 
experimental techniques to measure the flames of hydrogen-air pre­
mixed, swirl-stabilized burners under atmospheric pressure conditions. 
The inlet conditions are systematically varied with respect to equiva­
lence ratio 0.2–1.0, bulk air velocity u0 = 30–90 m/s, and burner pre­
heat temperature ranging from 300 K to 700 K. The study investigated 
the influence of flame anchoring positions on the trend of flashback, 
with Fig. 2 showing OH-PLIF images. The experiment employed a novel 
hydrogen burner. The new burner design exhibits outstanding capabil­
ities in terms of flashback resistance. The hydrogen burner utilizes an 
axial air injection strategy. Experimental measurements have shown 
that both the fuel momentum of hydrogen and axial air injection can 
alter the isothermal flow field. The change in the axial position of the 
flame front is attributed to vortex breakdown and downstream migra­
tion. Through comparison, it’s observed that this displacement observed 
during the combustion process has a suppressing effect on flashback 
phenomena. 
In hydrogen flame, the challenges posed by thermally-formed NOX 
and the phenomenon of flashback induced by high temperatures and 
higher turbulent combustion speeds are considerable. The phenomenon 
of tempering in various structural configurations has been a focal point 
of research in recent years. In order to better organize hydrogen fuel 
combustion, combustion chambers designed with millimeter-scale 
nozzle arrays have shown outstanding performance in suppressing 
hydrogen flashback [61]. Research has found that when flames adhere 
or flashback to such small nozzles, there is intense interaction between 
the flame and the nozzle wall. At this point, the behavior of the flame 
under the strong interaction with the wall becomes crucial, as it pertains 
to the design issues of hydrogen combustion chambers. It is understood 
that the wall surface not only serves as a heat sink but also becomes a 
pool of active sites for radical adsorption/destruction of free radicals in 
the flame reaction zone. At this point, the reasons for flame extinction 
can be divided into two main factors: heat dissipation through the wall 
surface and a significant reduction in active free radicals. These phe­
nomena are respectively referred to as the wall thermal effect and 
chemical effect of the flame. The two-dimensional distribution of OH 
radicals and others in hydrogen flames was obtained by Yong Fan et al. 
[62] through planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF) and two-photon 
absorption laser-induced fluorescence (TALIF), as shown in Fig. 3. A 
premixed H2/air flame with N2 dilution (Uin = 533 cm/s, ϕ = 1) was 
formed in a quartz micro flow reactor with/without a 100-nm thick 
Inconel coating for the investigation of wall chemical effect of the metal 
surface. Researchers found that the distribution of all three major spe­
cies in hydrogen flames was significantly influenced by wall chemical 
effects through measurements of N2-diluted premixed H2/air flames. By 
observing channels coated with indium-nickel alloy, it can be noted that 
OH, O, and H move downstream. Furthermore, the concentrations of 
these three radicals are also lower compared to the less reactive quartz 
channel. Based on the measured distributions of OH, O, and H on the 
Fig. 2. Mean OH signal probability (top row) and instant OH-PLIF images (bottom row) in the presence of high axial air injection recorded at Tin = 453K and u0=70 
m/s [16]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 7 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1246
surface of the indium-nickel alloy, the initial adsorption coefficients of 
the radical quenching model were optimized. 
The development of pure hydrogen gas turbines must consider the 
issue of combustion instability. Therefore, accurate prediction and 
control of combustion instability phenomena are particularly important. 
The ultimate goal is to achieve carbon-neutral power generation. In the 
combustion chamber environment of gas turbines, there are commonly 
encountered velocity disturbances. The structure of hydrogen flames 
with porous injection nozzles represents a collective behavior of 
numerous small-scale hydrogen flames. Currently, little is known about 
the interactions between these flames. Further investigation is needed to 
deepen the understanding of the dynamic behavior of pure hydrogen 
flames when subjected to velocity disturbances. Hyebin Kang et al. [63] 
studied the flame dynamics of a densely distributed array of 
multi-element injectors consisting of a total of 293 small premixed 
hydrogen and air flames using phase-resolved OH* chemiluminescence 
and OH PLIF techniques, as shown in Fig. 4. It describes the basic 
principles of flame surface dynamics and the interaction mechanisms of 
lean premixed pure hydrogen combustion. Research has found that 
compact pure hydrogen flames produce high-amplitude pressure per­
turbations across a broad range of characteristic frequencies between 
400 and 1800 Hz, corresponding to the 3rd to 10th order eigenmodes. 
Under low equivalence ratio conditions, intense vortex interactions and 
the coupling of extinction-reignition processes occur, with the coupling 
affected by the low-frequency dynamics of the flame. Low-frequency 
flame dynamics exhibit the coexistence of several flames, leading to 
large-scale asymmetric oscillations throughout the entire reaction zone. 
At a intermediate frequency of around 600 Hz, flame surface dynamics 
exhibit prominent symmetric oscillations, accompanied by the phe­
nomenon of merging and pinch-off of pure hydrogen-air flames. At 
approximately 1720 Hz, high-frequency instabilities occur indepen­
dently of the complex flame dynamics structure. It is solely influenced 
by remarkably simple, seemingly linear flame surface motion, distinct 
from the low-frequency scenario, and does not entail sudden flame front 
extinction events. These studies provide new insights into the driving 
mechanisms of high-frequency combustion dynamics in closely spaced 
arrays of pure hydrogen-air flames. 
In lean-premixed combustion systems, the occurrence of high- 
amplitude self-excited pressure oscillations is influenced by nonlinear 
thermoacoustic oscillations. This thermoacoustic phenomenon is driven 
by the interaction between combustion and acoustics. After years of 
research accumulation, there has been a profound understanding of the 
driving mechanisms and fundamental feedback processes of thermoa­
coustic oscillations. A considerable amount of research has also been 
conducted on the nature of nonlinear flame dynamics. At present, 
theoretical knowledge is being combined with practical applications 
through rational structural design to control the occurrence of instability 
phenomena [64–66]. To distinguish the key differences between lean 
premixed hydrogen flames and methane flames in medium-scale nozzle 
arrays. Taesong Lee et al. [6] employed several measurement tech­
niques, including phase-synchronized OH* chemiluminescence imaging, 
OH 
planar 
laser-induced 
fluorescence, 
acoustic 
pressure, 
two-microphone technique, and reduced-order acoustic modeling. 
These measurement techniques enable the capture of key characteristics 
of lean premixed hydrogen-air flames and lean premixed methane-air 
flames. The resulting images are showed in Fig. 5. It was observed 
that in multi-nozzle array configurations, there was no significant flame 
coupling phenomenon between hydrogen flames. The flames exhibited 
independent oscillatory combustion over extremely short distances. The 
primary reason for this phenomenon is likely the excessive spacing be­
tween the nozzles, which prevents flame coupling between the flames. 
Continuing the analysis, by examining extensive data on self-excited 
instabilities and integrating it with analytical modeling, it was found 
that premixed hydrogen flames could more easily excite high-frequency 
oscillation modes. This included the occurrence of high-frequency in­
stabilities, such as those around 1 kHz. Adjusting high-frequency heat 
release is crucial for controlling combustion instability. The intense 
sound generation leads to further merging of flame fronts, causing sur­
face damage to lean premixed micro-scale array hydrogen flames. This 
phenomenon is closely related to the close proximity of flames to pres­
sure nodes. Through these optical diagnostics and experimental studies, 
the key features of self-excited combustion instability in micro-scale 
multi-nozzle hydrogen-air flames have been characterized. Conducting 
these experiments in a precisely controlled laboratory environment 
ensures the accuracy of the findings. This may pave the way for future 
advancements in combustion technology for carbon-neutral gas 
turbines. 
The theoretical, numerical, and experimental studies of flame sta­
bility and mechanisms can provide a comprehensive understanding of 
the essence of combustion phenomena [67,68]. Studying premixed 
flames, partially premixed flames, and large eddy structures is crucial 
for explaining and understanding the mechanisms of flame 
Fig. 3. Intensity contours of (a) OH-PLIF, (b) O-TALIF and (c) H-TALIF measured in the quartz and Inconel channels. The channel width is 1.5 mm [62]. (Reproduced 
from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 8 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1247
enhancement [69,70]. In order to focus on studying the behavior of 
non-premixed hydrogen jet flames and to explain the observed phe­
nomenon of a decrease in flame lift-off height with increasing fuel in­
jection velocity. Simultaneously analyzing the flame structure and 
behavior of lift-off flames, while obtaining the flame stability mecha­
nism of turbulent non-premixed hydrogen jet flames in coaxial air. 
Jeongseog Oh et al. [71] conducted simultaneous measurements of the 
velocity field and reaction zone using Nd:YAG laser and PIV/OH-PLIF 
techniques, with the obtained images depicted in Fig. 6. They also 
investigated the influence of turbulent effects under non-premixed 
conditions on the stability mechanism of lifted hydrogen jet flames 
through experimental studies. Hydrogen flow velocity varied from 100 
to 300 m/s. Coaxial air velocity was regulated from 12 to 20 m/s. They 
identified the flame stabilization mechanism and analyzed the flame 
structure to characterize the lifted jet flame at the flame stabilization 
point. They found that the flame detachment height decreases with 
increasing fuel velocity. However, due to the mixing effect of the coaxial 
air flow, the flame stabilizes in the low-velocity region next to the fast 
fuel jet. The turbulent non-premixed lifted hydrogen jet flame exhibits 
two flame structures, namely, a thin flame and a thick flame at the base. 
The local strain rate and turbulence intensity influence the stability of 
lifted flames, with combustion occurring where the local flow velocity 
Fig. 4. Thermoacoustically stable structures of an ensemble of 293 lean-premixed pure H2/air flames under adiabatic flame temperature conditions of 1400, 1600, 
1800, 2000 K. (a) Time-averaged line-of-sight integrated OH* chemiluminescence emission images. (b) Instantaneous OH PLIF images for 60 × 60 mm 2 region of 
interest (ROI) marked in Fig. 4a. (c) Abel-deconvoluted OH* chemiluminescence images of the center flames marked as four cyan rectangles in Fig. 4a. (d) Com­
parison of normalized OH* chemiluminescence intensity profiles of four center flames. (e) Overlay of 100 instantaneous flame fronts for adiabatic flame temperatures 
of 1400 and 2000 K [63]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to 
the Web version of this article.) 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 9 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1248
balances the turbulent flame propagation velocity. 
During turbulent combustion processes, there exists a fixed insta­
bility, and the sound generated by the reacting flow field is a primary 
source of combustion instability [72,73]. The coupling relationship be­
tween flame interactions and broadband combustion noise is a focal 
point of research. However, there are few studies reporting on the 
mechanisms behind the generation of relatively narrowband and peak 
features in the direct combustion noise spectrum. To explore the influ­
ence of global or local flame behavior on the generation of narrowband 
peaks in the direct combustion noise produced by open, lean-premixed 
swirling flames. To better understand the interaction between the 
acoustic and structural characteristics of such flames, Takeshi Shoji et al. 
[74] employed OH* chemiluminescence imaging at 10 kHz and OH 
planar laser-induced fluorescence (OH-PLIF) imaging techniques to 
separately investigate the spatiotemporal evolution of heat release and 
flame structure fluctuations in a lean-premixed gaseous H2/air low-swirl 
turbulent jet flame, as shown in Fig. 7. 2-D Particle Image Velocimetry 
(2-D PIV) measurement technique was employed at a frequency of 4 Hz 
to investigate the average relationship between velocity/vorticity fields 
and flame structure. These optical diagnostics can simultaneously 
characterize fluctuations in pressure and global heat release. Measure­
ment reveals that pronounced double peaks phenomena occur in the 
Fig. 5. Stable flame structures of lean fully-premixed hydrogen-air flames at Tad = 1881 K. (a, b) Flame luminescence photographs taken with digital SLR camera 
(exposure time = 0.020 s and 0.067 s), (c) time-averaged line-of-sight integrated OH* chemiluminescence image, (d) instantaneous OH PLIF image, (e) calculated 
flame front, (f) overlay of 100 instantaneous flame edges. Flow direction is from top to bottom. Dashed elliptic circle marked in (c) indicates position of combustor 
dump plane, white solid lines indicates 60 × 60 mm2 region of interest for OH PLIF measurements, and gray rectangles in (d), (e), and (f) denote metal surfaces [6]. 
(Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
Fig. 6. OH PLIF images from instantaneous measurements shows two types of flame base structure; i.e., a thin structure in (b), (d), (h) and a thick flame structure in 
(a), (c), (f), (g), (i) [71]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 10 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1249
spectra of combustion noise and global heat release fluctuations when 
the global equivalence ratio is greater than or equal to 0.45. Through 
spectral proper orthogonal decomposition of OH* chemiluminescence 
and OH-PLIF images. The first peak in the noise spectrum occupies 
nearly the entire flame region, thereby influencing the stability of the 
flame and leading to flame oscillations. The appearance of the second 
peak can be attributed to the periodically generated vortex flame 
structures near the downstream region. Analysis of the 2-D PIV results 
suggests that these vortex flame structures may arise from the interac­
tion between the flame and the inner/outer shear layers. 
The hydrogen fueled scramjet engines possesses characteristics of 
wide Mach number operation and high specific impulse, enabling it to 
meet various mission requirements under specific conditions. Among 
various stabilizing devices in stable flame holders, the cavity is consid­
ered the most effective flame stabilizer, while also serving as a distur­
bance source for transverse jet oscillations [75–77]. The transverse 
injection of hydrogen is characterized by deep cross-flow penetration, 
enhanced fuel and air mixing, and represents the simplest injection 
method for achieving rapid combustion within milliseconds of residence 
time. Understanding oscillation characteristics allows for controlling the 
growth and propagation of combustion instability, which is crucial for 
the design and optimization of combustion systems. PLIF technology 
holds great promise and significance in the study of supersonic com­
bustion. The hydroxyl (OH) radical is one of the most important 
chemical intermediates in combustion systems, and utilizing OH-PLIF 
technology allows for the characterization of flame structure. Dynamic 
Mode Decomposition (DMD) is one of the most effective techniques for 
analyzing the instability of combustion systems. DMD extracts dynamic, 
flow-related features from time-domain data, while also analyzing 
temporal dynamics [78,79]. The power spectrum of DMD can display 
the frequency characteristics of combustion oscillations. By studying 
these data, the spectral characteristics of the combustion field can be 
obtained. Studies have found that combustion instability often occurs in 
the combustion chambers of scramjet engines when employing trans­
verse fuel injection and flame holding cavities. The combustion oscil­
lation phenomenon is attributed to the coupling between the fuel 
injection/mixing process and the unstable heat release in the flame zone 
[80]. The time for acoustic waves to propagate from the combustion 
zone to the fuel injection location, as well as the time for mixing fluc­
tuations to propagate to the flame, known as the characteristic timescale 
of the acoustic feedback loop, determines the oscillation frequency [81]. 
Combustion instability can be studied by characterizing dominant fre­
quencies and growth factors. Frequencies with positive growth factors 
can be considered dominant frequencies and significantly affect the 
instability of the combustion system. 
To determine the influence of cavity location on combustion insta­
bility and to investigate the frequency characteristics of different com­
bustion modes. Jiangbo Peng et al. [82] utilized high-speed OH-PLIF 
(Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence) technique on a direct-connect su­
personic combustion facility, and employed Dynamic Mode Decompo­
sition (DMD) as post-processing, as shown in Fig. 8. The scramjet 
combustor simulated Mach 4 flight conditions by using high-enthalpy 
airflow, which was obtained by heating a hydrogen-air mixture. The 
airflow molar composition was 21% O2, 12% H2O, and 67% N2, and the 
mass flow rate was about 3 kg/s. Stagnation conditions were 950 K and 
0.8 MPa, and the Mach number at the isolator entrance was 2.0. The 
combustion instability of a hydrogen fueled scramjet engines combus­
tion chamber with a cavity flameholder was investigated for lateral 
positions. By adjusting the equivalence ratio of hydrogen, the peak 
frequencies of the scramjet mode and the detonation mode were 
compared. The supersonic combustion mode exhibited minor oscilla­
tions around 150–200 Hz, indicative of negative growth factors attrib­
uted to stable flame structures. During the transition from detonation to 
supersonic combustion, oscillations significantly intensified around 
80–120 Hz, exhibiting positive growth factors. In the detonation mode, 
significant differences in lateral position frequency characteristics were 
observed. The dominant DMD mode near the cavity wall has a negative 
growth factor, resulting in stable flames with small oscillations. It is 
found that changes in injector position affect frequency modulation 
characteristics. 
3.2. Methane-hydrogen hybrid fuel combustion 
As time progresses, the importance of decarbonization in combustion 
power systems for reducing pollutant emissions becomes increasingly 
prominent. Therefore, there is a need to accelerate adjustments or re­
designs in the operation of aviation or power generation gas turbines. 
These efforts aim to achieve the feasibility of combustion with alterna­
tive fuels under lean combustion conditions, such as hydrogen and 
hydrogen-enriched methane. Achieving 100% operation with hydrogen 
on gas turbines remains highly challenging at present. In this context, 
hydrogen-enriched methane, serving as an intermediary fuel, has been 
widely applied in gas turbines with the aim of reducing carbon emis­
sions. The primary challenge of completely transitioning gas turbine fuel 
to hydrogen lies in the organization of the combustion field. When using 
hydrogen at volumes less than 50%, the objective can be achieved by 
making slight adjustments to traditional lean-premixed gas turbine 
combustion systems. However, increasing the volume fraction of 
hydrogen undoubtedly imposes strict technical requirements on fuel 
flexibility in the engine design process, especially for pure hydrogen or 
hydrogen-rich fuels [83]. It is essential to rigorously consider the issues 
and challenges encountered, including flame flashback often encoun­
tered in rapid premixed hydrogen flames. The coupling of pressure with 
heat release processes results in significant alterations. In addition, the 
increase in nitrogen oxide emissions due to higher flame temperatures is 
also a concern. Within these technical challenges, the primary focus lies 
Fig. 7. Typical instantaneous images acquired via (a) OH* chemiluminescence and (b) OH-PLIF imaging for the (Vm,φ)=(15 m/s,0.45) case [74]. (Reproduced from 
Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 11 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1250
on developing a fundamental understanding of thermoacoustic oscilla­
tions and nitrogen oxide emission characteristics based on variations in 
hydrogen concentration. Hydrogen-mixed hydrocarbon fuels have been 
widely recognized to have a significant impact on hydrogen flame sta­
bility mechanisms, exhaust emissions, and static and dynamic stability 
[84–86]. However, it’s important to note that under appropriate stoi­
chiometric or lean conditions, combustion of CH4/H2/air mixtures is 
still susceptible to flashback, similar to other fuels [50,51,87–89]. The 
combustion of CH4/H2/air mixture has attracted increasing attention in 
recent years with the development of low-emission gas turbines. At the 
same time, it is necessary to ensure low NOx emissions and to reduce the 
risk of flashback [49,90]. The occurrence of flashback is highly unde­
sirable in lean premixed combustion, which gas turbines cannot tolerate 
[91,92]. Understanding the interaction between flow and flame and its 
influence on the shape and stability of lean CH4/H2/air flames remains a 
pressing issue requiring further investigation and deeper understanding 
[84,93,94]. It is essential to study the impact of flow-flame interaction 
on the stability of CH4/H2/air flames. Flashback in hydrogen-enriched 
combustion systems can be influenced by various factors such as the 
extinction strain rate of the fuel mixture and the dynamic state of the 
combustor. The extinction strain rate plays a crucial role in character­
izing the dynamic behavior of the combustor, with transitions observed 
from quiescent states to intermittent instabilities and eventually to fully 
established thermoacoustic oscillations. Additionally, the spatial rela­
tionship between the flow-imposed strain rate and the mixture extinc­
tion strain rate dictates the flame anchoring locations and the coupling 
between the flame and swirling flow structures. The flame behavior 
during flashback can be visualized through high-speed chemilumines­
cent imaging, which captures the spatial distribution of heat release rate 
and provides insights into the flame dynamics under different operating 
conditions. Furthermore, the interaction of helical instabilities with the 
flame can trigger mechanisms leading to random dynamic pressure and 
heat release rate bursts, potentially contributing to flashback phenom­
ena in hydrogen-enriched combustion systems. 
In practical combustion systems, swirl and bluff body, or their 
combinations, are commonly employed to establish effective recircula­
tion zones, aiming to achieve flame stability [95–97]. In confined 
combustion chambers, there exist inner recirculation zones (IRZ) and 
outer recirculation zones (ORZ). Previous studies have indicated that 
such recirculation flow can lead to unpredictable flame shapes when 
there are variations in reactant composition [94]. The temperature 
distribution characteristics within the combustion chamber can reflect 
the shape of the flame, which in turn correlates with pollutant emissions 
[98], wall heat transfer [99], and combustion instability [100]. Varia­
tions in the overall flame shape may result in oscillatory heat release, 
leading to unstable combustion due to fluctuations in dynamic pressure 
and velocity [101]. Runze Mao et al. [37] conducted experiments on 
rich premixed CH4/H2/air flames with H2 concentrations up to 80%, as 
depicted in Fig. 9. The flame structure was obtained using planar 
laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF) of the OH radical. Particle Image 
Velocimetry (PIV) was employed to measure the flow field. It was 
observed that the flame transitioned from a “V" shape to an “M" shape. 
The entire process involved the gradual upstream propagation of the 
flame tip within the external shear layer, which ultimately anchored to 
the injector with increasing hydrogen concentration. Simultaneous in­
vestigations into both flame structure and flame flow dynamics were 
conducted during the transition process. The transformation of shape 
was directly correlated with the evolution of the external shear layer 
along the corner flame. Upon the addition of H2, an external recircula­
tion zone first appeared downstream, followed by the upstream propa­
gation of the corner flame. Subsequently, the recirculation zone 
expanded upwards, gradually forming a stable “M" shaped flame. This 
study 
is 
valuable 
for 
understanding 
strongly 
constrained 
recirculation-stabilized swirling flames. The flame structure and flow 
characteristics of flames with high H2 content are also valuable for 
model validation. They contribute to understanding constrained 
recirculation-stabilized flames. In the subsequent study, Runze Mao 
et al. [102] utilized synchronized OH-PLIF and PIV measurements to 
obtain flame images as shown in Fig. 10. The study investigated pre­
mixed CH4/H2/air swirling flames under pre-mixing conditions. The 
hydrogen content ranged from 0 to 80% under both stable and lean 
conditions. The topological structure of flame varied with the hydrogen 
equivalence ratio. Flames with 0% and 40% H2 always exhibit a “V" 
shape. As the equivalence ratio increases, swirl flames containing 80% 
H2 gradually transition from an “M" shape to a “V" shape. At a constant 
equivalence ratio, compared to the basic characteristics of CH4/H2/air 
combustion, adding hydrogen to the fuel significantly extends the lower 
flammability limit. Hydrogen can increase laminar flame speed and 
quenching strain rate, and it has been found to reduce the effective Lewis 
number. The addition of hydrogen enables hydrogen-rich methane 
flames to resist the effects of flame strain (see Fig. 11). 
Lean premixed combustion has the potential to reduce NOx emis­
sions, but in practical applications, it often experiences flame blowout 
due to the influence of the lean flammability limit. This is one of the 
reasons hindering its development and application [49,91,103–105]. 
Enhanced internal recirculation is typically achieved by compact flames. 
Fig. 8. Instantaneous, mean and DMD dominant mode of OH-PLIF images [82]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission).  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 12 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1251
Flame cooling in the internal recirculation zone can lead to the extinc­
tion of short, compact flames. Observing extinction occurring around 
the base of the flame, it can be inferred that this leads to flame lift-off 
and extinction processes. A comprehensive understanding of these 
mechanisms is crucial. Adding H2 shifts the flame jet limit to a lower 
equivalence ratio. This effect is attributed to the increase in laminar 
burning velocity [56], higher adiabatic flame temperature, and the 
enhanced resistance to strain-induced extinction due to the addition of 
H2 [106,107]. Stable flame experiments were conducted using H2 
addition. Subsequent research further demonstrated the effects of flow 
expansion and contraction, vortices, and their influence on flame sta­
bility. The aim was to investigate how hydrogen would affect flame 
stability, particularly by examining its impact on flow-flame coupling. 
Weijie Zhang et al. [108] conducted simultaneous PIV/OH-PLIF mea­
surements as shown in Fig. 13 and analyzed the fluid-flame dynamics. 
Experimental investigations were conducted on compact lean premixed 
Fig. 9. Instantaneous OH-PLIF images [37]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission).  
Fig. 10. Lean flame structures at αH2 = 0, 40%, and 80% [102]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission).  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 13 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1252
flames of CH4/H2/air mixtures with varying hydrogen fractions up to 
80% on a bluff-body and swirl burner. Premixed CH4/H2/air mixtures 
were adopted with three hydrogen fractions as 0, 40% and 80%. The 
research findings indicate that flow stretching near the flame root is the 
primary cause of root extinction and the initiation of detachment. This 
stretching is primarily induced by shear deformation. The weakening of 
root combustion intensity is demonstrated through CH* chem­
iluminescence. With the addition of hydrogen, the flame intensity at the 
flame root is strengthened due to enhanced resistance to stretching. It 
can be inferred that the increase in combustion speed and temperature is 
also beneficial for flame stability. To determine the influence of 
hydrogen enrichment and differential diffusion on flame expansion 
[109], the subsequent study utilized CH4/H2/air mixtures with 
hydrogen volume fractions of 0%, 30%, and 60%. Plane laser-induced 
fluorescence (PLIF) of OH and CH2O radicals from various species was 
employed to capture the preheat and reaction zones on a Bunsen burner. 
The flame thickness of the preheat and reaction zones was measured. 
The results indicate an expansion of the preheat zone and thinning of the 
reaction zone, with the preheat zone thickness increasing to approxi­
mately 3–6 times that of the laminar preheat thickness, as shown in 
Fig. 12. It was observed that the preheat zone thickness significantly 
decreases with the addition of hydrogen. Differential diffusion is ex­
pected to thicken the reaction zone locally along the flame front. The 
average reaction zone thickness is almost unaffected by turbulence or 
hydrogen addition. 
The increase in laminar burning velocity, enhanced generation of 
flame front region, and the increase in local burning rate have resulted in 
methane/air flames enriched with hydrogen exhibiting higher turbulent 
burning velocities. Due to the diffusion-thermal effect of hydrogen, 
methane/air flames enriched with hydrogen are inherently unstable. 
The rate of flame region generation is greatly intensified due to the 
presence of this instability in the hydrogen-enriched methane/air 
flames. The high diffusivity of hydrogen leads to an increase in local 
burning rate, attributed to the unburned gases near the positively curved 
and stretched flame front having a higher equivalence ratio. In order to 
investigate the chemical effects of hydrogen in stable vortex flames, 
Shilong Guo et al. [97] studied the stability mechanisms in three 
different volume fractions of hydrogen in stable vortex/bluff-body 
methane/air lean premixed flames through experiments and numerical 
simulations. The swirl number, according to the geometric configuration 
of swirler, is about 0.7. All the experiments were carried out at normal 
temperature and pressure conditions (T = 300 K, P = 0.1 MPa). Details 
about the burner can be seen in our previous work. The volume fractions 
of hydrogen were respectively ZH2 = 0%, ZH2 = 40%, and ZH2 = 80%. 
Velocity fields and flame structures were obtained using Particle Image 
Velocimetry (PIV) and Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) of OH, 
as shown in Fig. 13. The turbulent reactive flow was analyzed by 
employing Large Eddy Simulation (LES) with the Thickened Flame (TF) 
model to describe the oxidation process of CH4/H2/air mixtures. The 
increase in hydrogen content causes the flame brush to gradually tend to 
depart from the inner shear layer, effectively reducing the risk of flame 
detachment. The oxidation reactions of H2 and CO are respectively 
inhibited by the chemical reaction kinetics of gas combustion through 
H2 + OH = H + H2O and CO + OH = CO2 + H. In fact, the attachment of 
CH4/air flames is inherently weak. Studies indicate that the addition of 
hydrogen not only increases the overall reaction rate but also changes 
the combustion intensity at the nozzle exit from relatively weak to 
strong, which is crucial for flame stability. 
In basic research, the mixture combustion of natural gas and 
hydrogen gas offers numerous advantages in reducing pollutant emis­
sions, enhancing thermal efficiency, and promoting combustion stabil­
ity, enabling some combustion systems to utilize lean fuel mixtures 
[110]. The performance of lean premixed combustion flexible burners 
depends on the development of robust flame control techniques, 
Fig. 11. CH* chemiluminescence of the flames [108]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission).  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 14 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1253
particularly relying on a better understanding of differential diffusion 
when using alternative hydrogen-rich fuels [49,111–114]. The occur­
rence of differential diffusion arises from unequal molecular transport of 
mixture 
species 
[115]. 
For 
lean 
premixed 
flames 
and 
hydrogen-containing flames, characteristic features of flames with dif­
ferential diffusion include extensive positive curvature protruding to­
wards unburned reactants propagation [116–120]. For diffusive stable 
flames, the curvature probability density function is symmetric [31,121, 
122]. Turbulence affects nearly equally the positive curvature and 
negative curvature fronts of stable flames. At lower turbulence in­
tensities, differential diffusion of hydrogen enhances the turbulent 
burning velocity [123]. The unevenness of combustion intensity is 
correlated with flame structures having differential diffusion effects 
[124]. Therefore, investigating the structural characteristics of flames 
and their coupled interactions with turbulence intensity is crucial for 
flame evolution. Meng Zhang et al. [125] conducted experiments on 
turbulent flames of hydrogen-enriched natural gas using OH-PLIF. The 
burner employed was an enhanced multi-jet design, utilized for studying 
the topology and characteristics of turbulent flames, while also inves­
tigating and analyzing the effects of hydrogen. Additionally, a com­
parison was made between the characteristics of turbulent flames with 
lean fuel mixture and those of uniform laminar burning flames. The 
study examined the influence of hydrogen diffusivity on combustion 
performance by comparing local flame structure parameters. It was 
found that under lean conditions and high turbulence intensity, the 
flames exhibited elongated wrinkles. Meanwhile, small-scale structures 
were observed to emerge, resulting in the detachment of small flames 
from the main flame. It was inferred that the cause of this phenomenon 
was intense thermal diffusion effects. As the hydrogen proportion 
increased, the scale of the wrinkle structure decreased. Turbulent 
burning velocity was found to enhance with the addition of hydrogen, 
with a more pronounced effect observed at higher turbulence levels. 
Flame front parameters to some extent reflected the combustion char­
acteristics of hydrogen-enriched flames. The formation of elongated 
wrinkles and small-scale structures in hydrogen-enriched methane 
flames can significantly impact combustion efficiency and pollutant 
emissions. These structural changes lead to the detachment of flame 
pockets from the main flame, especially at large turbulence perturba­
tions for lean flames. Additionally, the presence of cusp structures with 
large negative curvature at high hydrogen ratios affects the flame tur­
bulence interaction, potentially influencing combustion stability and 
efficiency. Furthermore, hydrogen addition enhances turbulent burning 
velocity, which can improve combustion efficiency by promoting faster 
flame propagation. The increase in flame surface density due to 
hydrogen enrichment may also play a role in enhancing turbulent 
burning velocity, which could lead to more complete combustion and 
potentially lower pollutant emissions. 
Furthermore, researchers such as Weijie Zhang et al. [126] utilized 
OH-PLIF to obtain flame morphology under lean conditions with a 
mixture of CH4/H2/air, as illustrated in Fig. 14. The experimental con­
ditions included hydrogen volume fractions of 0%, 30%, and 60%. The 
study investigated the structural characteristics influenced by hydrogen 
preferential diffusion and their evolution in turbulence. Laminar 
burning flame experiments were conducted alongside turbulent exper­
iments, where turbulence intensity was increased to simulate turbulent 
conditions. In the presence of hydrogen, differential diffusion facilitated 
the formation of flame protrusions extending towards the reactants and 
sharp peaks pointing towards the combustion zone, which exhibited 
high 
curvature. 
The 
wrinkles 
were 
primarily 
enhanced 
by 
turbulence-induced promotion of positive curvature. It can also be un­
derstood as disturbances causing protrusions, rendering them disor­
dered and thin. Meanwhile, turbulence is likely to induce random 
positive curvature peaks. These positive curvature peaks are enhanced 
by the preferential diffusion of hydrogen. Hyebin Kang et al. [127] 
utilized OH chemiluminescence and OH PLIF to investigate the collec­
tive 
behavior 
of 
flame 
structures 
in 
lean 
premixed 
hydrogen/methane/air flames, as illustrated in Fig. 15. They considered 
two different test cases, representing low and high flame temperature 
conditions 1600 K for Case A and 2000 K for Case B for the full range of 
0–100% hydrogen mole fraction in XH2 = 0.05 increments. They also 
conducted measurements of nitrogen oxide emissions and self-excited 
oscillations. Based on the static and dynamic stability, the system’s 
response was categorized into several distinct stages, including flame 
blow-off and thermoacoustic stable regions under relatively low 
hydrogen concentrations. Under intermediate hydrogen concentrations, 
low-frequency self-excited instabilities occurred, while intense pressure 
perturbations were triggered around 1.7 kHz under conditions of high 
hydrogen content combustion or pure hydrogen combustion. Observa­
tions revealed a dynamic transition from longitudinal to transverse 
motion, mechanically accommodating higher-frequency fluctuations in 
heat release rate in flame dynamics. This transverse motion was signif­
icant enough to induce interactions between flames, reflecting 
high-frequency transverse modes. 
3.3. Ammonia-hydrogen hybrid fuel combustion 
Ammonia, as an important carbon-free fuel, is also considered a 
crucial carrier of hydrogen and can be applied in combustion systems 
[128]. Ammonia has received significant attention due to its sustain­
ability and advantages as an important solution for environmentally 
friendly energy [128,129]. The relatively high energy density and lack 
of carbon elements make it significantly superior compared to tradi­
tional fuels. From a fuel application perspective, both ammonia and 
hydrogen used together as fuel for combustion can be conceptualized as 
a new paradigm. The main reasons are as follows: (1) NH3 can be 
cracked to obtain hydrogen during chemical reactions; (2) Hydrogen gas 
has high reactivity, thereby compensating for the low reactivity of NH3; 
(3) NH3 is carbon-free, resulting in no CO2 emissions. The addition of a 
high concentration of H2 can lead to flashback in NH3 flames, accom­
panied by the occurrence of thermoacoustic instability. Therefore, 
controlling the mixture ratio of H2 in NH3 flames is necessary. The in­
fluence of turbulent velocity, coupled with the limitations of high NOx, 
restricts the practical application of combustion systems. Hydrogen it­
self is carbon-free and exhibits high chemical reactivity, while NH3 has 
relatively low chemical reactivity. By introducing hydrogen into NH3 
and fully leveraging its high reactivity, the drawbacks of low reaction 
rates are mitigated [130–132]. Moreover, hydrogen can directly 
decompose from the catalytic cracking of ammonia. The laminar 
burning velocity of ammonia is low, and its flame thickness is relatively 
large, characteristics that can be influenced by turbulent effects in 
Fig. 12. Normalized mean preheat/heat release zone thickness [109]. 
(Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 15 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1254
practical combustion systems. Additionally, hydrogen possesses a high 
diffusion rate, which becomes significantly pronounced when mixed 
with ammonia, leading to notable differential diffusion effects. Xiao Cai 
et al. [133] conducted research to elucidate the role of differential 
diffusion in highly turbulent premixed flames using NH-PLIF diagnostic 
techniques on a series of turbulent premixed ammonia/hydrogen/air 
flames. Their study aimed to uncover the impact of differential diffusion 
in turbulent combustion on relevant parameters of the combustion field. 
In scenarios of high turbulence intensity, flame propagation is signifi­
cantly affected by differential diffusion. Extraction of flame surface 
density can be based on NH peaks, while area ratios and flame stretch 
factors can also be obtained through NH extraction. Studies indicate that 
the differential diffusion effect can enhance the turbulent combustion 
speed of sub-unity flames by promoting local flame burning rates. Cor­
relations suggest that turbulent heat and mass transfer, along with dif­
ferential diffusion, hold equal significance. Differential diffusion effects 
Fig. 13. OH-PLIF images. (a)e(e):instantaneous OH-PLIF images with different ZH2; (f): Time averaged OH-PLIF of ZH40 [97]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with 
kind permission). 
Fig. 14. The image processing procedures: (a) the original OH-PLIF image of the flame; (b) the binarized result; (c) extracted raw flame front; (d) flame brush 
obtained by overlaying 10 instantaneous flame fronts and the pixel box for flame surface density; (e) mean progress variable contours of the flame brush [126]. 
(Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 16 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1255
should be incorporated into models of turbulent flames under high 
Karlovitz numbers. The generation of flashback for H2 in combustion 
processes involves several factors. One of the main features contributing 
to flashback is the use of hydrogen injection, which requires a new in­
jection strategy to ensure stable combustion, as premixing can lead to 
early flashback. It has been observed that NOx and CO emissions are 
considerably lower at high equivalence ratios (>1.10) in the balance 
between ammonia combustion, indicating a region of chemically reac­
tive balance that can influence flashback generation. Additionally, the 
recombination of NOx emissions with unburned ammonia can increase 
OH radicals, potentially affecting the occurrence of flashback in com­
bustion processes involving hydrogen and ammonia blends. 
Considering the lower chemical reactivity of ammonia and its unique 
chemical reactions involving nitrogen oxides, directly applying 
ammonia as a fuel in existing combustion systems is not feasible and 
faces several challenges [134]. To expand the application scope of 
ammonia and make it more widely applicable, its blending with 
methane and hydrogen has been widely recognized. However, the main 
challenge lies in exceeding pollutant emissions standards [135,136]. 
Nevertheless, with the advancement in chemical reaction kinetics, the 
discovery of ammonia cracking offers an economically feasible solution. 
This method can serve as an approach to address the challenges asso­
ciated with using ammonia as a fuel [137]. Research has found that 
during the chemical reaction process of ammonia, its cracking produces 
an ammonia-hydrogen-nitrogen mixture, thereby increasing hydrogen 
concentration and enhancing the reactivity of the fuel. This improve­
ment in reactivity enhances ignition performance and combustion speed 
[138]. Extensive experimental studies have been conducted to better 
understand the chemical kinetics of ammonia combustion, addressing 
issues such as flame propagation, ignition delay time, and extinction 
strain rate throughout the entire combustion process. At this stage, 
significant attention is focused on the process of ammonia cracking and 
the formation of ammonia-hydrogen mixtures [139–143]. Additionally, 
extensive research has been conducted to explore the stability limita­
tions and nitrogen oxide emissions of ammonia flames in various com­
bustion chamber configurations [96,144–148]. The turbulent-chemical 
interactions of ammonia combustion play a crucial role in determining 
its 
combustion 
stability 
and 
emissions 
[149]. 
The 
ammonia-hydrogen-nitrogen cracking process in ammonia jet flames 
can be indirectly quantified using laser diagnostic techniques [150,151]. 
Guoqing Wang et al. [152] utilized synchronous NH and NO planar 
laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF) techniques to analyze the structure of 
turbulent 
non-premixed 
ammonia 
jet 
flames 
using 
ammonia-hydrogen-nitrogen mixtures, as illustrated in Fig. 16. Rey­
nolds numbers (Re) were set at 5600 and 11200, which are 20 % and 40 
% of blowout Re at a 14 % cracking ratio, respectively. A series of 
experimental measurements were conducted to elucidate the 
turbulent-chemical interactions of hydrogen in ammonia combustion 
and explore the flame structure and pollutant generation mechanisms in 
cracked ammonia jet flames. These experiments involved varying pres­
sures (1–5 bar) and cracking ratios (7%–28%). By conducting compar­
ative analyses, it was found that the cracking ratio has a significant 
influence on the chemical reactivity of ammonia-hydrogen flames and 
the characteristics of the NH layer. NH effectively marks the thermal 
release layer of cracked ammonia jet flames. Changes in the cracking 
ratio and pressure have a minor impact on the thickness of the thermal 
release layer. In the reaction zone, a significant amount of pollutant NO 
is observed to be generated, persisting in the external thermal products, 
and gradually diluted as it reaches the turbulent region with airflow 
mixing. The reduction of NO is associated with the formation of vortex 
structures; the disruption of these structures lowers the concentration of 
NO. The study proposes a novel approach to reflect the formation 
characteristics of N2O by multiplying NH and NO. This study has 
advanced the understanding of turbulent-chemical interactions in 
cracked ammonia combustion, which is beneficial for enhancing the 
stability of ammonia flames and controlling pollutant emissions. To 
design gas turbine combustors suitable for NH3–H2 fuel, it is necessary to 
visualize the distribution of OH and NO radicals under rich and lean 
conditions. This work aids in understanding flame form. Jae Hyun Kim 
et al. [153] utilized OH and NO planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF) 
imaging systems to investigate the combustion characteristics of tur­
bulent flames using premixed NH3–H2(-N2)/air mixtures. They explored 
the interaction between turbulence and flames by varying the fuel 
equivalence ratio and the H2 content in the fuel mixture. The combus­
tion stability boundary was found to widen with increasing hydrogen 
content and the transition from laminar to turbulent combustion con­
ditions. The peak NOx emissions occurred under fuel-lean conditions. 
With increasing hydrogen content, the denitrification effect of NH3 was 
enhanced, and different primary pathways for NH3 oxidation to NO 
were discovered depending on the equivalence ratio. 
A considerable amount of experimental and numerical simulation 
work has been conducted to characterize the mechanism of NO forma­
tion in NH3/H2 flames. Advanced laser diagnostic techniques, such as 
NO planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF), have been employed to 
Fig. 15. Thermoacoustically stable structures of lean-premixed H 2/CH 4/air flames with different fuel compositions between X H2 = 0.5 and 1.0 (Case A): (a) line- 
of-sight integrated OH* chemiluminescence images of entire reaction zone, and (b) instantaneous OH fluorescence images for 60 × 60 mm2 region of interest. Flow 
direction is from top to bottom in positive x direction, and spatial resolution of OH* chemiluminescence and OH PLIF measurements is 0.125 and 0.063 mm/pixel, 
respectively [127]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 17 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1256
Fig. 16. Simultaneous single-shot images of NO-PLIF (blue) and NH-PLIF (red). The images for different heights in the same flame were taken at different instants of 
time. The intensities have been scaled by their respective maximum intensities in each case [152]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). (For inter­
pretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
Fig. 17. Corrected OH-PLIF (left) and NO-PLIF (right) images for the two 65/35 (v/v) NH3/H2 flames, (a) lean and (b) rich, and the (c) reference CH4 lean flame. The 
[OH] and [NO] scales are the same for the (a) and (b) and are shown on the left and right respectfully [161]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 18 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1257
precisely provide detailed spatial and temporal distributions of NO 
concentrations in different flames [154–160]. More detailed investiga­
tion into how flame structure affects NOx production is deemed more 
crucial compared to directly measuring NO signal intensity. The heat 
release rate is a fundamental characteristic of the combustion process, 
representing the degree of conversion from chemical energy to thermal 
energy, which determines flame structure. Cosway et al. [161] con­
ducted synchronized measurement experiments using OH/NO-PLIF and 
OH-PLIF/chemiluminescence (NH*, NH2, and OH), and compared them 
with computational results from four reaction mechanisms applicable to 
NH3/H2 flames. The NH3/H2 mixture chosen for investigation was 
65/35 (v/v). Two different flames at this ratio were investigated, with 
slightly rich and slightly lean equivalence ratios along with a reference 
methane flame for comparison The obtained images are shown in 
Fig. 17. By comparing the two experimental conditions, the OH and NH 
chemiluminescence results exhibit a good spatial correlation with the 
maximum gradient of the OH-PLIF signal. Analysis of the experimental 
results reveals a gradual increase in NH2 production throughout the 
entire experimental cycle from lean to rich equivalence ratios. The data 
analysis method based on synchronized measurements can be further 
utilized to optimize the chemical kinetics mechanism of NH3/H2 flames. 
Optical diagnostic techniques are increasingly prominent in tem­
perature measurement [162–165]. Although Raman/Rayleigh scat­
tering is often employed for point-wise temperature measurement in a 
one-dimensional manner, it has been demonstrated to be effective for 
precise temperature measurement [166]. With the advancement of laser 
technology, two-dimensional imaging techniques have matured without 
the need for additional tracer materials to be added. NO is the primary 
pollutant in ammonia combustion, sensitive to changes in environ­
mental temperature, where the temperature level determines the 
amount of NO generated [144,150]. In order to assess the entire flame 
structure, it is necessary to observe a stable flame with a relatively stable 
and clear structure. Co-flow laminar diffusion flames, characterized by 
considerable stability and clear structure, have been widely acknowl­
edged in the study of two-dimensional flame information. Haogang Wei 
et al. [167] conducted experimental analysis using the dual-color 
NO-PLIF method. Six co-flow rates ranging from 4.0 L/min to 14.0 
L/min were set. Subsequently, the molar fraction of hydrogen is varied 
across nine values from 10 % to 90 % under each co-flow rate for tem­
perature measurement. They investigated the temperature field in 
ammonia-hydrogen laminar diffusion flames at ambient temperature 
and pressure, as shown in Fig. 18. By adjusting the airflow rate and the 
molar fraction of hydrogen, they obtained different fuel ratios, thus 
creating various NO generation environments. Using numerical simu­
lation methods, the researchers systematically evaluated the measure­
ment uncertainty along the flame centerline and analyzed the impact on 
two-dimensional temperature measurements. The study findings indi­
cate that in laminar diffusion flames, the distribution of NO becomes 
more concentrated with increased flow velocity and decreased hydrogen 
content. The temperature field outside the flame front is influenced by 
the contraction and expansion of the flame front. Multiscalar diagnostics 
are crucial for understanding turbulent-flame interactions and identi­
fying combustion modes. Due to challenges such as the arrangement of 
optical paths and signal synchronization, multiscalar measurements in 
laboratory settings face numerous intricate issues. Further efforts are 
required to extract quantitative information from multiscalar 
Fig. 18. Two-dimensional profiles of ammonia-hydrogen diffusion flames for different co-flow rate at atmospheric pressure (Cases 1–6). (a) Flame luminescence (b) 
2D-temperature field [167]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 19 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1258
measurements for research on turbulent NH3/H2 flames. Ze Wang et al. 
[168] for the first time utilized a single Nd:YAG-pumped dye laser sys­
tem to simultaneously visualize three key scalars (NH3, NH, and Ray­
leigh scattering signals) in turbulent premixed NH3/H2/air flames, as 
depicted in Fig. 19. Proposing dual-photon laser-induced fluorescence 
(LIF) for NH3 and single-photon LIF for NH to be simultaneously excited 
at 304.79 nm, providing excellent signal-to-noise ratios for both scalars. 
Rayleigh scattering measurements are conducted at the same wave­
length, taking advantage of the higher Rayleigh scattering cross-section 
at shorter wavelengths. The development of this diagnostic strategy 
simplifies the complexity of optical arrangement, synchronization, and 
calibration. More importantly, it enables multiscalar measurements to 
be coupled with other diagnostic techniques such as particle image 
velocimetry (PIV) and/or OH-/NO-PLIF, providing crucial information 
for the study of NH3/H2 turbulent combustion. 
Currently, various research is being conducted to better understand 
and improve its combustion behavior. Previous studies on non-premixed 
combustion [169,170] indicate that the decomposition of NH3 gener­
ates H2 and N2 similarly to mixing, reducing NO and unburned NH3 
emissions during flame oxidation processes to promote reaction activity. 
As is well-known, bluff-body center nozzle burners create recirculation 
zones on the burner surface. These zones play a crucial role in stabilizing 
the flame. They transport heat-recirculating products to the bluff-body 
surface and provide a continuous and stable ignition source for the 
fuel. Therefore, to examine the role of free radicals in ammonia 
decomposition and self-sustained combustion in the recirculation zone 
of bluff-body flames. Adamu Alfazazi et al. [171] conducted experi­
mental measurements of non-premixed bluff-stabilized flames using OH 
planar laser-induced fluorescence and other techniques to better un­
derstand the flame and emission characteristics of NH3/H2/N2 flames, as 
shown in Fig. 20. To investigate various levels of ammonia decompo­
sition, fuel mixtures with four different NH3/(H2/N2) ratios were studied 
as replacements for varying levels of decomposition. A comparative 
analysis was conducted on flame characteristics, reaction zone 
properties, and concentrations of NO and NH3 in the flame and exhaust. 
It was observed that reducing the proportion of NH3 in the mixture 
resulted in a stretched and more stable flame. In comparison to fuel 
mixtures with higher NH3 content, it was found that thermal radiation 
decreased. As the ratio of H2/N2 increases in the fuel mixture, the 
momentum flux ratio (nozzle/co-flow) also increases. When the volume 
fraction of NH3 in the fuel mixture exceeds 50%, unburned ammonia 
passes through the flame into the exhaust, but secondary combustion 
mechanisms lead to a reduction in NO emissions. 
The interaction between turbulence and flame is influenced by flame 
thickness. The flame thickness of NH3/air mixtures is thicker than that of 
CH4/air flames [172]. Studies on NH3/air flames [173] have shown that 
NH3/air flames are prone to local extinction in turbulent flows, due to 
significantly reduced extinction stretch rates [174]. The role of 
hydrogen in combustion not only provides active free radicals to pro­
mote chemical reactions but also increases the resistance to turbulent 
flow. Xutao Wei et al. [175] employed OH-PLIF and PIV techniques to 
investigate the co-combustion effects of H2 on the characteristics and 
stability mechanisms of turbulent NH3/air flames, as depicted in Fig. 21. 
Additionally, numerical simulations were conducted for both experi­
ments using Large Eddy Simulation (LES) with a Dynamic Thickened 
Flame (DTF) model, further enhancing the understanding of the intrinsic 
connections within flame stability mechanisms. By comparing the 
detailed structures of two turbulent flames, it was observed that the 
addition of 10% H2 in the fuel leads to a higher flame propagation 
speed, resulting in flame stabilization in a higher region of positive axial 
velocity. Flames with 10% H2 exhibit stronger resistance to stretch. 
Observations of the leading edge of the 10% H2 flame reveal fewer large 
scales but more small-scale wrinkles, indicating their contribution to 
flame stabilization. NH3 flames exhibit lower reactivity and weaker 
flame stability. The primary reason for this is the lower mass fractions of 
H, NH, and NH2 at the base of the flame. Observations of the 10% H2 
flame reveal an increase in the mass fractions of H, NH, and NH2 
throughout the combustion process. These species are strengthened at 
Fig. 19. Illustration of simultaneous (a) Rayleigh scattering (RS) (b)NH 3 -PLIF (c)NH-PLIF measurements for turbulent NH 3/H 2/air premixed flames. The last 
column shows local detailed comparison of RS and NH-LIF [168]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 20 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1259
the base of the flame, indicating that the enhancement of combustion 
activity stems not only from hydrogen oxidation but also from the 
improvement in ammonia oxidation. The internal recirculation zone 
becomes thinner with the addition of H2, which is disadvantageous for 
flame stability mechanisms. However, these species originate from the 
base of the flame, i.e., from fuel oxidation rather than internal recircu­
lation effects. 
3.4. Water vapor-hydrogen hybrid fuel combustion 
The use of water vapor as a diluent can affect the mechanisms of 
chemical, thermal, and dilution effects in the combustion process. 
Employing H2O dilution as another technique to achieve stable H2 
combustion and reduce NOx emissions holds great promise [176]. The 
addition of H2O can affect the propagation speed of hydrogen flames, 
combustion instability, the rate of key free radical generation, and 
thermal efficiency, among other factors. The influence of diluents 
Fig. 20. Selected OH-PLIF images collected at various axial locations from flames a) FNH3 _0 b) FNH3 _25 c) FNH3 _50 d) FNH3 _72. The horizontal line separates to 
rows of the images; the bottom row covers the axial distance 0 ≤Z ≤42.5 mm, while the upper row covers the axial distance 42.5 ≤Z ≤85 mm. Circles and 
rectangles show positions with partial extinction and corrugations [171]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 21 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1260
throughout the combustion process can be categorized into dilution 
effects, thermodynamic effects, chemical effects, transport effects, and 
radiation effects. H2O can either directly participate in elementary re­
actions, causing chemical effects, or it can act as a third body, partici­
pating in termolecular reactions. Steam dilution technology is one 
promising technique for H2/air combustion. It can effectively reduce 
flashback in H2/air flames. H2O can participate as an oxidizer in the 
combustion of hydrogen. There are various mixing methods for H2O, 
such as passing through a swirl generator to create strong turbulent flow 
before undergoing combustion reactions. Mixing H2O can effectively 
suppress the chemical reactivity of H2, reducing flame propagation 
speed. Thus, it reduces the risk of flashback or autoignition during the 
combustion process, enhancing operational safety. The addition of water 
vapor can significantly lower flame temperature, thereby inhibiting the 
emission of nitrogen oxides. This effect is much more pronounced 
compared to the dilution effect of nitrogen (N2). Traditional 
swirl-stabilized lean-premixed flames are influenced by various factors, 
including flame interactions, precessing vortex cores, or thermoacoustic 
oscillations. Terhaar et al. [177] used particle image velocimetry (PIV) 
and OH* chemiluminescence to investigate the effect of H2O dilution on 
turbulent swirling H2 flames. H2O dilution resulted in a decrease in 
turbulent flame speed, weakening the central recirculation zone. The 
addition of H2O diluent reduced the risk of H2 flashback. In their sub­
sequent study, Terhaar et al. [178] employed the same research methods 
to investigate the impact of H2O dilution on flame position, velocity 
field, and temperature field. Using proper orthogonal decomposition, 
they discovered that under moderate dilution conditions, vortex insta­
bility occurred downstream of the flame with a lower frequency. This 
structural feature completely disappeared when H2O was not added. The 
higher the water vapor dilution ratio, the more pronounced this phe­
nomenon became in the flame structure. This study provides insights 
into the effects of H2O dilution on flame characteristics and flow dy­
namics in combustion systems. Flashback in hydrogen-rich fuels is a 
critical phenomenon in combustion systems, especially in gas turbine 
applications. The propensity for flashback is influenced by various fac­
tors, including fuel composition, flow characteristics, and combustion 
conditions. Studies have shown that hydrogen has a higher flashback 
tendency compared to methane, leading to a narrower statically stable 
operation window in terms of equivalence ratio. The onset of flashback 
is more sensitive to fuel composition, with higher percentages of H2 in a 
mixture leading to flashback at leaner conditions. Additionally, the 
turbulent flame speed, which is not an intrinsic property of the fuel, 
plays a crucial role in flashback prediction, making it challenging to 
predict for hydrogen-containing fuels. The presence of hydrogen in fuel 
mixtures can significantly impact the flashback behavior, with pure 
hydrogen presenting a much bigger flashback challenge compared to 
mixtures containing methane. Furthermore, the swirl strength in com­
bustion systems can affect flashback propensity, with an increase in 
swirl strength potentially balancing the increase in hydrogen concen­
tration to avoid combustion-induced vortex breakdown (CIVB) 
Fig. 21. The mean OH-PLIF images for different operating conditions [175]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission).  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 22 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1261
flashback in practical systems. 
The addition of water vapor can enhance the stability of a flame, 
primarily by influencing both thermal effects and chemical kinetic ef­
fects. Water vapor can also reduce the emission of nitrogen oxides [179, 
180]. In the combustion of hydrogen gas, the dilution of water vapor can 
reduce certain combustion characteristics by altering the concentration 
of reactive species. The addition of water vapor can reduce ignition 
delay time and flame propagation speed. Changes in flame temperature 
can alter the generation of nitrogen oxides, and adding water vapor can 
influence the pathways of nitrogen oxide formation, thereby reducing 
nitrogen oxide emissions. Steam-diluted combustion offers significant 
advantages in reducing the reactivity of hydrogen. Water vapor can 
significantly alter the pressure changes during the combustion process of 
hydrogen gas. Water vapor dilution enables the use of pure hydrogen or 
hydrogen-rich fuels in gas turbine combustors. Numerous studies on 
micro-mixing burner design and optimization have focused on the 
pollutant emission characteristics of hydrogen and synthetic gas fuels 
[181,182]. In micro-mixing combustion systems, directly utilizing 
hydrogen as fuel also faces the challenge of combustion instability. 
Low-frequency, high-amplitude, and self-induced pressure oscillations 
are inevitable. Micro-mixing combustion technology achieves thorough 
premixing through the principle of distributed jet-crossflow mixing. 
Zhen Cao et al. [15] utilized OH-PLIF measurements at a frequency of 5 
kHz to investigate flame structure and evolution, as illustrated in Fig. 22. 
They studied the effects of equivalence ratio and steam dilution rate on 
the instability characteristics of hydrogen-air flames in a micro-mixing 
burner. The evolution and oscillation characteristics of hydrogen-air 
flames with steam dilution were examined in the micro-mixing 
burner. Through spectrum analysis, low-frequency oscillations in the 
flame region were identified, accompanied by heat release oscillations. 
As the equivalence ratio of hydrogen increased, the flame length grad­
ually extended. Changes in the concentration of OH radicals occurred 
with increasing H2O content, accompanied by the migration of oscilla­
tion region position and intensity. 
Micro-mixing technology, as an advanced H2 combustion technique, 
plays a role in reducing nitrogen oxide emissions and stabilizing flames. 
Micro-mixing technology follows the concept of “reducing mixing scale 
and increasing mixing intensity.” Micro-mixing technology enhances the 
mixing of fuel and oxidizer by reducing the mixing scale, enabling 
complete premixing of fuel and oxidizer within a shorter premix length. 
Additionally, the smaller mixing scale of this design helps suppress the 
occurrence of flashback. By reducing the flame size, the residence time 
of reactants in the flame zone is shortened, thereby achieving low NOx 
emissions. However, when combining both methods (dilution and 
micro-mixing) in a hydrogen burner, there is still no consistent conclu­
sion regarding the main causes of flame structure, stability, and NOx 
emissions. The impact of water vapor dilution on micro-mixed hydrogen 
flames may differ from its impact on standard large-scale flames. This is 
because the structural size on micro-mixed hydrogen flames is extremely 
small, and the mixing process is very rapid. Based on considerations 
related to such issues, Cheng Lu et al. [183] utilized OH-PLIF to measure 
the micro-mixed structure of H2/air turbulent flames under H2O dilu­
tion. They found that the majority of OH was distributed in the middle 
and downstream regions of the flame. Through numerical simulation 
analysis, they concluded that the thermal dilution effect of steam had 
the greatest impact on flame temperature. Due to this effect, the stability 
of micro-mixed hydrogen flames might decrease, although direct 
chemical effects might slightly enhance the stability of micro-mixed 
hydrogen flames. In their subsequent research, Cheng Lu et al. [184] 
investigated the micro-mixed structure of H2/air flames diluted with 
water vapor using a 10 kHz high-speed OH* chemiluminescence imag­
ing system. In the present experimental studies, the equivalence ratio is 
ranges from 0.5 to 0.9 and the steam dilution ratio is ranges from 0 to 
30%, which include a large part of the equivalence ratio and the steam 
dilution ratio of lean premixed humidification combustion for practical 
applications. The range of the thermal power in the experiment is from 
1 kW to 8 kW. The unburned mixture temperature and pressure are 393 
K and 1 atm. By detecting instantaneous flame structures, they explored 
the effects of equivalence ratio, steam dilution rate, and micro-mixing 
structure diameter on turbulent structures. As the equivalence ratio in­
creases or the water vapor dilution ratio decreases, the overall OH signal 
intensity increases. With the increase in nozzle diameter, the maximum 
OH* signal was detected at positions away from the nozzle outlet. 
Time-averaged flames exhibit two types, as shown in Fig. 23: one is the 
anchored flame anchored at the nozzle outlet, and the other is the lifted 
flame rising above the nozzle. An increase in hydrogen velocity may lead 
Fig. 22. Selected time-resolved OH-PLIF images with a period under the condition of ϕ = 0.7 and D = 25% [15]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission).  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 23 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1262
to a transition in flame type from anchored flame to lifted flame. Dy­
namic Mode Decomposition (DMD) analysis suggests that the distribu­
tion of dominant modes resembles the distribution of OH* signals. The 
primary oscillation region of the anchored flame is near the flame shear 
layer, while that of the lifted flame is in the central recirculation zone of 
the flame. Anchored flames are more stable compared to lifted flames. It 
is advisable to avoid using lifted flames in practical combustors. High 
mixing intensity of fuel and oxidizer contributes to the stability of 
micro-mixed flames. 
The micro-mixed structure significantly reduces the integral length 
scale of flow, while water vapor dilution alters the thermophysical pa­
rameters of the mixture and some reaction processes. The variations in 
turbulent combustion flame structure are closely related to these factors. 
Studying the flame structure parameters and fluctuation characteristics 
contributes to a deeper understanding of hydrogen micro-mixed com­
bustion characteristics, providing richer standards for the design and 
optimization of hydrogen micro-mixing technology, and promoting the 
efficient and stable utilization of hydrogen fuel in traditional burners. 
For in-depth analysis, Yajin Lyu et al. [185] employed 5 kHz OH Planar 
Laser-Induced Fluorescence (OH PLIF) technique to detect the transient 
structure of flames, as shown in Fig. 24. The fuel and air are heated to 
the predetermined temperature of 388 K to prevent the condensation of 
water vapor after mixing. The air/fuel pipeline and the outer wall of the 
burner are equipped with heating cable and insulation cotton to ensure 
the stability of preheating temperature. The dilution rate and equiva­
lence ratio of hydrogen-air micro-mixed combustion diluted with water 
vapor can influence flame characteristics. Through flame structure pa­
rameters, one can study the characteristics and variations of 
micro-mixed combustion. An increase in dilution rate, by reducing 
downstream OH radicals, indicates a decrease in flame area, contrary to 
the effect of CO2 dilution. The local curvature radius of the flame shows 
that micro-mixed combustion is characterized by high turbulent in­
tensity, with protruding structures being more frequent. An increase in 
equivalence ratio or a decrease in dilution rate leads to smaller instan­
taneous average curvature radius, indicating the generation of more 
small-scale wrinkled structures. 
In summary, water vapor dilution and micro-mixed combustion 
technology have emerged as promising techniques for H2/air combus­
tion. Water vapor dilution combustion technology can chemically alter 
the structure, stability, and NOx emissions of hydrogen flames. Micro- 
mixing technology, on the other hand, demonstrates its effects from a 
physical standpoint. For H2/air combustion, especially for reducing NOx 
emissions, combining micro-mixed combustion with steam dilution may 
be a favorable choice. Mechanism studies on this combined approach 
have received significant attention in the field of hydrogen combustion. 
H2O dilution, as another technique to achieve stable H2 combustion and 
reduce NOx emissions, has garnered the attention of researchers in 
recent years. Terhaar et al. [177] used Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) 
and OH* chemiluminescence to study the impact of H2O dilution on H2 
swirl flames. The results showed that H2O dilution reduces the flame 
propagation speed and weakens the central recirculation zone, which 
explains the reduced risk of H2 flashback. In subsequent research, Ter­
haar et al. [178] used Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) and 
found that near moderate dilution rates, the downstream flow field of 
the flame exhibited low-frequency helical instabilities. This structure 
was completely suppressed in undiluted flames but was more pro­
nounced in highly diluted separated flames. Oliver et al. [176] investi­
gated the combustion characteristics of H2O-diluted H2 flames in a 
model combustor. They reported that adding H2O reduced the flame 
propagation speed and broadened the heat release peak. At high dilution 
rates, the flame front thickened and extended downstream. Therefore, it 
can be concluded that H2O dilution significantly affects the flame 
structure and combustion characteristics. With the support of the Eu­
ropean advanced research project GREENEST, G¨oke et al. [186,187] 
conducted extensive research on H2O-diluted H2 combustion, particu­
larly its impact on NOx emissions. The results indicated that H2O can 
effectively suppress NOx emissions. At a dilution rate of 35%, NOx 
emissions from an H2 flame with an equivalence ratio of 1 could be 
reduced to 10 ppm. Moreover, even with relatively low H2O content, H2 
flame flashback can be prevented. Increasing the H2O dilution rate 
causes the H2 flame to move downstream and increases the flame vol­
ume. They found that H2O is more effective than N2 in suppressing NOx 
emissions. At a 20% dilution rate and a flame temperature of 1850 K, 
NOx emissions were close to 10 ppm. Even at a constant flame temper­
ature, using H2O dilution can effectively reduce NOx emissions. This 
implies that the suppression of NOx by H2O is not solely due to the 
reduction of flame temperature. 
3.5. Carbon monoxide-hydrogen hybrid fuel combustion 
Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) technology plays a 
crucial role in energy security and clean energy generation. In an IGCC 
power generation system, syngas, primarily composed of CO and H2, is 
produced by gasifying coal or other fuels [188]. Due to the high content 
of hydrogen in syngas, it exhibits high thermal diffusivity and reactivity. 
It has a high laminar burning velocity, extremely thin flame thickness, 
and low Lewis number. All of these characteristics make combustion 
unstable and lead to more complex turbulence-flame interactions. The 
hydrogen ratio in syngas varies from 25% to 76% depending on the 
specific feedstock and gasification process. The ratio of hydrogen de­
termines the laminar and turbulent combustion speeds of syngas [189, 
Fig. 23. Schematic of the anchored flame (Type A) and lifted flame (Type B) 
[184]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission). 
Fig. 24. Instantaneous OH-PLIF images [185]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission).  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 24 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1263
190]. Understanding the interaction of turbulent flames at high pres­
sures is an important task, crucial for the application and design of 
modern premixed combustors. Turbulent flame structures can elucidate 
the interaction between turbulence and flames, directly guiding turbu­
lent combustion modeling and model assessment. Due to the advance­
ments in combustion laser diagnostics over the past few decades, 
turbulent combustion speeds and flame structures have been measured 
[114,191]. Jinhua Wang et al. [192] investigated the instantaneous 
flame structure of turbulent premixed flames of CO/H2/CO2/O2 and 
CO/H2/CO2/air using OH-PLIF technique, as shown in Fig. 25. The 
experimental results were compared with methane/air mixtures at high 
pressure (up to 1.0 MPa). The hydrogen ratio in the syngas was set at 
volume fractions of 35%, 50%, and 65%. To elucidate the multiscale 
turbulence-flame interaction, statistical flame structure parameters and 
turbulent combustion speeds were derived. The flame structure of syn­
gas is more wrinkled compared to CH4 flames, with sharper protrusions 
and greater depth from the burnt to unburnt regions. At a high pressure 
of 1.0 MPa, the volume fraction of hydrogen has an insignificant impact 
on the flame structure, while the wrinkling of the flame front is more 
significantly influenced by pressure. The minimal influence of hydrogen 
proportion on flame structure at high pressure can be attributed to the 
fact that the flame surface density of syngas flames remains almost 
constant above 50% hydrogen, indicating a slower enhancement of 
turbulent combustion at very high hydrogen ratios. On the other hand, 
pressure has a significant impact on combustion stability by promoting 
the combustion process through the generation of a finer flame front 
structure at higher pressures, resulting in a more unstable flame. The 
pressure effect is more evident for CH4 flames, where the flame surface 
density increases significantly with pressure, compared to syngas flames 
where the effect of pressure is weaker. Additionally, the turbulent 
burning velocity is influenced by both pressure and hydrogen ratio, with 
pressure showing a less pronounced effect on increasing turbulent 
burning velocity compared to the influence of hydrogen ratio within 
certain ranges. The flame surface density of syngas is greater than that of 
Fig. 25. OH-PLIF images of turbulent premixed flames [192]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission).  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 25 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1264
methane. A significant characteristic of syngas combustion occurs when 
the hydrogen ratio exceeds 50%, where the flame surface density of 
syngas is hardly affected by pressure and hydrogen ratio. To investigate 
the local extinction characteristics at the flame tip of premixed syngas 
flames with different hydrogen fractions, Jinhua Wang et al. [193] 
continued to utilize OH-PLIF technology. The air flow is measured using 
a mass flow controller and the fuel is metered by a mass flow controller. 
They explored the coupling effects of stretch and diffusion on highly 
curved premixed syngas flame through numerical simulations and 
experimental studies. The coupling of stretch and diffusion leads to a 
reduction in reaction rate along the Bunsen flame of syngas with high 
curvature. The local Karlovitz number can be used to indicate the 
extinction at the highly curved, stretched tip of syngas Bunsen flames. 
CO acts as a catalyst in the combustion reaction of H2 [194]. In 
premixed gas turbines, the mechanism of turbulence-flame interaction is 
influenced by the hydrogen content in syngas. The impact of hydrogen 
on combustion performance is much greater compared to traditional 
hydrocarbon fuels [195] (such as CH4). Extensive research has been 
conducted under laminar conditions. There is a lot of literature studying 
the flame topology characteristics [189,196] and instability [197,198] 
of CO/H2 mixed fuels and CH4. Most of these studies encompass thermal 
diffusion instability and hydrodynamic instability. The corresponding 
experiments were conducted under high pressure [199,200], but there is 
limited research on turbulent conditions. The role of hydrogen in syngas 
is unique, exhibiting flame structure states markedly different from 
traditional hydrocarbon fuels. These characteristics will significantly 
Fig. 26. Representative OH-PLIF images of the turbulent premixed flames under various conditions at P = 0.5 MPa [202]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with 
kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 26 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1265
impact the chemical reaction processes occurring during combustion. 
This will affect the turbulent flame-turbulence interaction. The wrinkle 
structure and fractal characteristics of the front of syngas flames are 
evident [201]. Through analyzing the topology and wrinkle structure of 
the turbulent premixed flame of the flame lamp, Meng Zhang et al. [202] 
used OH-PLIF to measure the turbulent flame front of two different 
hydrogen proportions of model syngas. The CO/H2 ratios were 65/35 
and 80/20, with an equivalence ratio of 0.7, and statistical studies were 
conducted on their flame topological characteristics. The combustion 
pressure was maintained at 0.5 MPa and 1.0 MPa to simulate conditions 
similar to those of an engine, as shown in Figs. 26 and 27. The 
small-scale wrinkle structures of high-pressure premixed turbulent 
flames are superimposed on larger-scale structures. Sharp-edged pro­
trusions similar to acute structures extend into the combustion gases. 
Hydrogen in syngas can enhance the strength of these finer structures. A 
higher proportion of hydrogen in syngas can result in a higher flame 
surface density. At pressures of 0.5 MPa and 1.0 MPa, syngas flames may 
be more prone to combustion oscillations. In their subsequent research, 
Meng Zhang et al. [203] investigated the structure of methane/air 
flames enriched with hydrogen and diluted with CO2. Turbulent pre­
mixed flames were stabilized on Bunsen-type burners. Two-dimensional 
instantaneous OH profiles were measured via planar laser-induced 
fluorescence (PLIF). Flame front structural characteristics were ob­
tained, and turbulent flame interactions were analyzed through statis­
tical parameter analysis. The effects of hydrogen addition and CO2 
dilution on turbulent flame characteristics were revealed. The addition 
of hydrogen can enhance turbulent combustion speed by reducing the 
fine-scale structure of flame wrinkles at the flame front, which is caused 
by smaller flame instability scales. CO2 dilution decreases turbulent 
combustion speed. This is because it is unreactive to turbulent 
disturbances and leads to larger flame wrinkles. The addition of 
hydrogen increases flame volume and results in more intense combus­
tion. Hydrogen enrichment improves combustion, while CO2 can 
modulate it. During the combustion chamber design phase, adding 
hydrogen and CO2 to natural gas may be a potential method for 
adjusting combustion intensity. To understand the molecular and ther­
mal transfer effects in turbulent premixed flames and explore the in­
fluence of fuel on flame structure and turbulent combustion speed, 
Weijie Zhang et al. [204] measured the flame structure and combustion 
speed of CO/H2/air turbulent premixed flames using OH-PLIF, as shown 
in Fig. 28. They also simultaneously measured C3H8/air and CH4/air 
mixtures. OH-PLIF images of CO/H2/air flames exhibit more wrinkling 
compared to CH4/air and C3H8/air flames. Fuel effects have a significant 
impact on flame structure. A higher hydrogen fraction in CO/H2/air 
leads to more wrinkling structures, causing protrusions to propagate 
further into the unburned mixture. 
A table is provided here to summarize the applications of the selected 
non-intrusive diagnostic techniques, as shown in Table 2. 
3.6. Practical applications of PLIF in hydrogen combustion 
The application of Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) tech­
nology in combustion research can provide valuable insights and im­
provements for the design and operation of commercial combustion 
systems. The following are some methods to translate PLIF research 
findings into practical improvements for the design and operation of 
commercial combustion systems, along with examples of successful 
implementations: PLIF can help researchers understand flame structure 
and stability. By optimizing burner design to improve flame stability, 
flame extinction or unstable combustion can be avoided, which is crucial 
Fig. 27. Representative OH-PLIF images of the turbulent premixed flames under various conditions at P = 1.0 MPa [202]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with 
kind permission). 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 27 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1266
for the safety and efficiency of combustion systems. PLIF technology can 
provide detailed measurements of the distribution and concentration of 
various species during combustion, such as OH, NOx, and fuel molecules, 
thereby optimizing combustion efficiency. By analyzing these data, 
burner design can be optimized to enhance combustion efficiency and 
reduce unburned fuel emissions. This optimization can lower fuel con­
sumption and operational costs. Examples of successful implementation: 
Aviation engines. In aviation engine design, PLIF technology is widely 
used for the optimization of combustion chambers. For example, GE 
Aviation and Pratt & Whitney have used PLIF technology to study the 
combustion process and optimize combustion chamber design to 
improve combustion efficiency and reduce emissions [70–72,74,75]. 
Some power plants have used PLIF technology to improve burner design. 
For example, companies like Siemens and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 
have employed PLIF technology to optimize combustion processes, 
reduce NOx emissions, and improve combustion efficiency when 
developing new burners [76,77,80]. 
Over the past few decades, advanced combustion diagnostic tech­
niques have been extensively used to study the mechanisms of com­
bustion instability in gas turbine model combustors. To stabilize the 
slowly propagating flame in a premixed gas turbine combustor against 
high-speed flows, two common flame stabilization schemes include 
swirl stabilization and bluff-body stabilization or their combination 
[205]. Configurations of swirl-stabilized and dump-stabilized combus­
tors are the most commonly used [206,207]. These methods are 
commonly used in modern gas turbine combustors. As the fluid expands 
from the injector outlet and develops downstream, large-scale coherent 
structures are generated due to the velocity difference between the 
swirling flow and the ambient fluid in the dump region. Results indicate 
that four significant structures are of primary concern: the central 
recirculation zone (also known as the inner recirculation zone) caused 
by vortex breakdown downstream of the injector, the corner recircula­
tion zone (also known as the outer recirculation zone), the precessing 
vortex core (PVC), and the shear layer. These flow structures have a 
significant impact on the combustion process. The effect of flame-flow 
interaction on combustion instability in gas turbine model combustors 
has been studied through numerous model gas turbine burners. In a 
series of studies, the flame and flow characteristics have been 
well-characterized using multi-kHz laser diagnostic techniques. Sada­
nandan et al. [208] used this burner to perform simultaneous PIV and 
OH-PLIF measurements to study the impact of turbulence on local flame 
characteristics. In their experiments, a swirling CH4/air flame operated 
at a thermal power of 10.3 kW, with an overall equivalence ratio of 0.75, 
exhibiting strong thermoacoustic oscillations at approximately 295 Hz. 
Simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements indicated that the reac­
tion zones formed in the outer and inner shear layers, where hot com­
bustion gases from the outer and inner recirculation zones mixed with 
fresh fuel/air mixtures (designated as regions C and D, respectively). 
However, the repetition rate of the PLIF and PIV systems in this work 
was limited to 2.5 Hz, which was insufficient to resolve the flame dy­
namics during the thermoacoustic instability cycle (295 Hz). To achieve 
time-resolved measurements of the interactions between the flow field, 
fuel, and flame during self-excited thermoacoustic oscillations in this 
combustor. Time-resolved measurements indicate that the PVC induces 
Fig. 28. OH-PLIF images of the CO/H2/air turbulent premixed flames under different turbulence intensity [204]. (Reproduced from Elsevier with kind permission).  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 28 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1267
a regular sequence of flame roll-up, mixing of burnt and unburnt gases, 
and subsequent ignition of the mixture in the inner recirculation zone. 
The PVC also creates an unstable stagnation point near the frontal 
collision of burnt and unburnt gases, leading to significant heat release. 
Worth and Dawson [209] elucidated the complex three-dimensional 
(3D) dynamics of flame-flame and vortex-flame interactions in two 
bluff-body stabilized flames under external acoustic excitation. These 
experimental results not only provide new insights into the coupling 
mechanisms between combustion and the resulting instability but also 
offer valuable well-documented data for the development and validation 
of advanced models. 
Regarding the research on PLIF in hydrogen gas turbines. Eun-Seong 
Cho 
et al. [18] studied the flame morphology and OH* 
chemiluminescence distribution of a pure hydrogen array micro-mixing 
burner at an equivalence ratio of 0.45, as shown in Fig. 29(a). The 
experimental results indicate significant downstream interactions be­
tween micro-mixing flame units. At an equivalence ratio of 0.7, dark red 
flames (indicative of high-temperature H2O radiation, suggesting higher 
flame temperatures) appeared, accompanied by flashback phenomena 
and a rapid increase in NOx emissions. Increasing the flow rate resulted 
in local flame blowout and other phenomena. Therefore, based on the jet 
flame shear layer stretching effect and the dynamic balance mechanism 
between the premixed flame combustion rate and flow velocity, only a 
narrow range of flame stability can be achieved. Future work should 
consider regulating flame stability through flow rate/fuel distribution 
mixing to broaden the stability boundaries. Tomohiro Asai et al. [210] 
Table 2 
Summary of the applications.  
Refs. 
Approaches 
Combustor 
Fuel 
Application 
[16,71,82,125, 
126] 
OH-PLIF 
Swirl-stabilized hydrogen 
burner 
hydrogen 
Study on the flow field characteristics of hydrogen 
combustors 
Jet flame 
hydrogen 
Stability mechanism of turbulent hydrogen Jet flames 
Scramjet combustor 
hydrogen 
Study on supersonic combustion instability 
Turbulent Bunsen burner 
CH4/H2/air mixture 
Mechanism of turbulent interaction between hydrogen- 
hybrid and natural gas flames 
Turbulent Bunsen burner 
CH4/H2/air mixture 
Coupling effects between diffusion-unstable flame fronts 
and turbulence 
[15,185] 
OH-PLIF 
Micro-Mixed Combustor 
Steam-diluted hydrogen- 
air mixture 
Flame instability in micro-mixed combustion systems 
Study on flame retardation and reduction of NOx emissions 
[194,202,204] 
OH-PLIF 
Turbulent Bunsen burner 
CO/H2/CO2/air mixture 
Turbulent combustion rate and flame front structure 
Turbulent flame topology and wrinkle structure 
Molecular and thermal diffusion processes in turbulent 
flames 
[6,184] 
OH*chemiluminescence 
Microporous nozzle array with 
sixty nozzles 
hydrogen 
Low-emission gas turbine combustor 
Micro-mixing combustion 
system 
Steam-diluted hydrogen- 
air mixture 
Development of steam-diluted micro-Mixed combustion 
technology 
[63,74,127] 
OH*chemiluminescence and 
OH-PLIF 
Variable-length combustion 
section 
hydrogen 
Combustion dynamics of lean premixed hydrogen-air 
flame assemblies 
Low-swirl turbulent jet flame 
Dilute premixed 
hydrogen/air 
Influence of flame behavior on direct combustion noise 
Variable-length combustion 
section 
CH4/H2/air mixture 
Detailed study of self-excited oscillations in combustion 
instability 
[37,97,102, 
108,175] 
OH-PLIF and PIV 
lean-premixed (LPM) 
combustion 
Ultra-dilute CH4/H2/air 
Evolution process of flame morphology 
Combination of bluff body and 
swirler 
Mechanisms of hydrogen in stable vortical and bluff body 
flames 
Combination of bluff body and 
swirler 
Investigation on flame morphology and stability 
Compact swirl combustor 
Key reasons for blowout near the lean limit 
Fully premixed swirl combustor 
NH3/H2 mixture 
Influence of ammonia and hydrogen mixed fuels on flame 
stability 
[161,168,171] 
NO PLIF and OH PLIF 
Turbulent Bunsen burner 
NH3/H2 mixture 
Mechanisms of NO generation and flame structure in 
flames 
Jet flame 
Complete fuel chemical process 
Swirl combustor 
Combustion and emission characteristics of ammonia- 
hydrogen mixtures  
Fig. 29. (a) OH* chemical lumen distribution of array pure hydrogen micro-mixed burner (b) Flame morphology and emission law of different fuel ratios.  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 29 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1268
employed a spatial compound angle arrangement of micro-mixing 
burner units with the outlet plane to introduce a certain degree of 
swirling flow, enhancing flame stability. The experiment also used the 
radial distribution of fuel through the micro-mixing holes as a control 
variable to study the impact of fuel staging on the combustion charac­
teristics of the combustor. As shown in Fig. 29(b), the results indicate 
that as the fuel staging ratio changes, the micro-mixing flame transitions 
from a lifted flame to an attached flame, with corresponding reductions 
in NOx emissions. However, due to the interaction between jet flames in 
the wake downstream of the orifice plate, thermoacoustic oscillations 
occurred. To mitigate the thermoacoustic oscillation issue in the 
combustor, the micro-mixing structure’s orifice diameter and fuel 
staging ratio were simultaneously optimized. It was found that a fuel 
staging ratio of 83.3% could achieve both low NOx emissions and low 
thermoacoustic oscillation amplitudes. This indicates that micro-mixing 
structure design and flame characteristic control are effective means to 
optimize combustor emissions and thermoacoustic oscillation charac­
teristics. However, due to the lack of detailed experimental measure­
ments and analysis, the mechanisms of these control methods require 
further study. 
Aesong Lee et al. [38] and Hyebin Kang et al. [63] simplified the 
arrayed pure hydrogen micro-mixing process into a premixed pure 
hydrogen jet flame. They employed phase-locked OH* chem­
iluminescence, low-frequency OH-PLIF, pressure sensors, and micro­
phones to study the self-excited oscillation characteristics of the flame 
system. The results, as shown in Fig. 30, indicate that compared to 
natural gas flames, premixed pure hydrogen flames are more compact 
with weaker flame front wrinkles and less interaction at the flame root. 
Premixed pure hydrogen flames exhibit higher frequencies and ampli­
tudes of self-excited instability oscillations. They are also more prone to 
causing combustion instability frequencies to switch between inherent 
modes, prompting the transition from stable to unstable combustion. 
The self-excited oscillation frequency is closely related to the diameter 
of the burner’s single nozzle. However, these conclusions were derived 
under conditions that completely ignore the micro-mixing process of the 
fuel. They fail to reveal the significant impact of strong turbulence 
characteristics in the actual micro-mixing structure and the distribution 
of premixed fuel under different operating conditions on flame structure 
and thermoacoustic oscillation characteristics. Further systematic and 
in-depth studies are needed to understand these effects. 
These examples demonstrate that applying PLIF research findings to 
the design and operation of actual combustion systems can significantly 
enhance system efficiency and environmental performance. In the 
future, as PLIF technology continues to advance and be applied, more 
commercial combustion systems will benefit from this advanced diag­
nostic technology. Compared to traditional gas turbines, the design and 
development of hydrogen gas turbines are relatively new fields, with 
much research still at the laboratory scale. PLIF measurements in actual 
combustion chambers will undoubtedly be applied to the design process 
of hydrogen combustion chambers, just as they are in traditional com­
bustion chambers. 
In the study of various mixed fuels, we found that hydrogen not only 
has significant advantages in combustion efficiency and performance 
but also exhibits unique benefits in reducing emissions. When hydrogen 
burns, it only produces water vapor, thereby completely eliminating the 
emissions of common greenhouse gases and harmful pollutants such as 
carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon monoxide (CO), and hydrocarbons (HC). 
Additionally, the higher combustion temperature of hydrogen helps 
improve combustion efficiency and further reduces the formation of 
nitrogen oxides (NOx). This makes hydrogen capable of providing effi­
cient energy utilization while also being significant for environmental 
protection and improving air quality. Therefore, hydrogen, as a clean 
energy source, is gaining increasing attention and application 
worldwide. 
4. Conclusion 
This paper provides the application of Planar Laser-Induced Fluo­
rescence (PLIF) in the study of combustion flame structure, flashback 
characteristics, NOx emissions, and combustion instability in hydrogen 
fuel and hydrogen hybrid fuel. The basic principles of PLIF for flame 
structure detection and typical experimental setups are discussed. 
Through the implementation of advanced instabilities combustion 
diagnostic techniques, comprehensive research has been conducted on 
the complex flow-flame-acoustic coupling of combustion instability in 
hydrogen fuel and hydrogen hybrid fuel. 
Specifically, prominent observations from this review are.  
(1) The research on premixed flames of hydrogen, partially premixed 
flames, and large eddy structures is crucial for understanding 
flame mechanisms. Combustors designed with millimeter-scale 
nozzle arrays exhibit outstanding performance in suppressing 
hydrogen flashback. Their surface flame dynamics exhibit 
various oscillation characteristics, including low-frequency flame 
coexistence phenomena and high-frequency instabilities. Regu­
lation of high-frequency heat release is crucial for controlling 
combustion instability. 
Fig. 30. Study on the flame structure and self-oscillation characteristics of pure hydrogen array premixed jets.  
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 30 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1269
(2) The methane/air flame enriched with hydrogen exhibits a higher 
turbulent combustion speed, and the high diffusivity of hydrogen 
leads to an increase in local combustion rate. The addition of 
hydrogen results in the formation of elongated wrinkles in the 
flame, generating small-scale structures. The combustion of nat­
ural gas mixed with hydrogen offers significant advantages in 
reducing pollutant emissions, improving thermal efficiency, and 
promoting combustion stability.  
(3) The differential diffusion effect significantly influences the flame 
structure of turbulent premixed ammonia/hydrogen/air flames. 
Turbulent-flame interactions also affect flame thickness and sta­
bility, while the addition of H2 can enhance flame stretch and 
stability. High concentrations of hydrogen can lead to flashback 
phenomena and thermoacoustic instability in ammonia flames. 
(4) The addition of water vapor as a diluent can improve flame sta­
bility and reduce nitrogen oxide emissions. The inclusion of water 
vapor primarily affects the combustion process through thermal 
and chemical kinetic effects, reducing flame propagation speed 
and ignition delay time. Both the dilution rate of water vapor and 
the equivalence ratio of hydrogen have a significant impact on 
flame characteristics.  
(5) The high hydrogen content in syngas leads to fast combustion 
rates, thin flames, and high reactivity, making it susceptible to 
instability and complex turbulent-flame interactions. At high 
pressure, the proportion of hydrogen has minimal influence on 
flame structure, but pressure has a more significant effect on 
flame front wrinkling. 
To effectively organize the combustion of hydrogen fuel, the next 
step inevitably involves designing novel combustion systems tailored to 
specific requirements. These new combustion systems correspond to 
novel flame structures, which can be characterized not only using PLIF 
but also through simultaneous high-speed measurements of multiple 
components based on mapped flow fields, reaction zones, temperature, 
species, and fuel-air mixtures. These approaches enable a better un­
derstanding of chemical reaction processes and a more detailed inves­
tigation of combustion instability. Further development of three- 
dimensional diagnostic techniques, such as state-of-the-art time- 
resolved tomographic imaging LIF. It is possible to provide new insights 
into the flame-flow-acoustic coupling system. 
PLIF technology has played a significant role in the field of hydrogen 
or hydrogen mixture combustion research. PLIF offers advantages such 
as non-intrusive, real-time in-situ measurements, high component 
selectivity, good sensitivity, and high spatiotemporal resolution. Multi- 
component PLIF and tracer PLIF technologies have been widely 
applied in combustion diagnostics to measure key parameters like 
instantaneous flame structure, component concentration, temperature, 
and flow field velocity. PLIF technology can visualize the high spatio­
temporal resolution of the instantaneous structure of the preheat zone, 
burnt zone, and reaction zone in combustion flames by imaging the two- 
dimensional distribution of important components such as CH2O, OH, 
and CH during combustion. Despite significant research progress in 
combustion diagnostics, PLIF technology faces issues like low repetition 
frequency (~10 Hz), limited dimensions (2D), and single-field mea­
surements. With the development of high-energy, high-repetition-rate 
pulsed lasers, high-speed PLIF technology (10–1000 kHz) is gradually 
being applied in combustion diagnostics to measure the dynamic evo­
lution of flame instantaneous structures during processes such as local 
extinction and combustion oscillations. VLIF technology has been 
demonstrated and validated in open-space flame furnaces, capable of 
imaging the three-dimensional structure of flames. Combined with high- 
speed lasers, it can achieve 4D (3D + t) measurements, potentially 
applying to high-speed evolution imaging of the three-dimensional 
instantaneous structure of combustion flames in the future. When used 
synchronously with PIV, Rayleigh scattering, and other techniques, PLIF 
technology can achieve multi-field, multi-parameter synchronous 
visualization of component fields, flow fields, and temperature fields, 
helping to further reveal the interaction mechanisms between combus­
tion and turbulence. Currently, VLIF technology and multi-field multi- 
parameter synchronous diagnostic technology are primarily applied in 
fundamental combustion diagnostics. However, challenges such as 
complex optical path adjustments, optical window design, stray light 
filtering from chamber walls, and signal-to-noise ratio optimization still 
need to be addressed. PLIF measurement results need to be better inte­
grated with theoretical models and numerical simulation results to 
further reveal the characteristics and mechanisms of mixing, flow, and 
combustion. This integration will lay the foundation for optimizing the 
design of hydrogen or hydrogen mixture combustors, supporting the 
improvement of combustion efficiency and performance. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Wu Gu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Inves­
tigation, Data curation. Xiao Liu: Writing – review & editing, Project 
administration, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Zhiqiang Wang: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis. Hongtao 
Zheng: Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Data 
curation. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the 
Design, development, and application of a highly stable, low-emission 
combustion chamber for pure hydrogen gas turbines. (Nos. 
CXRC20231117119). We also want to thank the anonymous reviewers 
for their careful review and insightful suggestions which have helped to 
improve this paper substantially. 
References 
[1] Rasul MG, Hazrat MA, Sattar MA, Jahirul MI, Shearer MJ. The future of 
hydrogen: challenges on production, storage and applications. Energy Convers 
Manag 2022;272:116326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2022.116326. 
[2] Undertaking HJ. Hydrogen roadmap Europe: a sustainable pathway for the 
European energy transition. Fuel 2019;13:25. https://doi.org/10.1325/ 
1.3321076. 
[3] Krishnan Unni J, Govindappa P, Das LM. Development of hydrogen fuelled 
transport engine and field tests on vehicles. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42: 
643–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.09.107. 
[4] Song Z, Zhang X, Hou X, Li M. Effect of initial pressure, temperature and 
equivalence ratios on laminar combustion characteristics of hydrogen enriched 
natural gas. J Energy Inst 2018;91:887–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
joei.2017.09.007. 
[5] Ren F, Chu H, Xiang L, Han W, Gu M. Effect of hydrogen addition on the laminar 
premixed combustion characteristics the main components of natural gas. 
J Energy Inst 2019;92:1178–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joei.2018.05.011. 
[6] Lee T, Kim KT. Combustion dynamics of lean fully-premixed hydrogen-air flames 
in a mesoscale multinozzle array. Combust Flame 2020;218:234–46. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.04.024. 
[7] Indlekofer T, Faure-Beaulieu A, Noiray N, Dawson J. The effect of dynamic 
operating conditions on the thermoacoustic response of hydrogen rich flames in 
an annular combustor. Combust Flame 2021;223:284–94. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2020.10.013. 
[8] Ueda A, Nisida K, Matsumura Y, Ichikawa T, Nakashimada Y, Endo T, et al. 
Effects of hydrogen and carbon dioxide on the laminar burning velocities of 
methane–air mixtures. J Energy Inst 2021;99:178–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
joei.2021.09.007. 
[9] Xie Y, Li Q. Effect of the initial pressures on evolution of intrinsically unstable 
hydrogen/air premixed flame fronts. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:17030–40. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.04.220. 
[10] Stathopoulos P, Kuhn P, Wendler J, Tanneberger T, Terhaar S, Paschereit CO, 
et al. Emissions of a Wet premixed flame of natural gas and a mixture with 
hydrogen at high pressure. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2017;139:041507. https:// 
doi.org/10.1115/1.4034687. 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 31 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1270
[11] Sazonov YA, Mokhov MA, Gryaznova IV, Voronova VV, Tumanyan KA, 
Konyushkov EI. Thrust Vector control within a geometric sphere, and the use of 
euler’s tips to create jet technology. Civ Eng J 2023;9:2516–34. https://doi.org/ 
10.28991/CEJ-2023-09-10-011. 
[12] Sazonov YA, Mokhov MA, Bondarenko AV, Voronova VV, Tumanyan KA, 
Konyushkov EI. Interdisciplinary studies of jet systems using euler methodology 
and computational. Fluid Dynamics Technologies 2023;4. 
[13] Sazonov YA, Mokhov MA, Gryaznova IV, Voronova VV, Tumanyan KA, 
Konyushkov EI. Solving innovative problems of thrust vector control based on 
euler’s scientific legacy. Civ Eng J 2023;9:2868–95. https://doi.org/10.28991/ 
CEJ-2023-09-11-017. 
[14] Adavi K, Tahery D, Khajouei M, et al. High local supersaturation formation for 
precipitated calcium carbonate synthesis by applying a rotating disk reactor. Braz 
J Chem Eng 2023:1–8. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-2635605/v1. 
[15] Cao Z, Lyu Y, Peng J, Qiu P, Liu L, Yang C, et al. Experimental study of flame 
evolution, frequency and oscillation characteristics of steam diluted micro-mixing 
hydrogen flame. Fuel 2021;301:121078. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fuel.2021.121078. 
[16] Reichel TG, Goeckeler K, Paschereit O. Investigation of lean premixed swirl- 
stabilized hydrogen burner with axial air injection using OH-PLIF imaging. J Eng 
Gas Turbines Power 2015;137:111513. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4031181. 
[17] Choi Y, Kim KT. Strong flame interaction-induced collective dynamics of multi- 
element lean-premixed hydrogen flames. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2023;48: 
2030–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.10.091. 
[18] Cho E-S, Jeong H, Hwang J, Kim M. A novel 100% hydrogen gas turbine 
combustor development for industrial use. Volume 3A: combustion, fuels, and 
emissions. Rotterdam, Netherlands: American Society of Mechanical Engineers; 
2022, V03AT04A020. https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2022-80619. 
[19] Zhou H, Xue J, Gao H, Ma N. Hydrogen-fueled gas turbines in future energy 
system. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2024;64:569–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2024.03.327. 
[20] Yang N, Xiong Y, Liu Z, Xu X. Experimental investigation of the characteristics of 
combustion in the full hydrogen blending range of methane-hydrogen mixtures in 
a MILD model combustor. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2024;65:252–61. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2024.04.013. 
[21] Kroniger D, Kamiya H, Horikawa A. Investigation of combustion oscillation 
modes of hydrogen micromix flames. Volume 3A: combustion, fuels, and 
emissions. Boston, Massachusetts, USA: American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers; 2023, V03AT04A050. https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2023-102068. 
[22] Liu Z, Xiong Y, Yang N, Ren L, Liu Y, Zhang S, et al. Comparison of combustion 
characteristics of MILD model combustor and multi-nozzle array model 
combustor fueled hydrogen-methane mixtures. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2023;48: 
31802–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2023.04.326. 
[23] Hasche A, Navid A, Krause H, Eckart S. Experimental and numerical assessment of 
the effects of hydrogen admixtures on premixed methane-oxygen flames. Fuel 
2023;352:128964. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2023.128964. 
[24] Ald´en M, Bood J, Li Z, Richter M. Visualization and understanding of combustion 
processes using spatially and temporally resolved laser diagnostic techniques. 
Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:69–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.09.004. 
[25] Durocher A, Fan L, Füri M, Bourque G, Sirois J, May D, et al. Characterization of a 
5-nozzle array using premix/micromix injection for hydrogen. Applications in 
Energy and Combustion Science 2024;18:100260. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jaecs.2024.100260. 
[26] Durocher A, Fan L, Francolini B, Füri M, Bourque G, Sirois J, et al. 
Characterization of a novel additive manufacturing micromix nozzle burning 
methane to hydrogen. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2024;146:051009. https://doi. 
org/10.1115/1.4063690. 
[27] Yu T, Ruan C, Liu H, Cai W, Lu X. Time-resolved measurements of a swirl flame at 
4 kHz via computed tomography of chemiluminescence. Appl Opt 2018;57:5962. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.57.005962. 
[28] Floyd J, Kempf AM. Computed tomography of chemiluminescence (CTC): high 
resolution and instantaneous 3-D measurements of a matrix burner. Proc Combust 
Inst 2011;33:751–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.06.015. 
[29] Pfadler S, Beyrau F, Leipertz A. Flame front detection and characterization using 
conditioned particle image velocimetry (CPIV). Opt Express 2007;15:15444. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.15.015444. 
[30] Wolfrum J. Lasers in combustion: from basic theory to practical devices. 
Symposium (International) on Combustion 1998;27:1–41. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0082-0784(98)80387-1. 
[31] Gashi S, Hult J, Jenkins KW, Chakraborty N, Cant S, Kaminski CF. Curvature and 
wrinkling of premixed flame kernels—comparisons of OH PLIF and DNS data. 
Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:809–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2004.08.003. 
[32] Chterev I, Rock N, Ek H, Emerson B, Seitzman J, Jiang N, et al. Simultaneous 
imaging of fuel, OH, and three component velocity fields in high pressure, liquid 
fueled, swirl stabilized flames at 5 kHz. Combust Flame 2017;186:150–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.07.021. 
[33] Hanson RK, Seitzman JM, Paul PH. Planar laser-fluorescence imaging of 
combustion gases. Appl Phys B 1990;50:441–54. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF00408770. 
[34] Tian Y, Zeng X, Yang S, Zhong F, Le J. Experimental study on the effect of 
equivalence ratio and injector position on flow structure and flame development 
in the scramjet combustor. Aero Sci Technol 2018;82–83:9–19. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ast.2018.08.026. 
[35] Tian Y, Yang S, Le J, Su T, Yue M, Zhong F, et al. Investigation of combustion and 
flame stabilization modes in a hydrogen fueled scramjet combustor. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2016;41:19218–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2016.07.219. 
[36] Yu N, Zhang Y, Li F, Dai J. Numerical and experimental investigations of single- 
element and double-element injectors using gaseous oxygen/gaseous methane. 
Aero Sci Technol 2018;75:24–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2017.12.039. 
[37] Mao R, Wang J, Zhang W, An Z, Lin W, Zhang M, et al. Effect of high hydrogen 
enrichment on the outer-shear-layer flame of confined lean premixed CH4/H2/air 
swirl flames. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:17969–81. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.02.181. 
[38] Sj¨oholm J, Rosell J, Li B, Richter M, Li Z, Bai X-S, et al. Simultaneous visualization 
of OH, CH, CH2O and toluene PLIF in a methane jet flame with varying degrees of 
turbulence. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34:1475–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2012.05.037. 
[39] Hult J, Richter M, Nygren J, Ald´en M, Hultqvist A, Christensen M, et al. 
Application of a high-repetition-rate laser diagnostic system for single-cycle- 
resolved imaging in internal combustion engines. Appl Opt 2002;41:5002. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.41.005002. 
[40] Ma L, Lei Q, Ikeda J, Xu W, Wu Y, Carter CD. Single-shot 3D flame diagnostic 
based on volumetric laser induced fluorescence (VLIF). Proc Combust Inst 2017; 
36:4575–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2016.07.050. 
[41] Nazir SM, Cloete JH, Cloete S, Amini S. Efficient hydrogen production with CO2 
capture using gas switching reforming. Energy 2019;185:372–85. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.07.072. 
[42] Welder L, Ryberg DS, Kotzur L, Grube T, Robinius M, Stolten D. Spatio-temporal 
optimization of a future energy system for power-to-hydrogen applications in 
Germany. Energy 2018;158:1130–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
energy.2018.05.059. 
[43] Dincer I, Acar C. Review and evaluation of hydrogen production methods for 
better sustainability. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2015;40:11094–111. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.12.035. 
[44] Ranga Dinesh KKJ, Jiang X, Van Oijen JA. Hydrogen-enriched non-premixed jet 
flames: analysis of the flame surface, flame normal, flame index and Wobbe 
index. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;39:6753–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2014.01.208. 
[45] Sun Z, Liu F-S, Liu X, Sun B, Sun D-W. Research and development of hydrogen 
fuelled engines in China. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37:664–81. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.09.114. 
[46] Be´er JM. Combustion technology developments in power generation in response 
to environmental challenges. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2000;26:301–27. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0360-1285(00)00007-1. 
[47] Mac Kinnon MA, Brouwer J, Samuelsen S. The role of natural gas and its 
infrastructure in mitigating greenhouse gas emissions, improving regional air 
quality, and renewable resource integration. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;64: 
62–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2017.10.002. 
[48] Gazzani M, Chiesa P, Martelli E, Sigali S, Brunetti I. Using hydrogen as gas turbine 
fuel: premixed versus diffusive flame combustors. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 
2014;136:051504. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4026085. 
[49] Taamallah S, Vogiatzaki K, Alzahrani FM, Mokheimer EMA, Habib MA, 
Ghoniem AF. Fuel flexibility, stability and emissions in premixed hydrogen-rich 
gas turbine combustion: technology, fundamentals, and numerical simulations. 
Appl Energy 2015;154:1020–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2015.04.044. 
[50] Ebi D, Clemens NT. Experimental investigation of upstream flame propagation 
during boundary layer flashback of swirl flames. Combust Flame 2016;168: 
39–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.03.027. 
[51] Ranjan R, Clemens NT. Insights into flashback-to-flameholding transition of 
hydrogen-rich stratified swirl flames. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:6289–97. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.017. 
[52] Hoferichter V, Sattelmayer T. Boundary layer flashback in premixed hydrogen–air 
flames with acoustic excitation. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2018;140:051502. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4038128. 
[53] Sattelmayer T, Mayer C, Sangl J. Interaction of flame flashback mechanisms in 
premixed hydrogen–air swirl flames. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2016;138: 
011503. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4031239. 
[54] Goldmann A, Dinkelacker F. Experimental investigation and modeling of 
boundary layer flashback for non-swirling premixed hydrogen/ammonia/air 
flames. Combust Flame 2021;226:362–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2020.12.021. 
[55] Reichel TG, Terhaar S, Paschereit O. Increasing flashback resistance in lean 
premixed swirl-stabilized hydrogen combustion by axial air injection. J Eng Gas 
Turbines Power 2015;137:071503. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4029119. 
[56] Bradley D, Lawes M, Liu K, Verhelst S, Woolley R. Laminar burning velocities of 
lean hydrogen–air mixtures at pressures up to 1.0 MPa. Combust Flame 2007;149: 
162–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2006.12.002. 
[57] Marek C, Smith T, Kundu K. Low emission hydrogen combustors for gas turbines 
using lean direct injection. In: 41st AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE joint propulsion 
conference & exhibit. Tucson, Arizona: American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics; 2005. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2005-3776. 
[58] Urbano A, Selle L, Staffelbach G, Cuenot B, Schmitt T, Ducruix S, et al. 
Exploration of combustion instability triggering using Large Eddy Simulation of a 
multiple injector liquid rocket engine. Combust Flame 2016;169:129–40. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.03.020. 
[59] D¨obbeling K, Hellat J, Koch H. 25 years of BBC/ABB/Alstom lean premix 
combustion technologies. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2181183; 2007. 
[60] Reichel TG, Terhaar S, Paschereit CO. Flow field manipulation by axial air 
injection to achieve flashback resistance and its impact on mixing quality. 43rd 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 32 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1271
fluid dynamics conference. San Diego, CA: American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics; 2013. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2013-2603. 
[61] Asai T, Dodo S, Koizumi H, Takahashi H, Yoshida S, Inoue H. Effects of multiple- 
injection-burner configurations on combustion characteristics for dry low-NOx 
combustion of hydrogen-rich fuels. Volume 2: combustion, fuels and emissions, 
parts A and B. Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada: ASMEDC; 2011. p. 311–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2011-45295. 
[62] Fan Y, Guo J, Lee M, Iki N, Suzuki Y. Quantitative evaluation of wall chemical 
effect in hydrogen flame using two-photon absorption LIF. Proc Combust Inst 
2021;38:2361–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.021. 
[63] Kang H, Kim KT. Combustion dynamics of multi-element lean-premixed 
hydrogen-air flame ensemble. Combust Flame 2021;233:111585. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2021.111585. 
[64] Mongia HC, Held TJ, Hsiao GC, Pandalai RP. Challenges and progress in 
controlling dynamics in gas turbine combustors. J Propul Power 2003;19:822–9. 
https://doi.org/10.2514/2.6197. 
[65] Davis LB. Dry low NOx combustion systems for GE heavy-duty gas turbines. Coal, 
Biomass Alternative Fuels; Combust Fuels; Oil and Gas Appl; Cycle Innovat 1996; 
3:V003T06A003. https://doi.org/10.1115/96-GT-027. Birmingham, UK: 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
[66] Karim H, Natarajan J, Narra V, Cai J, Rao S, Kegley J, et al. Staged combustion 
system for improved emissions operability and flexibility for 7HA class Heavy 
duty gas turbine engine. Volume 4A: combustion, fuels and emissions. Charlotte, 
North Carolina, USA: American Society of Mechanical Engineers; 2017, 
V04AT04A062. https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2017-63998. 
[67] Joedicke A, Peters N, Mansour M. The stabilization mechanism and structure of 
turbulent hydrocarbon lifted flames. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:901–9. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.031. 
[68] Su L, Sun O, Mungal M. Experimental investigation of stabilization mechanisms in 
turbulent, lifted jet diffusion flames. Combust Flame 2006;144:494–512. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.08.010. 
[69] Tacke MM, Geyer D, Hassel EP, Janicka J. A detailed investigation of the 
stabilization point of lifted turbulent diffusion flames. Symposium (International) 
on Combustion 1998;27:1157–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0082-0784(98) 
80518-3. 
[70] Lyons KM. Toward an understanding of the stabilization mechanisms of lifted 
turbulent jet flames: experiments. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2007;33:211–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2006.11.001. 
[71] Oh J, Yoon Y. Flame stabilization in a lifted non-premixed turbulent hydrogen jet 
with coaxial air. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2010;35:10569–79. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2010.07.146. 
[72] Candel S, Durox D, Ducruix S, Birbaud A-L, Noiray N, Schuller T. Flame dynamics 
and combustion noise: progress and challenges. Int J Aeroacoustics 2009;8:1–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1260/147547209786234984. 
[73] Dowling AP, Mahmoudi Y. Combustion noise. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35: 
65–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.08.016. 
[74] Shoji T, Iwasaki Y, Kodai K, Yoshida S, Tachibana S, Yokomori T. Effects of flame 
behaviors on combustion noise from lean-premixed hydrogen low-swirl flames. 
AIAA J 2020;58:4505–21. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J059049. 
[75] Tian Y, Xiao B, Zhang S, Xing J. Experimental and computational study on 
combustion performance of a kerosene fueled dual-mode scramjet engine. Aero 
Sci Technol 2015;46:451–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2015.09.002. 
[76] Tian Y, Yang S, Le J, Zhong F, Tian X. Investigation of combustion process of a 
kerosene fueled combustor with air throttling. Combust Flame 2017;179:74–85. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2017.01.021. 
[77] Tian Y, Zeng X, Yang S, Zhong F, Le J. Study on the effects of thermal throat on 
flame stabilization in a kerosene fueled supersonic combustor. Energy Convers 
Manag 2018;166:98–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2018.04.023. 
[78] Schmid PJ. Dynamic mode decomposition of numerical and experimental data. 
J Fluid Mech 2010;656:5–28. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112010001217. 
[79] Renaud A, Tachibana S, Arase S, Yokomori T. Experimental study of thermo- 
acoustic instability triggering in a staged liquid fuel combustor using high-speed 
OH-PLIF. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2018;140:081505. https://doi.org/10.1115/ 
1.4038915. 
[80] Choi J-Y, Ma F, Yang V. Combustion oscillations in a scramjet engine combustor 
with transverse fuel injection. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:2851–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.250. 
[81] Lin K-C, Jackson K, Behdadnia R, Jackson TA, Ma F, Yang V. Acoustic 
characterization of an ethylene-fueled scramjet combustor with a cavity 
flameholder. J Propul Power 2010;26:1161–70. https://doi.org/10.2514/ 
1.43338. 
[82] Peng J, Cao Z, Yu X, Yang S, Yu Y, Ren H, et al. Analysis of combustion instability 
of hydrogen fueled scramjet combustor on high-speed OH-PLIF measurements 
and dynamic mode decomposition. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45:13108–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.02.216. 
[83] Masri AR. Challenges for turbulent combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38: 
121–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.07.144. 
[84] Guiberti TF, Durox D, Scouflaire P, Schuller T. Impact of heat loss and hydrogen 
enrichment on the shape of confined swirling flames. Proc Combust Inst 2015;35: 
1385–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.06.016. 
[85] Laera D, Agostinelli PW, Selle L, Caz`eres Q, Oztarlik G, Schuller T, et al. 
Stabilization mechanisms of CH4 premixed swirled flame enriched with a non- 
premixed hydrogen injection. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:6355–63. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.378. 
[86] Weiland NT, Sidwell TG, Strakey PA. Testing of a hydrogen diffusion flame array 
injector at gas turbine conditions. Combust Sci Technol 2013;185:1132–50. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2013.781164. 
[87] Ebi D, Ranjan R, Clemens NT. Coupling between premixed flame propagation and 
swirl flow during boundary layer flashback. Exp Fluids 2018;59:109. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00348-018-2563-7. 
[88] Ebi D, Jansohn P. Boundary layer flashback limits of hydrogen-methane-air 
flames in a generic swirl burner at gas turbine-relevant conditions. J Eng Gas 
Turbines Power 2021;143:081011. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4049777. 
[89] Ebi D, Bombach R, Jansohn P. Swirl flame boundary layer flashback at elevated 
pressure: modes of propagation and effect of hydrogen addition. Proc Combust 
Inst 2021;38:6345–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.305. 
[90] Karlis E, Liu Y, Hardalupas Y, Taylor AMKP. H 2 enrichment of CH 4 blends in 
lean premixed gas turbine combustion: an experimental study on effects on flame 
shape and thermoacoustic oscillation dynamics. Fuel 2019;254:115524. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2019.05.107. 
[91] Huang Y, Yang V. Dynamics and stability of lean-premixed swirl-stabilized 
combustion. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2009;35:293–364. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.pecs.2009.01.002. 
[92] Shanbhogue SJ, Husain S, Lieuwen T. Lean blowoff of bluff body stabilized 
flames: scaling and dynamics. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2009;35:98–120. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2008.07.003. 
[93] Taamallah S, Shanbhogue SJ, Ghoniem AF. Turbulent flame stabilization modes 
in premixed swirl combustion: physical mechanism and Karlovitz number-based 
criterion. Combust Flame 2016;166:19–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2015.12.007. 
[94] Guiberti TF, Durox D, Zimmer L, Schuller T. Analysis of topology transitions of 
swirl flames interacting with the combustor side wall. Combust Flame 2015;162: 
4342–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2015.07.001. 
[95] Chaudhuri S, Kostka S, Renfro MW, Cetegen BM. Blowoff dynamics of bluff body 
stabilized turbulent premixed flames. Combust Flame 2010;157:790–802. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2009.10.020. 
[96] Hayakawa A, Arakawa Y, Mimoto R, Somarathne KDKA, Kudo T, Kobayashi H. 
Experimental investigation of stabilization and emission characteristics of 
ammonia/air premixed flames in a swirl combustor. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017; 
42:14010–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.01.046. 
[97] Guo S, Wang J, Zhang W, Zhang M, Huang Z. Effect of hydrogen enrichment on 
swirl/bluff-body lean premixed flame stabilization. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020; 
45:10906–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.02.020. 
[98] Schmitt P, Poinsot T, Schuermans B, Geigle KP. Large-eddy simulation and 
experimental study of heat transfer, nitric oxide emissions and combustion 
instability in a swirled turbulent high-pressure burner. J Fluid Mech 2007;570: 
17–46. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112006003156. 
[99] Chterev I, Foley CW, Foti D, Kostka S, Caswell AW, Jiang N, et al. Flame and flow 
topologies in an annular swirling flow. Combust Sci Technol 2014;186:1041–74. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2014.882916. 
[100] Huang Y, Yang V. Bifurcation of flame structure in a lean-premixed swirl- 
stabilized combustor: transition from stable to unstable flame. Combust Flame 
2004;136:383–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2003.10.006. 
[101] Huang Y, Yang V. Effect of swirl on combustion dynamics in a lean-premixed 
swirl-stabilized combustor. Proc Combust Inst 2005;30:1775–82. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.237. 
[102] Mao R, Wang J, Lin W, Han W, Zhang W, Huang Z. Effects of flow–flame 
interactions on the stabilization of ultra-lean swirling CH 4/H 2/air flames. Fuel 
2022;319:123619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2022.123619. 
[103] Karagiannaki Ch, Dogkas E, Paterakis G, Souflas K, Psarakis EZ, Vasiliou P, et al. 
A comparison of the characteristics of disk stabilized lean propane flames 
operated under premixed or stratified inlet mixture conditions. Exp Therm Fluid 
Sci 2014;59:264–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2014.04.002. 
[104] Ciardiello R, Skiba AW, Gordon RL, Mastorakos E. Experimental assessment of the 
lean blow-off in a fully premixed annular combustor. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2020; 
112:109994. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2019.109994. 
[105] Runyon J, Marsh R, Bowen P, Pugh D, Giles A, Morris S. Lean methane flame 
stability in a premixed generic swirl burner: isothermal flow and atmospheric 
combustion characterization. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2018;92:125–40. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2017.11.019. 
[106] Zhang Q, Noble DR, Shanbhogue SJ, Lieuwen T. Impacts of hydrogen addition on 
near-lean blowout dynamics in a swirling combustor. Turbo Expo 2007;2:189–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2007-27308. 2007, Montreal, Canada: ASMEDC. 
[107] Jackson GS, Sai R, Plaia JM, Boggs CM, Kiger KT. Influence of H2 on the response 
of lean premixed CH4 flames to high strained flows. Combust Flame 2003;132: 
503–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02)00496-0. 
[108] Zhang W, Wang J, Mao R, Lin W, Lin B, Wu Y, et al. Experimental study of 
compact swirl flames with lean premixed CH4/H2/air mixtures at stable and near 
blow-off conditions. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2021;122:110294. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2020.110294. 
[109] Zhang W, Wang J, Lin W, Li G, Hu Z, Zhang M, et al. Effect of hydrogen 
enrichment on flame broadening of turbulent premixed flames in thin reaction 
regime. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46:1210–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2020.09.159. 
[110] Boushaki T, Dhu´e Y, Selle L, et al. Effects of hydrogen and steam addition on 
laminar burning velocity of methane–air premixed flame: experimental and 
numerical analysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37(11):9412–22. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.03.037. 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 33 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1272
[111] Bell JB, Cheng RK, Day MS, Shepherd IG. Numerical simulation of Lewis number 
effects on lean premixed turbulent flames. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31:1309–17. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.07.216. 
[112] Abbasi-Atibeh E, Bergthorson JM. Differential diffusion effects in counter-flow 
premixed hydrogen-enriched methane and propane flames. Proc Combust Inst 
2019;37:2399–406. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.08.006. 
[113] Emadi M, Karkow D, Salameh T, Gohil A, Ratner A. Flame structure changes 
resulting from hydrogen-enrichment and pressurization for low-swirl premixed 
methane–air flames. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37:10397–404. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.04.017. 
[114] Lipatnikov AN, Chomiak J. Molecular transport effects on turbulent flame 
propagation and structure. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2005;31:1–73. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pecs.2004.07.001. 
[115] Ranganath B, Echekki T. Effects of preferential and differential diffusion on the 
mutual annihilation of two premixed hydrogen–air flames. Combust Theor Model 
2005;9:659–72. https://doi.org/10.1080/13647830500294006. 
[116] Wang J, Zhang M, Huang Z, Kudo T, Kobayashi H. Measurement of the 
instantaneous flame front structure of syngas turbulent premixed flames at high 
pressure. Combust Flame 2013;160:2434–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2013.06.008. 
[117] Altantzis C, Frouzakis CE, Tomboulides AG, Kerkemeier SG, Boulouchos K. 
Detailed numerical simulations of intrinsically unstable two-dimensional planar 
lean premixed hydrogen/air flames. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:1261–8. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2010.06.082. 
[118] Vreman AW, Van Oijen JA, De Goey LPH, Bastiaans RJM. Direct numerical 
simulation of hydrogen addition in turbulent premixed Bunsen flames using 
flamelet-generated manifold reduction. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2009;34:2778–88. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2009.01.075. 
[119] Day M, Bell J, Bremer P-T, Pascucci V, Beckner V, Lijewski M. Turbulence effects 
on cellular burning structures in lean premixed hydrogen flames. Combust Flame 
2009;156:1035–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2008.10.029. 
[120] Im HG. Preferential Diffusion Effects on the Burning Rate of Interacting Turbulent 
Premixed Hydrogen-Air Flames n.d. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02) 
00405-4. 
[121] Zhang W, Wang J, Lin W, Guo S, Zhang M, Li G, et al. Measurements on flame 
structure of bluff body and swirl stabilized premixed flames close to blow-off. Exp 
Therm Fluid Sci 2019;104:15–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
expthermflusci.2019.02.010. 
[122] Haq MZ, Sheppard CGW, Woolley R, Greenhalgh DA, Lockett RD. Wrinkling and 
curvature of laminar and turbulent premixed flames. Combust Flame 2002;131: 
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(02)00383-8. 
[123] Zhang M, Wang J, Xie Y, Jin W, Wei Z, Huang Z, et al. Flame front structure and 
burning velocity of turbulent premixed CH4/H2/air flames. Int J Hydrogen 
Energy 2013;38:11421–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.05.051. 
[124] Venkateswaran P, Marshall A, Shin DH, Noble D, Seitzman J, Lieuwen T. 
Measurements and analysis of turbulent consumption speeds of H2/CO mixtures. 
Combust Flame 2011;158:1602–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2010.12.030. 
[125] Zhang M, Chang M, Wang J, Huang Z. Flame dynamics analysis of highly 
hydrogen-enrichment premixed turbulent combustion. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2020;45:1072–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.10.194. 
[126] Zhang W, Wang J, Lin W, Mao R, Xia H, Zhang M, et al. Effect of differential 
diffusion on turbulent lean premixed hydrogen enriched flames through structure 
analysis. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45:10920–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2020.02.032. 
[127] Kang H, Lee M, Kim KT. Measurements of self-excited instabilities and nitrogen 
oxides emissions in a multi-element lean-premixed hydrogen/methane/air flame 
ensemble. Proc Combust Inst 2023;39:4721–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2022.07.258. 
[128] Kobayashi H, Hayakawa A, Somarathne KDKA, Okafor EC. Science and 
technology of ammonia combustion. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:109–33. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.09.029. 
[129] Valera-Medina A, Xiao H, Owen-Jones M, David WIF, Bowen PJ. Ammonia for 
power. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2018;69:63–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pecs.2018.07.001. 
[130] Han X, Wang Z, Costa M, Sun Z, He Y, Cen K. Experimental and kinetic modeling 
study of laminar burning velocities of NH3/air, NH3/H2/air, NH3/CO/air and 
NH3/CH4/air premixed flames. Combust Flame 2019;206:214–26. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.05.003. 
[131] Issayev G, Giri BR, Elbaz AM, Shrestha KP, Mauss F, Roberts WL, et al. 
Combustion behavior of ammonia blended with diethyl ether. Proc Combust Inst 
2021;38:499–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2020.06.337. 
[132] Shrestha KP, Lhuillier C, Barbosa AA, Brequigny P, Contino F, Mounaïm- 
Rousselle C, et al. An experimental and modeling study of ammonia with enriched 
oxygen content and ammonia/hydrogen laminar flame speed at elevated pressure 
and temperature. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:2163–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.proci.2020.06.197. 
[133] Cai X, Fan Q, Bai X-S, Wang J, Zhang M, Huang Z, et al. Turbulent burning 
velocity and its related statistics of ammonia-hydrogen-air jet flames at high 
Karlovitz number: effect of differential diffusion. Proc Combust Inst 2023;39: 
4215–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2022.07.016. 
[134] Berwal P, Kumar S, Khandelwal B. A comprehensive review on synthesis, 
chemical kinetics, and practical application of ammonia as future fuel for 
combustion. J Energy Inst 2021;99:273–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
joei.2021.10.001. 
[135] Kang L, Pan W, Zhang J, Wang W, Tang C. A review on ammonia blends 
combustion for industrial applications. Fuel 2023;332:126150. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.fuel.2022.126150. 
[136] Guan Y, Zhao D. Enhancing ammonia combustion with minimum hydrogen 
blended in presence of self-excited intermittent pulsating oscillations. Phys Fluids 
2023;35:054102. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0147474. 
[137] Cesaro Z, Ives M, Nayak-Luke R, Mason M, Ba˜nares-Alc´antara R. Ammonia to 
power: forecasting the levelized cost of electricity from green ammonia in large- 
scale power plants. Appl Energy 2021;282:116009. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2020.116009. 
[138] Valera-Medina A, Pugh DG, Marsh P, Bulat G, Bowen P. Preliminary study on lean 
premixed combustion of ammonia-hydrogen for swirling gas turbine combustors. 
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2017;42:24495–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2017.08.028. 
[139] Elbaz AM, Wang S, Guiberti TF, Roberts WL. Review on the recent advances on 
ammonia combustion from the fundamentals to the applications. Fuel 
Communicat 2022;10:100053. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfueco.2022.100053. 
[140] Zitouni S, Brequigny P, Mounaїm-Rousselle C. Influence of hydrogen and 
methane addition in laminar ammonia premixed flame on burning velocity, Lewis 
number and Markstein length. Combust Flame 2023;253:112786. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2023.112786. 
[141] Richter M, Schultheis R, Dawson JR, Gruber A, Barlow RS, Dreizler A, et al. 
Extinction strain rates of premixed ammonia/hydrogen/nitrogen-air counterflow 
flames. Proc Combust Inst 2023;39:2027–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2022.09.011. 
[142] He X, Liu Z, Jiang H, Yang Q, Jiang Z, Feng G, et al. Super adiabatic flame 
temperature phenomenon for NH3/O2/N2 mixtures. Fuel 2023;346:128264. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2023.128264. 
[143] Xiao H, Chen A, Guo Y, Zhang L, Zhang M, Deng X, et al. Auto-ignition delay 
characteristics of ammonia substitution on methane. Processes 2022;10:2214. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/pr10112214. 
[144] Wang G, Guiberti TF, Cardona S, Jimenez CA, Roberts WL. Effects of residence 
time on the NOx emissions of premixed ammonia-methane-air swirling flames at 
elevated pressure. Proc Combust Inst 2023;39:4277–88. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2022.07.141. 
[145] Khateeb AA, Guiberti TF, Zhu X, Younes M, Jamal A, Roberts WL. Stability limits 
and exhaust NO performances of ammonia-methane-air swirl flames. Exp Therm 
Fluid Sci 2020;114:110058. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
expthermflusci.2020.110058. 
[146] Valera-Medina A, Marsh R, Runyon J, Pugh D, Beasley P, Hughes T, et al. 
Ammonia–methane combustion in tangential swirl burners for gas turbine power 
generation. Appl Energy 2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.02.073. 
[147] Okafor EC, Somarathne KDKA, Hayakawa A, Kudo T, Kurata O, Iki N, et al. 
Towards the development of an efficient low-NOx ammonia combustor for a 
micro gas turbine. Proc Combust Inst 2019;37:4597–606. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2018.07.083. 
[148] Cai T, Zhao D, Ji L, Agarwal AK. Removal and mechanism analysis of NO 
emissions in carbon-free ammonia combustion systems with a secondary fuel 
injection. Fuel 2023;344:128088. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2023.128088. 
[149] Okafor EC, Somarathne KDKA, Ratthanan R, Hayakawa A, Kudo T, Kurata O, 
et al. Control of NOx and other emissions in micro gas turbine combustors fuelled 
with mixtures of methane and ammonia. Combust Flame 2020;211:406–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.10.012. 
[150] Wang G, Tang H, Yang C, Magnotti G, Roberts WL, Guiberti TF. Quantitative 
laser-induced fluorescence of NO in ammonia-hydrogen-nitrogen turbulent jet 
flames at elevated pressure. Proc Combust Inst 2023;39:1465–74. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proci.2022.08.097. 
[151] Tang H, Yang C, Wang G, Krishna Y, Guiberti TF, Roberts WL, et al. Scalar 
structure in turbulent non-premixed NH3/H2/N2 jet flames at elevated pressure 
using Raman spectroscopy. Combust Flame 2022;244:112292. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.combustflame.2022.112292. 
[152] Wang G, Roberts WL, Guiberti TF. Characterizing turbulent non-premixed flame 
structure and pollutant formation of cracked ammonia jet flames using 
simultaneous NH and NO PLIF. Fuel 2024;367:131430. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.fuel.2024.131430. 
[153] Kim JH, Song JH, Ku JW, Kim YH, Kwon OC. Combustion characteristics of 
premixed ammonia-hydrogen/air flames in a swirl model combustor. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2024;49:1075–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2023.10.059. 
[154] Mulla IA, Godard G, Cabot G, et al. Quantitative imaging of nitric oxide 
concentration in a turbulent n-heptane spray flame. Combust Flame 2019;203: 
217–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.02.005. 
[155] Mulla IA, Godard G, Renou B. Instantaneous planar measurements of nitric oxide 
concentration in a turbulent n-heptane spray flame. Combust Flame 2019;208: 
451–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.07.026. 
[156] Bohon MD, Guiberti TF, Roberts WL. PLIF measurements of non-thermal NO 
concentrations in alcohol and alkane premixed flames. Combust Flame 2018;194: 
363–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2018.05.024. 
[157] Fan Q, Liu X, Cai X, Brackmann C, Alden M, Bai X-S, et al. Structure and scalar 
correlation of ammonia/air turbulent premixed flames in the distributed reaction 
zone regime. Combust Flame 2022;241:112090. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2022.112090. 
[158] Rocha RC, Zhong S, Xu L, Bai X-S, Costa M, Cai X, et al. Structure and laminar 
flame speed of an ammonia/methane/air premixed flame under varying pressure 
and equivalence ratio. Energy Fuels 2021;35:7179–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.energyfuels.0c03520. 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 34 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1273
[159] Versailles P, Durocher A, Bourque G, Bergthorson JM. Nitric oxide formation in 
lean, methane-air stagnation flames at supra-atmospheric pressures. Proc 
Combust Inst 2019;37:711–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2018.05.060. 
[160] Mashruk S, Marsh R, Runyon J, Morris S, Bowen P. Methodology and comparison 
of quantitative NO-LIF imaging in a bunsen burner with numerical simulation 
results. 2018. 
[161] Cosway B, Talibi DrM, Balachandran ProfR. Investigation of NO production and 
flame structures in ammonia-hydrogen flames. Jae 2023;1. https://doi.org/ 
10.18573/jae.20. 
[162] Satija A, Chang Z, Lowe A, Thomas LM, Masri AR, Lucht RP. CARS thermometry 
in laminar sooting ethylene-air co-flow diffusion flames with nitrogen dilution. 
Combust Flame 2019;208:37–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2019.06.025. 
[163] Liu H, Zheng S. Measurement of temperature and wavelength-dependent 
emissivity distributions using multi-wavelength radiation thermometry. Opt 
Commun 2020;472:125895. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optcom.2020.125895. 
[164] Bonnety J, Guibaud A, Jalain R, Matynia A, Consalvi J-L, Liu F, et al. Probing the 
local radiative quenching during the transition from a non-smoking to a smoking 
laminar coflow ethylene/air non-premixed flame. Combust Flame 2019;203: 
120–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2019.01.038. 
[165] Yang SS, Karatas¸ AE, Gülder ¨OL. Effect of hydrogen enrichment of laminar 
ethylene diffusion flames on thermal structure and soot yields at pressures up to 
10 bar. Proc Combust Inst 2021;38:2507–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
proci.2020.06.157. 
[166] Tang H, Yang C, Krishna Y, Wang G, Roberts WL, Guiberti TF, et al. Differential 
diffusion effects in the near field of non-premixed NH3/H2/N2-air jet flames at 
elevated pressure. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2023;149:111020. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2023.111020. 
[167] Wei H, Du H, Zhou G, Zhou L. Temperature measurements of ammonia-hydrogen 
laminar diffusion flames by two-color NO-PLIF. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2024;58: 
931–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2024.01.279. 
[168] Wang Z, Li X, Li L, Zhao Z, Zhou B, Gan X. Strategy for simultaneous multi-scalar 
imaging in turbulent NH3/H2 premixed flames using a single laser system. 
Combust Flame 2022;242:112185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2022.112185. 
[169] Ryu K, Zacharakis-Jutz GE, Kong S-C. Performance enhancement of ammonia- 
fueled engine by using dissociation catalyst for hydrogen generation. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2014;39:2390–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2013.11.098. 
[170] Ciccarelli G, Jackson D, Verreault J. Flammability limits of NH3–H2–N2–air 
mixtures at elevated initial temperatures. Combust Flame 2006;144:53–63. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2005.06.010. 
[171] Alfazazi A, Elbaz AM, Li J, Abdelwahid S, Im HG, Dally B. Characteristics of 
ammonia-hydrogen nonpremixed bluff-body-stabilized flames. Combust Flame 
2023;258:113066. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2023.113066. 
[172] Ichikawa A, Naito Y, Hayakawa A, Kudo T, Kobayashi H. Burning velocity and 
flame structure of CH4/NH3/air turbulent premixed flames at high pressure. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:6991–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2019.01.193. 
[173] Zhang M, An Z, Wei X, Wang J, Huang Z, Tan H. Emission analysis of the CH4/ 
NH3/air co-firing fuels in a model combustor. Fuel 2021;291:120135. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.120135. 
[174] Santhosh R, Basu S. Transitions and blowoff of unconfined non-premixed swirling 
flame. Combust Flame 2016;164:35–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2015.10.034. 
[175] Wei X, Zhang M, Wang J, Huang Z. Investigation on lean blow-off characteristics 
and stabilization mechanism of premixed hydrogen enhanced ammonia/air swirl 
flames in a gas turbine combustor. Combust Flame 2023;249:112600. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2022.112600. 
[176] Krüger O, Terhaar S, Paschereit CO, Duwig C. Large eddy simulations of hydrogen 
oxidation at ultra-wet conditions in a model gas turbine combustor applying 
detailed chemistry. J Eng Gas Turbines Power 2013;135:021501. https://doi.org/ 
10.1115/1.4007718. 
[177] Terhaar S, Goeckeler K, Schimek S, G¨oke S, Paschereit C. Non-reacting and 
reacting flow in a swirl-stabilized burner for ultra-wet combustion. 41st AIAA 
fluid dynamics conference and exhibit. Honolulu, Hawaii: American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics; 2011. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2011-3584. 
[178] Terhaar S, Oberleithner K, Paschereit CO. Impact of steam-dilution on the flame 
shape and coherent structures in swirl-stabilized combustors. Combust Sci 
Technol 2014;186:889–911. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2014.890597. 
[179] Mazas AN, Fiorina B, Lacoste DA, Schuller T. Effects of water vapor addition on 
the laminar burning velocity of oxygen-enriched methane flames. Combust Flame 
2011. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.combustflame.2011.05.014. 
[180] Cheikhravat H, Goulier J, Bentaib A, Meynet N, Chaumeix N, Paillard C-E. Effects 
of water sprays on flame propagation in hydrogen/air/steam mixtures. Proc 
Combust Inst 2015;35:2715–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2014.05.102. 
[181] Zhang Y, Yang T, Liu X, Tian L, Fu Z, Zhang K. Reduction of emissions from a 
syngas flame using micromixing and dilution with CO 2. Energy Fuels 2012;26: 
6595–601. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef300751d. 
[182] Haj Ayed A, Kusterer K, Funke HH-W, Keinz J, Striegan C, Bohn D. Experimental 
and numerical investigations of the dry-low-NOx hydrogen micromix combustion 
chamber of an industrial gas turbine. Propul Power Res. 2015;4:123–31. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jppr.2015.07.005. 
[183] Lu C, Zhang L, Chen X, Xing C, Liu L, Shi H, et al. The effects of steam dilution on 
flame structure and stability for a H2/air micromix burner. J Energy Inst 2023; 
107:101188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joei.2023.101188. 
[184] Lu C, Jiang X, Zhang L, Xing C, Liu L, Qiu P. The turbulent flame structure in a 
steam diluted H2/Air micromix flame. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2023;48: 
38496–507. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2023.06.101. 
[185] Lyu Y, Xing C, Liu L, Peng J, Shen W, Yu X, et al. Study of turbulent flame 
characteristics of water vapor diluted hydrogen-air micro-mixing combustion. 
Renew Energy 2022;189:1194–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2022.03.093. 
[186] G¨oke S, Terhaar S, Schimek S, G¨ockeler K, Paschereit CO. Combustion of natural 
gas, hydrogen and bio-fuels at ultra-wet conditions. Combustion, Fuels Emission 
2011;2:659–70. https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2011-45696. Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada: ASMEDC. 
[187] G¨oke S, G¨ockeler K, Krüger O, Paschereit CO. Computational and experimental 
study of premixed combustion at ultra wet conditions. Combustion, Fuels 
Emissions Glasgow UK: ASMEDC 2010;2:1125–35. https://doi.org/10.1115/ 
GT2010-23417. 
[188] Wall TF. Combustion processes for carbon capture. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31: 
31–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.08.123. 
[189] Wang J, Huang Z, Kobayashi H, Ogami Y. Laminar burning velocities and flame 
characteristics of CO–H2–CO2–O2 mixtures. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37: 
19158–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.07.103. 
[190] Zhang M, Wang J, Wu J, Wei Z, Huang Z, Kobayashi H. Flame front structure of 
turbulent premixed flames of syngas oxyfuel mixtures. Int J Hydrogen Energy 
2014;39:5176–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.01.038. 
[191] Lipatnikov AN, Chomiak J. Effects of premixed flames on turbulence and 
turbulent scalar transport. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2010;36:1–102. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pecs.2009.07.001. 
[192] Wang J, Guo S, Zhang W, Zhang M, Huang Z. Effect of hydrogen ratio on 
turbulent flame structure of oxyfuel syngas at high pressure up to 1.0 MPa. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:11185–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2019.02.209. 
[193] Wang J, Nie Y, Cai X, Guo S, Zhang W, Xie Y, et al. Investigation on the highly 
negative curved syngas Bunsen flame and the critical local Karlovitz number 
when tip opening. Fuel 2018;215:429–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fuel.2017.11.031. 
[194] Wang J, Zhang M, Xie Y, Huang Z, Kudo T, Kobayashi H. Correlation of turbulent 
burning velocity for syngas/air mixtures at high pressure up to 1.0MPa. Exp 
Therm Fluid Sci 2013;50:90–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
expthermflusci.2013.05.008. 
[195] Ichikawa Y, Otawara Y, Kobayashi H, Ogami Y, Kudo T, Okuyama M, et al. Flame 
structure and radiation characteristics of CO/H2/CO2/air turbulent premixed 
flames at high pressure. Proc Combust Inst 2011;33:1543–50. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.proci.2010.05.068. 
[196] Hu E, Fu J, Pan L, Jiang X, Huang Z, Zhang Y. Experimental and numerical study 
on the effect of composition on laminar burning velocities of H2/CO/N2/CO2/air 
mixtures. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2012;37:18509–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2012.09.053. 
[197] Miao H, Lu L, Huang Z. Flammability limits of hydrogen-enriched natural gas. Int 
J Hydrogen Energy 2011;36:6937–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2011.02.126. 
[198] Fu J, Tang C, Jin W, Thi LD, Huang Z, Zhang Y. Study on laminar flame speed and 
flame structure of syngas with varied compositions using OH-PLIF and 
spectrograph. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2013;38:1636–43. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.11.023. 
[199] Sivaramakrishnan R, Comandini A, Tranter RS, Brezinsky K, Davis SG, Wang H. 
Combustion of CO/H2 mixtures at elevated pressures. Proc Combust Inst 2007;31: 
429–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2006.08.057. 
[200] Sung C-J, Law CK. Fundamental combustion properties of H 2/CO mixtures: 
ignition and flame propagation at elevated pressures. Combust Sci Technol 2008; 
180:1097–116. https://doi.org/10.1080/00102200801963169. 
[201] Driscoll J. Turbulent premixed combustion: flamelet structure and its effect on 
turbulent burning velocities. Prog Energy Combust Sci 2008;34:91–134. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2007.04.002. 
[202] Zhang M, Wang J, Chang M, Huang Z. Turbulent flame topology and the wrinkled 
structure characteristics of high pressure syngas flames up to 1.0 MPa. Int J 
Hydrogen Energy 2019;44:15973–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2018.08.154. 
[203] Zhang M, Wang J, Huang Z. Turbulent flame structure characteristics of hydrogen 
enriched natural gas with CO2 dilution. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45: 
20426–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.12.015. 
[204] Zhang W, Wang J, Yu Q, Jin W, Zhang M, Huang Z. Investigation of the fuel 
effects on burning velocity and flame structure of turbulent premixed flames 
based on leading points concept. Combust Sci Technol 2018;190:1354–76. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00102202.2018.1451848. 
[205] Biswas S, Kopp-Vaughn K, Renfro MW, Cetegen BM. Phase resolved 
characterization of conical premixed flames near and far from blowoff. Combust 
Flame 2013;160:2843–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
combustflame.2013.06.014. 
[206] St¨ohr M, Arndt CM, Meier W. Effects of Damk¨ohler number on vortex–flame 
interaction in a gas turbine model combustor. Proc Combust Inst 2013;34: 
3107–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2012.06.086. 
[207] St¨ohr M, Sadanandan R, Meier W. Experimental study of unsteady flame 
structures of an oscillating swirl flame in a gas turbine model combustor. Proc 
Combust Inst 2009;32:2925–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2008.05.086. 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      


--- Page 35 ---

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 78 (2024) 1240–1274
1274
[208] Sadanandan R, St¨ohr M, Meier W. Simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements 
in a gas turbine model combustor. Appl Phys B 2008;90:609–18. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00340-007-2928-8. 
[209] Worth NA, Dawson JR. Tomographic reconstruction of OH* chemiluminescence 
in two interacting turbulent flames. Meas Sci Technol 2013;24:024013. https:// 
doi.org/10.1088/0957-0233/24/2/024013. 
[210] Asai T, Miura K, Akiyama Y, et al. Development of fuel-flexible gas turbine 
combustor[C]//Proceedings of the 45th Turbomachinery Symposium. 
Turbomachinery Laboratories. Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station; 
2016. https://doi.org/10.21423/R1101Z. 
W. Gu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
