
--- Page 1 ---

Meas. Sci. Technol. 11 (2000) 870–886. Printed in the UK
PII: S0957-0233(00)11401-8
Measurement of fuel mixing and
transport processes in gas turbine
combustion
V G McDonell and G S Samuelsen
University Gas Turbine Laboratory, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-3550, USA
E-mail: gss@uci.edu
Received 28 January 2000, in ﬁnal form 30 March 2000, accepted for publication
13 April 2000
Abstract. The measurement techniques for delineating fuel–air mixing and transport in gas
turbine combustion, as well as examples of representative results, are provided in this
overview. The summary is broken into applications for gaseous fuels and liquid fuels since
many diagnostics which are speciﬁc to the phase of the fuel have been developed. Many
possible methods for assessing the general mixing have been developed, but not all have been
applied to practical systems either under scaled or under actual conditions. With respect to
gaseous mixing processes, planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) based on acetone is now
starting to be successfully applied to actual systems and conditions. In spray-ﬁred systems,
the need to discriminate between phases leads to considerable complication in delineating
fuel–air mixing. Methods that focus on the discrete phase have successfully provided details
relative to the droplets. These include phase Doppler interferometry (PDI), which is
becoming ubiquitous in application to practical devices and under practical conditions. PDI
is typically being applied to quantify droplet sizes, although the volume ﬂux, which is
relevant to fuel–air mixing, in practical systems is also being reported. In addition, PLIF
strategies that focus upon the behaviour of the droplets are now being developed. However,
PLIF strategies that can discriminate between phases either in the fuel or with respect to the
liquid fuel and combustion air are also being developed. In terms of characterizing the vector
ﬁelds associated with the mixing process, laser anemometry (LA), although it is tedious to
apply, has proven reliable even in the presence of droplets. Newer methods such as DPIV and
FRS have seen only limited application in practical systems but appear promising. In terms of
scalar ﬁelds, LIF and PLIF have also been applied successfully to these systems, and
examples of the measurements of concentrations of various radical species such as OH are
found throughout the literature.
Keywords: fuel–air mixing, aerodynamic ﬂowﬁeld, velocity, concentration, laser-induced
ﬂuorescence, ﬂame ionization detector, CCD camera, photomultiplier tube, imaging, sample
probe, particle image velocimetry, planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence, gas turbine combustion,
combustion diagnostics, spray combustion, natural gas combustion
1. Introduction
The motivation for understanding the dynamic and coupled
phenomena associated with gas turbine combustion is driven
by a need to improve the overall operability of combustion
devices while reducing the amount of pollutants produced
and improving efﬁciency. The complex nature of gas turbine
combustion is associated with the large number of processes
occurring. See, for example, ﬁgure 1 for a typical swirl-
stabilized reaction occurring within the combustor.
Gas turbine combustion is utilized today to provide
both ground-based power generation and propulsion for aero
applications. In the case of power generation, gas turbines
are fuelled either with gaseous fuel or with liquid fuels. In
the cases in which control of emissions is of great concern,
gaseous fuels are required and natural gas is typically utilized.
However, in cases in which economic requirements lead
to the use of liquid fuels, a fuel that is readily available
and relatively inexpensive is utilized. In this case common
fuels such as diesel and naptha are used. For ground-based
systems, improvements in efﬁciency translate directly into
cost savings as well as a reduction in emission of CO2, which
has implications relative to global warming.
For practical reasons, aero engines rely exclusively upon
liquid fuels. Because of safety concerns the speciﬁcations of
these fuels are well documented. In commercial engines,
Jet-A is utilized throughout the world, whereas JP-8 is the
current fuel of choice for military applications. Because the
fuel type is ﬁxed, the requirements for the combustion system
do not vary as much as they do for ground-based systems.
From a safety standpoint, the failure of aero engines cannot
betolerated. Hence, themaintainabilityanddurabilityofaero
0957-0233/00/070870+17$30.00
© 2000 IOP Publishing Ltd


--- Page 2 ---

Fuel mixing and transport in gas turbines
Figure 1. Basic processes in a simple cycle gas turbine engine and associated phenomena occurring within the combustor.
engines is a critical issue, together with factors concerning
emissions and fuel economy. Fuel economy translates into
savings in the cost of the fuel as well as into the reduction
in the emission of CO2.
The increasing prevalence of
taxation associated with emissions also drives the economic
considerations related to performance regarding emissions
and fuel economy.
Both for gas-ﬁred and for liquid-ﬁred gas turbines, the
performance of the combustor is perhaps the most critical
aspect of the engine. The method of combustion dictates the
amount of pollutants formed and ultimately emitted by the
engine. The combustion system is subject to thermal strain
due to temperature gradients and heat transfer issues. As a
result, it can be a limiting factor in terms of the durability
and reliability of these devices. In addition, the combustion
system dictates the temperature proﬁle of the gases entering
the turbine. Hot streaks and changes in temperature proﬁle
associated with degraded combustion performance and/or
components can affect turbine components and the reliability
and durability of these parts. In each of these cases, the fuel
injection and mixing behaviour are key factors determining
performance.
As designers struggle to reduce emissions and improve
efﬁciency while at the same time increasing reliability
and durability, understanding the basic processes occurring
within
the
combustion
system
becomes
increasingly
important. This is in part due to the cost of design, but also to
the improvements that have already been made in combustion
system design over the past 25 years. Eking out additional
improvements without contributing to the exorbitant cost
associated with employing trial and error strategies requires
experience coupled with a detailed understanding of the
basic processes. The use of constantly evolving numerical
and experimental tools to provide the necessary insight
is promising.
Recent advances that have been made in
the development of experimental tools have resulted in
additional insight into the basic physics occurring in complex
combustion systems. In some cases, non-reacting ﬂowﬁelds
are interrogated in addition to reacting cases in an effort
to reduce the complexity of interpreting the combustor
ﬂowﬁeld. Such measurements are required in order to detail
the physics of the phenomena occurring as well as to validate
models proposed for comprehensive numerical predictions.
To organize the paper, the fuel injection and transport
measurement issues in gas turbine combustion are divided
into three elements: (i) injection and mixing of gaseous fuels,
(ii) injection and mixing of liquid fuels and (iii) transport
and combustion.
The synergism amongst these elements
cannot be overlooked.
For example, in the continuous
combustion process, the transport of the ignited mixture
promotesvaporizationthatinturnaffectstheunmixedness. A
synergism amongst the elements also produces fundamental
boundaries such as ‘lean and rich extinction limits’.
In
addition to examining each element, the interaction amongst
the various elements is presented. Hence, the purpose of this
paper is to present an overview of the current measurement
strategies that are used to elucidate details of the fuel injection
and transport phenomena in gas turbine combustors, such
as that shown in ﬁgure 1. Examples of these measurement
techniques are provided and speciﬁc references that provide
additional detail regarding the methods are cited.
2. Fuel injection and mixing
Perhaps the most critical aspect of the combustion process
is the introduction of fuel into the device and its subsequent
mixing with air in the device. In this section, a distinction
between gaseous and liquid fuels is made since many of the
measurement methodologies and strategies differ according
to the phase of the fuel. In the case of liquid fuels, additional
871


--- Page 3 ---

V G McDonell and G S Samuelsen
Figure 2. The trade-off of stability and pollutant emissions.
steps of atomization and vaporization are required prior to
mixing. The presence of the discrete phase thus requires the
additional understanding of transport-related processes.
Various methods are utilized to mix the fuel and air
depending upon the application. In advanced combustion
concepts, careful premixing of the fuel and air prior to
combustion is required in order to ensure that homogeneous
reaction temperatures are obtained.
This is true both for
catalytic and for non-catalytic combustion strategies.
In
non-catalytic applications, the goal is to reduce local peak
temperatures in the reaction zone, thereby reducing the
formation of thermal NOx. However, with ‘perfect mixing’
comes a decrease in stability, which can lead to constraints
relativetooperability. Figure2illustratesthetypicaltrade-off
amongst production of NOx, production of CO and stability
for non-catalytic systems.
As a result of the trade-off between stability and
emissions, optimum performance will be attained not with
ideal mixing, but rather with an intelligent strategy of fuel
placement and mixing.
As a result, the characterization
of the local fuel–air ratio upstream of the reaction and
the relationship of the fuel–air ratio to the combustion
performance are of great interest.
The mixing of the fuel prior to its entry into the reaction
region is also crucial for achieving high performance in
catalytic systems. Having a homogeneous fuel–air mixture
in these cases is important for maintaining a uniform
temperature throughout the catalyst bed and preventing
overheating the reactor, which can occur in cases with locally
rich pockets of fuel.
In this section, examples both for gaseous and for liquid
fuel injection scenarios will be provided.
2.1. Gaseous fuels
Gaseous fuels are utilized in gas turbines for stationary power
generation for industry, utilities and independent power
producers. Natural gas is the most commonly used gaseous
fuel, although the inherent robustness of the gas turbine
allows consideration of other gaseous fuels including those
obtained from biomass and other renewable sources. Owing
to the differing heat content and ignition delay properties of
these fuels, the fuel injection and mixing techniques must
be tailored to some extent on the fuel composition.
The
varying properties associated with these fuels also highlight
the need to understand fuel preparation and mixing processes.
Methods that provide a direct measure of the local fuel–
air ratio are desired. It is also desired to characterize the
behaviours of actual fuels rather than simulants since scaling
is difﬁcult to establish.
Various measurement techniques
can be utilized to characterize the local fuel–air ratio both
in a steady state and in a time-dependent manner. Some of
these methods are non-intrusive, whereas others are intrusive.
The following discussion is divided into ‘tracer-based’ and
‘non-tracer based’ methods that are either intrusive or non-
intrusive.
2.1.1. Intrusive non-tracer based methods.
In intrusive,
non-tracer-based methods, the descriptor implies that the fuel
is not altered, doped with or replaced by a simulant that
has desirable measurement or operational characteristics. In
other words, the combustion system is operated exactly as
it would be, with the gaseous fuels that are used in practice.
Theintrusivedescriptorimpliesthataphysicaldevicemustbe
inserted into the ﬂowﬁeld. These non-tracer-based methods
requirethatamethodfordirectlymeasuringtheconcentration
of natural gas (or some other gaseous fuel) be available.
Measurements with intrusive probes have been made
in reacting and non-reacting systems for many years. As
a result, several excellent reviews of various applications
in homogeneous combustion are available in the literature
(Bowman 1977, Bilger 1977).
Although much attention
and effort has been devoted to the accurate measurement of
gaseous products of combustion by intrusive probes (Nguyen
et al 1995, Zabielski et al 1981, Samuelsen and Benson
1977), extractive sampling through these probes can be used
to obtain information related to the mixing of gaseous fuels
prior to combustion. For example, it might be desirable to
assess the local fuel–air ratio both under reacting and under
non-reacting conditions in order to assess fuel–air mixing. In
advanced engines (e.g. dry low NOx, catalytic), preparation
of the fuel–air mixture prior to combustion is crucial for its
performance. Asmallprobecanbeinsertedintotheﬂowﬁeld,
extract a sample of the gas and convey it to an analyser
872


--- Page 4 ---

Fuel mixing and transport in gas turbines
which can then determine the relative amount of fuel at a
given position in the ﬂow. This can be accomplished using
any fuel that can be measured by standard detectors (e.g. a
ﬂame ionization detector) and in a high temperature, elevated
pressure environment.
In a ﬂowﬁeld without recirculation, it is possible to
sample in an ‘iso-kinetic’ manner to help reduce probe
perturbation effects. By sampling iso-kinetically, the probe
opening brings in a mass ﬂow of material that would have
been contained in the volume occupied by the physical
probe, thus minimizing the distortion of the streamlines in
the vicinity of the probe.
This may be possible in well-
behaved ﬂows that might exist within a premixing duct, for
example.
However, in the complex elliptical ﬂow that is
typical of gas turbine domes, it is difﬁcult to avoid perturbing
the ﬂow†. For many complex systems, however, an extractive
probe measurement can provide useful information. Purists
may prefer to utilize non-intrusive methods if possible
(as discussed in section 2.1.2), but limited optical access
and uncertainties in the skill of operators performing the
measurements often limit the application of non-intrusive
methods.
Figure 3 shows an example of a fuel injection system
set-up and an associated measurement of fuel concentration
within the measurement plane. In this study, the injector
hardware can be conﬁgured to inject from the locations
shown by the bent arrows in ﬁgure 3 (either wall jet or
centrebody).
The results shown in ﬁgure 3 demonstrate
the type of information that can be obtained by extractive
probe measurements. The results shown in ﬁgure 3(b) were
obtained using a grid of 90 points distributed throughout the
measurement plane of interest, which was, in this case, at a
location 3 mm downstream of the centrebody face. Because
recirculation occurs, the sampling is not iso-kinetic.
In this particular case, the combustion performance was
found to be a function of the proportions of the injection split
betweenthetwocircuits, oneinjectingradiallyoutwardsfrom
six centrebody jets (% CB) and one injecting radially inwards
from six wall jets (% WJ). Figure 4 illustrates the difference
between the fuel distributions observed for injection from the
centrebody and from the wall. In this case, a well-mixed fuel
distribution was obtained with the 50% CB condition (see
ﬁgure 4(b)). As more fuel is injected from the centrebody,
higher concentrations of fuel appear near the centreline. The
asymmetry noted in the plots can be attributed to the relative
alignment of the fuel jets (six in total) and the swirler vanes
(four in total).
As a result, the orientation between the
fuel distribution and swirler vanes cycles every 180◦with
respect to the centre.
The results in ﬁgure 4 reﬂect this
characteristic with symmetrical behaviour observed across
the halves of the ﬂowﬁeld. As a result, despite the intrusive
nature, useful information can be obtained in a relatively
quick fashion. Although this information is obtained using
intrusive methods, the results provide insight into the details
of the fuel distribution as a function of the injector operation.
† ‘In mathematically elliptic ﬂows,
such as recirculation regions,
disturbances from the probe always will propagate upstream.
Although
the problem is obvious, it does not appear to have been addressed in the
literature, not even to the extent of saying that visual observations indicated
no effect! Of course up to now we have been pleased to have any sort of
measurements in such regions.’ (Bilger 1977).
It is also possible to utilize intrusive probes to provide
time varying information relative to the gas concentration.
One strategy involves absorption of energy by the fuel. The
Lambert–Beer law describes this absorption theoretically:
I
I0
= e−αCL
(1)
where I is the intensity of energy after passing through an
absorbing media, I0 is the intensity of energy prior to passing
through the medium, α is the absorption coefﬁcient of the
medium, C is the concentration of the medium and L is the
pathlength.
For hydrocarbons, a strong absorption band is present
at wavelengths of 3.3–3.5 µm.
Fortuitously, relatively
inexpensive lasers that operate at a wavelength of 3.39 µm
are available.
Since most hydrocarbons absorb energy
at this wavelength, to determine the concentration of a
speciﬁc gas (or blend of individual gases, such as natural
gas), a calibration procedure must be conducted in order
to isolate the absorption coefﬁcient.
The absorption
coefﬁcient of the hydrocarbon gas(es) of interest can be
determined by a procedure that involves ﬂowing speciﬁed
concentrations through a cell with a known pathlength,
and monitoring the attenuation of light passing through
the cell as a function of concentration.
As a result, by
passing a 3.39 µm wavelength laser beam through the
ﬂowﬁeld containing gas and measuring the attenuation,
the concentration of hydrocarbon fuel within the beam
pathlength can be determined. This strategy has been further
reﬁned spatially by using an intrusive probe with a relatively
short pathlength (Mongia et al 1996).
The accuracy of
this measurement depends upon having accurate knowledge
of the pathlength and the absorption coefﬁcient.
The
pathlength is established by knowing the distance between
the windows. However, the absorption coefﬁcient, which
depends on the ambient temperature as well as the molecular
structure, must be determined by calibration. As a result,
in a ﬂow with temperature gradients (e.g. with elevated inlet
temperatures), the uncertainty in the absorption coefﬁcient
may be signiﬁcant, depending upon the fuel utilized. The
frequency response of this system is limited only by the
electronics and therefore can be utilized to evaluate high
frequency ﬂuctuations in concentration. Extracting a sample
and running it through a cell through which the 3.39 µm
laser beam is passed can render this system more rugged.
If the overall volume of the sampling system can be made
small enough, a reasonable level of frequency response can
be achieved (e.g. approaching 1 kHz).
Hot-ﬁlm strategies can also be used in conjunction with
intrusive probes. Intrusive probes that implement hot-ﬁlm
methods include a probe manufactured by TSI (Model 1440)
that utilizes a constant temperature anemometer to maintain
the temperature of a hot ﬁlm. In such a device, the heat
transfer between a thermal sensor and the environment is
measured. This heat transfer depends on the temperature,
static pressure, velocity and thermal properties of the gas.
A sonic oriﬁce can be utilized to ensure that the velocity
is constant.
In this case, as long as the temperature is
accounted for (or is constant), the probe measures the ratio
of the speciﬁc heats of two gases. Hence, the hot-ﬁlm probe
873


--- Page 5 ---

V G McDonell and G S Samuelsen
Figure 3. Fuel distribution (% HC) measurement using an extractive probe (700 K inlet temperature): (a) the injector conﬁguration and
measurement plane and (b) an example result, 0% centrebody,  = 0.47.
Figure 4. Fuel distribution (% HC) versus the percentage of fuel injected from the centrebody for  = 0.47: (a) 0%, (b) 50% and (c) 100%.
can be utilized to measure the mixture ratio of two gases.
To enhance the signal strength, it is beneﬁcial to measure
gases with a large variation in speciﬁc heat. In the fuel–
air-mixing problem, for example, the ratio of the speciﬁc
heats of methane and air is 2.2. In contrast, the speciﬁc heat
ratio for hydrogen and air is 14.1 and that for helium and
air is 5.2. The sensitivity of the hot-ﬁlm strategy will thus
be limited in the case of natural gas compared with a fuel
replicant. The frequency response of this probe is rated up to
100kHzand, withsufﬁcientcoolingoftheprobe, thisstrategy
can also be applied to a high temperature environment.
However, because it cannot distinguish between temperature
and concentration changes, the hot-ﬁlm probe cannot resolve
fuel–air ratios in situations with temperature gradients in time
and/or space.
2.1.2. Intrusive tracer-based methods.
As an alternative
to measuring the fuel directly using intrusive methods, it is
also possible to dope the fuel stream with a tracer that can
be measured by a sensor that would otherwise have been
insensitive to the presence of fuel. The use of tracers such
as inert gases and molecules with photo-physical properties
that are well suited for optical methods will be addressed in
section 2.1.4.
Few examples regarding the application of intrusive
probes to measure tracers that track fuel–air mixing are
available in the literature.
The reasons are probably
associated with the inherent desire to progress towards
non-intrusive methods, as well as the introduction of
complications that using a tracer produces by requiring
an additional set of assumptions.
Although most of this
discussion focuses on tracer-based, non-intrusive methods,
examples of intrusive tracer-based methods do exist.
In
particular, an intrusive probe not unlike that of Mongia et al
(1996) has been developed with the purpose of providing
an excitation wavelength and collecting the ﬂuorescence
signal from a point (Lee and Santavicca 1997).
In this
case, acetone is seeded into the fuel stream to provide
a convenient marker (this is discussed in more detail in
section 2.1.4). With suitable calibration, this method obtains
spatially and temporally resolved measurements of fuel tracer
concentration, which can be further related to the local
equivalence ratio.
Although no results for an actual gas
turbine combustor have been published, the strategy may
have merit in practice.
An extractive probe that monitors the concentration of
an inert gas species has been applied successfully to study
mixing problems in gas turbines and, in particular, the jet
874


--- Page 6 ---

Fuel mixing and transport in gas turbines
mixing aspects of these devices (Thayer and Corlett 1971,
Rastogi and Whitelaw 1973, Khan and Whitelaw 1980).
These methods rely upon the unreactive nature of helium,
which acts as a passive scalar and can be readily measured
using available analysers.
2.1.3.
Non-intrusive non-tracer-based methods.
Al-
though intrusive methods can provide information relative to
the mixing of fuel and air, non-intrusive methods for obtain-
ing the same measurements are also available. Non-intrusive
methods are more attractive due to their ability to extract mea-
surements without actually contacting or disrupting the ﬂow-
ﬁeld. The other potentially attractive aspect of non-intrusive
methods is the ability to capture information in multiple di-
mensions (i.e. in a plane).
With the advent of laser-based diagnostics over the past
30 years, much effort has gone into the development and
application of non-intrusive laser-based methods. Several
excellent reviews which provide an overview of the various
issues and experiences associated with these diagnostics are
available (Eckbreth 1988, Chigier 1991).
Several laser-based strategies are available for applica-
tion to quantiﬁcation of fuel–air mixing in gas-ﬁred gas tur-
bine combustors. In practical gas turbine related systems,
non-intrusive methods that assess fuel–air mixing must in-
volve the characterization of natural gas or air. For natural
gas, it is possible to utilize laser Rayleigh scattering, which
is an elastic scattering process (i.e. the scattering occurs at
the same wavelength as that of the incident beam). Detailed
discussion of the theory behind Rayleigh scattering is avail-
able elsewhere in the reviews identiﬁed in the previous para-
graph. The key issues with respect to practical applications,
however, can be illustrated with a simple application. Con-
sider for the moment an isothermal case involving a mixture
of natural gas and air. In this case, the Rayleigh signal can
be expressed in a simple manner as
IR = K(χaσa + χbσb)
(2)
where K is a constant, χa is the mole fraction of air, χb
is the mole fraction of natural gas, σa is the scattering cross
section for air and σb is the scattering cross section for natural
gas.
In this case, it is clear that a large differential cross
section will result in the highest signal level. For natural
gas, in which methane is the largest constituent, a scattering
cross section of about 19 × 10−28 cm−2 is found (Muller-
Dethlefs and Weinberg 1978), which is about 2.3 times
larger than that of air.
As a result, the sensitivity of the
method for measurement of natural gas does not provide a
large dynamic range of measurement. As with the hot-ﬁlm
strategy discussed in section 2.1.2 above, a system relying on
Rayleigh scattering would beneﬁt from a tracer (e.g. propane,
whichhasacrosssectionthatisabout15timeslargerthanthat
of air). Nonetheless, if the temperature of the system is ﬁxed,
the variation in signal will be attributable to the variation
in the fuel concentration. This principle has been applied
to the case of mixing fuel and air (e.g. Graham et al 1974,
Escoda and Long 1983, Pitts and Kashiwagi 1984). However,
Rayleigh scattering does have its limits for application
to complex practical devices.
In particular, background
scattering from particles or surfaces and luminosity from
various sources lead to serious challenges with noise. As
a result, Rayleigh scattering has not been widely applied to
natural gas ﬁred systems despite its beneﬁt of not requiring
a tracer.
The absorption strategy outlined in section 2.1.1 can
also be used to assess the fuel distribution. The elements
required for implementing this procedure imply the use of
windowsandline-of-sighttransmissionofabeamthroughthe
ﬂow. Though the results from this method are not spatially
resolved, the adequacy of the method can be determined from
the application and the physical geometry of the device. For
example, if the performance of a system over a period of
time needs to be assessed, changes in the behaviour of the
absorption can be monitored.
Spatial resolution can be attained from absorption
measurements using tomographic strategies (Chen and
Goulard 1976, Santoro et al 1981), but these require
fairly extensive optical access in order to make the
necessary multi-angular measurements.
Furthermore, the
use of tomography essentially eliminates any possibility of
measuring temporally resolved information.
Nonetheless,
absorption methodologies can yield useful information
regarding the distribution of natural gas, without using a
tracer.
2.1.4.
Non-intrusive tracer-based methods.
Since the
photophysical properties of natural gas limit application of
optical methods, the vast majority of recent work in the area
of measuring the mixing of fuel and air has relied upon
seeding with a tracer or on replacing the fuel by a tracer
in an effort to (i) increase the signal strength and (ii) reduce
the noise associated with elastic scattering processes. As
a result of the second issue, methods that result in a signal
wavelength that is shifted from the original laser wavelength
are preferred. Examples include laser-induced ﬂuorescence
and spontaneous laser Raman scattering.
Many excellent
review papers and books are available on these methods
and the reader is referred to these offerings for details and
discussions of their applications (Eckbreth 1988, Chigier
1991, Daily 1997).
For fuel–air mixing, several successful methods have
been employed both for point and for planar measurements.
Point measurements can utilize the same basic set-up as
that for laser Rayleigh scattering, with the exception of the
use of ﬁlters to isolate the red-shifted ﬂuorescence from the
elastic scattering. As a result, point measurements can be
accomplished with a relatively straightforward set-up and
with minimal optical access. The use of point-wise detectors
also allows one to obtain high signal strength with relatively
low-powered continuous lasers and allows the measurement
of time series information which can be used to elicit the time
varying mixing behaviour of the system.
To obtain planar information in highly turbulent
ﬂows, high-powered pulsed lasers are typically utilized in
conjunction with highly sensitive area detectors to capture
strong signal levels. As a result, the cost and complexity of
the diagnostic becomes an issue. Though planar methods do
provide a large amount of information, the qualitative nature
875


--- Page 7 ---

V G McDonell and G S Samuelsen
of such measurements often prohibits the acquisition of what
might be termed ‘comprehensive’ information. Regardless
of this issue, a remarkable number of tracer methods for the
characterization of mixing has evolved. Some examples are
provided in the following.
Some examples in the literature make use of scattering
of light from ﬁne particles to study mixing (Shaughnessy
and Morton 1977, Long et al 1981, Clemens and Mungal
1991, Gullett et al 1993, Eaton et al 1996). In these cases,
either small particles are seeded into the ﬂow or particles are
formed through a process occurring in the ﬂow (e.g. titanium
dioxide can be formed by reaction of titanium tetrachloride
and water vapour).
In the case of solid particles, it is
often a challenge to introduce particles in a very steady and
homogeneous manner. In addition, bias can be introduced
due to temporal variation in the seeding density. Despite
theseissues, successfulresultshavebeenobtainedusingbasic
scattering.
Gaseous species are easier to disperse into the ﬂow
than are solid particles. Nitrogen dioxide has been utilized
for point measurements of mixing in a model gas turbine
combustor. The methodology, which has been discussed in
detail (Gulati and Warren 1994), is applied to quantify not
only spatial variations in mixing but also temporal variations,
which are then correlated to the combustion performance
(Fric 1993).
Although NO2 has excellent photophysical
properties for the study of mixing, its highly toxic nature
may preclude its use in general applications.
Iodine has also been utilized for the measurement of
mixing. Hiller and Hanson (1990) have reviewed the details
of its use and historical applications in detail. Iodine has been
utilized for the study of jet mixing applications (Hartﬁeld
et al 1989) and has also been utilized to measure a variety of
other ﬂowﬁeld properties (Donohue and McDaniel 1996).
Its use for gas turbine mixing applications has not been
widespread.
Part of the problem may be associated with
the seeding strategies (sublimation) and with the corrosive
nature of iodine. In addition, more convenient approaches
have become popular.
Biacetyl has also been utilized for mixing studies (Yip
et al 1988, van Cruyningen et al 1990). Not unlike iodine,
however, widespread use of biacetyl ﬂuorescence has not yet
occurred, according to a review of the literature.
Perhaps the most widely used tracer for mixing studies
is acetone. A detailed discussion of the principles and issues
associated with use of acetone is provided by Lozano et al
(1992). Acetone is excited over a wide range of wavelengths
which allows relatively common lasers to be utilized (e.g.
frequency quadrupled Nd : YAG lasers operating at 266 nm
or excimer lasers operating at 308 nm). Relative to mixing
studies for gas turbines, research has also been conducted to
examine the photophysics of acetone at various temperatures
and pressures (Grossmann et al 1996, Yuen et al 1997,
Thurber et al 1998).
These studies provide information
that allows acetone PLIF to be utilized under conditions of
elevated temperature and pressure. Recent work has utilized
acetone PLIF to make measurements in practical devices in
order to advance their design and/or operation (Stufﬂebeam
et al 1999, Frazier et al 1998).
An example is shown in ﬁgure 5 for the same model
combustor hardware as that with which the measurements
(a)
(b)
Figure 5. Instantaneous acetone PLIF images for the model
combustor illustrated in ﬁgure 3(a): (a) without background
treatment and (b) after background treatment.
illustrated in ﬁgure 3 were obtained. In this case a frequency
quadrupled Nd : YAG laser (266 nm) was utilized to stimulate
the acetone which was introduced through the fuel circuits.
In ﬁgure 5(a), the distinct ring of bright light is due to
the ﬂuorescence of the quartz tube conﬁning the ﬂowﬁeld.
The lobe-like structure in the middle is produced by the
ﬂuorescence of acetone.
By subtracting the background,
the ﬂuorescence associated with the ‘fuel’ is observed.
Although this example is intended to be qualitative, the
general structures are similar to those seen in ﬁgure 3(b).
With the advent of tracer-based methods, additional
factors need to be considered.
In complex systems with
windows and other optical issues, strong mixing and
associated dilution, signal strength is at a premium. In order
to maximize signal levels, the tracer may, in fact, become a
replacement. When another constituent is utilized to trace the
fuel distribution, the scaling of the mixing becomes an issue.
In many cases, advanced lean premixed concepts for gaseous
fuel utilize discrete jet injection for the fuel. In jet mixing
problems, the momentum ratio of the fuel stream and the
stream into which the fuel is injected is a critical parameter
(Patrick 1965). As an example, if the geometry illustrated
in ﬁgure 3(a) utilized acetone instead of natural gas in order
to study mixing behaviour, the jet penetration would vary.
Figure 6 compares the results of using acetone matched with
either the mass ﬂowrate of natural gas or the velocity of the
fuel jet. Alternatively, one could match the momentum ﬂux
ratio to obtain the same penetration, but this would result
in a mismatch of Reynolds number, which is also important
in the near-ﬁeld mixing characteristics. As shown by the
differences between the penetration curves in ﬁgure 6, the
use of tracers requires considerable care.
For pure mixing applications, techniques such as Raman
scattering can also be utilized; however, the signal strength
is signiﬁcantly lower than that of ﬂuorescence or even
Rayleigh scattering and, as a result, Raman scattering has
not seen widespread use in mixing studies. Indeed, Raman
scattering tends to be limited to applications in which
practical geometries and situations do not complicate signal
interpretation (Eckbreth 1988).
2.2. Liquid fuels
When liquid fuels are utilized, additional complexities are
added to the overall process.
Whereas gaseous fuels
876


--- Page 8 ---

Fuel mixing and transport in gas turbines
Figure 6. A comparison of calculated jet penetrations for natural gas and pure acetone for a radial injection system. The equivalence ratio
for natural gas and air is 0.42 using the geometry in ﬁgure 2(a).
require time to mix and react, liquid fuels require the
additional steps of atomization and vaporization. In addition,
the heterogeneous system creates additional challenges
and opportunities for performing measurements within the
system. Liquid fuels are introduced into the combustor by a
variety of mechanisms. Direct injection via an atomizer is
the most common strategy. However, advanced concepts are
relying upon partial or complete prevaporization of the fuel
prior to its entry into the combustion chamber.
For assessing the mixing of the fuel and air, the
measurement of the spatial (and/or temporal) distribution
of mass is required.
In the case of sprays, however, the
presence of two phases for the fuel brings to attention the
question of what should be measured. Ideally a method for
measuring the fractions of vapour and liquid phases can be
employed, although this will not be necessary in some cases.
In a prevaporized system, for example, it is possible to utilize
methods similar to those utilized for gaseous fuels, assuming
that no droplets are present. However, in the case in which
droplets are being examined, other methods for quantifying
and also examining the evolving behaviour of the droplets
are available. The approaches for examining fuel behaviour
in the case of the two-phase ﬂowﬁeld are summarized in this
section.
2.2.1.
Patternation.
Manufacturers of fuel injectors
commonly conduct ‘patternation’ of sprays to ensure quality
control, symmetry and the spray angle.
Traditionally,
these measurements have been conducted in the absence
of reaction and also in the absence of the complex
aerodynamics produced by the air ﬂow required for
combustion. Nonetheless, these measurements are typically
required by the end user in order to ensure that the spray
injector is performing as expected. These requirements are
well founded in that intuition and experimental evidence
have indicated that the spray pattern clearly inﬂuences the
combustion performance (McDonell et al 1996).
Mechanical devices have traditionally been utilized to
measure the distribution of the spray in the ﬂow.
These
devices may consist of a series of collection areas that are
suddenly exposed to the spray and used to collect liquid
over a ﬁxed time. The volume (or mass) collected in each
area can then be evaluated to assess the symmetry, spray
angle and overall shape of the spray. These collection tubes
have evolved into fairly sophisticated devices (McVey et al
1987). Mechanical devices have also been utilized to study
spray patterns at elevated pressure (Cohen and Rosfjord
1991). Excellent examples that demonstrate the utility of
advanced mechanical patternators for assessing the inﬂuence
of hardware on spray behaviour are available in the literature
(Cohen and Rosfjord 1993).
In addition to the use of mechanical devices, optical
methods have also been applied in the area of spray
patternation. In particular, laser-induced ﬂuorescence has
been applied to provide semi-quantitative mass distributions
of the sprays.
The methodology for application to liquid
sprays is based on the same strategy as that for gas ﬂows.
Work in this area was pioneered by Melton (1983), who,
in addition to applying this strategy to the liquid spray,
added the ability to distinguish between the gaseous and
liquid phases of the spray (Melton and Verdieck 1984).
This was accomplished by using ‘exciplex ﬂuorescence’,
in which the photophysical properties associated with
speciﬁc combinations of molecules produce laser-induced
ﬂuorescence from the vapour phase that undergoes a lesser
red shift than does that from the liquid. This method has been
applied most commonly to automotive sprays and examples
are found typically under the auspices of the SAE. A listing
of work conducted until the early 1990s is available (Melton
1993), but few examples are to be found in the archived
literature, and no example which utilized exciplex methods
forgasturbinescouldbeidentiﬁed. Onereasonforthelimited
application of exciplex strategies in gas turbine applications
is the role oxygen molecules play in the relative signal (i.e. the
877


--- Page 9 ---

V G McDonell and G S Samuelsen
Figure 7. The relationship between the total integrated intensity and the droplet volume for optically thin monodisperse droplets (adapted
from McDonell et al (1995)): (a) single droplet ﬂuorescence intensity contours and (b) droplet volume versus the integrated intensity.
signal is quenched in the presence of oxygen). As a result, it is
difﬁcult to apply exciplex ﬂuorescence techniques to general
gas turbine systems. Recent work has taken advantage of
the quenching to assess local fuel–air ratios in an oxygenated
environment (Fr¨oba et al 1998) and perhaps this will lead to
additional studies in gas turbine applications. The chemical
combination required to simulate the ‘fuel’ (including toxic
substances such as benzene), however, may lead to similar
practical limitations to, for example, those on the use of NO2.
The early work by Melton led to additional work which
examined the ﬂuorescence of the liquid fuel only. As with
the mechanical patternator, the basic liquid ﬂuorescence
technique provides information about the spatial distribution
of the fuel. In early studies, the challenge of identifying
complex chemical compounds and concerns regarding safety
associated with use of exciplexes were overcome by the use of
dyes and solvents which were compatible with a typical ‘open
air’ test stand that might be utilized for the characterization
of a fuel spray.
Some early examples include studies by
McDonell et al (1996) and Chung et al (1997). In both of
these cases, a ﬂuorescein dye was doped into methanol and
the spray was excited with an Ar+ continuous wave laser. The
doping process for such methods, however, must be carefully
controlled. If the absorption of the laser light is so great
that it cannot excite the molecules throughout the droplet,
the subsequent ﬂuorescence will not be proportional to the
volume and the resulting image will not provide information
about the mass distribution. Figure 7(a) illustrates the desired
behaviour relative to the ﬂuorescence intensity. In this case,
the laser sheet is introduced from the bottom of the page. The
droplet ﬂuorescence is shown in the contours. The far side
of the drop has a local maximum, which corresponds to the
focusing of the laser light by the droplet curvature. Despite
the non-uniformity of the ﬂuorescence emission from the
droplet, the relationship between the total integrated intensity
(i.e. the sum of the intensities from the image shown in
ﬁgure 7(a)) and volume is linear for this case of optically
thin droplets (ﬁgure 7(b)).
In a system in which the dye can be introduced into
the solvent, this problem can be overcome easily. However,
it would be very beneﬁcial from a practical perspective if
the addition of dyes or other chemical compounds could be
avoided.
For many practical distillate fuels, there are compounds
within the fuels which ﬂuoresce when they are excited by
short wavelengths of light.
This behaviour is typical of
many aromatic compounds, whose absorption occurs in the
ultraviolet range.
As a result, solid state lasers with UV
wavelengths (e.g. frequency tripled or quadrupled Nd : YAG
lasers) can be utilized. However, as with the use of dyes,
care must be taken to assess the relative absorption in order
to ensure that the system is optically thin so that the image
will be a direct measure of the fuel mass distribution. Good
examples that illustrate a non-mass-related image are found
in Bazile and Stepowski (1995) and Le Gal et al (1999), in
which images of droplets that are optically thick are shown
in a manner similar to ﬁgure 7(a). In these cases, the laser
light may penetrate only into the ﬁrst few micrometres of the
droplet surface before being completely absorbed!
Examples of planar liquid laser-induced ﬂuorescence
(PLLIF) applied to map out the fuel distribution for gas
turbine applications are now available in the literature
(McDonell et al 1996, Locke et al 1998, Ateshkadi et al
1998).
In the case of McDonell et al (1996), a direct
correlation between the statistical interpretation of the
spray distribution and the combustion performance is made.
This result reafﬁrms the utility of inferring fuel–air mixing
behaviour from the measurement of the spray distribution. In
the case of Ateshkadi et al (1998), the results obtained using
PLLIF to determine the fuel distribution were correlated
to several aspects of combustion performance, including
stability and emissions.
Hence, the ability to assess the
uniformity of the fuel distribution via the spray droplets
does provide an indicator of how fuel-air mixing relates to
combustion performance.
878


--- Page 10 ---

Fuel mixing and transport in gas turbines
Figure 8. A comparison of the volume ﬂux (cm3 cm−2 s−1) from PDI and the intensity concentration (grey level) from PLLIF for two
combustor injectors/swirler conﬁgurations at axial distance Z = 50 mm from the injector exit plane (adapted from McDonell et al (1996):
(a) conﬁguration 1: PDI; (b) conﬁguration 1, PLLIF; (c) conﬁguration 2, PDI; and (d) conﬁguration 2, PLLIF.
In each of these cases, no consideration was given to
the issue of laser attenuation, which can lead to perceived
asymmetry. Since the excitation light source is scattered by
droplets as it enters the spray, droplets on the far side of the
spray relative to the laser sheet will receive less incident light
and therefore generate less ﬂuorescence. Several methods
that have been developed to help address this problem are
beginning to appear (Talley et al 1995). Examples of using
PLLIF to detect fuel in reacting sprays are also to be found
in the literature, although many assumptions which make
it nearly impossible to obtain quantitative results in these
situations are made (Locke et al 1998, Allen et al 1995).
2.2.2.
Phase Doppler interferometry.
Phase Doppler
interferometry (PDI) provides extensive information about
the behaviour of sprays from point-speciﬁc, simultaneous
measurements of droplet size and velocity (Bachalo and
Houser 1984). The PDI measurements provide information
on the liquid volume (from the droplet size) and the time
between arrivals of droplets.
In addition, with some
estimation of the laser beam sampling volume, an estimation
of the liquid mass ﬂux can be made (Qiu and Sommerfeld
1992). This method has been applied extensively world wide
and is commonly utilized for detailed spray measurements.
Discussions regarding the measurement issues associated
with this method are available elsewhere (Bachalo and
Houser 1984, McDonell and Samuelsen 1995a).
PDI is not ideally suited for the study of spatial fuel–air
mixing in that, since it is a point measurement, the mapping of
information over a plane can be tedious. However, the added
information on droplet size and velocity may well make
the extra effort worthwhile, depending upon the application.
Indeed, the study of transport of the fuel requires knowledge
of the droplet sizes and velocities.
For an assessment of
fuel–air mixing, PDI can be utilized in a manner similar to
PLLIF. Figure 8 shows an example of results obtained for
two combustor fuel injection systems. In this case, the PDI
and PLLIF results reveal similar overall features of the spray
mass distribution. This comparison also helps to reafﬁrm the
utility of the PLLIF results.
879


--- Page 11 ---

V G McDonell and G S Samuelsen
2.2.3. Droplet sizing.
Although the droplet size is not a
direct indicator of fuel–air mixing, it is a critical parameter
associated with any liquid fuel system. The droplet size will
play a key role in the vaporization process and may lead to
fundamental constraints on the geometry of hardware being
developed for the express purpose of mixing. In addition, in
the case of droplet transport, the droplet size must be known
in order to determine how the droplet will be convected by
the continuous phase. Hence, some discussion on droplet
size is provided here, even though it is not a direct measure
of mixing.
As mentioned above (section 2.22), PDI is a well-
established method for the measurement of droplet size and
velocity. Although it was described in the previous section in
the context of fuel volume ﬂux measurements, PDI is used to
directly measure the droplet size.
In addition to point measurements of droplet size, planar
methods are now starting to be developed and applied.
The basis for the use of planar methods is a combination
of scattering (proportional to the droplet surface area) and
ﬂuorescence (proportional to the droplet volume if certain
criteria are satisﬁed).
The ratio of the ﬂuorescence to
scattering, therefore, should be proportional to the Sauter
meandiameter(orD32)†. Theperformanceofthediagnostics
that provide D32 distributions across a plane has been
demonstrated only very recently (Sankar et al 1999, Locke
et al 1998, Le Gal et al 1999).
An example is shown
in ﬁgure 9 for an air-assisted plain-jet atomizer measured
10 mm below the injector exit plane.
In this case, the
ratio of ﬂuorescence to scattering is presented together
with discrete circles, which reﬂect the D32 (concentration
weighted) measured via PDI. The results are shown for three
drops in atomizing air pressure (of 2, 4 and 6%).
It is
well established that, as the atomizing drop in air pressure
(and hence the mass ﬂow) increases, the droplet sizes will
decrease. This is reﬂected both in the PDI and in planar
methods for size measurement.
The strategy for using planar methods for measuring
droplet size appears well founded and their application has
been demonstrated for basic sprays as well as for a complex
ﬂow application (Locke et al 1998).
The results for the
basic sprays appear quite consistent and promising.
The
resultsforthecomplexreactingspraysappearmuchlessclear.
Indeed, the difﬁculties raised with respect to temperature
dependencies and multi-component fuels must be further
evaluated before planar droplet sizing methods can be applied
in general to complex sprays.
2.2.4.
Phase discrimination.
As mentioned above, the
measurement of fuel–air mixing in fuel sprays is complicated
by the potential need to discriminate the vapour phase from
the droplet phase. The assessment of vapour is important
because the mixture of vapour and air is the mixture that
actually combusts. As a result, the ability to determine the
local fuel–air ratio on the basis of the measurements of the
vaporized fuel and air is greatly desired.
Intrusive methods have been developed speciﬁcally to
address the discrimination of phases.
The most recent
† Given by D32 =
 niD3
i
 niD2
i .
application discussed in the literature appears to be that of
Dodge and Moses (1984).
In this case, an aerodynamic
separation strategy is utilized to sample vapour within a spray
using an extractive probe in a manner similar to that described
in section 2.1.1. Although the results appeared satisfactory in
that study and the few examples that preceded it, widespread
use of these probes has not appeared in the more recent
literature.
Another strategy for measuring the vapour concentration
in the presence of droplets is the use of light extinction.
By using absorption lines at 3.39 µm for hydrocarbons
in conjunction with a non-absorbing wavelength (e.g.
0.6328 µm) the vapour concentration along a line of sight
can be deduced. Since the droplets scatter both wavelengths,
but only the 3.39 µm wavelength is absorbed by vapour,
the relative transmission of the two wavelengths yields the
amount of extinction due to the presence of the vapour.
This approach was developed by Chraplyvy (1981) and
further analysed and extended by Adachi et al (1991) and
Drallmeier and Peters (1991). In each case, deconvolution of
the measurements was applied to retrieve spatially resolved
information. Suzuki et al (1994) did some additional work
using this differential absorption strategy, whereby additional
tomographic techniques were employed to recover spatially
resolved information for non-axisymmetrical sprays.
Planar methods for measuring vapour in the presence
of droplets have already been described in section 2.2.1
in the discussion of exciplex ﬂuorescence.
Non-exciplex
strategies have also been utilized.
In particular, Bazile
and Stepowski (1995) utilized a combination of scattering
and ﬂuorescence in conjunction with fairly elaborate image
processing to characterize the vapour and liquid phases in
an acetone spray.
In this case, the signals from isolated
droplets could be evaluated. This would seem to limit the
strategy to dilute sprays. Bazile and Stepowski (1994) also
utilized a combination of Raman scattering and laser induced
ﬂuorescence to evaluate the relative concentrations of vapour
and liquid.
The key strategy involved the assumption
that the Raman signal would be proportional to the total
liquid volume whereas the ﬂuorescence, with the dye–solvent
system utilized, would be proportional to the original volume.
This technique assumed that the dye would not vaporize with
the fuel, but rather would remain dissolved in the liquid in
its original quantity, thereby maintaining the total number of
dye molecules independently of vaporization.
In addition to phase discrimination associated with the
fuel, it is also possible to discriminate between the fuel
(regardless of phase) and the continuous phase. This has
been done for reacting ﬂows (Allen et al 1995) for which, in
addition to the imaging of the fuel concentration, the imaging
of other species (e.g. OH) can be used to deduce the relative
location of the fuel and the reaction zone.
Another possibility, which is of interest regarding the
injection of liquid fuel, is the relative behaviours of the liquid
fuel and the atomizing air.
This is of interest in that the
ﬁdelity of the droplet behaviour with the aerodynamics can
be evaluated.
Figure 10 shows an example for the same
plain-jet air-blast atomizer as that considered in the results
shown in ﬁgure 9. In ﬁgure 10, a careful combination of
ﬁlters allows the isolation of the atomizing air seeded with
880


--- Page 12 ---

Fuel mixing and transport in gas turbines
Figure 9. A comparison of the ratio of ﬂuorescence and scattering images with PDI-measured D32 values for various atomizing drops in air
pressure (adapted from Leong et al (2000)).
Figure 10. A comparison of the liquid mass distribution (top row) and the atomizing air concentration (lower row) for plain-jet-air-assisted
atomizer (diameters of circles in the top row correspond to PDI proﬁles of liquid volume concentrations) (adapted from Leong et al (2000).
Figure 11. A comparison of the gas phase velocity, turbulent kinetic energy, velocity and population of two droplet size classes for a
production gas turbine engine dome assembly: (a) gas phase, (b) particles of 11–20 µm diameter and (c) particles of 76–90 µm diameter.
881


--- Page 13 ---

V G McDonell and G S Samuelsen
acetone and the hydrocarbon liquid fuel excited at the same
wavelength. In ﬁgure 10, the mass distribution of liquid is
shown 10 mm downstream of the injector in the top row
of images for three atomizing drops in air pressure (of 2, 4
and 6%). The air is introduced from two opposite, discrete
injection ports (corresponding to left-hand and right-hand
sides of the images), which causes the two-lobed structure
revealed by the PLLIF. Overlaid upon the images are discrete
circles.
The diameter of the circles corresponds to the
volume concentration measured by PDI. The correspondence
between PDI and PLLIF is again quite consistent (recall
ﬁgure 8). In the lower row of images in ﬁgure 10 are the
corresponding PLIF images associated with the atomizing
air. In this case, the acetone ﬂuorescence is being utilized to
deduce where the bulk of the atomizing air is going and to
establish the comparative dispersion of the droplets and the
air.
It is noteworthy that the methods for discriminating
phases have not been utilized to obtain measurements in
highly complex practical devices. Indeed, many assumptions
about interference, noise and signal proportionality are
required in order to make the results even semi-quantitative.
As a result, it is likely that these methods will not be
utilized in a widespread manner outside research oriented
facilities. Although this is not necessarily a shortcoming, the
application of these methods and strategies on a regular basis
in a production type of environment without experienced
personnel will be very challenging and requires considerably
more development effort.
3. Flowﬁeld transport
The assessment of the transport of the fuel–air mixture
requires knowledge of the aerodynamics of the combustion
chamber. In the case of gaseous fuels, the transport following
injection will be tied to the physical properties such as
the turbulent Schmidt number.
In these cases, detailed
knowledge of the continuous phase ﬂowﬁeld allows the
interpretation of the direction and velocity at which the fuel
is being transported. In the case of liquid fuels, the transport
is more complex. This is associated with the relative strength
of the droplet momentum and body forces (e.g. droplet drag)
which depend upon the size of the droplet and the velocity
of the droplet relative to the continuous phase. These issues
are discussed in detail elsewhere (Sirignano 1993, McDonell
and Samuelsen 1995b, Faeth et al 1995).
Regardless of whether the fuel is present in the form
of droplets or gas, an understanding of the transport issues
requires the delineation of the ﬂowﬁeld characteristics. As
a result, a discussion of approaches used to accomplish this
is provided here. In general, the need to delineate the ﬂow
vector and scalar ﬁelds is evident.
3.1. Vector ﬁelds
The measurement of the velocity ﬁeld in complex combustion
systems has evolved from point measurements (i.e. laser
anemometry) to planar measurements (i.e. particle image
velocimetry and Doppler global velocimetry).
Multiple
components of the velocity can be measured using either
method.
3.1.1.
Laser anemometry.
Laser anemometry is a
very well-established technique in which two laser beams
of the same frequency are crossed in space to form an
interferometric sample volume (Yeh and Cummins 1964).
Fine particles are ‘seeded’ into the ﬂowﬁeld and, when
they scatter light from the region in which the beams
cross, the light is collected using sensitive detectors and
the signal generated is subsequently analysed for frequency
characteristics which are then related to the velocity. The
technique is ubiquitous in its application to complex ﬂows, so
the reader is directed elsewhere for its history and evolution
(Durst et al 1976, Thomson and Stevenson 1979, Chigier
1991).
The use of laser anemometry in complex ﬂows was
extended to sprays in 1984 with the advent of PDI, which
was discussed previously in section 2.2.2. An illustration of
thetypeofresultsthatcanbeobtainedisshowninﬁgure11, in
which the detailed ﬂowﬁeld and spray behaviour downstream
of a production gas turbine combustor dome are shown. In
this example, the combustor is liquid ﬁred.
As a result,
PDI has been applied in parallel with LA to delineate the
droplet behaviour. Figure11(a) shows the gas phase mean
axial velocity vectors in the r–Z plane with contours of the
gas phase turbulent kinetic energy. Figure11(b) and (c) show
the mean velocity vectors in the r–Z plane and contours of
the population of droplets for an 11–20 µm-diameter range
and a 76–90 µm-diameter range, respectively. Several key
points are illustrated by the results.
First, the gas phase
featuresastrongon-axisrecirculationzone, whichisbounded
by regions of strong turbulence.
The ﬂow generated by
the mixer actually impinges on the combustor wall, which
results in an acceleration of the ﬂow in the downstream
direction at the wall. The combustor dome also generates
a corner recirculation zone.
These features give a clear
impression of the actual ﬂowﬁeld that this production device
provides. In the case of gaseous fuel, it would be possible
to apply a technique like acetone PLIF to mark the path of
the fuel and to observe the degree of its mixing (Frazier
et al 1998). In the liquid ﬁred example shown in ﬁgure 11,
PDI is utilized to delineate the droplet behaviour.
Two
size classes are shown for comparison. The ﬁne droplets
tend to follow the gas phase associated with the relatively
small mass of these droplets.
Also, the PDI illustrates
where these drops are found (i.e. the largest population of
droplets is found at a location corresponding to the region of
most intense mixing in the gas phase). The larger droplets
penetrate the gas phase ﬂowﬁeld and behave ballistically
in impinging on the wall. Figure 11 illustrates the type of
detailed results made possible by LA and its extension, PDI,
and conﬁrms the power of these methods for illustrating the
ﬂowﬁelds and transport of material within the combustion
chamber.
3.1.2.
Particle image velocimetry.
Particle image
velocimetry (PIV) evolved from a desire to rapidly obtain the
type of information shown in ﬁgure 11. In addition, the point
measurements provided by LA, despite providing substantial
information from a statistical point of view (i.e. distribution
means, the standard deviation, skewness, etc), cannot resolve
the large structures present in the ﬂow. The development
882


--- Page 14 ---

Fuel mixing and transport in gas turbines
Figure 12. Examples of DPIV results from a swirl-stabilized combustor compared with CFD modelling simulations at two axial locations:
(a) x/D = 0.75 and (b) x/D = 2.83.
of PIV began in the late 1970s, with the work of Grousson
and Mallick (1977), Simpkins and Dudderar (1978), Barker
and Fourney (1977) and others, and has been extensively
researched since (Meynart 1983, Grant and Smith 1988,
Keane and Adrian 1990, Willert and Gharib 1991, Mungal
et al 1995, Adrian 1996).
PIV is a diagnostic technique
that measures instantaneous ﬂow-ﬁeld velocities over a two-
dimensional plane.
This is accomplished by recording,
during successive periods, the positions of small particulate
markers suspended in the ﬂuid during successive periods.
These small particles are illuminated for a short period (to
freeze the motion of the ﬂow) by using a high-energy light
source such as a pulsed laser. A set of images (generally
two) is recorded using a succession of light pulses.
The
light scattered from the particles is recorded and analysed.
Whereas early PIV methods relied upon ﬁlm, the advent
of high resolution digital cameras in the early 1980s has
allowed a digital version of PIV (digital particle image
velocimetry (DPIV)) to be developed. This has the potential
for widespread use in a variety of commercialized systems.
Only recently have the cost/performance issues related to
immense data storage requirements, camera resolution and
laser light sources been resolved in order to facilitate its
application to complex ﬂows found in combustors.
Recent developments in PIV include stereo methods,
which allow three velocity components to be measured
instead of only two (Soloff et al 1997). Although this requires
the use of multiple cameras, the past ﬁve years have seen
developments in digital cameras that allow cost-effective
strategies to be developed.
To illustrate the potential of DPIV, ﬁgure 12 presents
comparisons of DPIV measurements with CFD calculations
(FLUENT UNS) in a swirl-stabilized combustor at two axial
locations (Shaffar 1997).
The measurements in this case
were made in a circular quartz tube and therefore required
considerable treatment of the DPIV images in order to
account for distortion near the walls. The results illustrate
the ability of the method to measure proﬁles provided by LA
that are obtained within a matter of minutes rather than hours.
3.1.3.
Other ﬁeld velocity measurements.
Other
planar methods for the measurement of velocity have been
developed during the 1990s.
These methods generally
involve a set-up not unlike that for DPIV or stereo DPIV.
883


--- Page 15 ---

V G McDonell and G S Samuelsen
The difference between these newer methods and PIV is the
use of the spectral shift of the imaged light, which can then
be utilized to deduce the velocity. Most of the applications
in which these other methods have been utilized involve very
high-speed ﬂows (e.g. >100 m s−1). In some cases, particles
are seeded into the ﬂow and the relative frequency shift of
the scattered light is determined by using a molecular ﬁlter
that transmits as a function of the frequency of the light
in a carefully calibrated fashion (Devlin et al 1971).
An
example of a method in which seeding is utilized is Doppler
global velocimetry (DGV) (Meyers and Komine 1991, Elliott
et al 1994, Roehle 1997). Roehle (1997) shows examples in
which DGV has been applied using an argon-ion laser and
an iodine ﬁlter to characterize the three-dimensional velocity
ﬁeld generated by a gas turbine fuel injector not unlike that
shown in ﬁgure 11. For ﬂowﬁeld velocities that are not as
extreme as those found in many other applications, the results
from DGV look quite promising.
Efforts have also been directed at strategies in which
seeding is not required. In this case, a laser is again utilized,
but it is used to excite molecules that are already present in
the ﬂowﬁeld rather than relying upon scattering from foreign
particles. Examples include RELIEF (Miles et al 1989, Pitz
et al 1996) and ﬁltered Rayleigh scattering (FRS) (Forkey
et al 1996). An overview of the history and evolution of
these methods is provided in Forkey et al 1998).
For the application to gas turbine combustion, in
which total velocities typically are below 100 m s−1, laser
anemometry is well established. DPIV for reacting ﬂows in
general has not been demonstrated extensively, and requires
fairly high powered lasers to get reasonable signal-to-noise
ratios, even in complex non-reacting ﬂows. DGV may be
possible for reacting systems, but has not been investigated
extensively.
The recirculating ﬂows found in gas turbine
combustors lead to regions of near zero velocity components
and thus may pose questions regarding accuracy for DGV.
3.2. Scalar ﬁelds
In addition to vector ﬁelds, additional insight into mixing
behaviour may also be gained by the measurement of scalar
ﬁelds including species and temperature. The measurement
of species may be achieved using the same approaches as
those employed in measuring fuel mixing behaviour, namely
laser-induced ﬂuorescence both in point and in planar forms.
These methods have been discussed brieﬂy here and in detail
elsewhere within this issue (Laurendeau 2000).
The measurement of temperature may be of interest
relative to mixing and heat release. This can also be done
using ﬂuorescence methods.
Other strategies including
coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS) can also
be applied (Eckbreth 1988).
4. Summary
An overview of measurement practices for the delineation of
fuel–air mixing and transport in gas turbine combustion has
been provided. The summary is divided into applications for
gaseous fuels and liquid fuels since most of the diagnostics
developed are speciﬁc to the phase of the fuel.
Many
possible methods for assessing the general mixing have been
developed, but not all have been applied to practical systems
either under scaled or under actual conditions. For gaseous
mixing processes, acetone PLIF appears to be ﬁnding general
acceptance and application in actual systems. Spray-ﬁred
systems have seen the proliferating application of PDI in
practical devices and under practical conditions, while planar
laser-induced ﬂuorescence approaches are beginning to be
implemented in more applications. In terms of delineating
the vector ﬁelds associated with the process of mixing, laser
anemometry, although it is tedious to apply, has proven
reliable. Newer methods such as DPIV and FRS have seen
only limited application in practical systems. In terms of
scalar ﬁelds, LIF has successfully been applied to practical
systems.
References
Adachi M, McDonell V G and Samuelsen G S 1991 Non-intrusive
measurement of gaseous species in reacting and non-reacting
sprays Combust. Sci. Technol. 75 179–94
Adrian R J 1996 Bibliography of particle image velocimetry using
imaging methods: 1917–1995 Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics Report 817, UILU-ENG-96-6004 University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Allen M G, McManus K R, Sonnenfroh D M and Paul P H 1995
Planar-laser-induced-ﬂuorescence imaging measurements of
OH and hydrocarbon fuel fragments in high-pressure
spray-ﬂame combustion Appl. Opt. 34 6287–300
Ateshkadi A, McDonell V G and Samuelsen G S 1998 Effect of
hardware geometry on gas and drop behaviour in a radial
mixer spray 27th Symp. (Int.) on Combustion (Pittsburgh:
The Combustion Institute) pp 1985–92
Bachalo W D and Houser M J 1984 Phase Doppler spray analyzer
for simultaneous measurements of drop size and velocity
distributions Opt. Engng 23 583–90
Barker D B and Fourney M E 1977 Measuring ﬂuid velocities with
speckle patterns Opt. Lett. 1 135–7
Bazile R and Stepowski D 1994 Measurements of the vaporization
dynamics in the development zone of a burning spray by
planar laser induced ﬂuorescence and Raman scattering Exp.
Fluids 16 171–80
Bazile R and Stepowski D 1995 Measurements of vapourized and
liquid fuel concentration ﬁelds in a burning spray jet of
acetone using planar laser induced ﬂuorescence Exp. Fluids.
20 1–9
Bilger R W 1977 Probe measurements in turbulent combustion
Experimental Diagnostics in Gas Phase Combustion Systems
ed B T Zinn (New York: AIAA)
Bowman C T 1977 Probe measurements in ﬂames Experimental
Diagnostics in Gas Phase Combustion Systems ed B T Zinn
(New York: AIAA)
Chen F P and Goulard R 1976 Retrieval of arbitrary concentration
and temperature ﬁelds by multiangular scanning techniques
J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 16 819
Chigier N A 1991 Combustion Measurements (New York:
Hemisphere)
Chung I P, Dunn-Rankin D and Ganji A 1997 Characterization of
a spray from an ultrasonically modulated nozzle Atomization
Sprays 7 295–315
Chraplyvy A R 1981 Non-intrusive measurements of vapour
concentration inside sprays Appl. Opt. 20 2620–4
Clemens N T and Mungal M G 1991 A planar Mie scattering
technique for visualizing supersonic mixing ﬂows Exp.
Fluids. 11 175–85
Cohen J M and Rosfjord T J 1991 Spray patternation at high
pressure J. Propulsion Power 7 481–7
——1993 Inﬂuences on the sprays formed by high-shear fuel
nozzle swirler assemblies J. Propulsion Power 9 16–27
884


--- Page 16 ---

Fuel mixing and transport in gas turbines
Daily J D 1997 Laser induced ﬂuorescence spectroscopy in ﬂames
Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 23 133–99
Devlin G E, Davis J L, Chase L and Geschwind S 1971
Absorption of unshifted scattered light by a molecular I2
ﬁlter in Brillouin and Raman scattering Appl. Phys. Lett. 19
138
Dodge L G and Moses C A 1984 Diagnostics for fuel sprays as
applied to emulsiﬁed fuels 20th Symp. (Int.) on Combustion
(Pittsburgh: The Combustion Institute) pp 1239–47
Donohue J M, McDaniel J C 1996 Computer-controlled
multiparameter ﬂowﬁeld measurements using planar
laser-induced iodine ﬂuorescence AIAA J. 34 1604–11
Drallmeier J A and Peters J E 1991 Experimental investigation of
fuel spray vapor phase characterization Atomization Sprays 1
63–88
Durst F, Melling A and Whitelaw J H 1976 Principles and
Practices of Laser Anemometry (New York: Academic).
Eaton A R, Frey S F, Cusano D M, Plesniak M W and Sojka P E
1996 Development of full-ﬁeld planar Mie scattering
technique for evaluating swirling mixers Exp. Fluids. 21
325–30
Eckbreth A C 1988 Laser Diagnostics for Combustion
Temperature and Species (Cambridge, MA: Abacus)
Elliott G S, Samimy M and Arnette S A 1994 A molecular ﬁlter
based velocimetry technique for high speed ﬂows Exp.
Fluids. 18 107
Escoda M C and Long M B 1983 Rayleigh scattering
measurements of the gas concentration ﬁeld in turbulent jets
AIAA J. 21 81–4
Faeth G M, Hsiang L P and Wu P K 1995 Structure and breakup
properties of sprays Int. J. Multiphase Flow 21 (suppl)
99–127
Forkey J N, Lempert W R and Miles R B 1996 Demonstration and
characterization of ﬁltered Rayleigh scattering for planar
velocity measurements AIAA J. 34 442
——1998 Accuracy limits for planar measurements of ﬂow ﬁeld
velocity, temperature, and pressure using ﬁltered Rayleigh
scattering Exp. Fluids. 24 151–62
Frazier T R, Foglesong R E, Coverdill R E, Peters J E and
Lucht R P 1998 An experimental investigation of fuel/air
mixing in an optically accessible axial premixer 34th
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conf. & Exhibit.,
Cleveland, OH, July
Fric T F 1993 Effects of fuel–air unmixedness on NOx emissions
J. Propulsion Power 9 708–13
Fr¨oba A P, Rabenstein R, M¨unch K-U and Leipertz A 1998
Mixture of triethylamine (TEA) and benzene as a new
seeding material for the quantitative two-dimensional
laser-induced ﬂuorescence imaging of vapour and liquid fuel
inside SI engines Combust. Flame 112 199–209
Graham S C, Grant A J and Jones J M 1974 Transient molecular
concentration measurements in turbulent ﬂows AIAA J. 12
1140–2
Grant I and Smith G H 1988 Modern developments in particle
image velocimetry Opt. Lasers Engng 9 245–64
Grossmann F, Monkhouse P B, Ridder M, Sick V and Wolfrum J
1996 Temperature and pressure dependences of the
laser-induced ﬂuorescence of gas-phase acetone and
3-pentanone Appl. Phys. B 62 249–53
Grousson R and Mallick S 1977 Study of ﬂow patterns in a ﬂuid
by scattered light Appl. Opt. 16 2334–6
Gulati A and Warren R E 1994 NO2-based laser-induced
ﬂuorescence technique to measure cold-ﬂow mixing J.
Propulsion Power 10 54–61
Gullett B K Groff P W and Stefanski L A 1993 Mixing quant-
iﬁcation by visual imaging analysis Exp. Fluids. 15 443–51
Hartﬁeld R J, Abbitt J D and McDaniel J C 1989 Injectant mole
fraction imaging in compressible mixing ﬂows using planar
laser-induced iodine ﬂuorescence Opt. Lett. 14 850–2
Hiller B and Hanson R K 1990 Properties of the iodine molecule
relevant to laser induced ﬂuorescence experiments in gas
ﬂows Exp. Fluids. 10 1–11
Keane R D and Adrian R J 1990 Optimization of particle image
velocimeters. Part I: double pulsed systems Meas. Sci.
Technol. 1 1202–15
Khan Z A and Whitelaw J H 1980 Vector and scalar characteristics
of opposing jets discharging normally into a cross-stream Int.
J. Heat Mass Transfer. 23 1673–80
Laurendeau N M 2000 Review of laser induced ﬂuorescence
methods Meas. Sci. Technol.
Le Gal P, Farrugia N and Greenhalgh D A 1999 Laser sheet
dropsizing of dense sprays Opt. Laser Technol. 31 75–83
Lee J G and Santavicca D A 1997 Fiber-optic probe for
laser-induced ﬂuorescence measurements of the fuel–air
distribution in gas-turbine combustors J. Propulsion Power
13 384–7
Leong M Y, McDonell V G and Samuelsen G S 2000 Visualization
of an airblast-atomized spray jet using laser induced
ﬂuorescence and scattering methods Atomization Sprays
submitted
Locke R J, Hicks Y R, Anderson R C and Zaller M M 1998
Optical fuel injector patternation measurements in advanced
liquid-fueled, high pressure, gas turbine combustors
Combust. Sci. Technol. 138 297–311
Long M B, Chu B T and Chang R K 1981 Instantaneous
two-dimensional gas concentration measurements by light
scattering AIAA J. 19 1151–7
Lozano A, Yip B and Hanson R K 1992 Acetone—a tracer for
concentration measurements in gaseous ﬂows by planar
laser-induced ﬂuorescence Exp. Fluids 13 369–76
McDonell V G and Samuelsen G S 1995a Intra- and
inter-laboratory experiments to evaluate the performance of
phase Doppler interferometry Recent Advances in Spray
Combustion ed K K Kuo (New York: AIAA) pp 57–106
——1995b Assessing the physics of spray behaviour in complex
combustion systems Recent Advances in Spray Combustion
ed K K Kuo (New York: AIAA) pp 159–85
McDonell V G, Arellano L, Lee S W and Samuelsen G S 1996
Effect of hardware alignment on fuel distribution and
combustion performance for a production engine fuel
injection assembly 26th Symp. (Int.) on Combustion
(Pittsburgh: The Combustion Institute) p 2725–32
McDonell V G, Lee S W and Samuelsen G S 1995 Interpretation
of spray behaviour in complex aerodynamic ﬂows using
phase Doppler interferometry and planar liquid laser induced
ﬂuorescence Proc. SPIE 2546 530–8
McVey J B, Russell S and Kennedy J B 1987 High resolution
patternator for the characterization of fuel sprays J.
Propulsion Power 3 202–9
Melton L A 1983 Spectrally separated ﬂuorescence emissions for
diesel fuel droplets and vapor Appl. Opt. 22 2224
——1993 Planar liquid and gas visualization Ber. Bunsenges.
Phys. Chem. 97 1560–7
Melton L A and Verdieck J 1984 Vapour/liquid visualization in
fuel sprays 20th Symp. (Int.) on Combustion (Pittsburgh: The
Combustion Institute) p 1283
Meyers J F and Komine H 1991 Doppler global velocimetry: a
new way to look at velocity Laser Anemometry, Advances
and Applications ed A Dybbs and B Ghorashi (Cleveland,
OH: American Society of Mechanical Engineering)
Meynart R 1983 Instantaneous velocity ﬁeld measurements in
unsteady ﬂow by speckle velocimetry Appl. Opt. 22 535–40.
Miles R B, Connors J, Markovitz E, Howard P and Roth G 1989
Instantaneous supersonic velocity proﬁles in an
underexpanded sonic air jet by oxygen ﬂow tagging Phys.
Fluids A 1 389
Mongia R, Tomita E, Hsu F, Talbot L and Dibble R 1996 Optical
probe for in-situ measurements of air-to-fuel ratio in low
emissions engines AIAA Paper 96-0174
Muller-Dethlefs K and Weinberg F A 1978 Burning velocity
measurement based on laser Rayleigh scattering 17th Symp.
(Int.) on Combustion (Pittsburgh: The Combustion Institute)
p 985–92
Mungal M G, Lourenco L M and Krothapalli A 1995 Instantaneous
885


--- Page 17 ---

V G McDonell and G S Samuelsen
velocity measurements in laminar and turbulent premixed
ﬂames using on-line PIV Combust. Sci. Technol. 106 239–65
Nguyen Q V, Edgar B L, Dibble R W and Gulati A 1995
Experimental and numerical comparison of extractive and
in-situ laser measurements of non-equilibrium carbon
monoxide in lean-premixed natural gas combustion Combust.
Flame 100 395–406
Patrick M A 1965 Shefﬁeld Univ. Fuel Soc. J. 16 46–61
Pitts W M and Kashiwagi T 1984 The application of laser induced
Rayleigh light scattering to the study of turbulent mixing
J. Fluid Mech. 141 3910–429
Pitz R W, Brown T M, Nandula S P, Skaggs P A, DeBarber P A,
Brown M S and Segall J 1996 Unseeded velocity
measurement by ozone tagging velocimetry Opt. Lett. 21
755–7
Qiu H-H and Sommerfeld M 1992 A reliable method for
determining the measurement volume size and particle mass
ﬂuxes using phase Doppler anemometry Exp. Fluids. 13
393–404
Roehle I 1997 Three-dimensional Doppler global velocimetry in
the ﬂow of a fuel spray nozzle and the wake region of a car
Flow Meas. Instrum. 7 287–94
Rastogi A K and Whitelaw J H 1973 The effectiveness of
three-dimensional ﬁlm cooling slots—I. Measurements Int. J.
Heat Mass Transfer. 16 1665–81
Samuelsen G S and Benson R C 1979 Chemical transformations of
nitrogen oxides while sampling combustion products
Nitrogenous Air Pollutants ed D Grosjean (Ann Arbor, MI:
Ann Arbor Science) pp 65–82
Sankar S V, Maher K E, Robart D M and Bachalo W D 1999
Rapid characterization of fuel atomizers using an optical
patternator J. Engng Gas Turbines Power 121 409–14
Santoro R J, Semerjian H G, Emmerman P J and Goulard R 1981
Optical tomography of ﬂow ﬁeld diagnostics Int. J. Heat
Mass Transfer 24 1139
Shaffar S W 1997 The integration of computational ﬂuid dynamics
and experimental methods PhD Dissertation University of
California, Irvine
Shaughnessy E J and Morton J B 1977 Laser light scattering
measurement in a turbulent jet J. Fluid Mech. 30 129–48
Simpkins P G and Dudderar T D 1978 Laser speckle measurements
of transient B´enard ﬂow J. Fluid Mech. 89 665–71
Siringano W A 1993 Fluid dynamics of sprays—1992 Freeman
Scholar Lecture J. Fluids Engng 115 345–78
Soloff S M, Adrian R J and Liu Z C 1997 Distortion compensation
for generalized stereoscopic particle image velocimetry
Meas. Sci. Technol. 8 1441–54
Stufﬂebeam J H, Kendrick D W, Sowa W A and Snyder T 1999
Quantifying fuel air unmixedness in premixing nozzles using
an acetone ﬂuorescence technique 1999 ASME IGTI Conf.
Indianapolis, IN, June
Suzuki M, Nishida K and Hiroyasu H 1994 Imaging of drop and
vapour clouds in an evaporating fuel spray by ultraviolet and
visible lasers Particle Particle Syst. Characterization 11
241–9
Talley D G, Thamban A T S, McDonell V G and Samuelsen G S
1995 Laser sheet visualization of spray structure Recent
Advances in Spray Combustion ed K K Kuo (New York:
AIAA) pp 113–41
Thayer W J and Corlett R C 1971 Gas dynamic and transport
phenomena in the two-dimensional jet interaction ﬂowﬁeld
AIAA J. 10 488
Thompson H D and Stevenson W H 1979 Laser Velocimetry and
Particle Sizing (New York: Hemisphere)
Thurber M C, Grisch F, Kirby B J, Votsmeier M and Hanson R K
1998 Measurements and modelling of acetone laser-induced
ﬂuorescence with implications for temperature-imaging
diagnostics Appl. Opt. 37 4963–4678
Thurber M C and Hanson R K 1999 Pressure and composition
dependences of acetone laser-induced ﬂuorescence with
excitation at 248, 266, and 308 nm Appl. Phys. B 3 229–40
Willert C E and Gharib M 1991 Digital particle image
velocimetry Exp. Fluids 10 181–93
van Cruyningen I, Lozano A and Hanson R K 1990 Quantitative
imaging of concentration by planar laser induced
ﬂuorescence Exp. Fluids. 10 1–10
Yeh Y and Cummins H Z 1964 Localized ﬂuid ﬂow measurements
with an He–Ne laser spectrometer Appl. Phys. Lett. 4 176
Yip B, Schmitt R L and Long M B 1988 Instantaneous
three-dimensional concentration measurements in turbulent
jets and ﬂames Opt. Lett. 13 96–8
Yuen L S, Peters J E and Lucht R P 1997 Pressure dependence of
laser-induced ﬂuorescence from acetone Appl. Opt. 36
3271–7
Zabielski M F, Dodge L G, Colket M B and Seery D J 1981 The
optical and probe measurement of NO: a comparative study
18th Symp. (Int.) on Combustion (Pittsburgh: The
Combustion Institute) pp 1591–8
886
