
--- Page 1 ---

 
 
 
© 2007 Springer. 
GENERATION AND ALLEVIATION OF COMBUSTION 
INSTABILITIES IN SWIRLING FLOW 
N. SYRED∗ 
Cardiff School of Engineering, Cardiff University,  
Queens Buildings, The Parade, Cardiff CF 24 3AA, Wales, UK,  
Abstract. Most gas turbine and other combustion systems use swirl as a 
method of flame stabilization. Swirling flows can in themselves generate 
several different types of flow and flame instability, as well as facilitating 
coupling with natural acoustic modes of a system. This paper reviews recent 
work in the area and describes how fluctuation in the structure of the re-
circulation zone and tangential coherent structures (precessing vortex core 
[PVC]) can generate structures in other planes, capable of giving periodic heat 
release and excitation of combustion instability via the Rayleigh criterion. This 
is related to combustion-driven oscillations in gas turbine combustors. It is 
shown how damping of these tangential coherent structures can occur via 
certain modes of combustion whilst appropriate acoustic coupling can reexcite 
these phenomena. Methodologies for alleviation of these effects are described. 
Keywords: combustion instabilities, swirling flow, precessing vortex cores, recircu-
lation zones 
1.  
Lean premixed (LP) gas turbine combustion is the current approach employed 
to reduce pollutant emissions, particularly NOx emissions. Some of the main 
______ 
∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed. Professor Nick Syred. Cardiff School of 
Engineering, Cardiff University, Queens Buildings, The Parade, Cardiff CF24 3AA, Wales, UK; e-mail: 
syredn@cardiff.ac.uk 
Introduction 
3 
N. Syred and A. Khalatov (eds.), Advanced Combustion and Aerothermal Technologies, 3–20.  
advantages of LP operation are increased combustion intensity, shorter flame 


--- Page 2 ---

 
lengths and better fuel burnout. However, the gains made by LP operating 
conditions can be accompanied by stability problems. Premixed flames are 
naturally more susceptible to static and dynamic instability due to a lack of 
inherent damping mechanisms. The absence of diffusive mixing increases  
the sensitivity of flames to acoustic excitation. If conditions favor instabi-
lity, periodic fluctuations in the heat release will match the natural resonant 
frequency of one or more of the acoustic modes of the system geometry, self-
exciting a thermoacoustic instability. The occurrence of thermoacoustic instabi-
lity over a wide range of operating conditions in LP combustion continues to 
hinder the development of modern gas turbine combustors in both propulsion 
and power generation units. 
A number of studies have been carried out to identify the various processes 
governing combustion oscillations. Keller et al. (1989, 1990) showed that a 
limit cycle can be divided into interrelated characteristic time lags rep-
resentative of combustion chemistry, acoustic period, and flow dynamics, some 
typical figures are shown in Table 1. A series of parametric experiments in a 
gas turbine combustor by Richards and Janus (1997), Straub and Richards 
(1998) and Straub et al. (1998) have described the influence of various inlet 
parameters on reactant flow oscillations. An oscillating reactant flow can 
introduce variations to the reactant composition that is delivered to the flame 
front. The role of equivalence ratio fluctuations as a mechanism of combustion 
instability has also been treated by Lieuwen and Zinn (1998) and Mongia et al. 
(1998). The well-known Rayleigh criteria needs to be satisfied where the 
periodic heat release needs to be added as close as possible to the pressure peak 
of the oscillation for excitation to occur. 
Recent studies by Broda et al. (1998), Venkataraman et al. (1999), 
Paschereit et al. (2000), Lee et al. (2000) and Giezendanner et al. (2003) have 
employed chemiluminescence and fluorescence techniques to study flame dyna-
mics in swirl-stabilized flames. These studies have captured how the flame 
behaves over a limit cycle and have explored the mean periodic response of  
the progress rate variable and identified the location of the driving regions. 
Despite an absence of velocity information, most of these authors have referred to 
the importance of velocity oscillations around the flame zone as a key mechanism 
behind the observed flame response. There is an absence of detailed experiment 
and other data here. 
Table 1 clearly shows the greatest similarity in timescales between con-
vective processes and acoustic periods in the range of 100–500 Hz and indeed 
this can be easily extended to cover a much wider range of conditions. 
Convection effects can of course cover a wide range of different phenomena 
including convection of reactants in the inlets, convection of disturbances along 
4 
N. SYRED 


--- Page 3 ---

 
COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES IN SWIRLING FLOW 
a flame front or convection of vortical structures. Chemical kinetic effects can 
be seen to be important at higher frequencies. Although timing is important, it 
is not necessarily the only condition for excitation of oscillation. Although 
phasing of the unsteady heat release rate with the pressure is important, it must 
also be added at a rate that exceeds damping effects. 
TABLE 1. Various processes in gas and liquid fueled combustors and associated characteristic 
times (Lieuwen 1999) 
Process 
Timescale 
(ms) 
Acoustic disturbance of 100 Hz 
10 
Acoustic disturbance of 500 Hz 
2 
Chemical kinetic ignition delay, φ = 0.7 
~1 
Chemical kinetic ignition delay, φ = 1 
~3 
Convection of disturbance 100 mm at 10 m/s 
10 
Convection of disturbance 100 mm at 50 m/s 
2 
Evaporation of 10 µm hydrocarbon droplet 
0.3 
Evaporation of 50 µm hydrocarbon droplet 
8 
Growth rate of an acoustic disturbance 10 mm diameter liquid jet 
125 
Propagation of an acoustic disturbance 100 mm at 330 m/s (300 K) 
0.3 
Propagation of an acoustic disturbance 100 mm at 600 m/s (1,000 K) 
0.17 
Extensive investigations have been undertaken on the effect of various 
combustion parameters on the stability of combustion systems (Lieuwen and 
Zinn 1998; Lieuwen 1999) and it emerges that a very significant parameter is 
the fluctuation of equivalence ratio upon the reaction rate (Figure 1a) especially 
for ranges of equivalence ration <0.8 where LP combustors operate, this being 
derived from analysis of well stirred reactor simulations of the initial stages of 
gas turbine combustors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1a. Response of a well-stirred reactor to typical fluctuations in equivalence ratio 
5 


--- Page 4 ---

 
A typical gas turbine combustor flow is illustrated in Figure 1b. The 
formation of a central toroidal recirculation zone is evident, surrounded by an 
annular shear flow: this initial part of the flow can be easily perturbed as will be 
described later. Indeed this sensitivity to small perturbations allows coupling 
with acoustic oscillations without the presence of combustion. Syred (2006) 
reports the acoustic coupling of flows in large cyclone dust separators and long 
pipe runs at high pressure in process plants. Measure to reduce vibration and the 
acoustic coupling include the installation of carefully shaped center bodies in 
the exhaust of the cyclone dust separator and at the base of the long cone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1b. Typical flow aerodynamics in a natural gas-fired swirl-stabilized gas turbine 
combustor. (From Turrell et al. 2004.) 
 
The following discussion thus examines a series of studies which charac-
terize oscillatory flow fields in swirl combustion system and seeks to analyze 
the underlying mechanisms of excitation. They comprise both experimental and 
predictive work and bring out the acoustic streaming or modification of the 
gross flow and flame characteristics which occur due to these oscillations. 
These results are then used to discuss the mechanisms of initial excitation 
followed by the features of the system which determine the stability behavior. 
2. Swirling Flow and Combustion Instabilities 
Swirl-stabilized combustion is widely used in gas turbines and many other 
systems. Stability considerations are crucial in high-intensity units. Figure 1a 
shows typical time-dependent flows generated by a Siemens swirl-stabilized 
gas turbine combustor as predicted by the CFX code (Turrell et al. 2004). The 
expected characteristics of an annular burning swirling flow leaving the swirler 
6 
N. SYRED 


--- Page 5 ---

 
COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES IN SWIRLING FLOW 
 
via an annular shear flow with a large central recirculation zone (CRZ) 
recirculating heat and active chemical species to the flame root is shown. 
Asymmetries in the CRZ are clearly shown with the formation of regular time-
dependent axial radial eddies in the CRZ, whilst the presence of a precessing 
vortex core (PVC) is noted (Syred 1974, 2006). An external recirculation zone 
is also clearly shown (ORZ) as the swirling flow expands into the combustion 
chamber. 
Swirl combustors and burners are usually characterized by the swirl 
number, S, defined as the ratio of axial flux of angular momentum to the axial 
flux of axial momentum, normalized by the exit radius of the system. 
Although this parameter should be defined from experimental readings or 
measurements, it is commonly defined in terms of geometry (for further 
discussion refer to Beer and Chigier 1972; Syred and Beer 1974; Gupta et al. 
1984). 
 
 
(c) Visualization of burning PVC 
Figure 2. (From Syred et al. 2006) 
7 


--- Page 6 ---

 
The characteristics of swirl burners and combustors have been summarized 
in Syred and Beer (1974) and Gupta et al. (1984). The occurrence of the PVC 
and its associated instabilities have been summarized by Syred (2006). It was 
shown that the formation of the CRZ is caused by the axial decay of radial 
centrifugal pressure gradients, which in turn set up axial pressure gradients 
sufficient to cause extensive central recirculation and CRZ formation. Often 
associated with this is the formation of a PVCs, which occurs as the central 
vortex core is perturbed by external disturbances i.e., hydrodynamic, acoustic. 
The PVCs, appear to be linked to the CRZ, are wrapped around and distort it. 
This is illustrated by Figure 2a, which shows a schematic of the PVC pheno-
mena (Figure 2b), which shows the typical PVC signal from a pressure 
transducer (Figure 2c), which presents visualizations of the PVC produced by 
natural gas-burning fuel rich on its boundary and from LES predictions of 
isothermal flow from a gas turbine swirler, presented by Figure 2d. 
In gas turbine combustors, the problem appears to arise from a threefold 
interaction of combustion, system acoustics, and swirl flow aerodynamics. The 
principal of acoustic streaming is well known in the areas of rockets and ram 
jets, but its effect has not been considered to the same extent with swirl 
combustion systems. Here, the acoustic forcing of the system interacts with the 
flow and flame dynamics to actually maintain or increase the excitation and this 
is illustrated by two examples; Figure 3 shows the first example (Rodriquez-
Martinez 2003, Syred 2006). Here, the swirl burner furnace system shown 
(geometric swirl number 2.18) is set up in such a way that regular oscillations 
of around 243 Hz occur, the oscillation being driven by a Helmholtz resonance 
with the burner and neck forming the oscillator. Natural gas is used as fuel with 
50% axial fuel injection and 50% premixed. A regular near sinusoidal pressure 
oscillation is imposed on the system, shown by the pressure trace. Curve a 
shows the cyclic variation of axial velocity over the averaged limit cycle, c, the 
corresponding tangential velocity, and b and d, the corresponding directional 
intermittency or percentage of time the flow is reversed. The oscillation has 
significant effects on all the flow components. The axial velocity follows the 
well-known pattern of a swirling shear flow entering the furnace and generating 
a CRZ and an ORZ. Both the CRZ and ORZ vary considerably in size, extent, 
and level of reverse flow velocity (and hence level of recirculation of hot active 
products) over the oscillation cycle, and appear to be part of the mechanism 
giving rise to excitation via the Rayleigh criterion. The boundary of the CRZ is 
quite well marked by the yellow γ = 50% contour; it is clear that the visible 
throughout the oscillation cycle, clearly seen from Figure 3a and c where there  
 
volume of the CRZ is varying by up to a factor of 5 over the phase angles   
of 0–180°. Arising from this is the considerable variation of swirl number 
8 
N. SYRED 


--- Page 7 ---

 
COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES IN SWIRLING FLOW 
 
 
Figure 3. LDA phase-locked velocities in furnace of swirl burner/furnace system, excited at 250 
velocity; (d) tangential directional intermittency. Mean inlet flow velocity Ui = 4.3 m/s: inlet flow 
rate air 0.468 m3/s: φ = 0.81: natural gas injected 50% axially through base, rest premixed, no 
quarl 
 
is substantially more variation in axial compared to tangential velocity for the 
various phase angles shown. Indeed, the CRZ is at its weakest between phase 
angles of 180° and 240° where axial velocity levels are highest, hence swirl 
numbers lowest. 
The tangential directional intermittency levels are very high on the outside 
of the flow around the ORZ (Figure 3d), for much of the oscillation cycle 
indicating the presence of external helical flame structures on the edge of the 
flame. There is also some evidence of some PVC presence in the central region 
of flow. The axial direction intermittencies (Figure 3b), are also very high in the 
region of the ORZ and wall flow and again when considered with the tangential 
ones indicate the presence of helical or PVC type flow in this region. This is 
reinforced by reference to Figure 3e and f which replot the data. Figure 3e 
shows the phase-locked distributions of axial and tangential velocity in a 
tangential radial plane at x/De = 0.58 above the burner exhaust in the furnace. 
Here, it can be seen that the whole flow is rotating slightly off center or rotating 
eccentrically, and here the PVC effect in the center of the flow is small, but is 
amplified at the outside of the flow by the constraints applied by the furnace 
walls. Similarly, Figure 3f shows similar plots of the tangential directional 
HZ via Helmholtz resonance. (a) Axial velocity; (b) axial directional intermittency; (c) tangential 
9 


--- Page 8 ---

intermittency at three different heights in the furnace. Very high levels of 
negative tangential directional intermittency are shown for a significant range 
of phase angles for r > 0.8 for x/De = 0.31 and 0.58, as well as in a small central 
region. The effect is reduced considerably by x/De = 0.84. Again, this rein-
forces the argument for helical structures on the outside of the flame. 
 
 
 
Figure 3e. Distribution of phase-averaged axial velocity (left) and tangential (right) in tangential 
radial plane for x/De = 0.58 
 
The addition of an exhaust quarl, which nearly filled in the region where the 
ORZ forms, caused substantial reduction in the amplitude of the oscillation, 
primarily through the virtual elimination of the ORZ, illustrated by Figure 4. As 
can be seen the CRZ is much more regular in size (Figure 4a), whilst the levels 
of directional intermittency on the outside of the flow are much reduced (Figure 
4b and d). However, there is still an underlying oscillation and this is returned 
to later. Figure 5a and b analyze the data from Figures 3 and 4 further by 
integrating the axial velocity profiles for each measured phase angle and 
measurement section in the furnace so as to give a volumetric flow rate at each 
section and phase angle. This can be used to give indications of the phase 
angle-related burning patterns in the system. Figure 5a clearly shows that most 
expansion of the flow occurs well downstream of the burner exit in the furnace 
velocity levels are highest in the furnace (average inlet flow 0.468 m3/s). 
Combustion appears to occur for all phase angles here. Closer to the burner exit 
temperature levels, whilst just past the burner exit at x/De = 0.31 there is 
for x/De>1.4 and for phase angles between 150° and 270°, where axial 
for x/De<0.9 volumetric flow rates are much less, hence the observed 
10 
N. SYRED 


--- Page 9 ---

 
COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES IN SWIRLING FLOW 
 
reestablish itself close to the burner for phase angles between 120° and 300°, 
before lifting off again to a point further downstream. For the second confi-
guration with the quarl there is much more uniformity of volumetric flow rate 
for all phase angles and measurement sections, whilst the flame is anchored much 
closer to the burner exhaust, as shown by comparing the volumetric flow rates at 
sections x/De = 0.58 and 0.84. 
  
 
 
evidence of flow reversal back into the burner for phase angles between 330° 
and 90°, with very little combustion occurring. The flame then appears to 
x/De = 0.31;
 
(b) x/De = 0.58; (c) x/De = 0.84 
Figure 3f. Distribution of tangential intermittency at three heights in the furnace (a) 
11 


--- Page 10 ---

 
Figure 4. Phase-locked velocity measurements in furnace of swirl burner/furnace system, excited 
by 250 Hz Helmhlotz resonance. (a) Axial velocities; (b) axial directional intermittencies; (c) 
tangential velocities; (d) tangential directional Intermittencies. Cylindrical quarl inserted around 
 
Schildmacher et al. (2002) have confirmed the above findings as to the 
variation in swirl number during a regular acoustically excited oscillation 
caused by a natural gas flame from a gas turbine swirler firing into a square 
enclosure. This is illustrated by Figure 6a and b. This system is similar to that 
used in Figure 3, although operating at higher intensity. In the reaction zone the 
swirl number varies between 0.1 and 0.9 for phase angles between 0° and 180°, 
which in many ways is similar to that indicated by Figure 3. Although the flow 
characterization is not so detailed as that shown in Figures 3 and 4, there are 
indications of considerable variation in axial flow, swirl number and hence 
CRZ size over the limit cycle of oscillation. 
The second example of this phenomenon is also well illustrated by the 
work of Selle et al. (2006) who undertook a joint LES and Helmholtz analysis 
of rotating modes of oscillation in the natural gas flames produced by a 
Siemens gas turbine combustor firing into a square furnace. Although values of 
swirl number are not given, the device is stated to be of high “swirl” and  
thus comparable to other work discussed here. The 1,198 Hz helical structure 
 
burner exit. Other data as Figure 3 
12 
N. SYRED 


--- Page 11 ---

 
COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES IN SWIRLING FLOW 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Distribution of volumetric flow rate at each measurement section and phase angle 
observed in the flames was acoustically controlled and arose from the coupling 
of two transverse 1,192 Hz acoustic modes of the combustion chamber. This is 
shown in Figure 7 where the helical flame and flow shape is apparent. The 
work shows that in this combustion system the flame shape is strongly affected 
by acoustic velocity fluctuations at a frequency of 1,198 Hz. This mode is 
simply not forced by combustion. The acoustics also affect the flame itself 
leading to a self-sustained three-dimensional (3D) instability of helical shape. 
Critically, this occurs at the burner mouth, where the swirling flow is most 
sensitive to disturbances via coupling between the expanding swirling flow, 
associated centrifugal and axial pressure gradients, and formation of the CRZ 
and ORZ (Syred et al. 2006). The coherent structure is of spiral, tightly 
wrapped, PVC form and arises from the combination of two motions; the 
rotating mode and convection by the mean flow field. Selle et al. (2006) 
conclude that predictions of combustor flowfields need to take into account 
interaction of acoustics and turbulent flowfields. Other helical structures in 
similar gas turbine swirlers have also been reported (Schildmacher et al. 2002). 
Phase angle [°]
Qα [m3/s]
0
30
60
90
120 150 180 210 240 270 300 330 360
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
x/De=1.78
x/De=0.31
x/De=0.58
x/De=0.84
x/De=1.45
Phase angle [°]
Qα [m
3/s]
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
360
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
x/De=0.84
x/De=0.58
x/De=1.28
a) Distribution of Integrated 
Volume Flow Rate at each Phase 
Angle and Measurement Section, 
No Quarl, from Figure 3 
b) Distribution of Integrated 
Volume Flow Rate at each Phase 
Angle and Measurement Section, 
with Quarl, as Figure 4 
13 


--- Page 12 ---

 
Figure 6a. Gas turbine swirler firing into combustion chamber with optical access 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6b. Derived values of local swirl number as a function of phase angle over limit cycle 
oscillation 
 
It is now pertinent to return to the work of Syred et al. (2002), Dawson et al. 
(2005) and Rodriquez- Martinez (2003) via reexamination of the data shown in 
Figure 3 and further data just above the furnace exit (Figure 8) from Syred et al. 
(2006) and Rodriquez-Martinez (2003). As has been discussed above, Figure 3 
shows via the tangential directional intermittency measurements that there is 
tangential flow reversal on the outside of the flow near the furnace wall over 
part of the oscillation cycle, especially close to the region where the swirl 
burner fires into the furnace. When combined with high levels of axial direc-
tional intermittency in and around the same region, this again points to the 
14 
N. SYRED 


--- Page 13 ---

 
COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES IN SWIRLING FLOW 
 
Figure 7. Distortions produced in flame front by acoustic coupling of two transverse modes  
of the combustion chamber, resulting in a helical structure. The iso-surface is of the 1,000 K 
temperature 
existence of spiral PVCs or helical structures close to the furnace wall. Again 
just above the furnace exit (Figure 8) the swirling flow is near symmetrical 
about the axis (Figure 8b), although the axial exhaust shows significant bias to 
one side (Figure 8a). However, the two sets of directional intermittency show 
different, but complimentary, pictures (Figure 8c and d). Tangential directional 
intermittency show a very extensive layer of values of γ ~ 80–90% close to the 
wall, for phase angles 90–240°, accompanied by an even thinner layer of axial 
directional intermittencies of γ ~ 80–90% for phase angles 105–240°. When 
15 


--- Page 14 ---

 
extending from the base of the furnace by the burner exit right the way to the 
furnace exhaust. Thus, the data indicates the existence of helical waves on the 
outer edge of these confined, combustion, swirling flows, excited by the inter-
actions of the acoustics, combustion and swirling flow, the process being excited 
by wobble of the main vortex.  
onto a single frequency and thus information on other regular structures of 
different frequencies can be lost. Evidence from several sources (i.e., Syred 
2006, Rodriquez-Martinez 2003) shows that there are often several harmonics 
 
  
configuration 2a, as Figure 3a, sudden expansion  swirl burner to furnace. Velocities normalized 
by the mean inlet velocity Ui = 4.3 m/s 
combined with data from Figure 3f this can be interpreted as demonstrating  
the probable existence of tightly wrapped spiral PVCs or helical structures 
Unfortunately, the phase-locked technique used, although powerful, only locks 
Figure 8. Phase-averaged (a) axial and (b) tangential velocities, directional intermittencies γ  
of the (c) axial and (d) tangential  velocities  just above the furnace nozzle exit (x/De = 4.0) for 
16 
N. SYRED 


--- Page 15 ---

 
COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES IN SWIRLING FLOW 
 
of PVC or helical structures present and the flow actually jumps between states, 
i.e., single to double, etc. 
It is now useful to look at the effect of configuration and equivalence ratio 
on oscillations in the swirl burner/furnace system shown in Figures 3 and 4. 
Figure 9a shows the effect of equivalence ratio upon pressure amplitude for the 
two configurations, 2a without the quarl, as shown in Figures 3 and 8 and 2b 
with the quarl (Figure 4). What is clear is that both configurations produce 
highest amplitudes for an equivalence ratio of about 0.65–0.7, with a rapid tail 
off in amplitude for 0.6 > φ > 0.9. These limits correspond to frequency jumps 
from 250 Hz down to 50 Hz resonances, which are excited by other acoustic 
systems (travelling waves in the inlet pipes), Rodriquez-Martinez (2003). Thus, 
the ORZ clearly produces increased excitation of the Helmholtz 250 Hz oscil-
lation over the equivalence ratio range 0.6 > φ > 0.9, but does not remove the 
underlying cause of excitation.  
 
 
Figure 9. (a) Effect of configuration and equivalence ratio upon pressure amplitude; (b) effect of 
configuration and equivalence ratio upon oscillation frequency 
 
Selle et al. (2006) fired their swirl combustor into a square furnace and 
undoubtedly there would have been regions where external recirculation zones 
would have formed, i.e., ORZs, possibly contributing to the excitation of 
combustion oscillations. Unfortunately, the work does not discuss the defor-
mation of the CRZ over the oscillation cycle. 
Rodriquez-Martinez (2003) and Froud et al. (1997) used the same swirl 
burner/furnace system as shown in Figure 3, but produced a wide range of 
stable oscillatory conditions by varying a wide range of parameters including 
inlet pipe length and configuration, furnace configuration, method of fuel entry, 
partial premixing, exhaust pipe length, and swirl number. System oscillations 
were typically in a frequency range of 40–60 Hz or more and corresponded to 
17 


--- Page 16 ---

 
excitation either via Helmholtz resonance or via travelling acoustic waves in the 
inlet duct or exhaust pipe resonance. These low frequency oscillations could be 
of amplitudes higher than those produced by the 250 Hz oscillation (Figure 3), 
and very dependent on the system configuration. However, the common factor 
with the 250 Hz oscillation is the considerable variation in the size and shape of 
the CRZ over the limit cycle of oscillation, as well as the axial flow into the 
furnace and hence swirl number. Indeed reversed flow in the inlets was 
recorded by Rodriquez-Martinez (2003). 
In all these studies of the swirl/burner furnace system of Figure 3 the 
common characteristic has thus been the variation in the size and shape of the 
CRZ and ORZ (where present), as well as the swirl number over the limit cycle 
of oscillation. Thus, this appears to be one of the major feedback mechanisms 
maintaining the amplitude of the limit cycle oscillation at high levels and is also 
in accord with typical convection and acoustic timescales. 
However, what is still not clear is the initiation mechanisms for these 
oscillations and the role of the PVC or helical waves. One possible mechanism 
is the shedding of axial radial eddies by the PVC or by the helical structures on 
the edge of the flame as shown schematically in Figures 2a and 10. Figure 10 
 
Figure 10. Four water model photographs of the exhaust of a swirl burner, S = 1.8, showing 
formation of axial radial eddies illumination via slit light in axial radial plane 
18 
N. SYRED 


--- Page 17 ---

 
COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES IN SWIRLING FLOW 
shows four water model photographs of the flow leaving a model swirl burner, 
illuminated on its center line by slit light in the axial radial plane. 
3. Conclusions 
Thus, the work presented here appears to bring out two major findings: 
 
Maintenance of the oscillations in swirl combustion systems appears to 
occur through amplification via variations in the size and shape of the CRZ and 
ORZ over the limit cycle of oscillation as this variation causes considerable 
variation in the flame holding capability of the system, allowing flame move-
ment and on occasion near extinction to occur. 
The initial excitation is more difficult to unravel, but does appear to be 
associated with the generation of axial radial eddies by the PVC, either 
internally in the CRZ or externally at the end of the shear layer. 
Further detailed time-dependent experimental and predictive work is needed 
to resolve these important issues is needed. 
References 
Broda, J.C., Seo, S., Santoro, R.J., Shirhattikar, G., and Yang, V. (1998) An Experimental Study 
of Combustion Dynamics of a Premixed Swirl Injector, Proc. Combust. Inst., 27, 1849–1856. 
Froude, D., Beale, A., O’Doherty, T., and Syred, N. (1997) Studies of Helmholtz Resonance  
in a Swirl Burner/Furnace System. Proceeding of the 26th International Symposium on 
Combustion, Pittsburgh, PA, The Combustion Institute, pp. 3355–3362. 
Giezendanner, R., Keck, O., Weigand, P., Meier, W., Meier, U., Stricker, W., and Aigner, M. 
(2003) Periodic Combustion Instabilities in a Swirl Burner Studied by Phase-Locked Planar 
Laser-Induced Fluorescence, Combust. Sci. and Tech., 175, 721–741. 
Keller, J.O., Bramlette, T.T., Dec, J.E., and Westbrook, C.K. (1989) Pulse Combustion: The 
Importance of Characteristic Times, Combust. Flame, 75, 33–44. 
Keller, J.O., Bramlette, T.T., Westbrook, C.K., and Dec, J.E. (1990) Pulse Combustion: The 
Quantification of Characteristic Times, Combust. Flame, 79, 151–161. 
Gupta, A.K., Lilley, D.G., and Syred, N. (1984) Swirl Flows, Abacus Press, Tunbridge Wells, 
England. 
Lee, S.-Y., Seo, S., Broda, J.C., Pal, S., and Santoro, R.J. (2000) An Experimental Estimation of 
Mean Reaction Rate and Flame Structure During Combustion Instability in a Lean Premixed 
Gas Turbine Combustor, Proc. Combust. Instit., 28, 775–782. 
Lieuwen, T. and Zinn, B.T. (1998) The Role of Equivalence Ratio Oscillations in Driving 
Combustion Instabilities in Low NOx Gas Turbines, Proc. Combust. Inst., 27, 1809–1816. 
Lieuwen, T. (1999) Ph.D. thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA . 
Mongia, R., Dibble, R., and Lovett, J. (1998) Measurement of Air-Fuel Ratio Fluctuations 
Caused by Combustor Driven Oscillations, Proc. of the ASME/IGTI Turbo Expo, ASME 
paper No. 98-GT-304. 
19 


--- Page 18 ---

 
Paschereit, C.O., Gutmark, E., and Weisenstein, W. (2000) Excitation of Thermoacoustic 
Instabilities by Interaction of Acoustics and Unstable Swirling Flow, AIAA Journal, 38(6), 
1025. 
Richards, G.A. and Janus, M.C. (1997) Oscillations During Premix Gas Turbine Combustion, 
ASME Paper No. 97-GT-244. 
Rodriquez-Martinez, V.M. (2003) Ph.D. thesis, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. 
Roux, S, Lartigue, G., Poinsot, T, Meier, U., and Bérat, C. (2005) Studies of Mean and Unsteady 
Flow in a Swirled Combusator Using Experiments, Acoustic Analysis and Large Eddy 
Simulations, Combust. Flame, 141, 40–54. 
Schildmacher, K.-U., Koch, R., Krebs, W., Hoffman, S., and Wittig, S. (2002), Experimental 
Investigations of Unsteady Flow Phenomena in High Intense Combustion Systems, 
Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference on Industrial Furnaces and Boilers [ISBN 
972-8034-05-9]. 
Selle, L., Benoit, L., Poinsot, T., Nicoud, F., and Krebs W. (2006) Joint use of Compressible 
Large-eddy Simulation and Helmholtz Solvers for the Analysis of Rotating Modes in an 
Industrial Swirled Buner, Combust. Flame, 145(1–2), 194–205. 
Straub, D.L. and Richards, G.A. (1998) Effect of Fuel Nozzle Configuration on Premix 
Combustion Dynamics, ASME Paper No. 98-GT-492. 
Straub, D.L., Richards, G.A., Yip, M.J., Rodgers, W.A., and Robey, E.H. (1998) Importance of 
Axial Swirl Vane Location on Combustion Dynamics for Lean Premix Fuel Injectors, AIAA 
Joint Propulsion Conference, 13–15 July, Paper no. AIAA-98-3909. 
Syred, N. and Beer, J.M. (1974) “Combustion in Swirling Flow: A Review”. Combust. Flame, 
23, 143–201. 
Syred, N. (2006) A Review of Oscillation Mechanisms and the role of the Precessing Vortex 
Core (PVC) in Swirl Combustion Systems, Progress in Energy and Combustion Systems, 
32(2), 93–161, ISSN 0360-1285. 
Turrell, M.D., Stopford, P.J., Syed, K., and Buchanan, E. (2004) CFD Simulations of the Flow 
within and Downstream of High swirl Lean premixed Gas turbine Combustors, Proceedings 
ASME Turbo-Expo 2004, vol. 1, Combustion and Fuels, pp. 31–38, Education 2004. 
Venkataraman, K.K., Preston, L.H., Simons, D.W., Lee, B.J., Lee, J.G., and Santavicca, D.A 
(1999) Mechansim of Combustion Instability in a Lean Premixed Dump Combustor, J. Prop. 
Power, 15(6), 909–918. 
20 
N. SYRED 
