
--- Page 1 ---

Christian H. Beck
e-mail: christian.beck@its.uka.de
Rainer Koch
Hans-Jörg Bauer
Institut für Thermische Strömungsmaschinen,
Universität Karlsruhe (TH),
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
Investigation of the Effect of
Incomplete Droplet
Prevaporization on NOx
Emissions in LDI Combustion
Systems
The inﬂuence of incomplete liquid fuel prevaporization on the emissions of nitric oxides
in a swirl stabilized model gas turbine combustor is investigated experimentally and
numerically. The design of the model combustor enables the variation of the degree of
prevaporization. This is achieved by using two liquid fuel injectors. One injector is
located far upstream of the combustor and generates a fully prevaporized and premixed
air fuel mixture. The second injector is located at the combustor inlet. Consequently, the
liquid fuel mass ﬂow split between the two injectors determines the fraction of nonpre-
vaporized fuel present in the reaction zone. The NO/NO2 measurements were performed
with a chemoluminescence analyzer. In accordance to the ﬁndings of other researchers,
the present experimental study revealed that the inﬂuence of prevaporization on nitric
oxide emissions is of signiﬁcance for practical applications. The experimental studies
were accompanied by numerical studies of partially prevaporized lean combustion in an
abstracted conﬁguration. The purpose of this numerical study is to gain a detailed un-
derstanding of the inﬂuence of droplet slip on droplet ﬂame position and peak tempera-
ture. The droplet slip velocity was found to have a signiﬁcant impact on the peak tem-
perature of the droplet ﬂame and, therefore, NO formation rates within the droplet ﬂame.
The combustion system used for the experimental investigation was characterized regard-
ing droplet slip velocities with an extended laser Doppler anemometry technique. The
comparison between numerical and experimental results shows that the droplet slip ve-
locities in the macroscopic reaction zone are within the transition range from an envelope
to a wake ﬂame. It is concluded that small-scale mixing effects play a signiﬁcant role in
the
formation
of
nitric
oxides
in
spray
combustion
systems
with
incomplete
prevaporization. DOI: 10.1115/1.2906185
Introduction
As of today, the reduction of aero-gas-turbine emissions has
become the main driving force for the development of new com-
bustor concepts. The predominant idea is to achieve a reduction of
NOx emissions by minimizing the temporal and spatial inhomo-
geneities of the temperature in the reaction zone. In lean ﬂames,
temperature ﬂuctuations increase NO formation because of the
nonlinear dependence of the NO formation on temperature.
Theoretically, a lean perfectly premixed and prevaporized com-
bustion system does offer a signiﬁcant NOx emission reduction
potential 1. However, the high combustor pressure levels of
modern aeroengines make complete prevaporizing and premixing
practically impossible due to the fast onset of autoignition at these
conditions 2,3.
The lean direct injection LDI concept is characterized by a
global lean equivalence ratio and incomplete prevaporization of
the liquid fuel. While complete prevaporization is not achieved,
large-scale mixture inhomogeneities are avoided. However, the
presence of liquid fuel droplets in the macroscopic reaction zone
can create mixture inhomogeneities on a microscopic length scale,
if a near stoichiometric burning envelope ﬂame is established
around individual droplets.
The ﬁrst question to be addressed in the present work is to what
extent the NOx emissions are affected by the fraction of liquid
fuel present in the macroscopic reaction zone. This question was
previously investigated by other authors 4,5. In the ﬁrst study, a
two-injector system was used where the degree of prevaporization
is adjusted like in the rig used in the present study. The liquid fuel
mass fraction  was varied between 0.30 at =0.6; 0.72.
The operating pressure was 0.3 MPa and the preheat temperature
was 600–700 K. The author reports a piecewise linear depen-
dence of NOx emissions on . At higher equivalence ratios, the
inﬂuence of prevaporization on emissions was found to decrease.
The second study was performed at atmospheric pressure with
air preheat temperatures of 323–376 K. The degree of prevapor-
ization was varied by adjusting the premixing duct length and the
preheat temperature. The degree of prevaporization was evaluated
from phase Doppler PDA liquid phase ﬂux measurements. For
ﬂame stabilization, an electrically heated wire ring was used. The
generally very low preheat temperature causes low adiabatic ﬂame
temperatures at lean conditions. The authors report a piecewise
linear dependence of emissions on  for 0.5. For 0.51,
emissions were found not to vary with the degree of prevaporiza-
tion.
The main difference between the experimental setups of the
previous studies and the present one is the type of ﬂame stabili-
zation. In the present study, a generic swirl-stabilized burner is
used. The stabilization mechanism is expected to have a signiﬁ-
cant impact on the ﬂame structure. In addition, the droplet slip is
fundamentally different in a swirl-stabilized ﬂame, where gas
Manuscript received November 9, 2007; ﬁnal manuscript received November 12,
2007. published online June 13, 2008. Review conducted by Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2008, Vol. 130 / 051504-1
Copyright © 2008 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

phase velocities signiﬁcantly change along the droplet trajectories
compared to a pipe ﬂow. Therefore, the setup used in the present
study can be expected to represent the characteristics of a gas
turbine combustor to a greater extent than previous studies.
In the second part of the paper, a detailed analysis of the NO
formation in lean ﬂames with partial droplet prevaporization is
presented. The linear dependence of NOx emissions on the degree
of prevaporization suggests that the variation of the degree of
prevaporization may be abstracted as the superposition of two
ﬂame types: droplet ﬂame and premixed ﬂame. The ﬂame type
causing high emissions is the individual burning droplet. In order
to gain a better understanding of the prevailing NO formation
mechanism, the emission formation of a single droplet ﬂame will
be numerically studied. It is known that signiﬁcant droplet slip
velocities can cause the stoichiometric envelope ﬂame to extin-
guish and a wake ﬂame to establish. The inﬂuence of this ﬂame
type transition on the NO formation of a single droplet ﬂame will
be discussed.
First experimental studies on droplet ﬂame extinction were per-
formed by Spalding 6. Recently, Pope 7 presented a correlation
based on these early experiments and new numerical results. The
numerical results are based on a setup quite similar to the one
used here. The authors report a nonlinear relation between droplet
diameter and extinction velocity. Furthermore, the extinction ve-
locity was found to exponentially vary with ambient gas tempera-
ture. In general, the study presented by Pope 7 focuses on the
point at which extinction of the envelope ﬂame at the forward
stagnation point occurs. Investigations using similar numerical
setups were performed by Raghavan et al. 8 and Jiang et al. 9.
Both studies focus on the ﬂame type transition caused by the
variation of droplet slip velocity. In all available numerical studies
on droplet ﬂame extinction, chemical reaction is modeled with a
single step global reactions. In the present study, the detailed
mechanism from Held et al. 10 is used for several reasons. First,
the position of the droplet wake ﬂame is mainly determined by the
chemical time scales. Since the droplet ﬂame position was found
to have a signiﬁcant effect on emissions, detailed modeling of the
chemical processes is of importance. Second, the formation of
nitric oxides is to be modeled. Again, a detailed mechanism from
Hewson 11 is used since the accuracy of simpliﬁed NO forma-
tion rate expressions is limited.
The ﬁnal experimental investigation presented in this paper will
discuss the range of droplet slip velocities found in typical swirl-
stabilized combustion systems. By using the results from the nu-
merical investigation, the droplet ﬂame type, which is present in
the macroscopic reaction zone of typical swirl-stabilized ﬂames,
will be deduced.
Experimental Investigation
Concept and Design of the Experimental Setup. The com-
bustion system used in this study is speciﬁcally designed to allow
the variation of droplet prevaporization. The setup contains two
liquid fuel injectors see Fig. 1. One injector is positioned far
upstream while the second injector is placed in the proximity of
the reaction zone. The upstream injector is used to generate a
prevaporized and perfectly premixed fuel air mixture, while the
downstream injector is used to directly inject droplets into the
ﬂame. By varying the fuel mass ﬂow split between the upstream
and the downstream injector, the fraction of nonprevaporized fuel
present in the reaction zone can be adjusted.
The fraction of liquid fuel present in the ﬂame front is to be
determined from fuel mass ﬂow measurements. Therefore, it is
necessary that the droplets injected by the downstream injector do
not signiﬁcantly vaporize before they reach the macroscopic reac-
tion zone. This is ensured by injecting the liquid fuel at a tem-
perature of only Tf=263 K. An accompanying numerical study
conﬁrmed that an injection temperature of 263 K is sufﬁcient to
minimize droplet mass loss due to vaporization for the droplet size
distribution, fuel, air temperature, and residence time of this com-
bustor. Flame stabilization is achieved by generating a vortex
breakdown.
Operating Conditions. In the experimental setup, all oxidizer
and fuel mass ﬂows are measured using calibrated sensors. The
combustor inlet temperature Tmix1 is controlled as well as the
liquid fuel temperature inside the injector. The pressure level be-
hind the combustor exit is atmospheric. An overview of the oper-
ating conditions relevant for this paper is given in Table 1.
The combustion system is fed with preheated air. A preheat
temperature of Tmix2=473 K was chosen. This temperature is a
compromise between minimizing liquid fuel prevaporization from
the downstream injector and achieving realistic adiabatic ﬂame
temperatures 1650–1850 K at lean conditions 0.6. The
preheat temperature is deﬁned here as the temperature of the un-
burnt mixture under the premise that all fuel is vaporized and
mixed Tmix2. The combustor inlet temperature Tmix1 is calculated
from this virtual temperature by Eq. 1, in which the temperature
change due to heating and vaporization of the nonprevaporized
fuel mass ﬂow is accounted for. If Tmix2 remains constant, the
adiabatic ﬂame temperature is independent of the degree of pre-
vaporization  and the liquid fuel temperature. For Tmix2=473 K
and =0.5, Tmix1 linearly varies between 473 KTmix1497 K
for 01. The enthalpy of fuel and oxidizer used in Eq. 1 is
Fig. 1
Schematic of the rig; detail of the burner and combus-
tion chamber
Table 1
Operating conditions
Quantity
Value
Comment

0.5, …, 0.6

0, …, 0.8
Liquid fuel fraction
Tmix2
473 K
Tf
263 K
Measured in atomizer
m˙ Ox
14.9 g/s
Total oxidizer mass ﬂow
m˙ core
0.7 g/s
Swirl generator bypass mass
ﬂow
m˙ atom
0.1, ... ,0.25 g/s
Downstream atomizer air
mass ﬂow
Fuel
Heptane
s
0.46
Swirl number at the combustor
inlet
051504-2 / Vol. 130, SEPTEMBER 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

calculated as a function of temperature. The thermodynamic data
provided with the reaction mechanism 10 are used.
hair + Y fhfTmix 2 = 1 −Y fhlg + hfTf + hair + Y fhfTmix 1
1
Experimental Investigation of Mixture Characteristics. For
the injection of liquid fuel, two air assist atomizers are used. The
upstream injector was chosen based on the requirement to gener-
ate a ﬁne spray suitable for fast prevaporization and premixing.
The mixing length is approximately 1 m with a mean residence
time of 200 ms. The performance of the premixing system was
evaluated in a previous study 12 and was found to deliver a very
homogeneous mixture =0.008. A traverse mounted gas sam-
pling system and a ﬂame ionization detector were used for the
characterization of mixture homogeneity. The measurements were
performed 0.4 m downstream of the upstream injector, implying
that the standard deviation at the combustor inlet is lower than the
value reported above.
For the downstream injector, the key requirements are that the
spray characteristics are independent of liquid mass ﬂow, and that
the liquid fuel equivalence ratio in the macroscopic reaction zone
is as homogeneous as possible. Since these requirements cannot
be ideally met, the impact of the deviation from ideal conditions
regarding the effects investigated in this study is assessed.
The downstream injector was characterized at reacting condi-
tions with a standard phase Doppler anemometry system setup for
a scattering angle of 74 deg. The simultaneous characterization of
liquid and gas phase ﬂow was achieved by using the recorded
particle diameter as phase discrimination criterion ddisc=3 m.
Since the data rate of small fuel droplets is very low, spherical
glass particles with d3 m and a refractive index of n1.5
were added by a “Palas RGB 1000” particle dispenser. A seeding
volume ﬂow was chosen, which is 0.5% of the liquid fuel vol-
ume ﬂow. At the chosen scattering angle, the PDA technique is
relatively insensitive to particle refractive index 13. The differ-
ence between the expected refractive index of the fuel droplets
n=1.4 and the gas tracer particles causes a sizing error 3%.
This sizing error for tracer particles is considered insigniﬁcant for
the purpose of phase discrimination. The data were sampled at
x/db=0.33 downstream of the combustor inlet. The radial range
covered is 0r/db0.66. This location is at the beginning of the
macroscopic reaction zone see Fig. 8.
The
radial
distribution
of
liquid
fuel
equivalence
ratio
l= fll/cggz was obtained from the PDA measurements see
Fig. 2. The data are shown for an operating condition with 50%
prevaporization and =0.55 at three atomizer air pressure levels.
For all atomizer pressure levels, the liquid fuel equivalence ratio
is rich near the center axis. The high liquid fuel equivalence ratio
in this region is due to the low gas phase velocity near the center
axis see Fig. 9.
In order to assess the importance of the rich region near the
center axis, the mixture mass ﬂow weighted cumulative distribu-
tion function for the mean liquid fuel equivalence ratio was de-
rived. Mixture mass ﬂow weighting is used since the local mixture
mass ﬂow represents the importance of a region for the overall
characteristics of the combustion system. The cumulative distri-
bution function CDF of the liquid fuel equivalence ratio is
shown in Fig. 3. The distribution of the liquid fuel equivalence
ratio is relatively narrow in all three cases. Approximately 10% of
the mixture mass ﬂow has a liquid fuel equivalence ratio higher
than the mean value.
The inhomogeneity of liquid fuel placement could bias the de-
pendence of NOx emissions on the degree of prevaporization by
formation of large-scale temperature inhomogeneities. Since it is
not clear to what extent the inhomogeneity of liquid fuel place-
ment affects the overall NOx emissions of the combustor, a prac-
tical test regarding the sensitivity of NO formation on liquid fuel
placement was performed. The variation of the atomizing air pres-
sure has a signiﬁcant effect on the liquid fuel equivalence ratio in
the proximity of the burner axis see Fig. 2. However, the overall
NO emissions of the combustion system change by less than 2.5%
when a variation of atomizer air pressure is performed see Table
2. It is concluded that the effect of inhomogeneities in liquid fuel
placement, as they are present in the experimental setup, is more
than two orders of magnitudes smaller than the effect of the de-
gree of prevaporization on emissions see Fig. 4. For the emis-
sion measurements presented later, an atomizer air pressure level
of patom=12 kPa was chosen. The low sensitivity of NOx emis-
sions regarding liquid fuel placement can be explained by mul-
tiple effects.
1. The mass ﬂow in the region where the inhomogeneities of
liquid fuel equivalence ratio are present burner axis is
small.
2. The length of the droplet trajectories within the macroscopic
reaction zone is of the order of the linear diameter. Further-
more, the droplets in the macroscopic reaction zone do not
reach momentum equilibrium see Fig. 9. Therefore, the
heat release caused by nonprevaporized fuel is distributed
over a large volume. Consequently, the inhomogeneous dis-
tribution of liquid fuel at the beginning of the reaction zone
does not necessarily imply the existence of a macroscopic
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
φl [−]
r/db [−]
8kPa
12kPa
16kPa
Fig. 2
Radial distribution of liquid fuel equivalence ratio for
three atomizer air pressure levels, =0.55, =0.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
φl [−]
P [−]
8kPa
12kPa
16kPa
Fig. 3
CDF of liquid fuel equivalence ratio for three atomizer
air pressure levels, =0.55, =0.5
Table 2
Effect of variation of fuel placement on emissions, 
=0.55, =0.5
Case
patom kPa
EINO g/kg
D¯ 32 m
1
8
0.53
52
2
12
0.52
45
3
16
0.52
37
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2008, Vol. 130 / 051504-3
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

temperature inhomogeneity and, thus, high NO formation
rates.
3. In the present experimental conﬁguration, the gaseous fuel
equivalence ratio is not affected by inhomogeneities of the
liquid fuel placement, since liquid fuel prevaporization from
the downstream injector is minimized by cooling the liquid
fuel. An inhomogeneity of the gaseous fuel distribution
would cause a macroscopic hot spot and high NO formation
rates. Therefore, the impact of liquid fuel placement in the
experiment is fundamentally different from real combustors,
where the liquid fuel placement has a major impact on gas-
eous fuel distribution.
An additional source of uncertainty is the dependence of spray
properties on the injector liquid mass ﬂow. PDA measurements
demonstrated a sensitivity of the liquid mass ﬂow weighted Sauter
diameter on the atomizer fuel mass ﬂow. For a variation of the
liquid fuel mass fraction between 0.10.8, the mean Sauter
diameter varied within 40 mD3249 m. Considering the
low sensitivity of NO emissions regarding mean droplet diameter
see Table 2, the variation of the mean droplet diameter with the
liquid fuel mass fraction is not of signiﬁcance for the emission
measurements to be presented later.
Experimental Investigation of the Inﬂuence of Prevaporiza-
tion on NOx Emissions. The experimental setup previously de-
scribed was used to investigate the inﬂuence of incomplete pre-
vaporization on the NOx emissions. The variation of  was
performed for two equivalence ratios =0.5 and 0.6. The adia-
batic ﬂame temperatures corresponding to these equivalence ratios
are T=1650 K and 1837 K. The NO/NOx measurements were
performed with a chemoluminescence analyzer. Since the mea-
sured NO2 concentrations were virtually zero for all operating
conditions, only the NO concentration will be reported.
For both overall equivalence ratios, a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of
the liquid fuel fraction  on overall NO emissions is observed
Fig. 4. The relation between NO emissions and the liquid fuel
mass fraction is almost linear for both equivalence ratios. This
linear dependence of NO emissions on  can be explained by the
superposition of two ﬂame types: premixed combustion and drop-
let burning. Lean premixed ﬂames cause very low emissions of
nitric oxides see Fig. 4, =0 while droplet ﬂames, which may
burn at a near stoichiometric equivalence ratio, can cause signiﬁ-
cant formation of nitric oxides.
Numerical Investigation
Introduction. The experimental results presented in the previ-
ous section show that the presence of nonprevaporized droplets in
the macroscopic reaction zone has a signiﬁcant effect on overall
combustor NOx emissions. While the experimental setup allows
the variation of global parameters, detailed measurements are ex-
tremely difﬁcult to perform and analyze since the quantities of
interest show signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations in time and space due to
turbulence. Therefore, spray combustion was also numerically
studied. The primary objective of the numerical study is to iden-
tify and understand the effects governing the NO formation in
partially prevaporized spray ﬂames. An abstracted structure of
such a ﬂame is shown in Fig. 5.
In the case of a high degree of prevaporization, there will be a
stable premixed ﬂame front, which is traversed by droplets. If the
degree of prevaporization is reduced, the premixed ﬂame front
will extinguish. Then, an alternative ﬂame structure will be
formed. This ﬂame structure will still be characterized by an equi-
librium of upstream heat transport, which initiates chemical reac-
tion that in turn will cause downstream heat release. A detailed
discussion of plausible ﬂame structures is given by Borghi 14.
For a perfectly prevaporized mixture, the temperature of the
premixed ﬂame front will be at its maximum value. In contrast,
the global NOx emissions for this case are at a minimum see
Fig. 4. If the degree of prevaporization is reduced, the tempera-
ture of the premixed ﬂame front will decrease and cause the re-
gion to become less important to overall NO formation. Therefore,
the focus of the numerical investigation is on the processes in the
proximity of the droplet during droplet burning, which is likely to
predominantly contribute to overall emissions.
It is known that the droplet slip velocity inﬂuences the burning
mode of an individual burning droplet 6. Two characteristic
ﬂame types can be observed: An envelope ﬂame, which encloses
the droplet and burns as a diffusion ﬂame at near stoichiometric
conditions. At higher slip velocities, the envelope ﬂame extin-
guishes at the forward stagnation point and a wake ﬂame is estab-
lished. Since this transition from one ﬂame type to another is
expected to be accompanied by changes of the peak ﬂame tem-
perature, NO formation will also be affected by the ﬂame type
transition.
For the reasons previously discussed, the effect of droplet slip
velocity on ﬂame type transition and NO formation was numeri-
cally investigated. The results of the numerical simulation will be
discussed considering the droplet slip velocities measured in the
presented burner.
Concept of the Numerical Simulation. For the numerical
simulation, a conﬁguration representing a partially prevaporized
ﬂame burning in a constant area duct with isotropic droplet spac-
ing is considered Fig. 5. For a given equivalence ratio, degree of
prevaporization, oxidizer, and fuel temperature, the local tempera-
ture and mixture composition at Position 2, which is the beginning
of the computational domain, are calculated. This is done under
the assumption that all prevaporized fuel is burnt in the premixed
ﬂame and that the mixture has reached chemical equilibrium.
From the ratio of the gas and droplet velocity, the local liquid and
gas phase density, the overall equivalence ratio, and the degree of
prevaporization, the dimensionless droplet spacing l/d can be de-
termined from Eq. 2. The fuel mass fraction Yf is calculated
from the global equivalence ratio.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
α [−]
EINO [g/kg]
φ=0.5
φ=0.6
Fig. 4
Inﬂuence of liquid fuel mass fraction on overall NO
emissions
atomization
prevaporization
droplet burning
premixed flame
0
1
2
3
cg
cd
comp. domain
Fig. 5
Abstracted ﬂame structure of partially prevaporized
combustion
051504-4 / Vol. 130, SEPTEMBER 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

l/d =
1 −Y f	f
cd
cg
6Y fg 
1/3
2
For conditions covered by the experimental investigation, the
dimensionless spacing varies between 40l/d75. According to
Annamalai and Ryan 15, the interaction between burning drop-
lets is small to negligible for this droplet spacing range. Interac-
tion between burning droplets is referred to as group combustion.
Various regimes exist, which are generally characterized by the
presence of high gaseous fuel concentrations outside ﬂammability
limits surrounding a group of droplets in the reaction zone 15. In
lean spray ﬂames with homogeneous fuel placement, such a con-
dition is unlikely to exist since a homogeneous fuel placement
implies that the local equivalence ratio is identical to the overall
equivalence ratio. Therefore, nonprevaporized droplets will indi-
vidually burn in LDI combustion systems. Consequently, the
simulation does include just one individual droplet. The computa-
tional domain is a 2D rectangle, assuming rotational symmetry.
The computational domain covers −20x/d100 in the stream-
wise direction and 0r/d37.5 in the radial direction relative to
the droplet center. The domain is initialized with the temperature
and mixture composition present at the inlet. An initial droplet
temperature of 300 K was chosen. The droplet ﬂame establishes
itself due to autoignition. This initial condition is more realistic
than initializing an envelope ﬂame 16.
Numerical Modeling. In the present setup, the liquid phase
inside the droplet as well as the gas phase is fully discretized.
Hence, the modeling of vaporization and interphase heat transfer
requires an interface condition. For modeling of hydrocarbon oxi-
dation, a detailed mechanism for n-heptane is used 10. Addition-
ally, a detailed chemical mechanism developed by Hewson 11 is
used to model nitric oxide formation. In the gas phase region,
transport equations for momentum, enthalpy, and species mass
fractions are solved. The derivation of the transport equation is
discussed in detail by Warnatz et al. 17. In the liquid phase
region, only the enthalpy equation is solved.
For the modeling of heat conduction and concentration
driven species diffusion, mixture averaged coefﬁcients are used.
The thermal conductivity 
¯ is calculated from the mixture aver-
aged dynamic viscosity assuming a Prandtl number Pr=0.7 with

¯ =¯ c¯p/Pr. The diffusion coefﬁcient D¯
is calculated from
D¯ =¯ /¯Sc with Sc=0.7.
The interface condition is based on the assumption of phase
equilibrium at the droplet surface. The vapor pressure required for
the coupling of the species transport equation of the fuel was
calculated from the Antoine equation Eq. 3. The resulting local
evaporation ﬂux is needed to set the interface condition for energy
and mass conservation Eq. 4. The latent heat of vaporization
required for the energy interface condition is calculated as a func-
tion of temperature Eq. 5. The conservation of mass at the
interface is technically implemented by locally deforming the grid
Eq. 6. For spatial discretization, the central differencing
scheme was employed. For time stepping, the Crank–Nicolson
scheme was used.
Y f,s = Mf
M¯ exp	A −	
B
Tg,s + C

3
cf,s,g =
−D¯	
Yf
r
s
1 −Y f,s
4

f,l
dT
dr = f,gcf,shl,gTs,l
5
cf,s,gs,gYs,f = cf,s,lf,s,l
6
Results. A variation of the droplet slip velocity was performed
for one operating condition characterized by the preheat tempera-
ture Tmix2=673 K, liquid fuel fraction =0.1, global equivalence
ratio =0.5, and pamb=0.1 MPa. For these boundary conditions,
the temperature downstream of the premixed ﬂame and at the
beginning of the computational domain is 1805 K. The initial
droplet diameter is d=50 m. The droplet slip velocity was varied
between 1 m/scslip20 m/s, which corresponds to a droplet
Reynolds number of 0.18ReD3.6.
Since the simulation is transient, a time for comparison of the
nonintegral quantities needs to be chosen. For the operating
conditions considered here, the droplet ﬂames have reached a
stable burning mode after t=85, ... ,350 s, depending on the
ﬂame type. The comparison was performed at a simulation time
t=500 s.
For the investigation of the inﬂuence of the slip velocity on NO
formation, the ratio of the NO formation rate integrated over the
domain volume Eq. 7 and the vaporization fuel mass ﬂow of
the droplet is used to quantify NO formation. In a global context,
this is referred to as the emission index EINO.
m˙ NO = MNO 
i=1
m
ziRidV
7
In Fig. 6, the simulated effect of droplet slip on NO formation
in the droplet ﬂame is shown. For the range of droplet slip veloci-
ties considered, a variation of NO formation of almost two orders
of magnitude was found. The relation between emissions and slip
velocity exhibits a nonlinear transition in the slip velocity range of
2 m/scslip5 m/s. An explanation of this behavior can be ob-
tained from a comparison of the ﬂame structure.
The predicted temperature ﬁeld for three different droplet slip
velocities is shown in Fig. 7. The temperature ﬁeld around the
droplet is signiﬁcantly affected by droplet slip. Toward higher slip
velocities, it is becoming more homogeneous, while a decrease in
peak temperature is observed. Additionally, the region of the tem-
perature peak moves further away from the droplet.
From detailed analysis of the temperature and CH radical mass
fraction ﬁelds, it was concluded that the mass fraction peak of the
CH radical correlates quite well with the location of the heat re-
lease Fig. 7. For the smallest slip velocity of 2 m/s, an envelope
ﬂame is observed. However, the temperature and CH mass frac-
tion at the forward stagnation point are lower than in the wake
region. In the case of a slip velocity of 5 m/s, no signiﬁcant heat
release is observed in the upstream region of the droplet as the
local temperature does not exceed the inlet temperature. There-
fore, the extinction of the droplet ﬂame at the forward stagnation
Fig. 6
Dimensionless NO formation rate of single droplet
ﬂames
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2008, Vol. 130 / 051504-5
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

point must occur for a slip velocity of 2, ... ,5 m/s. If the slip
velocity is further increased, the ﬂame position moves further
downstream. The transition between the two droplet ﬂame types
explains the nonlinearity in the relation between droplet slip and
NO formation, as shown in Fig. 6.
Considering the results of the numerical investigation, the effect
of droplet slip on NO formation in a droplet ﬂame can be ex-
plained by the following mechanism.
1. The ﬂame position is determined by a chemical time scale
and a convective time scale. An increase of the slip velocity
results in a decrease of the convective time scale and, con-
sequently, the distance between droplet and ﬂame increases.
2. The distance between droplet and ﬂame exerts a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the equivalence ratio of the droplet ﬂame. In the
case of a large distance, mixing is improved, resulting in a
lower equivalence ratio of the droplet ﬂame.
3. The equivalence ratio at the position of the droplet ﬂame
determines the ﬂame temperature. Due to the nonlinear de-
pendence of NO formation on temperature, the equivalence
ratio has a signiﬁcant impact on NO formation in the ﬂame.
In the present analysis, radiative heat transfer was not consid-
ered. Radiative heat transfer can reduce the peak temperature of
the droplet ﬂame. Furthermore, the vaporization rate of the droplet
can be increased if the droplet absorbs radiation. The effect of
thermal radiation is, however, not expected to qualitatively alter
the effect of slip velocity on NO formation in droplet ﬂames.
Experimental Investigation of Droplet Slip Velocities
In the previous section, it was shown that the droplet slip ve-
locity has a strong impact on the microscopic droplet ﬂame shape
as well as local peak temperature, which in turn signiﬁcantly af-
fects NO formation. In the experimental investigation, it was
found that the presence of liquid fuel in the macroscopic reaction
zone has a signiﬁcant effect on overall emissions. In order to show
which magnitude of droplet slip velocities and, consequently,
droplet ﬂame type can be expected in a swirl-stabilized burner, the
droplet slip velocity was measured in the generic burner. As a
prerequisite, the location of the macroscopic reaction zone had to
be identiﬁed. Then, the mean gas phase and droplet velocities
were acquired in this region.
Identiﬁcation of the Macroscopic Reaction Zone. In order to
determine the mean slip velocities of the burning droplets, ﬁrst the
region where there is a high probability of the presence of burning
droplets needs to be identiﬁed. The recording of time averaged
chemiluminescence intensity and subsequent deconvolution is a
technique well suited to obtain this information. For the deconvo-
lution, the Abel transformation is used.
In the deconvoluted chemiluminescence recordings, two sepa-
rate regions are visible where signiﬁcant chemiluminescence in-
tensities are observed see Fig. 8. The main ﬂame burns in the
shear layer between fresh mixture and recirculated mixture. The
second region is located near the center axis in the inner recircu-
lation zone. The extent of the inner recirculation zone and the
position of the shear layer is characterized by the contour plot of
the axial gas phase velocity shown in Fig. 9.
Measurement of Droplet Slip in the Reaction Zone. For the
determination of droplet slip velocities, the disperse phase as well
as the gas phase velocities were simultaneously measured. An
LDA setup in combination with a phase discrimination technique
is used. Phase discrimination is performed by particle diameter.
The particle diameter is obtained from the recorded scattering
intensity. A discrimination diameter of d=2 m was chosen. The
effect of Gaussian laser intensity distribution in the measurement
volume on the scattering intensity is reduced by rejecting par-
ticles, which do not traverse the near center region of the mea-
surement volume. This is achieved by calculating the particle tra-
jectory length within the measurement volume and deﬁning a
boundary value lbound=0.8dprobevol. The results of the extended
LDA technique are in good agreement with disperse phase veloc-
Fig. 7
Effect of slip velocity on temperature and CH mass fraction
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
x/db
r/db
a.u. [ ]
0
1
2
3
4
main flame
inner recirculation
zone
Fig. 8
Chemiluminescence intensity, time averaged and de-
convoluted, band pass ﬁltered for CH* emission around
431 nm; =0.5, =0.5
051504-6 / Vol. 130, SEPTEMBER 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

ity measurements obtained with the PDA technique. The extended
LDA technique was preferred over the PDA technique for these
measurements since the optical access window available for LDA
was less susceptible to degradation by tracer particles.
The mean value of the axial and tangential velocity component
was obtained for both phases. The resulting droplet slip velocity is
shown in Fig. 9. The highest droplet slip velocities of 12 m/s
cslip16 m/s are observed near the center axis, where the inner
recirculation zone is located. Further outside, there exists a region
with lower slip velocities of 2 m/scslip5 m/s. This is the re-
gion of the main heat release. Thus, two regions characterized by
different droplet combustion modes can be discriminated.
1. The inner recirculation zone, where high droplet slip veloci-
ties prevail. According to the numerical study previously
presented Fig. 7 at high slip velocities, a wake ﬂame burn-
ing behind the droplet is expected to exist. The wake ﬂame
is characterized by low ﬂame temperatures and, thus, a mi-
nor contribution to the overall NOx emissions.
2. The main ﬂame, where low droplet slip velocities are ob-
served. In this region, the numerical simulation predicts the
existence of both envelope and wake ﬂames since the slip
velocities are within the range of the ﬂame type transition.
As a consequence, the droplet ﬂame temperature is higher,
which results in higher NO formation rates.
Summary
The experimental study shows that the degree of prevaporiza-
tion has a signiﬁcant impact on the NOx emissions of a swirl-
stabilized model gas turbine combustor. Thus, the reduction of
nonprevaporized fuel in the reaction zone does offer a signiﬁcant
NOx emission reduction potential for LDI combustion systems.
With increasing overall equivalence ratio, the emission reduction
potential decreases. The effect of the degree of prevaporization on
the NOx emissions is a consequence of the presence of droplets in
the macroscopic reaction zone. The droplet density in the reaction
zone is in the range in which individual droplet burning is ex-
pected. The absence of group combustion phenomena is a general
feature of LDI combustion systems with homogeneous fuel place-
ment.
An almost linear relation between the degree of prevaporization
and the overall nitric oxide emissions was found. The linearity
suggests that a superposition of two NO formation mechanisms
exists. While nitric oxide formation in lean premixed ﬂames is
minimal, a near stoichiometric droplet ﬂame can be a signiﬁcant
source of nitric oxides. Therefore, the amount of nonprevaporized
fuel which is burnt in droplet ﬂames is directly proportional to the
overall NOx emissions.
As a major result of the present study, an alternative method for
the NOx emission reduction in LDI combustion systems was iden-
tiﬁed. NO formation can be minimized for a given degree of pre-
vaporization by maximizing the droplet slip velocity in the mac-
roscopic reaction zone. The effect of the droplet slip velocity on
NOx emissions is governed by the following mechanism: An in-
crease in droplet slip velocity will increase the droplet/ﬂame dis-
tance, and due to an increase of the mixing length, the mixture
fraction at the ﬂame position is reduced. Consequently, the peak
temperature as well as the NO formation rates are lowered.
The mean droplet slip velocities in the swirl-stabilized model
combustor investigated in the present study were measured. In the
main reaction zone, relatively low droplet slip velocities were
measured, which are within the transition range between envelope
and wake ﬂame. In the inner recirculation zone, relatively high
slip velocities were measured, suggesting the presence of wake
ﬂames. Thus, it is concluded that major contributions to the NOx
emissions under nonprevaporized conditions stem from droplets
burning in the main reaction zone.
The ﬁnal conclusion of the present study is that a reliable pre-
diction of the NOx emissions of LDI combustors must include a
submodel that accounts for single droplet burning and the nitric
oxides formed within these droplet ﬂames.
Acknowledgment
The authors gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support for
this project by the European community within the framework of
the research program TLC “Towards Lean Combustion” Contract
No. AST4-CT-2005-012326.
Nomenclature
Latin Letters
c  velocity magnitude m/s
D  diffusion coefﬁcient m2/s
d  diameter m
D32  Sauter mean diameter SMD m
f  ﬂux m3/m2 s
h  total enthalpy J/kg K
l  droplet spacing m
M  molar mass kg/mol
axial gas velocity [m/s]
x/db
r/db
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
droplet slip velocity [m/s]
x/db
r/db
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Fig. 9
Axial gas phase velocity and droplet slip velocity magnitude, =0.5, 
=0.5, thick black line: cax=0 m/s
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2008, Vol. 130 / 051504-7
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 8 ---

m˙  mass ﬂow kg/s
R  species source term kg/s
s  swirl number
T  temperature K
u  velocity component m/s
X  molar fraction
Y  mass fraction
z  stoichiometric factor
Greek Letters
  ratio of liquid to total fuel mass
  equivalence ratio

  thermal conductivity W/m K
  density kg/m3
Subscripts
ax  axial
b  burner
f  fuel
g  gas phase
l  liquid phase
mix1  condition after mixing of prevaporized fuel
fraction
mix 2  virtual condition after complete vaporization
ox  oxidizer
r  radial
s  droplet surface
References
1 Bauer, H.-J., 2004, “New Low Emission Strategies and Combustor Designs for
Civil Aeroengine Applications,” Prog. Comput. Fluid Dyn., 4, pp. 130–142.
2 Aggarwal, S. K., 1998, “A Review of Spray Ignition Phenomena, Present
Status and Future Research,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 24, pp. 565–600.
3 Cano-Wolff, M., Meisl, J., Koch, R., and Wittig, S., 1998, “The Inﬂuence of
Evaporation on the Autoignition-Delay of n-Heptane Air Mixtures Under Gas
Turbine Conditions,” 27th International Symposium on Combustion, pp. 2025–
2031.
4 Cooper, L. P., 1980, “Effect of the Degree of Prevaporization Upon Emissions
for a Premixed Partially Vaporized Combustion System,” NASA Technical
Paper No. 1582.
5 Baessler, S., Moesl, K. G., and Sattelmayer, T., 2006, “NOx Emissions of a
Premixed Partially Vaporized Kerosene Spray Flame,” ASME Paper No.
GT2006-90248.
6 Spalding, D. B., 1953, “The Combustion of Liquid Fuels,” Fourth Interna-
tional Symposium on Combustion, pp. 847–864.
7 Pope, D. N., and Gogos, G., 2005, “Numerical Simulation of Fuel Droplet
Extinction Due to Forced Convection,” Combust. Flame, 142, pp. 89–106.
8 Raghavan, V., Babu, V., Sundararajan, T., and Natarajan, R., 2005, “Flame
Shapes and Burning Rates of Spherical Fuel Particles in a Mixed Convective
Environment,” Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 48, pp. 5354–5370.
9 Jiang, T. L., Chen, W. S., Tsai, M. J., and Chiu, H. H., 1995, “A Numerical
Investigation of Multiple Flame Conﬁgurations in Convective Droplet Gasiﬁ-
cation,” Combust. Flame, 103, pp. 221–238.
10 Held, T. J., Marchese, A. J., and Dryer, F. L., 1997, “A Semi-Empirical Reac-
tion Mechanism for n-Heptane Oxidation and Pyrolysis,” Combust. Flame,
123, pp. 107–146.
11 Hewson, J. C., 1997, “Pollutant Emissions From Nonpremixed Hydrocarbon
Flames,” University of California.
12 Schaefer, O., 2005, “Experimentelle und Numerische Analyse des Flammen-
rueckschlags bei der Mageren Vormischverbrennung,” ITS, University of
Karlsruhe.
13 Maier, G., and Wittig, S., 1999, “Fuel preparation and Emission Characteris-
tics of a Pressure Loaded LPP Combustor,” AIAA Paper No. 99-3774.
14 Borghi, R., 1996, “Background on Droplets and Sprays,” Lecture Series-von
Karman Institute, Vol. 2, pp. 1–39.
15 Annamalai, K., and Ryan, W., 1992, “Interactive Processes in Gasiﬁcation and
Combustion. Part 1: Liquid Drop Arrays and Clouds,” Prog. Energy Combust.
Sci., 18, pp. 221–295.
16 Chiu, H. H., 1996, “Multiple-State Phenomena and Hysteresis of a Combust-
ing Isolated Droplet,” Atomization Sprays, 6, pp. 1–26.
17 Warnatz, J., Maas, U., and Dibble, R. W., 2001, Combustion, Springer, New
York.
051504-8 / Vol. 130, SEPTEMBER 2008
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Mar 2010 to 129.137.90.23. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
