
--- Page 1 ---

S. Galeotti1
DIEF—Department of Industrial  
Engineering of Florence,  
University of Florence,  
Via S. Marta 3,  
Firenze 50139, Italy  
e-mail: sofia.galeotti@unifi.it
A. Picchi
DIEF—Department of Industrial  
Engineering of Florence,  
University of Florence,  
Via S. Marta 3,  
Firenze 50139, Italy  
e-mail: alessio.picchi@unifi.it
R. Becchi
DIEF—Department of Industrial  
Engineering of Florence,  
University of Florence,  
Via S. Marta 3,  
Firenze 50139, Italy  
e-mail: riccardo.becchi@unifi.it
R. Meloni
Baker Hughes,  
Via Felice Matteucci 2,  
Firenze 50127, Italy  
e-mail: roberto.meloni@bakerhughes.com
G. Babazzi
Baker Hughes,  
Via Felice Matteucci 2,  
Firenze 50127, Italy  
e-mail: giulia.babazzi@bakerhughes.com
A. Andreini
DIEF—Department of Industrial  
Engineering of Florence,  
University of Florence,  
Via S. Marta 3,  
Firenze 50139, Italy  
e-mail: antonio.andreini@unifi.it
Impact of Fuel Injection System 
on the Performance of an 
Industrial Burner With Hydrogen 
Piloting Operated With Simulated 
Exhaust Gas Recirculation
Exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) can be exploited to increase the CO2 content at the exhaust 
of gas turbines (GTs), in order to improve the efficiency of carbon capture systems. The lower 
oxygen level leads to challenging conditions for the combustion process, resulting in high 
CO and unburned hydrocarbon emissions and the possible onset of thermoacoustic 
instabilities. To mitigate these effects and expand the combustor’s operational range, pilot 
flames can be employed to stabilize the combustion process, with localized hydrogen 
injections further enhancing reactivity. In this demanding and complex environment created 
by EGR, fuel injection strategy is crucial in the flame stabilization mechanism, and many 
design parameters come into play. The present work illustrates the results of an extensive 
screening performed in a single-cup atmospheric test rig at the THT Lab of the University of 
Florence, with EGR conditions simulated with CO2 addition in the combustion air. In 
particular, six different configurations of a dry low NOx industrial burner have been tested, 
varying the arrangement and geometry of the pilot jets, and the premix fuel injection mode. 
Burners’ performance has been compared in terms of CO emissions, lean blow-out (LBO) 
limits, and dynamic behavior, and OH* chemiluminescence imaging has also been employed 
to investigate the flame structure. The results point out that, for the investigated 
configuration, the occurrence of thermoacoustic instabilities is, together with CO emissions, 
the main limiting factor, but benefits have been observed with hydrogen addition, and 
promising configurations will be further tested in engine-like conditions.  
[DOI: 10.1115/1.4069776] 
Introduction
Exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) is widely used in internal 
combustion engines as a strategy to reduce NOx emissions [1]. The 
adoption in gas turbine (GT) systems on the other hand has been 
limited because of the high costs and complexity involved, which 
are not easily justified when compared to the performance of 
existing emission control systems, such as dry low NOx technol­
ogies. EGR becomes relevant in gas turbines frameworks when 
considered as a mean to enhance CO2 concentrations in exhaust 
gases, for integration with carbon capture and storage (CCS) 
systems. Indeed, higher CO2 concentrations increase the efficiency 
of carbon capture process [2], but typically low levels are 
encountered in GT exhaust because of lean conditions and 
secondary air dilution. The implementation of EGR allows to 
mitigate this limitation [3,4], improving the performance of the 
coupled GT–CCS system.
Turbo Expo: Turbomachinery Technical Conference & Exposition (GT2025), June 
16–20, 2025. GT2025.
1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received July 9, 2025; final manuscript received August 26, 2025; 
published online November 17, 2025. Editor: Jerzy T. Sawicki.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041018-1 
Copyright V
C 2026 by ASME and Baker Hughes
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 2 ---

Early investigations into EGR’s impact at engine conditions 
revealed positive effects for NOx reduction [5–7], while lower 
oxygen levels in the recirculated oxidizer create challenging 
conditions for the combustion process, leading to increased 
emissions of CO and unburned hydrocarbons, which restrict the 
extent to which EGR can be applied [5,8–10]. Investigations with 
optical diagnostics revealed that CO2 significantly affects flame 
structure and temperature [11] and CO2 dilution reduces the smallest 
scales of flame wrinkling in turbulent methane–air flames, leading to 
lower turbulent burning velocities [12]. More recently, Rodriguez 
Camacho et al. [13] used CH* chemiluminescence to show that 
diluents with different compositions have impacts on dynamic flame 
response, particularly at extremely low oxygen levels.
To address the challenges posed by these adverse effects, various 
solutions can be implemented to enhance the combustor operation 
under such demanding conditions. In the present study, an 
innovative approach introduced is the addition of a small amount 
of hydrogen with the pilot line. Studies by Oztarlik et al. [14] and 
Barbosa et al. [15] demonstrated that small hydrogen injections can 
stabilize thermoacoustically unstable flames and reduce oscilla­
tions, albeit with increased NOx and, in some cases, CO emissions. 
Research by Shanbhogue et al. [16] further revealed how hydrogen 
blending alters flame dynamics by increasing the extinction strain 
rate, which impacts both flame holding and stability margins. Cheng 
et al. [17] confirmed that low-swirl injectors can handle significant 
hydrogen fractions without major system modifications, making 
hydrogen a viable solution for stabilizing flames in EGR conditions. 
Hydrogen applications within EGR systems can be found for 
internal combustion engines applications [18], while this approach 
remains largely unexplored for gas turbines. The most recent work 
of Rodriguez Camacho et al. [19] represents one of the first studies in 
this context focusing on the effect on the flame dynamic behavior.
This work is part of a wider research context, inside the European 
Project TRANSITION (fuTure hydRogen Assisted gas turbiNeS for 
effective carbon capTure IntegratiON) with the final goal of 
enhancing burner performance under challenging conditions 
involved by high EGR rates in gas turbines systems. In particular, 
an experimental campaign was conducted on an industrial burner in 
an atmospheric single-sector reactive test rig. This phase of the 
research can be considered the first stage of a design improvement to 
be placed inside a more general work frame, with test at atmospheric 
pressure allowing an extensive preliminary screening for exploring 
different solutions to improve flame stability. For replicating the 
lower oxygen level caused by EGR at lab scale, combustion air has 
been diluted with CO2, resulting in overall more challenging 
conditions for flame stability than real EGR because of the high CO2 
in the oxidizer [20]. This approach was chosen as it is convenient for 
storage purposes, while maintaining the main goal of comparing 
different solutions for enhancing burner performance under 
consistent conditions. The first stage of the investigation [21] 
presented a detailed characterization of the baseline burner 
configuration fueled only with natural gas (NG). In addition to 
studying behavior under conventional conditions, the effects of 
EGR were investigated, showing that as oxygen levels decrease, the 
flame becomes more widespread and shifts downstream. Higher CO 
emissions and thermoacoustic instabilities are recorded, limiting the 
performance under EGR conditions. The use of pilot hydrogen 
flames was explored in Ref. [20] to improve flame stability in order 
to limit the detrimental consequences of EGR. Hydrogen addition, 
whether blended with natural gas or injected as a pure stream, proved 
to be effective in mitigating these issues, reducing CO emissions, 
and improving the burner’s dynamic behavior, both with and 
without EGR.
The present work represents a further step to enhance the 
performance of GT burners under the conditions generated by high 
EGR rates. In particular, various fuel injection solutions were tested 
for both the premix and pilot lines, as fuel distribution in the primary 
zone of the combustor plays a key role in stabilizing the flame. After 
a summary of the experimental setup employed for the investigation 
and the tested conditions, the performance of the new burner 
configurations will be analyzed in terms of stability limits, 
emissions, and dynamic behavior, both with standard air as oxidizer 
and in EGR conditions. The effect of different fuel injection 
strategies on these parameters will be analyzed with the support of 
OH* chemiluminescence imaging, which allows to see variations in 
the reaction zone structure, offering a detailed analysis of the effect 
of the different geometric feature. Finally, a summary of the 
performance of all the tested configurations will be presented.
Experimental Apparatus
Test Rig and Measurements. The experimental campaign took 
place at the THT Lab of the University of Florence, employing an 
optical reactive test rig with single-sector tubular chamber. A 
detailed description of the facility and the adopted test rig is 
available in Ref. [22]. Figure 1 reports a schematic of the facility, 
together with a picture of the reactive test rig. Briefly, dried 
compressed air is fed to the test rig by two screw compressors, with 
an electric heater preheating the airflow. CO2 is injected in the 
combustion air upstream of the electric heater to lower the inlet 
oxygen content and reproduce EGR conditions. Downstream of the 
test section, a water jacket exhaust duct is installed, equipped with 
four water sprayers to quench the flue gases before the stack.
The test rig is fed by two natural gas lines, taken from the local gas 
network and compressed to 16 bars, while hydrogen is produced on 
demand with an electrolyzer, which can deliver up to 14,000 Nlt/h of 
hydrogen at 8 bar.
A cross section of the test rig is presented in Fig. 2(a), showing the 
tubular chamber enclosed in an outer vessel. The burner is installed 
on the upstream vessel, connected to the fuel lines with a dedicated 
flange. The outer downstream vessel is equipped with two 
perpendicular quartz windows to allow optical access on the flame. 
The combustion chamber consists of a 2.5 mm thick cylindrical 
quartz liner, held by rods and connected with a downstream metal 
duct which directs flue gases to the test rig’s exhaust system. Liner’s 
outer walls are cooled by forced convection, using a portion of 
incoming air that flows through the annular space between the liner 
and the confining vessel, bypassing the combustion process. The 
dome plate, different from the actual GT configuration, is equipped 
with effusion cooling holes, introducing cooling air into the 
combustion chamber to the burner main-flow. Ignition is achieved 
via a spark plug positioned along the flame tube downstream of the 
optical liner.
Regarding the measurement techniques, OH* chemilumines­
cence imaging was employed to visualize the flame structure, 
implemented with a Phantom MIRO M340 camera coupled with the 
Hamamatsu C16031-311-Ax image intensifier. A bandpass filter 
(k ¼ 310 6 5 nm) was mounted on a Nikon UV 105 mm f/4.5 lens to 
capture the OH* transition, and images were acquired at 1000 Hz 
with 0.5 ms intensifier gate. Camera field of view (FoV) for OH* 
chemiluminescence imaging is highlighted in Fig. 2(a), together 
with the coordinate system centered on the burner outlet.
CO and NOx levels are measured with a HORIBA PG350 gas 
analyzer, after the exhaust is extracted from the flame tube about 
350 mm from the burner exit, brought with heated pipeline kept at 
150 C and dried before the analysis by a HORIBA PSS-5H 
refrigerator. Because of the wide variation in operating conditions in 
terms of fuel and oxidant composition, emission measurements are 
expressed as raw ppm measured by the gas analyzer on dry flue gas, 
with the same approach adopted in Ref. [8].
A high frequency pressure sensor (PCB) is used to detect the onset 
of thermoacoustic instabilities measuring pressure oscillations 
inside the combustion chamber (faq ¼ 12.8 kHz). It is installed 
downstream of the optical liner, at the same axial location as the 
emission probe. Pressure oscillations are characterized by their root 
mean square value, denoted as P0
RMS.
Investigated Burner Configurations. The burner concept 
investigated in this work is a well-established design employed by 
Baker Hughes for industrial gas turbine applications. Based on an 
041018-2 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                              
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 3 ---

aeroderivative design, it offers versatility to operate stably under 
varying conditions [23], by minimizing the risks of flashback and 
auto-ignition while maintaining a compact combustor size. 
Turbulence is generated by two counter-rotating axial swirlers, 
with the burner architecture reported in the schematic of Fig. 2(b). 
Flowfield measurements performed in past test campaigns enlight­
ened how this layout generates a jet-flame, without inner 
recirculation zone [20]. Indeed, the low swirl number of the 
counter-rotating swirler configuration is not sufficient to cause 
vortex breakdown to occur inside the combustion chamber, and only 
the external recirculation zone is present.
The burner features three independent fuel lines, in order to 
control pollutant emissions and at the same time ensure a stable 
combustion process also at partial load [24]. Premix line (PMX) 
injects the fuel at the tip of one of the two swirlers in a jet cross 
flow configuration. Strong mixing is ensured thanks to the intense 
turbulence created by the shear layer generated between the two 
swirlers in the converging nozzle, which accelerates the flow 
before entering the combustion chamber. Pilot line (PLT) injects 
the fuel directly into the combustor chamber through circum­
ferentially equally spaced holes, giving rise to a diffusive flame 
front, helping the flame stabilization, and allowing safe and stable 
operation with different engine loads [25]. Center-body line (CB) 
injects the fuel along the burner axis in coflow with the incoming 
combustion air. Injection point is located upstream of the burner 
outlet, therefore ensuring a certain degree of premixing, although 
less than that achieved with the premix line. When it is not fed 
with fuel, the center-body is cooled by a small amount of purge air 
channeled through a hole along the burner axis. PMX and CB 
lines have been fed only with natural gas, while PLT holes can 
inject a fuel mixture going from pure natural gas to pure 
hydrogen. Fuel blending is realized upstream of the burner inlet, 
in correspondence with the flange connecting the burner to the 
test rig.
Different injection systems for both premix and pilot fuel have 
been tested, with a total of seven configurations, summarized in 
Table 1. The baseline configuration, which has been thoroughly 
characterized in previous works, is indicated as B0. In particular, the 
present study investigated the effect of different parameters:
 The pilot jet exit velocity was changed by varying the holes exit 
area (B1 and B4).
 Different jet orientations were tested varying the holes 
inclination / (see Fig. 2(b)) (B1, B4, and B6).
 The number of pilot holes was varied from N to 2N to reduce jet 
penetration (B2).
 The premix fuel injection location was moved from the inner 
swirler (all new layouts).
Operating Conditions. Reactive tests have been performed at 
ambient pressure, and the lower oxygen level in the oxidizer caused 
by EGR has been reproduced by adding CO2 to the combustion air. 
EGR condition is represented by the inlet oxygen mass fraction YO2, 
which is a key similarity parameter between real EGR and simulated 
conditions. Even though CO2 dilution is much more convenient than 
using nitrogen mixtures for the oxidizer to simulate EGR, tests with 
EGR-like conditions are still demanding in terms of gas con­
sumption. Indeed, only a single EGR level has been tested, 
sufficiently high to push the burners to operate close to the stability 
limit, corresponding to YO2 ¼ 16:6%. This condition is referred to as 
“EGR” in the results discussion.
For each configuration, the total thermal power was computed to 
match the same adiabatic flame temperature in standard conditions 
with only natural gas, in order to have a fairly comparison. This was 
done to compensate small variations in the burner effective areas due 
to the 3D printing process, leading to slightly different oxidizer mass 
flow rate with the same pressure drop. Except for lean blow-out 
(LBO) tests, total thermal power (TPTOT) has been kept constant for 
each configuration to such reference value (TPREF), in order to 
Fig. 1 Combustion test cell plant (a) and picture of the reactive test rig (b) at the THT Lab of the University of Florence 
Fig. 2 Cross section of the reactive test rig (a) and investigated burner schematic (b) 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041018-3 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 4 ---

compare different conditions because of the dual fuel configuration. 
For the same reason, fuel splits are defined with thermal power. 
PMX% is the thermal fraction of the premix line (always fully 
natural gas) over the total one. Split changes between the two fuel 
lines have been carried out to identify the most promising 
operational window for each configuration. TP(H2) is the fraction 
of hydrogen thermal power over the total one, which includes both 
the premix and pilot contributions regardless of the fuel. The 
hydrogen fraction was maintained below 10% of the total thermal 
power, a value identified as an effective tradeoff. This limit ensures a 
balance between enhancing combustion stability and maximizing 
CO2 content in the exhaust, aligning with the final goal of improving 
the efficiency of CCS integration [20].
The burner pressure drop has been kept at a reference value during 
the whole measurement campaign. Slight variations were measured 
for the test with simulated EGR, as the total mass flow rate of the 
oxidant was kept constant, while the composition of the mixture and 
thus the molecular weight varied. The inlet temperature of the 
oxidizer Tinlet was held constant at 300 C. Summarizing, the 
investigated operating conditions are reported in Table 2.
Results and Discussion
The results start with the steady flame structure of the different 
burner configurations, since it helps to interpret and understand the 
following findings. Then, the burners’ performance is presented, 
first under standard conditions without EGR, and second with 
simulated EGR, achieved by adding CO2 to the combustion air. In 
particular, stability limits, pollutant emissions, and dynamic 
behavior will be presented, in order to investigate the effect of 
different fuel injection modes on the burner behavior. In the last part 
of the results, a summary of the main performance parameters is 
offered, with the purpose to highlight the major outcomes of this 
comparison.
Steady Flame Structure. The effect on the flame structure of 
different fuel injection modes has been investigated with OH* 
chemiluminescence. Time-averaged normalized OH* images are 
presented in Fig. 3 for different operating conditions: the first 
column reports the fully diffusive case with only natural gas, while 
the second and third columns refer to 50%PMX and [TP(H2) ¼ 5%] 
with standard air as oxidizer and in simulated EGR conditions, 
respectively.
In the fully diffusive case (0%PMX), the reaction zone is lifted, 
with different extent for each configuration. In such conditions, 
some layouts give rise to a nonsymmetrical reaction zone (B1–B2 
and B4), probably due to small geometrical differences in the holes 
exit, altering the jets velocity. At higher premix, the influence of the 
single pilot jets is reduced, and the flame returns approximately 
symmetrical. In all cases with higher premixing and doping the pilot 
jets with a small amount of hydrogen, the reaction zone comes closer 
to the burner exit and becomes more compact, both shorter and with 
reduced radial extension. The effect of simulated EGR (third column 
of Fig. 3) is consistent for all the tested configurations, with the 
reaction zone that shifts downstream and becomes widespread, as 
observed in previous works from the authors [20–22]. In this 
condition, the diffuse flame structure is similar among all the burner 
configurations, but some differences, especially at the flame base, 
can be enlightened. The extension of the region with high OH* 
values is similar, but the overall position varies. In particular, 
configuration B1 shows the flame located very close to the burner 
exit, while B5-PMX positions the flame further downstream 
compared to the other layouts. Additionally, in some cases (B0 
and B4), a more pronounced curvature at the flame base is visible, 
anchoring near the pilot jets closer to the burner exit.
Results Without Exhaust Gas Recirculation (Standard Air as 
Oxidizer). A key factor in burner design is its ability to maintain 
stable combustion, which becomes even more critical in the 
perspective of operation with high EGR rates. With this purpose, 
LBO tests have been performed in order to explore the stability 
limits of the different burner configurations, for two fuel splits. In 
each case, starting from stable conditions, the fuel mass flow rate 
was gradually decreased while keeping constant the pressure drop 
across the combustion chamber and therefore the air mass flow rate, 
until the flame extinguished. The blow-out event was identified by 
looking at the pressure oscillations detected with the high frequency 
pressor sensor, which drop sharply when blow out is reached. The 
procedure was repeated three times for each case, showing great 
repeatability of the results.
Results are reported in terms of fraction of the reference thermal 
power at blow out in Fig. 4. Following the expected behavior with 
lower premix fraction, LBO margin increases, as pilot jets are 
primarily responsible in the flame stabilization process. As 
expected, all the new configurations show improved LBO resistance 
with respect to the baseline case, except for B4, which has straight 
pilot jets with higher exit velocity (half total outlet area). Looking at 
the chemiluminescence images of Fig. 3, with standard air B4 layout 
presents the flame significantly lifted (cases (j) and (k)), especially 
for the fully diffusive case, and stabilizes at higher distance from the 
burner outlet with respect to the other configurations. Straight pilot 
fuel jets intercept the main flow in a region where the premixed jet 
has high velocity, and the higher fuel jet velocity further lifts off the 
flame. This does not help in terms of combustion stability, as the 
flame is subjected to higher strain. As a consequence, flame loss is 
approached earlier, resulting in the worst LBO margin among the 
investigated configurations. The leanest condition is instead reached 
with B1 layout, with outward swirled holes and increased total pilot 
exit area, therefore reduced jet velocity. This causes part of the pilot 
fuel to remain entrapped in the outer recirculation zone and react 
with the dome effusion cooling air, as it can be seen in Figs. 3(d) and 
3(e). When the fuel mass flow rate is decreased to approach LBO, jet 
velocity is further reduced, and the flame stabilizes attached to the 
dome in the low velocity area of the outer recirculation zone, where 
reaction is able to sustain also in globally very lean conditions. As a 
drawback, for this configuration, high temperatures were recorded in 
stable conditions (TPREF). Figure 5 shows the temperature measured 
on the dome cold side, with a thermocouple installed near the liner 
walls, as reported in the schematic. In general, all the configurations 
show a decreasing trend with higher premix fraction, because the 
flame closes toward the burner axis, therefore reducing the thermal 
load at higher radius where the thermocouple is located. B4 
configuration with higher jet velocity shows the lowest thermal load 
Table 1 Investigated burner configurations 
PLT
PMX
N
D
/
(-)
(mm)
Direction
( deg)
Position
CB
B0
N
D
Outward
/REF
Inner swirler
—
B1
N
1.2D
Outward, swirled
/REF
Outer swirler
—
B2
2N
0.7D
Outward
/REF
Outer swirler
—
B4
N
0.7D
Straight
0
Outer swirler
—
B5-PMX
N
D
Outward
/REF
Outer swirler
—
B5-CB
N
D
Outward
/REF
—
YES
B6
N
D
2  Outward
2/REF
Outer swirler
—
Table 2 Tested operating conditions 
Tinlet
300
(C)
DP=P
4.2
(%)
TPTOT
TPREF
(kW)
PMX%
095
(%)
TP(H2) %
0–5–10
(%)
YO2
23.2–16.6
(%mass)
041018-4 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                              
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 5 ---

Fig. 3 Normalized OH* chemiluminescence images 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041018-5 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 6 ---

on the dome, as the flame is more lifted, with negative consequences 
on combustion stability, confirmed by LBO measurements. The 
highest temperatures are recorded for B1 configuration, particularly 
when the premix fraction exceeds a certain threshold. In fact, by 
reducing the pilot fraction and thus the pilot jet velocity, jet 
penetration is diminished, similarly to what occurs when reducing 
the fuel flow to approach LBO conditions, and pilot fuel reacts with 
the dome cooling air. Further increasing the premix does not lead to 
an increase in the measured temperature, probably because the small 
differences in the holes exit cause a nonsymmetrical distribution of 
the reaction zone, as it can be observed in Fig. 3(e), and only a single 
thermocouple is present. Overall, no damages or alterations were 
detected, neither on the burner outlet nor on the dome. At engine 
conditions, such behavior would be emphasized, but managing this 
effect would require a dedicated design of the cooling system, with 
possible drawbacks on other design aspects.
For all the new configurations, premix fuel is injected at the tip of 
the outer swirler (except B5-CB), while for the baseline case 
injection point is located in the inner swirler. B5 configuration has 
outwardly oriented pilot jets, similar to the baseline layout. Injecting 
the premix fuel in the outer swirler promotes the interaction with the 
pilot flames, giving rise to a more compact reaction zone with 
respect to the baseline case, as visible in Fig. 3(n). This has positive 
effects on the LBO margin, as shown by the significant gain in this 
aspect comparing the baseline case with B5-PMX. The same pilot 
layout has been tested also injecting the fuel with the center-body 
along the burner axis, in configuration B5-CB. In this configuration, 
premixed fuel is injected along the axis, closer to when it is injected 
on the internal swirler in terms of position, but lower mixture 
uniformity is achieved due to shorter premixing length. Also, in this 
case, the flame results more compact than the baseline case (see 
Fig. 3(q)), and the lower premixing level promotes locally richer 
condition which helps in stabilizing the flame. Indeed, the LBO 
margin is improved with respect to the baseline configuration, 
slightly lower than B5-PMX as the interaction between premix and 
pilot fuel is decreased.
Considering only the effect of the pilot holes orientation with 
premix fuel injected in the outer swirler, LBO margin is slightly 
improved for B6 with respect to B5-PMX. For B6 layout, with 
double outward angle of the pilot jets, enhanced interaction between 
pilot fuel and outer recirculation zone is present, as proved by the 
smears of OH* intensity at the flame base in this area for 50%PMX 
and [TP(H2) ¼ 5%] (Fig. 3(t)). Indeed, improved resistance to blow 
out is recorded because of the greater recirculation of activated 
radicals at the flame base, supporting flame stabilization.
The effect of increasing the number of pilot jets was studied with 
configuration B2, with nominally the same jets exit velocity of the 
baseline. The double number of jets should reduce the jet penetration 
and improve the mixing process. LBO resistance is better than the 
baseline, but it is almost the same as the B5-PMX, which has same 
premix system. Therefore, the specific effect of the pilot holes 
number is limited, and the main difference in terms of blow-out 
margin comes from the enhanced interaction between pilot and 
premix fuel that is established with the injection of the premix fuel in 
the outer swirler.
Overall, new configurations with premix fuel injected in the outer 
swirler generally show improved LBO margins due to enhanced 
interaction between pilot flames and the premix zone, resulting in 
more compact reaction zones. The B1 layout with reduced jet 
velocity achieved the leanest conditions, but this configuration led to 
other disadvantages in terms of flame position and dome heat load, 
as highlighted above. B5-PMX and B6 offered significant stability 
gains through better recirculation at the flame base with outwardly 
oriented pilot jets, while increasing the holes number (B2) showed 
limited additional benefit compared to improved premix–pilot 
interaction.
While the new configurations demonstrated improved lean blow- 
out resistance compared to the baseline, this comes at the expense of 
worsened dynamic behavior. Enhanced interactions between pilot 
and premix fuel reactions, while beneficial for LBO margin, can 
amplify pressure oscillations and exacerbate thermoacoustic 
instabilities, potentially limiting overall performance. For the 
baseline configuration, the outbreak of thermoacoustic instabilities 
was observed at high premix splits, and Fig. 6 summarizes this 
aspect for all the investigated burner layouts. Results are reported in 
in terms premix fraction stably achievable. Tests are performed at 
Fig. 4 LBO limits for different burner configurations with 
100%NG and standard air as oxidizer
Fig. 5 Temperature measured on the dome cold side for 
100%NG and TPREF
Fig. 6 Premix fraction stably achievable for different burner 
configurations with standard air as oxidizer
041018-6 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                              
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 7 ---

constant total thermal power, with pure hydrogen injected with the 
pilot line (TP(H2) ¼ TPPLT), and gradually increasing the premix 
fraction until an amplitude threshold of pressure oscillations is 
reached. For the baseline case with only natural gas, pressure 
oscillations increase sharply when the premix fraction overcomes 
80%PMX, and hydrogen injection allows to shift this limit to 90%, 
therefore widening the burner operating window [20]. For the B5- 
CB case, premix fraction has to be kept under 60%PMX because of 
facility limitations in the fuel upstream pressure, and this aspect 
could not be investigated. With respect to the baseline case, this 
aspect is worsened for all the new configurations, with oscillation 
rising for lower values of the premix fraction. Injecting hydrogen 
with the pilot line widens the stable region, with slightly different 
extent depending on the configuration. As the premix system is 
different for the new burner layouts (B1–B6), these results indicate 
that injecting the fuel in the outer swirler leads to better resistance to 
lean blow out due to the increased interaction with the pilots and the 
external recirculation zone, but at the same time the flame is more 
sensitive to local equivalence ratio fluctuations at high premix 
fractions. In general, it is worth noticing that the configurations with 
worst LBO limits (B0 and B4) show instead the capability to stably 
reach higher premix fractions, and the effect of hydrogen addition is 
more beneficial for such configurations. A possible interpretation of 
this behavior could be linked with the flame lift off. Indeed, 
detaching the flame base from the burner outlet increases the strain 
to which the flame is subjected therefore worsening flame stability, 
but at the same time helps in dampening fluctuations of the local 
flow, with the lift off height acting as a buffer, with positive effects 
on the dynamic behavior.
Concluding the burner characterization without EGR, Fig. 7
shows CO and NOx emissions measured for the different layouts 
varying the premix thermal power split, with only natural gas.
As expected, NOx levels decrease linearly with growing premix 
fraction for all the burner configurations. Diffusive pilot flames are 
mainly responsible for NOx production due to local quasi- 
stoichiometric conditions, which, on the other hand, are crucial in 
the stabilization process. Comparing the results of B0, B5-PMX, and 
B5-CB, which have similar pilot holes and different premixing 
strategies, NOx levels are almost the same for all the tested fuel split. 
This means that all these premixing strategies are effective, thanks to 
the airflow high velocity and strong turbulence created by the swirlers, 
and differences are limited. B4 layout shows the lowest NOx levels, 
further reinforcing the concept that faster and less open pilot jets mix 
better with the oxidizer. Indeed, by detaching the flame from the 
nozzle outlet, lifted flames provide a high premixing level in the 
reaction zone, with beneficial effect on NOx emissions, especially at 
low premix fraction. Results of B1 layout, with reduced jet velocity, 
also confirm this behavior, as NOx values are higher than the other 
configurations, overall indicating poor mixing, confirmed also by 
very high CO emissions at low premix (not included in the scale of 
Fig. 7(a) in order to better compare the other configurations). The 
dependency of CO emission on the premix fraction is reduced, but all 
the burner configurations exhibit the same nonmonotonic trend. CO 
levels are substantially lower for the B5-PMX case, because of the 
higher interaction between outwardly oriented pilot jets and premix 
fuel injected in the outer swirler. Focusing on the effect of pilot 
orientation, B6 shows slightly higher values for both CO and NOx 
levels with respect to B5-PMX, with decreasing difference as the 
premix fraction increases. This again could be linked with the mixing 
process, which is improved as the pilot jets interact more with the 
oxidizer main flow. Therefore, with more open pilot jets (B6), a lower 
level of premixing is achieved, but increasing the premix fraction this 
effect is reduced. Overall, new configurations show lower CO levels, 
with promising results for the application with EGR, as this aspect is 
one of the main issues in such conditions.
This performance screening has highlighted how injection of the 
premix fuel in the outer swirler generally improves CO emissions 
and lean blow-out resistance, but at the cost of increased dynamic 
Fig. 7 Pollutant emissions measured with standard air as oxidizer and 100%NG 
Fig. 8 Transient behavior with simulated EGR for B2 
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041018-7 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 8 ---

instability, with some differences arising from the varying pilot jet 
configurations.
Simulated Exhaust Gas Recirculation Conditions. Moving to 
EGR conditions, the different burner layouts have been compared in 
terms of NOx and, more importantly, CO emissions. Indeed, with 
EGR, NOx levels are already low as a consequence of the reduced 
reactivity and the widespread reaction zone, while CO emissions 
critically rise. Furthermore, for the baseline configuration, thermoa­
coustic instabilities have been detected when the oxidizer 
composition varies, with a nonmonotonic dependence on the inlet 
oxygen content and a positive effect of hydrogen injection. This 
aspect was investigated also for the new layouts, as showed in Fig. 8, 
presenting as an example the behavior of B2 configuration. In 
particular, the amplitude of pressure oscillations inside the 
combustion chamber is reported (last plot) as the operating 
conditions vary in terms of inlet oxygen level, premix fraction, 
and hydrogen content. The red rectangles highlight the conditions 
with simulated EGR, following the decrease in the oxygen inlet 
content reported in the first plot.
With simulated EGR, no thermoacoustic instabilities are 
observed with PMX up to 50% (Fig. 8, point A). However, at 
higher premix fraction (70% PMX and TP(H2) ¼ 5%, Fig. 8, 
point B), reducing the inlet oxygen content initially lowers the 
amplitude of pressure oscillations caused by high premixing. When 
the oxygen content is further reduced, the amplitude first reaches a 
peak before dropping significantly, indicating that intermediate 
conditions are critical at this level of premixing. As the oxygen level 
increases returning to standard conditions, the oscillations rise again 
but eventually disappear as the premix fraction decreases. To 
minimize the exposure of the quartz liner to intense oscillations, the 
transient was kept rapid, and tests at higher premix levels were not 
conducted. Similar behaviors have also been observed for other 
configurations, but they are not reported here for the sake of brevity. 
In general, higher premix fractions are always more unstable, and 
the configurations that show more stable behavior without EGR 
maintain lower oscillation amplitude also with lower oxygen levels.
Regarding emission performance, Fig. 9 reports CO and NOx 
values recorded at YO2 ¼ 16:6% with constant hydrogen fraction of 
5%. It is difficult to identify a general trend with the premix level for 
CO, while NOx remains decreasing with higher premix fraction. The 
beneficial effect of EGR on NOx emissions overcomes the 
differences between the different layouts, and all the tested 
configurations show similar values, which are very low.
High CO emissions are instead one of the main drawbacks of 
EGR, and indeed represent the major performance parameter for 
evaluating the burner capabilities. Contrary to what it was observed 
for NOx, the influence of the fuel injection mode on CO emissions is 
considerable, and some configurations have improved performance. 
In particular, all the new configurations show lower CO levels than 
the baseline, except B1 at low premix, which shows high CO values 
also without EGR at low PMX. The most promising layouts are 
B5-PMX, B2, and B6, which are able to stay under 500 ppm, which 
also in standard conditions showed lower CO values (see Fig. 7(a)). 
All these configurations have outwardly oriented pilot jets and 
premix fuel injected in the outer swirler. Increasing the number of 
holes or enhancing the outward orientation of the pilot jets does not 
improve CO emissions; instead, both changes result in a slight 
increase. Looking at the steady flame structure (Figs. 3(i), 3(o), and 
3(u)) in this condition, differences are negligible and the reaction 
zone is similar. Some differences are instead visible for B1 
configuration, with the lower pilot jet velocity that makes the 
reaction zone able to stay more attached to the burner also in EGR 
conditions. The overall length is also reduced with respect to the 
other configurations (see Fig. 3(f)). As observed in standard 
conditions, for this configuration also with EGR, CO emissions 
strongly vary with the premix fraction, with the highest and lowest 
recorded values. The very high CO levels at low premix are probably 
linked to the problematic behavior encountered with the fuel 
reacting with the dome cooling air. However, looking at the results at 
higher premix levels, a lower jet velocity could help reduce CO 
emissions and should be investigated more in detail.
The effect of the hydrogen amount has also been evaluated, even 
though the leeway on this parameter is limited because it is desired to 
keep the CO2 content in the exhaust high. Two different levels were 
tested, equal to 5% and 10% of the total thermal power, keeping the 
premix fraction constant at 50%PMX, with the results reported in 
Fig. 10. Increasing the hydrogen fraction has a beneficial effect on 
CO emissions, which decrease for all the tested configurations. The 
gain is quite relevant in all cases, and since the effect of reduced 
carbon content when increasing the hydrogen fraction is negligible, 
this highlights how higher hydrogen amounts improve CO 
emissions, while remaining low to limit the reduction of CO2 in 
the exhaust. NOx values are also reported for completeness, which 
do not show a significant effect of the hydrogen amount. For the 
baseline configuration, a slight decrease is recorded as hydrogen 
increases, while for the other configurations values are very similar. 
It is important to emphasize that all recorded values are single digits, 
thanks to the beneficial effect of EGR.
Layout B4 was conceived with the purpose to contrast a behavior 
observed with the baseline configuration, where with pure hydrogen 
jets at very high premix fraction two separate reaction zone arise, 
and the premixed natural gas flame front detaches from the hydrogen 
Fig. 9 Pollutant emissions measured with 50%PMX–YO2516:6% and TP(H2)55% 
041018-8 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                              
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 9 ---

pilots, as shown in Fig. 11. EGR conditions further separate the two 
reaction zones, with the pilot jets that continue to burn well attached 
to the burner outlet and the natural gas flame shifting downstream 
and becoming more widespread. Straight pilot jets with higher 
velocity adopted in the B4 configuration aimed to enhance the 
interaction between hydrogen pilots and premixed natural gas in 
order to reduce CO emissions. OH* images of Fig. 11 show that the 
two reaction zones remain separated in this condition also for B4 
configuration, without a significant improvement on this aspect with 
respect to the baseline case. Indeed, CO emissions are about the 
same in this condition, as reported in Fig. 12. Faster hydrogen jets 
are not sufficient to increase the interaction between the two 
separated flame fronts, and this behavior is mainly driven by the high 
core velocity of the main-flow jet, which causes the premixed 
natural gas reaction zone to stabilize very far from the burner exit. 
NOx values are also reported, with negligible differences between 
the two configurations. At this very high level of premix, the 
recorded values are extremely low, even with standard air as 
oxidizer, and the beneficial effect of EGR is limited. For the baseline 
configuration, a slight decrease is recorded as hydrogen increases, 
while for the other configurations values are very similar.
Performance Summary. All the data presented in this work 
constitute an extensive dataset characterizing the performance of the 
tested configurations. To provide a final synthesis, the variation of 
key performance parameters for each configuration was evaluated 
relative to the baseline case. This study aims to maintain a general 
approach, focusing on different factors and their correlation with the 
injection system geometry, and providing valuable insights into 
flame behavior under both standard and EGR conditions. A single 
performance indicator could streamline comparison and configura­
tion selection, but defining a comprehensive weighting function for 
all parameters is challenging due to varying operational contexts and 
falls out of the scope of this research. Specifically, to summarize the 
performance of the different burner configurations, the following 
metrics were analyzed:
 LBO Air: LBO margin without EGR at 50%PMX
 P00 NG Air: Stable premix limit achievable with natural gas and 
air as oxidizer
Fig. 10 Pollutant emissions measured with 50%PMX–YO2 5 16.6% 
Fig. 11 Normalized OH* chemiluminescence images at 90%PMX 
and [TP(H2) 5 10%] w/o EGR: comparison of B0 and B4
Fig. 12 Pollutant emissions for B0 and B4 at 90%PMX and TP 
(H2Þ510%
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041018-9 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 10 ---

 P00 H2 Air: Stable premix limit achievable with 100%H2 pilots 
and air as oxidizer
 NOx Air: NOx emissions with natural gas and air as oxidizer
 CO Air: CO emissions under standard conditions with natural 
gas and air as oxidizer
 NOx EGR: NOx emissions with simulated EGR conditions
 CO EGR: CO emissions with simulated EGR conditions
Regarding emissions, values with and without EGR were 
measured at different fuel splits and averaged for each configuration. 
The tested split levels are similar across the various configurations, 
and averaging the values should not significantly affect the results. 
The dynamic behavior under EGR conditions is challenging to 
quantify due to the wide variation in operating conditions and thus 
has not been captured with a single metric. The variation of these 
parameters with respect to the baseline case has been scaled with the 
maximum variation of each quantity, to allow a better visualization 
of the differences, and to be able to present different aspects in a 
single plot. These parameters were defined based on the specific 
conditions investigated and the type of analysis performed, and 
serve primarily to offer a general indication of each configuration’s 
behavior relative to the baseline case. Among the parameters 
analyzed, CO emissions under EGR conditions can be considered 
the most critical for the final targets of this research, with LBO limits 
also holding valuable meaning. NOx emissions under EGR 
conditions are of limited importance, as they are already very low 
in such conditions across all configurations. Conversely, NOx and 
CO levels measured with standard air as the oxidizer hold greater 
relevance for burner operation in conventional applications.
Figure 13 summarizes the results for all the new layouts, allowing 
to identify the most critical and the most promising aspects for each 
configuration, and providing valuable insight into where optimiza­
tion efforts might be most effective. As noted earlier, it is observed 
that configurations with better lean blowout margins tend to exhibit 
worse dynamic stability.
Overall, some configurations demonstrate promising results, 
outperforming others. Among these, B5-PMX layout appears to be 
the most effective solution investigated, featuring premix fuel 
injected into the outer swirler and axisymmetric pilot jets oriented 
outward at the same angle as the baseline. The B2 configuration also 
shows potential, with an improved pilot fuel distribution due to the 
increased number of holes. However, both configurations exhibit 
significantly worse dynamic stability limits compared to the baseline, 
an issue that will need to be addressed in future developments.
Conclusions
The present study explored the performance of different config­
urations of a dry low NOx industrial burner under both standard 
conditions and simulated EGR. Tests were performed at atmospheric 
pressure with natural gas, eventually doped with hydrogen on the pilot 
line to mitigate the challenges posed by reduced oxygen levels. A total 
of seven burner configurations including the baseline were tested, 
varying the fuel injection strategies for both pilot jets and premixing 
system, to evaluate their impact on key performance metrics such as 
emissions, stability limits, and dynamic behavior. The significant 
variation in operating conditions due to the unconventional 
application of EGR in gas turbines and the dual-fuel configuration, 
combined with the challenges of testing real hardware components, 
makes the burner behavior extremely complex.
The results highlight the critical role of the external 
recirculation zone in influencing flame behavior, particularly in 
the absence of an inner recirculation zone due to low swirl from 
the counter-rotating swirler configuration. When fuel is retained in 
this zone thanks to higher external orientation of the pilot jets or 
lower jet velocity, blowout resistance improves, but the flame also 
becomes more susceptible to thermoacoustic instabilities. 
Decreasing the pilot jet velocity brings benefits for the LBO 
margin but for the investigated configuration problems were found 
in normal operation. Moving the premix fuel injection point in the 
outer swirler also positively affects CO emissions and lean blow- 
out margin because of the enhanced interaction between premix 
and pilot fuel, again at the cost of lower dynamic stability. In EGR 
conditions, high CO emissions are the main limiting factor, and 
positive results have been encountered for the new configurations 
with respect to the baseline, with a significant reduction of 
measured CO levels. The dynamic behavior is also conditioned by 
EGR, representing another aspect to be addressed during the 
design and optimization processes in order to ensure the 
reliability, efficiency, and stability in real gas turbine applications.
Fig. 13 Performance summary for each burner configuration 
041018-10 / Vol. 148, APRIL 2026                                                                                                           
Transactions of the ASME 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025


--- Page 11 ---

In conclusion, the present study remarks the importance of 
dedicated experimental investigations to understand the flame 
behavior and stabilization mechanisms, with the final purpose of 
enhancing the performance of modern combustion systems under 
unconventional and demanding operating conditions. The collected 
results allowed for an understanding of the influence of control 
parameters and how they can be leveraged, highlighting the positive 
effects of hydrogen addition and the impact of fuel injection 
methods. In addition, the extensive data gathered during this work 
could be valuable for validating numerical models, particularly 
when analyzing unstable phenomena such as lean blowout or 
nonconventional conditions involving oxidant mixtures with 
reduced oxygen levels. Indeed, the combustion regimes resulting 
from the dual fuel operation into an oxygen depleted environment 
are particularly challenging to predict, and numerical models can 
greatly benefit from dedicated experimental investigations with 
optical diagnostics.
Within the Transition project framework, a restricted number of 
the presented burner configurations will be subjected to testing at 
high pressure, along with new designs optimized through numerical 
analysis utilizing the data gathered in this study. This next phase of 
the project involves an increase in the complexity of the 
experimental setup, aiming to a more accurate representation of 
the conditions experienced in real combustion systems, further 
contributing to the development of more efficient and reliable 
combustion technologies able to operate with high EGR rates.
Funding Data
 European Union’s Horizon Europe Research and Innovation 
program (Grant Agreement No. 101069665).
Data Availability Statement
The authors attest that all data for this study are included in the 
paper.
Nomenclature
BH ¼ Baker Hughes
CB ¼ center-body fuel line
CCS ¼ carbon capture and storage
D ¼ pilot holes diameter (mm)
EGR ¼ exhaust gas recirculation
faq ¼ acquisition frequency (Hz)
FoV ¼ field of view
GT ¼ gas turbine
LBO ¼ lean blow out
N ¼ pilot holes number
NG ¼ natural gas
OX ¼ oxidizer
P0
RMS ¼ root mean square of pressure oscillation (mbar)
PLT ¼ pilot fuel line
PMX ¼ premix fuel line
PMX% ¼ premix fuel thermal power fraction (%)
Tflame ¼ adiabatic flame temperature (C)
Tinlet ¼ inlet temperature (C)
TPREF ¼ reference thermal power (kW)
TPTOT ¼ total thermal power (kW)
TP(H2) % ¼ hydrogen thermal power fraction (%)
x ¼ axial coordinate (mm)
y ¼ radial coordinate (mm)
YO2 ¼ inlet oxygen mass fraction (%mass)
DP=P ¼ combustor pressure drop (%)
k ¼ wavelength (nm)
/ ¼ pilot orientation angle (deg)
References
0[1] Zheng, M., Reader, G. T., and Hawley, J., 2004, “Diesel Engine Exhaust Gas 
Recirculation––A Review on Advanced and Novel Concepts,” Energy Convers. 
Manage., 45(6), pp. 883–900.
0[2] Li, H., Ditaranto, M., and Berstad, D., 2011, “Technologies for Increasing CO2 
Concentration in Exhaust Gas From Natural Gas-Fired Power Production With 
Post-Combustion, Amine-Based CO2 Capture,” Energy, 36(2), pp. 1124–1133.
0[3] Vantaggiato, E., Riboldi, L., Anantharaman, R., Carcasci, C., Andreini, A., 
Roussanaly, S., and Ditaranto, M., 2024, “Understanding the Potential and the 
Challenges of a NGCC Integrated With Hydrogen-Assisted EGR and CO2 
Capture,” ASME Paper No. GT2024-125639.
0[4] Burnes, D., Saxena, P., and Dunn, P., 2020, “Study of Using Exhaust Gas 
Recirculation on a Gas Turbine for Carbon Capture,” ASME Paper No. GT2020- 
16080.
0[5] Elkady, A. M., Evulet, A., Brand, A., Peter Ursin, T., and Lynghjem, A., 2008, 
“Exhaust Gas Recirculation in DLN F-Class Gas Turbines for Post-Combustion 
CO2 Capture,” ASME Paper No. GT2008-51152.
0[6] Li, H., Elkady, A., and Evulet, A., 2009, “Effect of Exhaust Gas Recirculation on 
NOx Formation in Premixed Combustion System,” AIAA Paper No. 2009-226.
0[7] Røkke, P., and Hustad, J., 2005, “Exhaust Gas Recirculation in Gas Turbines for 
Reduction of CO2 Emissions; Combustion Testing With Focus on Stability and 
Emissions,” Int. J. Thermodyn., 8(4), pp. 167–173.
0[8] Burdet, A., Lachaux, T., de la Cruz Garcia, M., and Winkler, D., 2010, 
“Combustion Under Flue Gas Recirculation Conditions in a Gas Turbine Lean 
Premix Burner,” ASME Paper No. GT2010-23396.
0[9] Guethe, F., Stankovic, D., Genin, F., Syed, K., and Winkler, D., 2011, “Flue Gas 
Recirculation of the Alstom Sequential Gas Turbine Combustor Tested at High 
Pressure,” ASME Paper No. GT2011-45379.
[10] Evulet, A. T., Elkady, A. M., Branda, A. R., and Chinn, D., 2009, “On the 
Performance and Operability of GE’s Dry Low NOx Combustors Utilizing 
Exhaust Gas Recirculation for Post-Combustion Carbon Capture,” Energy 
Procedia, 1(1), pp. 3809–3816.
[11] Kitagawa, K., Konishi, N., Arai, N., and Gupta, A. K., 2003, “Temporally 
Resolved Two-Dimensional Spectroscopic Study on the Effect of Highly 
Preheated and Low Oxygen Concentration Air on Combustion,” ASME J. Eng. 
Gas Turbines Power, 125(1), pp. 326–331.
[12] Kobayashi, H., Hagiwara, H., Kaneko, H., and Ogami, Y., 2007, “Effects of CO2 
Dilution on Turbulent Premixed Flames at High Pressure and High Temperature,” 
Proc. Combust. Inst., 31(1), pp. 1451–1458.
[13] Rodriguez Camacho, J., Akiki, M., Blust, J., and O’Connor, J., 2024, “Effect of 
Inert Species on the Static and Dynamic Stability of a Piloted, Swirl-Stabilized 
Flame,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 146(6), p. 061021.
[14] Oztarlik, G., Selle, L., Poinsot, T., and Schuller, T., 2020, “Suppression of 
Instabilities of Swirled Premixed Flames With Minimal Secondary Hydrogen 
Injection,” Combust. Flame, 214, pp. 266–276.
[15] Barbosa, S., de La Cruz Garcia, M., Ducruix, S., Labegorre, B., and Lacas, F., 
2007, “Control of Combustion Instabilities by Local Injection of Hydrogen,” Proc. 
Combust. Inst., 31(2), pp. 3207–3214.
[16] Shanbhogue, S. J., Sanusi, Y. S., Taamallah, S., Habib, M. A., Mokheimer, E. M. 
A., and Ghoniem, A. F., 2016, “Flame Macrostructures, Combustion Instability 
and Extinction Strain Scaling in Swirl-Stabilized Premixed CH4/H2 Combustion,” 
Combust. Flame, 163, pp. 494–507.
[17] Cheng, R., Littlejohn, D., Strakey, P., and Sidwell, T., 2009, “Laboratory 
Investigations of a Low-Swirl Injector With H2 and CH4 at Gas Turbine 
Conditions,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 32(2), pp. 3001–3009.
[18] Du, Y., Yu, X., Liu, L., Li, R., Zuo, X., and Sun, Y., 2017, “Effect of Addition of 
Hydrogen and Exhaust Gas Recirculation on Characteristics of Hydrogen 
Gasoline Engine,” Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 42(12), pp. 8288–8298.
[19] Rodriguez Camacho, J., Le, D., Blust, J., and O’Connor, J., 2024, “Impact of 
Diluents on Flame Stability With Blends of Natural Gas and Hydrogen,” ASME J. 
Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 147(1), p. 011017.
[20] Galeotti, S., Picchi, A., Becchi, R., Lemmi, G., Meloni, R., Babazzi, G., Giannini, 
N., Facchini, B., and Andreini, A., 2024, “Experimental Study on Stability 
Enhancement of a Natural Gas GT Burner With Hydrogen Flame Piloting Operated 
With Simulated Exhaust Gas Recirculation,” ASME Paper No. GT2024-128732.
[21] Galeotti, S., Picchi, A., Becchi, R., Meloni, R., Babazzi, G., Romano, C., and 
Andreini, A., 2024, “Experimental Characterization of an Industrial Burner 
Operated With Simulated EGR,” Appl. Therm. Eng., 246, p. 122943.
[22] Babazzi, G., Galeotti, S., Picchi, A., Becchi, R., Cerutti, M., and Andreini, A., 
2024, “Combustion Diagnostics and Emissions Measurements of a Novel Low 
NOx Burner for Industrial Gas Turbine Operated With CO2 Diluted Methane/Air 
Mixtures,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 146(7), p. 071007.
[23] Joshi, N. D., Epstein, M. J., Durlak, S., Marakovits, S., and Sabla, P. E., 1994, 
“Development of a Fuel Air Premixer for Aero-Derivative Dry Low Emissions 
Combustors,” ASME Paper No. 94-GT-253.
[24] Innocenti, A., Andreini, A., Facchini, B., Cerutti, M., Ceccherini, G., and Riccio, 
G., 2016, “Design Improvement Survey for NOx Emissions Reduction of a Heavy- 
Duty Gas Turbine Partially Premixed Fuel Nozzle Operating With Natural Gas: 
Numerical Assessment,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 138(1), p. 011501.
[25] Andreini, A., Facchini, B., Innocenti, A., and Cerutti, M., 2014, “Numerical 
Analysis of a Low NOx Partially Premixed Burner for Industrial Gas Turbine 
Applications,” Energy Procedia, 45, pp. 1382–1391.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power                                                                                                                                      
APRIL 2026, Vol. 148 / 041018-11 
Downloaded from http://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/gasturbinespower/article-pdf/148/4/041018/7537413/gtp-25-1329.pdf by University of Cincinnati user on 31 December 2025
