
--- Page 1 ---

Effect of flow field on the combustion performance of a triple-swirler 
combustor for advanced aircraft engine
Lin Long a, Yuling Zhao a,*, Xiaomin He b
a School of Energy and Power, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212003, China
b College of Energy and Power Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Edited by: Dr Bing Wang
Keywords:
Combustion
Gas turbine combustor
Triple swirler
Flow characteristics
Large-scale vortex
A B S T R A C T
To investigate the effect of flow field, particularly specifically the large-scale axial vortex, on the combustion 
performance of a triple-swirler combustor, two triple-swirlers (referred to as S1 and S2) were developed to 
establish two distinct flow fields in a gas turbine combustor. The flow field of S1 is characterized by a larger 
recirculation zone at the center spanwise cross-section and a chaotic divergent flow at the axial cross-sections. In 
contrast, the flow field of S2 features a smaller recirculation zone at the center spanwise cross-section and a more 
uniform flow pattern with a prominent large-scale axial vortex at the axial cross-sections. Experimental in­
vestigations were conducted at atmospheric pressure and a temperature of 473 K to assess the combustion 
performance of the combustor under these differing flow fields. The evaluation of combustion performance 
included lean ignition performance, lean blowout limit, combustion efficiency, and pattern factor. The findings 
indicate that the combustion behavior of the combustor is strongly influenced by the flow field. S2 outperforms 
S1 in terms of lean ignition performance, lean blowout limits, and pattern factor under most operational con­
ditions. However, when the fuel-air ratio (FAR) is below 0.02 or above 0.4, S1 exhibits superior combustion 
efficiency compared to S2. Conversely, for the remaining FAR conditions, S2 achieves higher combustion effi­
ciency than S1.
1. Introduction
With the progression of human civilization and advancements in 
aviation technology, aero turbine engines have evolved to continuously 
improve engine efficiency and thrust-weight-ratio. The advanced com­
bustors are now designed to meet the demands of modern aero turbine 
engines, by offering enhanced temperature-rise capabilities, high com­
bustion efficiency, reduced pollutant emissions, and improved com­
bustion stability over a wider range of operating conditions. These 
advanced combustors are anticipated to operate with a higher fuel-air 
ratio (FAR) compared to current technology combustors [1,2]. This 
implies that the advanced combustor will have a much wider operating 
range. Additionally, the airflow rate at the head of the combustor will be 
significantly improved, posing a major challenge for flame stabilization 
and reliable ignition under higher flow velocities. However, other con­
straints for the advanced combustor remain, such as shorter combustor 
length, smaller pattern factor (PF), and longer combustor life. Addi­
tionally, addressing the growing environmental concerns requires lower 
pollutant emissions. Unfortunately, these requirements often conflict 
with each other, making compromise extremely challenging [3].
In order to achieve the excellent combustion characteristics of the 
advanced combustor, numerous innovative concepts have been pro­
posed and studied in the past decades [4–8]. These include the 
rich-burn/quick-mix/lean-burn (RQL) combustor [9], the lean premixed 
pre-vaporized (LPP) combustor [10], the lean direct injection (LDI) 
combustor [11–13],the cavity-swirler based combustor[14,15], the dual 
annular combustor (DAC) [16], and the trapped vortex combustor (TVC) 
[17–19]. Moreover, building upon the lessons learned from the fuel 
staging concept and advancements in multi-swirl technology, several 
triple-swirler combustors have been proposed and investigated [20–25]. 
The triple-swirler combustor generates a strong swirling flow through 
the synergistic action of three serially connected swirlers (typically a 
combination of radial and axial structures). Its principle is to utilize the 
rotating airflow to create a central recirculation zone inside the 
combustor, which entrains high-temperature combustion gases to sta­
bilize the flame while enhancing fuel atomization and mixing efficiency. 
This structure significantly improves combustion stability, reduces 
pollutant emissions, and meets the requirements for high temperature 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: linly-zhao@ujs.edu.cn (Y. Zhao). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Aerospace Science and Technology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/aescte
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2025.111097
Received 22 January 2025; Received in revised form 27 June 2025; Accepted 14 October 2025  
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
Available online 15 October 2025 
1270-9638/© 2025 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 


--- Page 2 ---

rise, making it one of the promising technologies of the advanced 
aircraft engine.
The initial investigation of a triple-swirler combustor aims to eval­
uate its potential as an innovative combustion system for future engines. 
Unfortunately, there is a scarcity of research on triple swirler combus­
tors. However, Morgan et al. addressed this gap by designing and 
examining a triple swirler combustor equipped with two different triple 
swirlers [20,21]. The main distinction between these two configurations 
lies in the main zone geometry: device-1 has a divergent geometry, while 
device-2 has a convergent geometry. Based on experimental findings, 
device-2 outperformed device-1 in terms of ignition, blowout, and 
combustion efficiency. To further explore the potential of multiple 
swirler combustors, Mongia et al. proposed and investigated high 
temperature-rise combustors equipped with multiple swirlers [23]. 
Their experiments demonstrated that a multiple swirler combustor 
shows promise as an advanced solution for enhancing combustion.
Achieving optimal aerodynamic performance is essential in the 
design of a combustor, especially for the triple swirler combustor. Both 
experimental and numerical studies have provided valuable insights 
into the flow field of the triple swirler combustor [24,25]. Li et al. 
conducted an experimental study on a triple swirler combustor [26–28]. 
They discovered that the flow field downstream of the triple swirler 
consists of an axisymmetric central recirculation zone and an annular 
jet. Zhao et al. used particle image velocimetry (PIV) to investigate the 
effect of rotational direction combinations of a triple swirler on the flow 
characteristics of a model combustor [29]. They found that a triple 
swirler with a co-rotating intermediate swirler and outer swirler pro­
duced a larger central toroidal recirculation zone (CTRZ), while a triple 
swirler with counter-rotating intermediate swirler and outer swirler 
resulted in a smaller CTRZ downstream. Qin et al. utilized hotwire 
technology and large eddy simulation (LES) to study the unsteady flow 
characteristics of a low emission triple swirler combustor [30]. They 
discovered the presence of a processing vortex core (PVC) in the pilot 
flow passage. A variety of studies indicate that PVCs influence the sta­
bilization of swirl flames in multiple manners. For example, PVC can 
result in improved fuel-air mixing, better integration of burned and 
unburned gases, as well as roll-up, stretching, or localized quenching of 
reaction zones. Additionally, the PVC might interact with the ther­
moacoustic oscillations present in the flame [31–33]. Due to the sig­
nificant effects on the flame, evaluating the presence or absence of PVC 
has become one of the key considerations in combustor design. Lin et al. 
conducted extensive studies on the ignition performance of the 
combustor. Their research delved deeply into key factors such as the 
axial position of the igniter, the reference velocity across the liner, and 
the venturi shape of the swirler [34–36].
Yang et al. examined how different flow field structures affect the 
combustion performance of a swirl combustor, emphasizing the crucial 
role of the flame kernel’s entry into the recirculation zone for successful 
ignition [37]. Lin et al. utilized high-speed cameras along with particle 
image velocimetry (PIV) and planar laser induced fluorescence (PLIF) 
techniques to capture the two-dimensional propagation path of the 
flame within steady flow fields [38]. Dong et al. extended this research 
by using a single high-speed camera in combination with multiple in­
dependent probes to study the three-dimensional flame structural and 
propagation characteristics in a swirl flow field [39]. Zhao et al. 
employed high-speed photography to explore the ignition process in 
swirling flow fields, uncovering a significant "hanging" phenomenon 
during flame kernel propagation [40].
It is evident from the literature survey that extensive research has 
been conducted on the flow field, combustion performance, and emis­
sion characteristics of a triple swirler combustor. However, certain 
challenges persist in the design of a triple-swirler combustor. For 
instance, the impact of turbulent vortices on fuel distribution and 
combustion characteristics has not yet been fully elucidated, particu­
larly regarding the influence of the large-scale axial vortex. Studies 
indicate that large vortices exert a more significant effect on flame 
characteristics compared to small vortices [41,42]. In contrast to the 
small-scale vortices found within and outside the recirculation zone, the 
large-scale axial vortex is substantially larger and comparable to the 
combustor’s scale. Consequently, it can be inferred that the large-scale 
axial vortex significantly influences fuel-air mixing and combustion ef­
ficiency. A comprehensive understanding of its effects will be advanta­
geous for optimizing the performance of triple-swirl combustors. 
However, current research has not yet addressed the impact of the 
large-scale axial vortex on fuel distribution, ignition performance, lean 
blowout limits, combustion efficiency, and pattern factor in three-stage 
swirl combustors. Therefore, the primary objective of this study is to 
investigate the large-scale axial vortex and its effects on the performance 
of a triple-swirler combustor, particularly elucidating the relationship 
between the large-scale axial vortex, fuel distribution, and combustion 
performance. The novelty of this work lies in revealing the importance 
of constructing a large-scale axial vortex in the triple-swirler combustor 
design. The findings will provide valuable insights for engineers, 
particularly those focused on enhancing combustion stability and 
achieving a homogeneous temperature distribution at the exit of the 
swirl combustor.
2. Experimental and numerical setups
In this study, two distinct triple-swirlers were designed to create flow 
fields with and without a large-scale vortex in the combustor. A com­
bination of numerical simulations and experimental methods was 
employed to compare the flow and combustion performance of the two 
triple-swirlers. The experimental study provided data on lean ignition, 
lean blowout, combustion efficiency, pattern factor, and velocity dis­
tribution at characteristic cross-sections. Furthermore, the experimental 
data was utilized to validate the numerical simulation method’s effec­
tiveness. The numerical simulation primarily compensated for detailed 
flow field structures, fuel distribution, and temperature distribution that 
could not be measured experimentally, thereby facilitating the inter­
pretation and analysis of the experimental results.
2.1. Combustor and swirler descriptions
The 2-D schematic and photos of the combustor for flow field test and 
combustion test are depicted in Fig. 1. The test rig is a 36 degrees sector 
combustor comprising of a dump diffuser, casing, liner, pilot pressure- 
swirl atomizer, triple swirler, and spark plug. Additionally, the triple 
swirler is interchangeable to investigate the impact of the flow field 
induced by it on the combustion performance. The diffuser and casing 
are constructed using stainless steel (310S), while the liner is made of 
high-temperature alloy (GH3536) with a thickness of 2 mm. For 
simplification in manufacturing, the inclined cooling holes on the liner 
have been replaced with several inclined cooling slots measuring 2 mm 
in width. An optical glass has been incorporated on the lateral side of the 
combustor to observe the flame, especially during ignition and extinc­
tion processes. To initiate the fuel-air mixture combustion, an electric 
spark plug has been utilized in the current study. The spark plug oper­
ates at a frequency of 8 Hz, storing an energy of 20 J. For reference, the 
detailed flow distributions for the main components of the triple-swirler 
combustor can be found in Table 1. To create distinct flow patterns 
within the combustor, two triple swirlers are developed. These swirlers 
consist of an inner swirler, an intermediate swirler, an outer swirler, an 
inner venturi, an intermediate venturi, and an outer flare. Fig. 2 displays 
3-D illustrations of the two triple swirlers. The primary distinction be­
tween the two lies in the rotation direction of the outer swirler. 
Accordingly, they are denoted as S1 and S2. For S1, the outer swirler 
rotates clockwise relative to the oncoming flow (referred to as "C"). 
Conversely, for S2, the outer swirler rotates counterclockwise (referred 
to as "CC"). Table 2 summarizes the specific rotation directions for each 
of the two triple swirlers. The tilt angle and blade installation angle of 
the inner-stage swirler are 55◦and 45◦, respectively, yielding a swirl 
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
2 


--- Page 3 ---

number of 0.6. In contrast, the second-stage swirler features a tilt angle 
of 0◦and a blade installation angle of 64◦, resulting in a swirl number of 
1.10. Lastly, the third-stage swirler has a tilt angle of 0◦and a blade 
installation angle of 39◦, with a swirl number of 0.6. The tilt angle, blade 
Fig 1. Schematics of the combustor for the present tests.
Table 1 
Detailed flow distributions for the triple-swirler combustor.
Component
Flow rate distribution
Inner-stage swirler
7.9 %
Intermediate-stage swirler
19.9 %
Outer-stage swirler
24.8 %
Primary hole
13.7 %
Dilution hole
7.7 %
Cooling slot
26.0 %
Fig 2. 3-D schematic of the two different triple swirlers.
Table 2 
Specific rotation directions for the two triple swirlers.
Rotating Direction
​
Inner
Intermediate
Outer
S1
C
CC
C
S2
C
CC
CC
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
3 


--- Page 4 ---

installation angle, and swirl number for each stage of the current swirler 
are presented in Table 3.
2.2. Fueling strategy
In this study, liquid RP-3 aircraft kerosene, a Jet-A equivalent 
available commercial aviation in china was adopted to fuel the 
combustor. The physical properties of RP-3 kerosene were summarized 
in Table 4. A schematic view of the fueling strategy for the pilot stage 
and main stage of the combustor is depicted in Fig. 3. The strategy 
consists of a two-stage fuel supply device, incorporating a pressure-swirl 
atomizer for the pilot stage fuel and a multi-point pneumatic injector for 
the main stage fuel. The pressure-swirl atomizer is centrally positioned 
within the triple swirler, with its axial position aligning with the 
constriction of the inner venturi. The fuel mass rate and spray angle of 
the pressure-swirl atomizer are depicted in Figs. 3 and 4. It is evident 
that the fuel mass rate of the pressure-swirl atomizer increases pro­
gressively with increasing pressure drop. Conversely, the spray angle of 
the pressure-swirl atomizer decreases from 75 to 65 degrees as the 
pressure drop rises from 0.28 MPa to 3.0 MPa. The droplet size distri­
butions for the pressure-swirl atomizer can be obtained from Ref. 37, 
where they were obtained using a phase Doppler particle analyzer 
(PDPA). In addition, the main stage pneumatic multi-point injector 
comprises eight equally-spaced injection holes, each with a diameter of 
0.5 mm, located on the fuel chamber. The main stage fuel is atomized by 
the rotating air flow from the inner and intermediate stages after being 
injected through these direct injection holes.
2.3. Experimental setup
The accuracy and reproducibility of experiments are closely related 
to the composition of the experimental system. Fig. 5 shows a schematic 
of the experimental apparatus, which consists primarily of four sub­
systems: an air supply system, a fuel supply system, a measurement 
system, and a test section. The air is supplied by a compressor that has a 
maximum airflow rate of 1.0 kg/s and a maximum pressure of 0.8 MPa. 
Prior to entering the test section, the airflow can be heated using an 
electric heater with a power of 600 kW. To measure the airflow rate and 
temperature, an orifice plate flow meter and a K-type thermocouple 
were utilized, respectively. The thermocouple and flow meter have 
uncertainties of 0.75 percent and 1 percent, respectively. To measure the 
RP-3 fuel flow rate, a turbine meter with a 1 % inaccuracy is employed. 
Exhaust gas samples are collected from the combustor’s outlet using a 
sampling rake that consisted of fifteen sampling points. The spatial 
distribution of these sampling points, corresponding to the measurement 
positions is depicted in Fig. 6. After being mixed in a mixing chamber, 
the exhaust gas collected from these fifteen sampling locations is 
transported to the gas analysis system through a well-insulated pipe. The 
gas analyzers utilized in this study measured various components 
including carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon monoxide (CO), oxygen (O2), 
total unburned hydrocarbons (THC), and methane (CH4). More specif­
ically, two non-dispersive infrared analyzers were employed to measure 
the concentrations of CO and CO2, while a flame ionization detection 
(FID) based analyzer was used to assess the levels of THC. The detailed 
operational parameters and the description of the analyzers are listed in 
Tables 5 and 6, respectively. The combustor’s exhaust temperature is 
measured by the NI PXle-4353 module, which is equipped with three 
stationary B-type thermocouple rakes. It is important to note that the NI 
PXle-4353 thermocouple input module has a 0.25 K isothermal error. 
Additionally, each B-type thermocouple rake contains five thermo­
couple spots for accurate temperature measurement. It is important to 
mention that the B-type thermocouple rake has a similar structure to the 
gas sampling rake, featuring identical sampling points and positions as 
depicted in Fig. 6. It is noteworthy that the uniformity and level of the 
combustor outlet temperature are closely related to the distance be­
tween the measurement points and the outlet of the combustor. In the 
experiment, the axial position of the temperature measurement points, 
as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), is aligned with the outlet of the combustor. For 
the flow field measurement, a LaVision 2-D PIV system is utilized. This 
system comprises of various components including a light source system, 
Table 3 
Swirl number of each stage of the current swirler.
Inner stage
Intermediate stage
Outer stage
Tilt angle
55
0
0
Installation angle
45
64
39
Swirl number
0.6
1.1
0.6
Table 4 
Physical properties of RP-3 kerosene.
Properties(1 atm)
Value
Density, g/cm3
810
Lower heating value, kJ/kg, 298K
42,900
Latent heat of evaporation, kJ/kg, 298K
291
Saturated hydrocarbons, volume fraction
92.1 %
Aromatic hydrocarbons, volume fraction
7.9 %
Fig 3. Fueling strategy for the pilot stage and main stage of the combustor.
Fig 4. Relationships between the fuel mass rate, spray angle, and pres­
sure drop.
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
4 


--- Page 5 ---

an imaging system, a synchronization control system, and a data 
acquisition and processing system, as shown in Fig. 7. The light source 
system utilizes a dual-pulsed laser with an output wavelength of 527 nm, 
a pulse duration of 6–8 ns, and a maximum single pulse energy of 200 
mJ. The thickness of the single light source is approximately 1 mm. To 
capture the flow field, a CCD camera with a resolution of 2048 × 2048, a 
pixel size of 7.4 μm, and a grayscale level of 12 bits is employed. As 
tracer particles, AL2O3 powder with a particle size range of 5–10 μm is 
used. These particles are injected into the flow field using a particle 
feeding system, which comprises of a piston-type air compressor, valves, 
a float flowmeter, a particle generator, and a nozzle. The particles are 
supplied by the air compressor at a suitable distance before the com­
bustion chamber inlet. After proper mixing with the incoming air, the 
particles enter the capture area. The average velocity field is computed 
based on the analysis of 3000 instantaneous particle pictures.
2.4. Numerical methods
Fig. 8 illustrates the computational model of the combustor, which is 
consistent with the experimental combustor model. The finite volume 
approach is utilized to discretize the steady-state continuity and mo­
mentum equations across the computational domain. To discretize the 
convection and diffusion terms, a second-order upwind scheme is 
employed. The widely used SIMPLE algorithm is used for pressure- 
Fig 5. Schematic of the experimental system for the present test.
Fig 6. Schematic diagram of the locations for the thermocouple spots.
Table 5 
Test condition for the combustor.
Parameter
Value
​
Lean ignition / lean blowout
Efficiency/Pattern factor
Temperature (K)
303
473
Air flow rate (kg/s)
0.141, 0.164, 0.187
0.178, 0.215, 0.252
Mach number
0.12, 0.14, 0.16
0.19, 0.23, 0.27
Fuel flow rate (g/s)
1.13–2.15/0.92–1.50
1.96–11.8/2.14–7.56
Fuel to air ratio
0.008 - 0.0115 / 0.0065 - 
0.008
0.011 - 0.047 /0.012 - 
0.030
Table 6 
Emission analyzer parameters.
Variable
Units
Accuracy levels
Range
Analyzer Type
CO2
%
1 %
0 - 20
ULTRAMAT 23
O2
%
1 %
0 - 25
ULTRAMAT 23
CO
ppm
1 %
0 - 5000
ULTRAMAT 23
CH4
%
1 %
0 - 0.05
ULTRAMAT 23
H2
%
1 %
0 - 1
CALOMAT 6
THC
ppm
1 %
0 - 1000
FIDAMAT 6
Fig 7. A photograph of the PIV system.
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
5 


--- Page 6 ---

velocity coupling, along with the two-equation standard k-ε turbulence 
model. Additionally, the non-premixed combustion model was utilized 
for simulating the reacting flow. The fuel-to-air ratio for the reacting 
flow simulation was established at 0.02. The inlet and outlet conditions 
are set as mass flow inlet and pressure outlet, respectively. The lateral 
sides of the computational domain are specified as wall boundary con­
ditions. To address the near-wall region, the standard wall function was 
employed. The accuracy of the simulation flow field is influenced to 
some extent by the number of grid cells, which affects the convergence 
characteristics and accuracy of the calculations. Therefore, a grid in­
dependence test was performed before simulating a large number of 
operating conditions. Taking S2 as an example, grid cells were divided 
into four different numbers: 1.75 million, 2.8 million, 4.2 million, and 
6.75 million. Numerical simulations were conducted for each grid cell 
number, as shown in Fig. 9. It can be seen that when the number of grid 
cells exceeds 4.2 million, the size and shape of the recirculation zone are 
minimally affected. Therefore, the grid cell number for subsequent 
calculations in this study is approximately 4.2 million hexahedral cells.
2.5. Experimental uncertainty and numerical validation
2.5.1. Experimental uncertainty
In this subsection, we discuss the analysis of experimental un­
certainties for both directly measured and derived parameters. The 
uncertainty of directly measured parameters is estimated based on the 
accuracy of the instrument used. On the other hand, the uncertainty of 
derived parameters is estimated using the following equation [43]: 
Wx =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
( ∂X
∂X1
W1
)2
+
( ∂X
∂X2
W2
)2
+ ⋯+
( ∂X
∂Xn
Wn
)2
√
(1) 
Where Wx is the uncertainties of the derived quantity, X1, X2, X3, …, 
Xn is the independent variables and corresponds to the independent 
uncertainties with the same confidence, W1, W2, W3, …, Wn.
Considering the effects of radiation, all the outlet temperature data 
were corrected using the following equation [44]: 
Tg = Ttc + εtcσ0
(
T4
tc −T4
w
)
d
/
kNu
(2) 
where Tg represents the actual temperature of the measured high tem­
perature gas, Ttc represents the measurement temperature of the ther­
mocouple, Tw represents the temperature of the thermal screen wall 
surface, εtc represents the radiation rate, and εtc = 0.22, σ0 represents the 
Stephen-Boltzmann constant, and σ0 = 5.67 × 10–8 W/(m2⋅K4), d in­
dicates the based diameter of the thermocouple, and d = 1 mm, k rep­
resents the gas thermal conductivity, Nu represents the Nusselt number.
2.5.2. Repeatability test
The measurement accuracy is significantly affected by the test sys­
tem. Consequently, to assess the measurement uncertainty of the test 
system, a repeatability test was performed. In the repeatability tests, the 
inlet Mach number and temperature were initially set at 0.19 and 473 K, 
respectively. Subsequently, the combustor was run five times under two 
different fuel-air ratio conditions (FAR = 0.0082, 0.0249). Ultimately, 
the estimated standard deviation (u) of the main variable with respect to 
its mean was obtained. Assuming a t-distribution, the uncertainty of the 
main variable can be calculated using the following equation: 
U = tu. (3)                                                                                         
Where U is the uncertainty, u is the standard deviation, t is the 
confidence factor. The freedom degree and confidence level are 4 and 95 
percent, respectively. The results listed in Table VII show that for all of 
the variables at the two different operating conditions, fairly good 
repeatability is attained. To further validate the accuracy of the gas 
analysis results, the fuel-to-air ratio (FAR)* was calculated using the gas 
analysis data and compared with the operating FAR obtained from the 
injected air and fuel mass rates in the combustor. Table 7 presents the 
comparison results for the two fuel-to-air ratios under different oper­
ating conditions. From Table 8, it can be observed that the uncertainties 
for both operating conditions are below 5 %. This implies that the gas 
analysis accuracy is quite good.
2.5.3. Numerical validation
Fig. 10 presents a comparison of macroscopic flow fields obtained 
from numerical simulation and a PIV system. The results pertain to time- 
averaged non-reacting flow, with the upper half showing numerical 
results and the lower half displaying PIV results under identical 
Fig 8. Combustor model for numerical simulation.
Fig 9. Grid independence test for the present simulation.
Table 7 
Repeatability test results.
Condition-1
Condition-2
Variable
Means
Uncertainty
Means
Uncertainty
CO2, %
1.396
0.0025
4.726
0.0163
O2, %
18.57
0.017
13.78
0.062
CO, ppm
2651.6
5.95
1890
10.75
THC, ppm
163.36
2.583
91.04
0.809
NO, ppm
29
0.13
30
0.55
CH4, %
0.0088
0.0002
0.0029
0.0001
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
6 


--- Page 7 ---

conditions. The white dot broken line represents the central boundary 
line of the central toroidal recirculation zone (CTRZ). It is important to 
note that the region depicted in the figure from the numerical simulation 
aligns with the PIV flow field region, having undergone mirror pro­
cessing for ease of comparision. A detailed analysis of the figure reveals 
a strong agreement between numerical and experimental results in 
terms of key parameters, including the vortex center position and the 
size of the CTRZ. This observation highlights the simulation’s ability to 
accurately reproduce the airflow patterns. To further validate the ac­
curacy of the numerical simulation, a comparison was made between the 
X-axial component velocity at different locations (X/D = 0.2, 0.3, and 
0.4) obtained by numerical simulation and the PIV system, as depicted 
in Fig. 11. The results show a significant agreement between the nu­
merical and experimental data for most Y/D values at various X/D lo­
cations, indicating the simulation’s ability to accurately reproduce 
velocity distribution. Considering the study’s focus on the impact of 
large-scale vortex on combustion performance, the simulation priori­
tized capturing major flow structure features (vortex structure) over 
minor details. As a result, the simulation method used in this study 
allows for precise prediction of the combustor’s macroscopic flow field, 
providing valuable insights that cannot be obtained solely through PIV 
photography.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Flow features
The time-averaged flow fields of the two swirlers on the center 
spanwise cross-section were investigated using PIV and the results are 
presented in Fig. 12. From Fig. 12, it can be observed that the upper 
vortex core of S1 is located at (X/D = 0.7, Y/D = 0.88), while the lower 
vortex core is located at (X/D = 0.41, Y/D = 0.17). The axial distance 
between these two vortex cores is approximately 0.35 D Furthermore, it 
is worth noting that the upper vortex core is in close proximity to the 
primary hole jet, with the penetration depth of the upper primary hole 
jet exceeding half the height of the combustor. On the other hand, when 
comparing S1 and S2, it is evident that the upper vortex core of S2 has 
shifted approximately 0.25 D upstream, while the lower vortex core has 
Table 8 
Accuracy estimation for the gas analysis.
Variable
FAR
FAR*
Uncertainty
Condition-1
0.0082
0.0079
3.7 %
Condition-2
0.0249
0.0241
3.2 %
Fig 10. The comparison of macroscopic flow fields obtained by PIV system and 
numerical simulation.
Fig 11. Comparison of X-axial component velocity distribution obtained by PIV 
system and numerical simulation.
Fig 12. Time-averaged flow fields obtained by PIV on the center spanwise 
cross-section.
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
7 


--- Page 8 ---

moved backward by 0.2 D Consequently, the axial distance between the 
upper and lower vortex cores has reduced from 0.35 D to 0.11 D To 
further investigate the flow field characteristics in detail, the axial ve­
locity (plotted in Fig 13) and transversal velocity (plotted in Fig 14) 
Fig 13. Axial velocity distribution obtained by PIV on the center spanwise 
cross-section for two different swirlers.
Fig 14. Transversal velocity distribution obtained by PIV on the center span­
wise cross-section for two different swirlers.
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
8 


--- Page 9 ---

distributions of S1 and S2 at various downstream positions of the swirler 
are analyzed. It can be seen from Fig. 13 that the axial velocity in the 
upstream region near the outer annular wall of S1 is smaller than that of 
S2. The similar phenomenon can also be observed in the transversal 
velocity distribution, as shown in Fig. 14.This phenomenon arises pri­
marily due to the opposite rotation directions of the middle and outer 
stage swirlers of S1. As a result, more axial momentum is consumed 
under the strong shear and mixing effect. Conversely, the middle and 
outer stage swirlers of S2 rotate in the same direction, resulting in a 
relatively less intense mixing between the stages and a lower con­
sumption of axial momentum. It is important to note that the absolute 
value of axial velocity in the recirculation region of S1 consistently 
surpasses that of S2. This discrepancy indicates that the recirculation 
flow rate of S1 is larger than that of S2 when considering the size of the 
spanwise center cross-section. The magnitude of axial velocity near the 
outer annular wall plays a crucial role in the formation and propagation 
of flame kernels during the ignition process. Further analysis and dis­
cussion of this relationship will be provided in the subsequent 
subsections.
Fig. 15 illustrates the flow fields and fuel distribution within the 
combustor at X/D = 0.45, corresponding to the axial position of the 
spark plug. The fuel distributions from the two swirlers were captured at 
FAR = 0.01 in a nonreactive flow environment. A comparison between 
the streamline patterns of the S1 and S2 swirlers reveals a significant 
difference in the distribution of streamlines on the axial cross-section of 
the S2 as compared to S1. Compared to the radial divergent flow pattern 
observed in S1, a large-scale axial vortex was generated in S2. This 
significant difference can be attributed to the reverse rotation directions 
of the middle and outer stage swirlers in S1, resulting in substantial 
shearing and mixing effects on the airflow as it passes through the two 
stages. Consequently, the airflow at the swirler outlet becomes chaotic, 
exhibiting radial divergence. Conversely, for S2, the same rotation di­
rection of the middle and outer stage swirlers weakens the shearing and 
mixing between the two stages of airflow, resulting in a more orderly 
flow field. This induces a large-scale axial vortex at the axial position of 
the combustor. It can also be observed from Fig. 15 that the fuel-to-air 
ratio of S2 at the central position of the cross-section is 0.024, which 
is 50 % higher than that of S1 (0.016). This difference is largely due to 
the fact that the large-scale axial vortex of S2 entraps significantly more 
fuel compared to the divergent flow pattern of S1. Fig. 16 illustrates the 
flow fields and temperature distribution of the combustor at X/D = 0.45, 
as determined through numerical simulations in a reactive flow. The 
temperature distributions of the two swirlers were measured at FAR =
0.02. Fig. 16 reveals that S1 displays a radial divergent flow pattern 
while S2 shows a flow pattern with a large-scale axial vortex. This 
pattern is consistent with what was observed in Fig. 15. As previously 
discussed, this disparity primarily stems from the rotational direction of 
the middle and outer stage swirlers of S1 and S2, which is evident in both 
nonreactive and reactive flow conditions.
3.2. Lean ignition performance
The lean igniting tests were conducted under atmospheric pressure 
and an inlet temperature of 303 K. Only the pilot fuel atomizer was used 
to fuel the combustor during the tests. The ignition tests were conducted 
following the steps outlined below: Initially, the inlet air flow rate and 
temperature of the combustor were maintained at a constant level. 
Subsequently, the fast-action solenoid valve of the fueling system and 
the ignition plug were turned on simultaneously. Finally, the fuel flow 
rate was gradually increased. When ignition occurs in the combustor, 
the fuel flow rate should be maintained for a certain period. Successful 
ignition is determined by sustained combustion, which means the flame 
should continue to burn steadily for >10 s after the igniting source is 
deactivated. The corresponding air and fuel flow rates are recorded. For 
each case, the successful ignition process is conducted three times, and 
the ignition fuel-to-air ratio is averaged from the three samples. Fig. 16
illustrates the variation in the lean ignition FAR of the combustor at 
different inlet Mach numbers. Generally, the lean ignition FAR of the 
combustor increases as the inlet Mach number increases. Specifically, 
the lean ignition FAR of S1 increases from 0.0092 to 0.0115, repre­
senting a 25 % increase, with the increase in the inlet Mach number. 
Similarly, the lean ignition FAR of S2 increases from 0.0081 to 0.0096, 
an increase of 18 %, with the increase in the inlet Mach number. This can 
be attributed to the fact that as the inlet Mach number of the combustor 
rises, the average velocity and turbulence intensity of the airflow within 
the combustor also increase, thereby enhancing the heat transfer be­
tween the effective flame kernel and the surrounding airflow. This 
increased heat transfer is unfavorable for ignition. Additionally, Fig. 17
demonstrates that the ignition FAR of S1 is significantly higher than that 
of S2. The average ignition FAR achieved by S2 at three different Mach 
Fig 15. The nonreactive flow fields and fuel distribution of the combustor at X/ 
D = 0.45 obtained by numerical simulations.
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
9 


--- Page 10 ---

numbers is 0.0085, while the average ignition FAR obtained by S1 is 
0.0101, which is 18.8 %, higher than that of S2. This discrepancy in 
ignition performance can be primarily attributed to the distinct flow 
fields, as the fueling strategy for both S1 and S2 remained consistent. 
The flow field not only impacts the formation and propagation of the 
flame kernel during the ignition process but also influences the ignition 
performance by affecting fuel distribution. By comparing the flow field 
characteristics of S1 and S2, the following reasons can be drawn: 1) The 
airflow velocity near the igniter of S1 is greater than that of S2. How­
ever, a higher air velocity does not facilitate the formation of an effective 
flame kernel. Furthermore, it is apparent that the cold air jet from the 
primary hole of S1 is significantly larger than that of S2, which can 
potentially extinguish the flame kernel during the ignition process. 2) It 
can be deduced that the turbulence intensity near the igniter of S1 will 
exceed that of S2. The increased turbulence intensity intensifies the heat 
transfer between the flame kernel and its surroundings, which hinders 
the formation of an effective flame kernel. 3) Fig. 15 illustrates that a 
large-scale vortex is generated in the axial cross-section of S2, con­
trasting with the divergent flow field of S1. Due to the effect of the 
secondary flow of the large-scale vortex, the flame kernel of S2 is more 
easily transported into the recirculation zone and subsequently ignites 
the fuel-air mixture there, in comparison to S1. 4) The recirculation zone 
of S2 is smaller than that of S1. This indicates that the fuel-air mixture in 
the recirculation zone of S2 has a higher concentration of fuel, which 
promotes more effective ignition and combustion. 5) The overall flow 
pattern of S2 appears to be more stable and well-organized compared to 
S1. This can be attributed to the presence of the large-scale vortex in S2, 
which helps to maintain a consistent and controlled flow.
3.3. Lean blowout limits
The lean blowout tests were performed at atmospheric pressure and 
303 K inlet temperature. It should be noted that during these tests, only 
the pilot fuel atomizer was used to fuel the combustor. The LBO tests are 
conducted in a manner by fixing the inlet air flow rate of the combustor, 
Fig 16. The reactive flow fields and temperature distribution of the combustor 
at X/D = 0.45 obtained by numerical simulations.
Fig 17. Ignition FARs of the combustor under different inlet Mach numbers.
Fig 18. Lean blowout limits for the combustor at different Mach numbers.
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
10 


--- Page 11 ---

and then, turning down the fuel flow rate gradually until extinction 
takes place. For each case, the lean blowout fuel-to-air ratio is averaged 
from the three samples. Fig. 18 shows that the lean blowout FARs 
generally increase as the Mach number increases for both S1 and S2. 
This is mainly due to the increase in air velocity in the combustion zone, 
which is a result of the higher Mach number. Another notable obser­
vation from Fig. 18 is that the lean blowout FARs obtained by S1 are 
higher than those achieved by S2. The average lean blowout FAR ach­
ieved by S2 at three different Mach numbers is 0.0068, while the average 
lean blowout FAR obtained by S1 is 0.0077, which is 13.2 %, higher than 
that of S2. Specifically, for S1, the ignition FAR increases from 0.0074 to 
0.0080 as the Mach number varies from 0.123 to 0.161. On the other 
hand, for S2, the ignition FAR increases from 0.0066 to 0.0071 within 
the same range of Mach numbers. Based on the information provided 
above, it can be concluded that the combustion stability of S2, when 
approaching the lean blowout condition, is superior to that of S1. This is 
primarily due to the distinct flow fields created by S1 and S2, which have 
a significant impact on various factors such as fuel evaporation, fuel-air 
mixing intensity, fuel distribution, and flame propagation, all of which 
ultimately affect flame stability. In comparison to the chaotic and 
divergent flow field of S1, the flow field of S2 features a large-scale 
vortex that enhances the residence time of the fuel droplets injected 
into the flow field. This extended residence time is particularly benefi­
cial when operating conditions approach the lean blowout state, where 
the local temperature of the combustion zone is too low to facilitate 
complete evaporation of the fuel droplets. Consequently, a longer resi­
dence time promotes a higher evaporation rate, resulting in improved 
local fuel-air ratio and ultimately enhancing the combustion stability of 
the flame. Additionally, under the influence of the large-scale axial 
vortex, the fuel droplets are transported towards the center region of the 
combustor. This is facilitated by the secondary flow generated by the 
axial large-scale vortex. The center region of the combustor is charac­
terized by low air velocity and low turbulence intensity, which are 
conducive to flame stabilization. Furthermore, the large-scale axial 
vortex can trap the flame in the low velocity region of the recirculation 
zone, thereby reducing the impact of high cold velocities from outside 
the recirculation zone. As a result, S2 exhibits improved combustion 
stability in comparison to the chaotic divergent flow field observed in 
S1. Considering these factors, it is reasonable that S2 has a lower lean 
blowout limit compared to S1.
3.4. Combustion efficiency
The combustion efficiency test was conducted for S1 and S2 under 
various operating conditions. In the test, three different Mach numbers 
(0.19, 0.23, and 0.27) were examined, while maintaining an inlet tem­
perature of 473 K. The operating FAR was varied from 0.011 to 0.047. 
The combustion efficiency of the present work is defined based on the 
components of RP-3 kerosene [45,46]: 
η = [CO2] + 0.531[CO] −0.397[H2] −0.319[CH4]
[CO2] + [CO] + [HC]
(4) 
Where “[]” denotes the volume fraction of each component of the 
exhaust gas.
Fig. 19 plots the combustion efficiency achieved by S1 and S2 under 
various fuel-air ratios and Mach numbers. Comparing the combustion 
efficiency of S1 and S2, it can be observed that when FAR is <0.02 or 
greater than 0.4, S1 exhibits slightly higher combustion efficiency than 
S2. Under low FAR conditions, achieving sufficient combustion of the 
main fuel in the primary combustion stage requires adequate high- 
temperature exhaust gas or flame support from the pilot stage. The ef­
ficiency of heat and mass transfer between the pilot flame and the pri­
mary flame determines the primary flame’s ability to achieve complete 
combustion. When FAR is relatively high, the combustion zone is in a 
rich fuel state, and the combustion efficiency is affected by the unifor­
mity of the fuel and air mixture. Higher combustion efficiency is 
Fig 19. Combustion efficiency of the combustor under different Mach numbers.
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
11 


--- Page 12 ---

obtained when the fuel and air mixture is more uniform. Due to the 
opposite rotation direction of the intermediate swirler and the outer 
swirler of S1, the interaction between these two counter-rotating jets is 
much stronger than that of S2, resulting in faster heat and mass ex­
change. Therefore, when FAR is <0.02 or greater than 0.4, S1 exhibits 
higher combustion efficiency.
3.5. Pattern factor
The pattern factor (PF) of the present study, which is a crucial 
parameter for describing the temperature distribution of the combustor, 
is determined by analyzing the temperature measured at the outlet of the 
combustor using thermocouple rakes. The PF can be expressed as fol­
lows: 
PF = Tmax −Tavg
Tavg −Tinlet
(5) 
Where Tmax is the maximal temperature at the outlet of the 
combustor, Tavg is the average temperature at the outlet of the 
combustor, Tinlet is the inlet temperature of the combustor.
Fig. 20 presents the pattern factor results for S1 and S2, revealing two 
noteworthy features. Firstly, the pattern factors for both cases generally 
decrease with increasing FAR. Under these FAR conditions, the com­
bustion zone temperature rises as the FAR increases. Consequently, the 
fuel evaporation rate and combustion rate improve, aiding in the 
reduction of hot spots. Thus, the combustor achieves a more uniform 
temperature distribution at high FAR conditions compared to low FAR 
conditions, resulting in a decrease in the pattern factor. Secondly, it is 
evident that the pattern factors of S2 are considerably smaller than those 
of S1 in most operating regimes. S2 yields average pattern factors of 
0.25, 0.27, and 0.28 at three different Mach numbers (Ma = 0.19, 0.23, 
0.27) respectively, while S1 yields corresponding pattern factors of 0.29, 
0.35, and 0.37, which are 16 %, 30 %, and 32 % larger than those of S2. 
This indicates that S2 achieves a much more uniform temperature dis­
tribution compared to S1. This discrepancy can be mainly attributed to 
the distinct flow fields of the two cases. Fig. 12 demonstrates the pres­
ence of a large-scale axial vortex of S2, significantly enhancing the fuel- 
air mixing intensity and residence time of the fuel droplets in compar­
ison to S1. As a result, S2 enables a much more uniform distribution of 
fuel, subsequently leading to a more uniform temperature distribution 
within the combustion zone. Therefore, it is logical to expect that the 
pattern factors obtained from S2 would be smaller compared to those 
acquired from S1.
Finally, to facilitate a concise and effective comparison of the per­
formance between the S1 and S2 swirlers, Table 9 presents a summary of 
the key combustion performance metrics for both swirlers. These met­
rics include lean ignition, lean blowout, combustion efficiency, and 
pattern factor. From the data comparison in this table, it can be observed 
that, except for certain conditions where the combustion efficiency of S1 
exceeds that of S2, other combustion performance metrics—including 
lean ignition, lean blowout, and the uniformity of outlet temperature 
distribution—demonstrate significant advantages for S2 over S1. This 
result indicates that in the design of a triple-swirler combustor, it is 
essential to ensure the formation of large-scale axial vortices within the 
flow field.
3.6. Future works
This study investigates the influence of the large-scale axial vortex on 
the flow and combustion characteristics of a triple-swirler combustor. 
The findings indicate that, compared to the swirler designated as S1, S2 
generates a large-scale axial vortex and exhibits improved lean ignition, 
blowout performance, and pattern factor. However, in terms of com­
bustion efficiency, when the fuel-to-air ratio is below 0.02 or exceeds 
0.4, S1 demonstrates higher combustion efficiency than S2. This sug­
gests that substantial research efforts are essential to validate the 
Fig 20. Pattern factors of the combustor under different Mach numbers.
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
12 


--- Page 13 ---

practical applicability of S2. The following research directions are pro­
posed for the S2: 1) The present experiments were conducted at atmo­
spheric pressure, which may not fully represent real-world combustor 
conditions. Future work should focus on operating the combustor under 
significantly higher air temperature and pressure conditions to examine 
the effects of pressure and temperature on combustion performance; 2) 
Adjust the airflow through each stage of S2 to further investigate the 
interactions between the different stages of the triple-swirler, focusing 
on their impact on transient flow fields and combustion phenomena; 3) 
It should be noted that Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) 
equations cannot accurately capture the interactions between the vortex 
and the flame compared to Large Eddy Simulation (LES). Therefore, LES 
should be adopted in future studies to simulate unsteady combustion 
processes, particularly during ignition and blowout, where large-scale 
vortices play a critical role; 4) To improve combustion efficiency 
under low oil-gas ratio conditions, it is essential to modify the local 
equivalence ratio and fuel distribution. This can be achieved by 
adjusting the airflow through each stage of S2 to further optimize the 
flow field structure downstream of the swirler. Furthermore, it is 
important to investigate the combustion characteristics under various 
fuel supply schemes to identify optimized fuel supply strategies; 5) 
Compare the fuel distribution ratio between the pilot stage and the main 
stage to assess its impact on combustion characteristics; 6) Adjust the 
axial position of the primary combustion hole of the combustor to 
modify the axial length of the recirculation zone, thereby optimizing the 
local fuel-to-air ratio in the main combustion zone.
4. Conclusions
In this study, two different flow fields were formed in a triple-swirler 
gas turbine combustor using two different triple swirlers (denoted as S1 
and S2). Overall, the flow pattern of S2 appears to be more stable and 
well-organized compared to S1. This can be attributed to the presence of 
a large-scale vortex in S2, which helps maintain a consistent and 
controlled flow. Experiments were conducted at atmospheric pressure to 
investigate the effect of the flow field, particularly the large-scale axial 
vortex, on the combustion performance of the combustor. The effect was 
directly studied in terms of ignition, lean blowout limit, combustion 
efficiency, and pattern factor. The findings indicated that the flow field 
significantly impacts combustion characteristics. The results show that 
S2 has more efficient and reliable lean ignition and blowout perfor­
mances compared to S1, owing to the combined effects of airflow ve­
locity, turbulence intensity, and the presence of the large-scale vortex. 
The average ignition FAR achieved by S2 is 0.0085, whereas the average 
ignition FAR obtained by S1 is 0.0101, indicating an increase of 18.8 % 
compared to S2. Additionally, the average lean blowout FAR for S2 is 
0.0068, while S1 demonstrates an average lean blowout FAR of 0.0077, 
which is 13.2 % higher than that of S2. This suggests that S2 may be a 
more suitable design for achieving successful ignition and robust sta­
bility in practical applications. Additionally, under the influence of the 
large-scale vortex, S2 achieved much lower pattern factors under most 
operating conditions. Interestingly, when the fuel-air ratio (FAR) is 
below 0.02 or above 0.4, S1 exhibits higher combustion efficiency 
compared to S2. On the other hand, for the remaining FAR conditions, 
S2 achieves higher combustion efficiency than S1.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the 
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Lin Long: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Funding acquisi­
tion, Data curation. Yuling Zhao: Writing – original draft, Validation, 
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data 
curation, Conceptualization. Xiaomin He: Software, Funding acquisi­
tion, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the funds of the Natural Science Foun­
dation of Jiangsu Province, China (BK20240858), Jiangsu Province 
Higher Education Institutions Basic Science (No.24 KJB590001), Gen­
eral Project of Basic Science (Natural Science) Research in Higher Ed­
ucation Institutions of Jiangsu Province (No. 23KJB470004), and 
Changzhou Applied Basic Research Program, Pre-funding (No. 
CJ20235008).
References
[1] R. Sharifzadeh, A. Afshari, Assessment of a hydrogen-fueled swirling trapped- 
vortex combustor using large-eddy simulation, Fuel 357 (2024) 129847.
[2] A.H. Lefebvre, D.R. Ballal, Gas Turbine Combustion, 3rd ed., Taylor & Francis, New 
York, 2010.
[3] Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, M. Li, B. Yu, A preliminary investigation on a novel vortex- 
controlled flameholder for aircraft engine combustor, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 155 
(2024) 109723.
[4] K. Zhang, Y. Jin, K.H. Yao, et al., Effects of swirling motion on the cavity flow field 
and combustion performance, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 138 (2023) 108275.
[5] A. Mardani, B. Asadi, A.A. Beig, Investigation of flame structure and precessing 
vortex core instability of a gas turbine model combustor with different swirler 
configurations, Phys. Fluids 34 (2022) 085129.
[6] A.E.E. Khalil, A.K. Gupta, Fuel flexible distributed combustion for efficient and 
clean gas turbine engines, Appl. Energy 109 (2013) 267–274.
[7] Z. Cai, M.B. Sun, Z.G. Wang, X.S. Bai, Effect of cavity geometry on fuel transport 
and mixing processes in a scramjet combustor, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 80 (2018) 
309–314.
[8] A.A.V. Perpignan, A.G. Rao, D.J.E.M. Roekaerts, Flameless combustion and its 
potential towards gas turbines, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 69 (2018) 28–62.
[9] W.S. Zhao, W.J. Fan, R.C. Zhang, Study on the effect of fuel injection on 
combustion performance and NOx emission of RQL trapped-vortex combustor, 
Energy Rep. 9 (2023) 54–63.
[10] S.M. Correa, A review of NOx formation under gas-turbine combustion conditions, 
Combust. Sci. Technol. 87 (1993) 329–362.
[11] J. Hermanson, M. Colket, J. Sangiovanni, Stability and emissions of lean, turbulent, 
premixed flames with very lean coflow, AIAA J. 35 (1997) 1705–1711.
[12] C. Paschereit, E. Gutmark, Enhanced stability and reduced emissions in an elliptic 
swirl-stabilized burner, AIAA J. 46 (2008) 1063–1071.
[13] Y.Z. Shen, M. Ghulam, K. Zhang, et al., Vortex breakdown of the swirling flow in a 
Lean Direct Injection burner, Phys. Fluids 32 (2020) 125118.
[14] M.Y. Li, Q. Wang, Y.L. Zhao, et al., Combustion and emission characteristics of a 
novel staged combustor for aero gas turbine engine, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 134 
(2023) 108169.
[15] R. Sharifzadeh, A. Afshari, Large eddy simulation of swirling flows in a non- 
reacting trapped-vortex combustor, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 127 (2022) 107711.
[16] H.C. Mongia, TAPS a 4th generation propulsion combustor technology for low 
emissions, AIAA 2003-2657 (2003).
[17] P. Jiang, X.M. He, Ignition characteristics of a novel mixed-flow trapped vortex 
combustor for turbo-shaft engine, Fuel 261 (2020) 116430.
[18] P. Jiang, X.M. He, Experimental investigation of flow field characteristics in a 
mixed-flow trapped vortex combustor, Aerosp. Sc Technol. 96 (2020) 105533.
[19] Y.L. Zhao, W.J. Fan, R.C. Zhang, Influence of coupling schemes of radial and 
circumferential flame stabilization modes on flow and combustion characteristics 
of compact combustion for gas turbine, Fuel 333 (2023) 126543.
[20] Mi X.T., Zhang C., Wang B., et al. Influence of main stage air splits on the ignition 
performance of TeLESS-II Combustor [C], ASME-GT2017-63216.
Table 9 
Performance comparison between S1 and S2.
Performance
S1
S2
Outstanding Swirler
Lean ignition FAR
high
low
S2
Lean blowout FAR
high
low
S2
Efficiency at low or high FAR
high
low
S1
Efficiency at intermediate FAR
low
high
S2
Pattern factor
high
low
S2
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
13 


--- Page 14 ---

[21] Brundish, K.D., Miller, M.N., Morgan, L.C., et al., “Variable fuel placement injector 
development,” ASME GT2003-38417, 2003.
[22] Lazik, W., Doerr, T., Bake, S., “Low NOx combustor development for the engine 3E 
core engine demonstrator,” ISABE 2007-1190, 2007.
[23] Mongia, H.C., “Engineering aspects of complex gas turbine combustion mixers, part 
I: high ΔT,” AIAA 2011-107, 2011.
[24] W. Gao, J.H. Yang, F.Q. Liu, et al., Experimental investigation on the flame 
propagation pattern of a staged partially premixed annular combustor [J], 
Combust. Flame 230 (2021) 11445.
[25] A. Horikawa, Y. Kinoshita, Improvement on ignition performance for a lean staged 
low NOx combustor, ASME GT2011-46187 (2011).
[26] G.Q. Li, E.J. Gutmark, Flow field measurements of triple swirler spray combustor, 
AIAA pap 2002-4010 (2002).
[27] G.Q. Li, S. Angier, O. Lambolez, et al., Experimental study of velocity flow field for 
a multiple swirl spray combustor, AIAA 2002-0618 (2002).
[28] A. Fordjour, X. Zhu, S. Yuan, F.A. Dwomoh, Z. Issaka, Numerical simulation and 
experimental study on internal flow characteristics in the dynamic fluidic 
sprinkler, Appl. Eng. Agric. 36 (2020) 61–70.
[29] Z.Q. Zhao, X.M. He, G.Y. Ding, et al., Effect of rotational direction of triple swirler 
on cold flow characteristics of a model combustor, J. Aerosp. Eng. 231 (2017) 
918–930.
[30] H. Qin, Y.Z. Lin, J.B. Li, Precessing motion in stratified radial swirl flow, Chin. J. 
Aeronaut. 29 (2016) 386–394.
[31] M. St¨ohr, I. Boxx, C.A.D. Carter, W. Meier, Experimental study of vortex-flame 
interaction in a gas turbine model combustor, Combust. Flame 159 (2012) 
2636–2649.
[32] Z.X. Chen, N. Swaminathan, M. St¨ohr, W. Meier, Interaction between self-excited 
oscillations and fuel-air mixing in a dual swirl combustor, Proc. Combust. Inst. 37 
(2019) 2325–2333.
[33] J. Gao, M.H. Tunio, Y. Chen, R. He, Design and experiment of low-frequency 
ultrasonic nozzle integrating air-assistant system and acoustic levitation 
mechanism, Int. J. Agric. Biol. Eng. 13 (2020) 25–33.
[34] Z.B. Fu, Y.Z. Lin, J.B. Li, et al., Experimental investigation on ignition performance 
of less combustor, ASME GT2011- 45786 (2011).
[35] X.F. Wang, Y.Z. Lin, H.S. Hu, et al., Effect of swirl cup’s venturi shape on spray 
structure and ignition process, ASME GT2014-25216 (2014).
[36] B. Wang, C. Zhang, Y.Z. Lin, et al., Influence of main swirler vane angle on the 
ignition performance of TeLESS-II combustor, ASME GT2016-56764 (2016).
[37] S.H. Yang, C. Zhang, Y.Z. Lin, et al., Experimental investigation of the ignition 
process in a separated dual-swirl spray flame [J], Combust. Flame 219 (2020) 
161–177.
[38] B.X. Lin, Y. Wu, M.X. Xu, et al., Experimental investigation on spark ignition and 
flame propagation of swirling kerosene spray flames [J], Fuel 303 (2021) 121254.
[39] R.X. Dong, Q.C. Lei, Q. Zhang, et al., Dynamics of ignition kernel in a liquid-fueled 
gas turbine model combustor studied via time-resolved 3D measurements [J], 
Combust. Flame 232 (2021) 111566.
[40] Y.L. Zhao, X.M. He, M.Y. Li, Ignition, efficiency and emissions of RP-3 kerosene in a 
three-staged multi-injection combustor, Fuel Process. Technol. 213 (2021), 
106635.32.
[41] S.F. Ahmed, E. Mastorakos, Correlation of spark ignition with the local 
instantaneous mixture fraction in a turbulent nonpremixed methane jet [J], 
Combust. Sci. Technol. 182 (2010) 1360–1368.
[42] W.L. Roberts, J.F. Driscoll, M.C. Drake, et al., Images of the quenching of a flame 
by a vortex to quantify regimes of turbulent combustion [J], Combust. Flame 94 
(1993) 58–69.
[43] S.J. Kline, F.A. McClintock, Describing uncertainties in single sample experiments, 
Mech. Eng. 75 (1953) 3–8.
[44] C.R. Shaddix, Correcting thermocouple measurements for radiation loss: a critical 
review, in: 33rd National Heat Transfer Conference. American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, 1999. HTD99-282.
[45] Q. Wang, M.Y. Li, Y.L. Zhao, et al., Combustion and emission performance of a 
trapped-vortex gas turbine combustor fueled by RP-3 kerosene, Fuel (2023) 
127929.
[46] Aviation Industry Department of China. Aero-engine gaseous pollutants sampling 
and measurement procedures, Aviat. Ind. Stand. HB (1987) 6117–6187.
L. Long et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Aerospace Science and Technology 168 (2026) 111097 
14 
