
--- Page 1 ---

DOI: 10.1007/s00340-007-2928-8
Appl. Phys. B 90, 609–618 (2008)
Lasers and Optics
Applied Physics B
r. sadanandanu
m. st¨ohr
w. meier
Simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements
in a gas turbine model combustor
Institut für Verbrennungstechnik, DLR Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 38–40, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
Received: 14 October 2007/
Revised version: 14 December 2007
Published online: 5 February 2008 • © Springer-Verlag 2008
ABSTRACT In highly turbulent environments, combustion is
strongly inﬂuenced by the effects of turbulence chemistry inter-
actions. Simultaneous measurement of the ﬂow ﬁeld and ﬂame
is, therefore, obligatory for a clear understanding of the under-
lying mechanisms. In the current studies simultaneous PIV and
OH-PLIF measurements were conducted in an enclosed gas tur-
bine model combustor for investigating the inﬂuence of turbu-
lence on local ﬂame characteristics. The swirling CH4/air ﬂame
that was investigated had a thermal power of 10.3 kW with
an overall equivalence ratio of ϕ = 0.75 and exhibited strong
thermoacoustic oscillations at a frequency of approximately
295 Hz. The measurements reveal the formation of reaction
zones at regions where hot burned gas from the recirculation
zones mixes with the fresh fuel/air mixture at the nozzle exit.
However, this does not seem to be a steady phenomenon as there
always exist regions where the mixture has failed to ignite, pos-
sibly due to the high local strain rates present, resulting in small
residence time available for a successful kinetic runaway to take
place. The time averaged PIV images showed ﬂow ﬁelds typical
of enclosed swirl burners, namely a big inner recirculation zone
and a small outer recirculation zone. However, the instantaneous
images show the existence of small vortical structures close to
the shear layers. These small vortical structures are seen play-
ing a vital role in the formation and destruction of reaction zone
structures. One does not see a smooth laminar ﬂame front in the
instantaneous OH-PLIF images, instead isolated regions of ig-
nition and extinction highlighting the strong interplay between
turbulence and chemical reactions.
PACS 33.20.-t; 33.50.-j; 47.27.-i; 47.32.Ef; 47.70.Pq; 82.33.Vx;
82.40.-g
1
Introduction
Combustion under gas turbine (GT)-like condi-
tions is a very complex process governed by a complicated
turbulent ﬂowﬁeld and strong effects of turbulence–chemistry
interactions. Modern stationary gas turbines are operated in
a lean premixed or partially premixed mode. However, pre-
u Fax: +49-711-6862 578, E-mail: rajesh.sadanandan@dlr.de
mixing is not perfect because usually fuel and air are mixed
shortly before entering the combustion chamber leading to
a signiﬁcant degree of unmixedness [1, 2]. Flame stabiliza-
tion is most often achieved by swirl, which induces a re-
circulation of burned gas to the ﬂame root thereby mixing
hot gas and radicals with fresh gas. Thus, a variety of dif-
ferent mixtures of fuel, air and exhaust gas can be present
before ﬂame reactions start [1, 3]. Mixtures with high tem-
peratures can spontaneously ignite if the ignition delay time
is on the order or shorter than the typical time scale of the
ﬂowﬁeld. After ignition a ﬂame front can propagate through
a partially premixed gas containing fuel and oxygen until
the ﬂame front is extinguished, e.g., by high local strain
rates. The situation becomes even more complex if ther-
moacoustic instabilities occur which further inﬂuence mixing
and reaction [4–8]. Considering this complex interplay be-
tween ﬂowﬁeld, chemical reactions and (acoustic) boundary
conditions, it becomes clear that the theoretical understand-
ing of such ﬂames is still incomplete and that its numeri-
cal simulation is challenging. In order to improve the un-
derstanding, experiments with advanced laser techniques are
needed.
A main advantage of laser techniques is their ability to
yield two-dimensional ﬁelds of velocities and scalars with
high temporal and spatial resolution. For the 2D measure-
ment of the ﬂowﬁeld, particle image velocimetry (PIV) and
stereoscopic PIV are well suited and for the imaging of
scalars planar laser induced ﬂuorescence (PLIF) is mostly
used [9, 10]. In particular, the simultaneous application of
PIV and PLIF enables new insights into the interaction be-
tween a turbulent ﬂowﬁeld and chemical reactions. Of spe-
cial interest is here the visualization of the reaction zones
by, e.g., PLIF of OH or CH. Several research groups have
contributed to a better understanding of various aspects of
turbulence–ﬂame front interactions by applying the combina-
tion of these techniques. Frank et al. used PLIF of OH together
with PIV to study countergradient transport in reaction zones
of premixed turbulent CH4/air ﬂames [11]. Similar investi-
gations have been performed by Böhm et al. in a partially
premixed counterﬂow ﬂame [12]. The ﬂame–vortex interac-
tion was studied by Meyer et al. applying OH PLIF/PIV
in a counterﬂow ﬂame [13]. Driscoll and coworkers applied
PIV simultaneously with PLIF of OH or CH to character-
ize ﬂame extinction phenomena in turbulent non-premixed jet


--- Page 2 ---

610
Applied Physics B – Lasers and Optics
ﬂames [14, 15]. Rehm and Clemens used PIV/OH-PLIF [16]
and Han and Mungal [17] used PIV/CH-PLIF to study the
inﬂuence of strain on the reaction zones in non-premixed jet
ﬂames. Watson et al. investigated the ﬂame stabilization of
a lifted CH4/air diffusion ﬂame by CH-PLIF/PIV [18]. Hult
et al. used the multi-shot imaging setup in Lund together with
stereoscopic PIV to study the interaction between the reac-
tion zone and turbulent vortices in the DLR jet ﬂame [19].
A ﬂame with a more complex ﬂowﬁeld was investigated by
Petersson et al. [20]. They applied PIV, PLIF and ﬁltered
Rayleigh to the premixed unconﬁned low swirl ﬂame from the
Lawrence Berkeley NationalLaboratory. Tanahashietal. used
CH- and OH-PLIF simultaneously with stereo PIV to study
the ﬂame structures in a conﬁned swirl-stabilized premixed
ﬂame [21].
In the experiments presented here, simultaneous OH-
PLIF/PIV imaging was applied to a conﬁned partially pre-
mixed GT model ﬂame. The GT model combustor has been
used before for the investigation of different CH4/air swirl
ﬂames [3, 22–30]. The ﬂame used in this investigation has
a thermal power of 10 kW and a global equivalence ratio
of ϕ = 0.75 and exhibits thermoacoustic pulsations at a fre-
quency of around 295 Hz. In previous studies this ﬂame
has been characterized using laser Raman scattering, laser
Doppler velocimetry, PLIF of OH, CH, and H2CO and two-
line OH-PLIF thermometry. Thus, a huge amount of experi-
mental data are available to support the interpretation of the
current experimental results.
In this paper, we concentrate on the ﬂame structures and on
the interaction between the ﬂowﬁeld and the reaction zones.
The different levels of OH concentrations occurring in this
ﬂame and the identiﬁcation of the reaction zones by the gra-
dients of the OH distributions are discussed. Furthermore, the
FIGURE 1
Schematic drawing of the GT model combus-
tor together with a photograph of the combustion chamber;
Inset: zoomed view of the burner as seen from the top
different orientations of the reaction zone with respect to the
ﬂowﬁeld are treated. The main goals of this contribution are
the demonstration of the potential of simultaneous PLIF/PIV
measurements for the investigation of GT-relevant ﬂames and
to contribute to a better understanding of the combustion pro-
cess in these ﬂames.
2
Experimental details
2.1
Gas turbine model combustor and ﬂames
The schematic of the gas turbine (GT) model com-
bustor and the burner used for the measurements is shown
in Fig. 1. The burner is a modiﬁed version of a GT com-
bustor originally equipped with an air blast nozzle for liquid
fuels [31]. Co-swirling dry air at room temperature and atmo-
spheric pressure was supplied to the ﬂame through a central
nozzle (diameter 15 mm) and an annular nozzle (i.d. 17 mm,
o.d. 25 mm contoured to an outer diameter of 40 mm). Both air
ﬂowswere fed from a common plenum with an inner diameter
of 79 mm and a height of 65 mm. The radial swirlers consisted
of eight channels for the central nozzle and 12 channels for the
annular nozzle. The ratio of the air mass ﬂows through the an-
nular and central nozzle was approximately 1.5. Non-swirling
CH4 was fed through 72 channels (0.5×0.5 mm2), forming
a ring between the air nozzles. Compared with an annular noz-
zle for CH4 with a slit width of < 0.5 mm, this conﬁguration
ensured better realisation of the cylindrical symmetry of the
fuel injection and sets well-deﬁned boundary conditions for
numerical simulation. The exit planes of the fuel and cen-
tral air nozzles were located 4.5 mm below the exit plane of
the outer air nozzle; the latter was deﬁned as reference height
h = 0. A contoured steel top plate with a central exhaust tube
(diameter 40 mm, length 50 mm) formed the exhaust gas exit.


--- Page 3 ---

SADANANDAN et al. Simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements in a gas turbine model combustor
611
The combustion chamber had a square section of 85 ×85 mm2
and a height of 114 mm and was equipped with four quartz
windows held by four rods (diameter 10 mm) in the corners,
thereby enabling excellent optical access to the ﬂame zone.
The high velocity in the exhaust tube avoided any backﬂow
from outside the combustion chamber.
The CH4/air ﬂame that was investigated in the current
studies had an overall equivalence ratio ϕ = 0.75 and ther-
mal power Pth = 10.3 kW, resulting from a CH4 mass ﬂow
of 12.3 g/min and air mass ﬂow of 280.8 g/min. The CH4
and air ﬂow rates were regulated with high precision coriolis
(Siemens Mass 2100) and mass ﬂow controllers (Bronkhorst).
The ﬂame under these operating conditions was lifted and thus
partially premixed before ignition and it exhibited thermo-
acoustic oscillations at a frequency of approximately 295 Hz.
This frequency did notcorrespond to any resonance frequency
of the combustor geometry. The pressure variations were
measured by two microphones (Brüel & Kjaer 4939), located
at the plenum and in the combustion chamber at a height of
16 mm in one of the 4 rods that held the quartz windows. The
nozzle Reynolds number based on the cold inﬂow and the
minimum outer nozzle diameter (25 mm) was about 15000
and the swirl number of the burner calculated from the vel-
ocity proﬁle just above the burner was S ≈0.55 [30]. From
the visible appearance and photos from different directions
the ﬂame exhibited axial symmetry despite of the square com-
bustion chamber. However, from PIV measurements it could
be deduced that the ﬂowﬁeld exhibited a slight deviation from
axial symmetry close to the combustor walls induced by the
corners of the chamber.
FIGURE 2
Schematics of the optical system used for simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements
2.2
Experimental setup and measurement techniques
The schematic of the optical setup used for the
measurements is shown in Fig. 2. It is a combination of an
OH-PLIF system with a PIV system. The output beams from
the dye laser at 283 nm for the OH-PLIF excitation and the
double pulse Nd:YAG laser at 532 nm used for the PIV meas-
urements were expanded into a vertical sheet by means of
a series of cylindrical lenses as shown in Fig. 2. Both sheets
were then combined together and were then sent along the
same optical path into the combustion chamber. This was
achieved by means of a mirror with high reﬂectivity at 283 nm
and also high transmissivity at 532 nm. The OH-PLIF and
PIV cameras were positioned diametrically opposite to each
other with respect to the combustion chamber. So no image
dewarping was performed as the image distortion due to per-
spective projections and inherent camera lens distortions were
very minimal. The pixel to pixel spatial matching between the
two cameras was accomplished by imaging a common refer-
ence grid placed at the same plane as the laser sheets at the
burner exit. From these images the pixel/mm ratio for each
camera was calculated to recalibrate all LIF and PIV images
and to map the two camera images into a common coordinate
system.
2.2.1 OH-LIF system.
For the OH-PLIF measurements
a ﬂashlamp pumped, frequency doubled Nd:YAG laser
(Quanta Ray, DCR-2) was used to pump a frequency dou-
bled tuneable dye laser (Lumonics, HD-500) at 10 Hz. The
UV beam (pulse duration 8 ns and line width ≈0.4 cm−1)


--- Page 4 ---

612
Applied Physics B – Lasers and Optics
had a pulse energy of approximately 2.5 mJ at the exit of
the laser and was tuned to the Q1(8) transition of OH at ap-
proximately 283 nm in the ν′′ = 0, ν′ = 1 vibrational band of
the A2Σ+–X2Π system. The population of the laser-coupled
ground state of the selected line varied by approximately 9%
in the temperature range of interest (1400–2200 K). Subse-
quent OH ﬂuorescence in the ν′ = 1, ν′′ = 1 and ν′ = 0, ν′′ = 0
bands near 310 nm was detected through an interference ﬁl-
ter in the wavelength region 295–340 nm. This also enabled
suppression of laser light scattered from both OH-PLIF and
PIV systems and background radiations. The laser sheet in-
side the combustor was approximately 50 mm in height and
400 µm in thickness. The spectral laser intensities in the im-
aged area was approximately 3.1 MW/cm2 cm−1 for OH. The
applied laser intensities were above the saturation intensities
of approximately 1 MW/cm2 cm−1 [32] for the chosen tran-
sitions of OH and thereby a considerable degree of saturation
is to be expected in measurements. By means of a beam split-
ter, a small portion of the incoming laser beam is directed into
a CH4/air reference ﬂame in a McKenna burner regulated by
means of digital mass ﬂow controllers, operating under lami-
nar conditions. The LIF produced by the ﬂame is used for the
online monitoring of the excitation line wavelength.
The OH-PLIF detection system consisted of an image-
intensiﬁed CCD camera (Roper Scientiﬁc, 512×512 pixels)
with achromatic UV lens (Halle, f/2, f = 64 mm). Part of in-
coming laser sheet was deﬂected into a quartz cell ﬁlled with
ﬂuorescent dye solution by means of a beam splitter. The dye
cell ﬂuorescence proﬁle was simultaneously imaged using
another ICCD camera (Roper Scientiﬁc, 512× 512 pixels)
equipped with a Nikon lens ( f/2.8, f = 50 mm). This dye cell
proﬁle is used for correcting the laser sheet proﬁle inhomo-
geneities. The image intensiﬁer was set to an exposure time
of 400 ns for both OH-PLIF and dye cell ﬂuorescence cam-
eras. The spatial resolution of the system based on the size of
a pixel in the ﬂowﬁeld is approximately 185 µm. The same
detection system along with the ﬁlter combination was used
for the OH∗chemiluminescence measurements. The exposure
time for the image intensiﬁer was set to 40 µs to capture the
integrated (along the line of sight) spontaneous emission from
OH in the electronically excited state (OH∗).
2.2.2 PIV system. The PIV system (New Wave Solo PIV 120)
consisted of a frequency doubled double-pulse Nd:YAG laser,
a double-shutter CCD camera (LaVision, 1376×1024 pixels)
and a programmable timing unit (PTU). The laser had a pulse
energy of 120 mJ/pulse at 532 nm. The vertical sheet had
a height of approximately 60 mm and a thickness of 1 mm in-
side the combustor. The time separation between the two laser
pulses was 15 µs. The air ﬂow was seeded with TiO2 particles
with a nominal diameter of 1 µm. The spatial resolution of
velocities is 0.77 mm (corresponding to an interrogation re-
gion of 12×12 pixels) in both directions. The rate of image
acquisition was 2.5 double frames/s. Due to the coating of the
windows with seeding particles during the measurements, ac-
quisition of images was possible only for 100 s corresponding
to 500 image pairs. Thereafter the windows had to be cleaned
before any further measurements could be performed.
The vector ﬁelds and streamline plots were generated
using the commercial PIV software from LaVision (Flow-
Master). A multi-scale cross-correlation algorithm was used,
with the interrogation window size ranging from 64×64 pixel
to 16×16 pixel. In the hot gas regions, approximately six par-
ticles were present in an area of 16×16 pixel, whereas in the
unburned gas, the density was considerably higher (more than
12 particles per interrogation area). Spurious vectors were de-
tected using the deviation from the local median, and replaced
either by vectors corresponding to the 2nd, 3rd or 4th highest
correlation peak (if they fulﬁl the median criterion), or else by
an interpolated vector.
2.2.3 Time synchronisation. The timing between the different
laser pulses and the camera gate openings were synchronised
by means of a PTU from LaVision and a pulse delay genera-
tor (SRS Inc. type, DG532). This enabled synchronising the
OH-PLIF and PIV cameras both framing at 2.5 Hz with the
OH-PLIF and PIV laser systems operating at 10 Hz. The OH-
PLIF image was captured in between the ﬁrst and the second
PIV images at 10 µs after the ﬁrst PIV laser pulse. The time
delay helped in reducing the effects of laser light scattering
from the PIV laser in addition to providing simultaneous OH-
PLIF images with the velocity ﬁelds.
2.3
Image post processing – identiﬁcation of the
reaction zones from OH-LIF images
Using OH-LIF image to locate the transient reac-
tion zones in highly turbulent ﬂows is not always straight-
forward as detectable amount of OH exists in abundance not
only in the reaction zone but also in the burned gases where
the temperature of the gases is approximately above 1400 K.
However, the equilibrium OH concentration increases expo-
nentially with temperature. So, in the reaction zone where
the temperature is maximum, one can expect a sharp tem-
perature gradient and a correspondingly sharp OH-LIF inten-
sity gradient. Additionally, chemical kinetic models as well
as previous Raman and LIF investigations in jet ﬂames have
shown that OH exists in superequilibrium concentrations in
the reaction zone [33, 34]. This results from the difference in
kinetic rates between the two-body radical production reac-
tions and the three-body radical decay reactions towards equi-
librium. For atmospheric-pressure ﬂames, the characteristic
timescale for two-body and three-body reactions are approxi-
mately 20 µs and 3 ms respectively. The strong temperature
gradients together with the existence of superequilibrium OH
concentration in the reaction zone results in strong gradients
in the OH-PLIFimages. Thus by deducing the gradients of the
OH-PLIF distributions in the axial and radial directions, the
spatial location and structure of the transient reactions zones
can be identiﬁed. There are different digital image process-
ing methods available for gradient calculation. In the present
work, we used a Sobel gradient ﬁlter which takes the deriva-
tive in the one direction and smoothes in the orthogonal direc-
tion using a one dimensional version of triangular ﬁlter [35].
The spatial averaging operation with the triangular ﬁlter is
based on a local averaging of the input ﬁlter where all the
values within the ﬁlter support have differing weights. This
combined process of differentiation and spatial averaging al-
leviates the sensitiveness of the method to small luminance
ﬂuctuations in the image.


--- Page 5 ---

SADANANDAN et al. Simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements in a gas turbine model combustor
613
3
Results and discussion
3.1
Flame shape and ﬂowﬁeld characteristics
The single shot and time averaged streamline plot
of the ﬂowﬁeld are shown in Fig. 3. The time averaged plot
shows a ﬂowﬁeld typical of enclosed swirl burners with a con-
ically shaped inﬂow of fresh gas, an inner recirculation zone
(IRZ) and an outer recirculation zone (ORZ). A shear layer
of high velocity ﬂuctuations is formed between the IRZ and
the high velocity inﬂowing stream. A second shear layer of
high velocity ﬂuctuation is formed between the ORZ and the
inﬂow. The instantaneous streamline plot on the other hand
shows a completely different picture. It shows the existence
of small scale vortical structures at regions close to the shear
layers which did not show up in the time averaged images.
These small scale vortical structures in the inner and outer
shear layer along with the high turbulence intensity present in
the shear layer result in intense mixing between the cold fresh
gas and the hot burned gases coming from IRZ and ORZ. It
can be seen in the following sections that the intense mixing
between the hot and the cold gases in turn plays a vital role in
the mixing and ignition of the fresh gas and thereby for the sta-
FIGURE 3
a Time averaged stream line plot of the ﬂowﬁeld at the axial plane of the burner and b instantaneous stream line plot of the ﬂowﬁeld at the axial
plane of the burner
FIGURE 4
a Time averaged OH∗-chemiluminescence image and b deconvoluted OH∗-chemiluminescence image
bilisation of the ﬂame above the burner in regions of high ﬂow
velocities.
Figure 4a shows the time averaged OH∗(electronically ex-
cited) chemiluminescence image of the ﬂame under the same
operating conditions. The chemiluminescence image gives in-
formation about the shape and position of the heat release
zone. When compared to LIF, which samples the electronic
ground state of the target species, chemiluminescence of-
fers qualitative information about the concentration of species
produced in the excited electronic state far from equilibrium
within the ﬂow. The near UV spontaneous emission from OH∗
is visible only in the heat release zone and not in the region
of burned gases. Since it is a line of sight technique, with
the total emission collected along the line of sight, the spatial
resolution is compromised. The chemiluminescence distribu-
tion displayed in Fig. 4a shows a rather ﬂat ﬂame with the
main region of heat release between 5 and 25 mm. It is not
quite clear whether the slight asymmetry of the distribution is
real or artiﬁcially caused by the experimental setup, e.g., by
a small misalignment of the optical axis. In case of axisym-
metric steady ﬂames, the chemiluminescence images can be
reprocessed to yield spatially resolved information. Figure 4b
shows the deconvoluted chemiluminescence image obtained


--- Page 6 ---

614
Applied Physics B – Lasers and Optics
from the time averaged image. It can be seen that the heat re-
lease zone is limited only up to a height of h ≃30 mm. Also
the ﬂame is not attached to the fuel nozzle exit, instead, it
stabilises at a height of approximately 2–5 mm, thereby im-
plying a high level of mixing before ignition and that the ﬂame
is of partially premixed nature [30].
Figure 5a and b displays the time averaged and instanta-
neous OH-PLIF images of the ﬂame, respectively. The laser
sheet travels from left to right in the image. The difference
in intensities seen between the left half and right half of the
OH-PLIF image, in spite of having an axisymmetrical ﬂame,
is due to the absorption by the OH radicals. The absorption
determined by comparing the average ﬂuorescence intensi-
ties in a rectangular region (5 mm wide and 10 mm in height)
from two sides of the combustor over a distance of 5 mm from
the quartz windows at a height of 30 mm from the burner exit
was ∼44%. In order to reduce the inﬂuence of absorption
on the interpretation of the results, we depict only sample re-
sults from the left side of the combustion chamber (r = −40 to
0 mm) in the following sections. As mentioned above OH-LIF
acts as a marker of the regions with high temperature namely,
the reaction zone and hot burned gases. The dark region at the
immediate exit of the burner represents the cold inﬂow with
mixture temperature less than ≈1400 K. On comparing with
the time averaged OH∗image in Fig. 4a, one can conclude that
the LIF intensity above 30 mm in the instantaneous and time
averaged OH-PLIF images are from the hot products of com-
bustion and not from the presence of reaction zone as the heat
release zone extends only up to a height of 30 mm.
In the instantaneous OH-LIF image, at the core of the IRZ
(r = −10 to 10 mm, h > 15 mm), no strong OH-LIF intensity
variations are visible, indicating an absence of reaction zones
in this region. Interestingly, the OH-LIF intensity scales are
also low in this region. But from previous temperature meas-
urements using planar two-line OH-PLIF thermometry [29]
and laser Raman scattering [30] methods in the same com-
bustor geometries and under the same operating conditions, it
was seen that the temperature in this region is around 1950 K,
with almost negligible rms ﬂuctuations at this height. Consid-
ering the rather long distance the ﬂuid elements have passed
FIGURE 5
a Time averaged and b instantaneous OH-PLIF distribution of the ﬂame
before they reach the core of the IRZ, it is obvious that the OH
concentrations are at equilibrium in this region. In contrast,
in the shear layer between the inﬂow and the IRZ (around
h = 5–30 mm, r = −25 to 0 mm) high OH-LIF intensities
are seen with levels approximately 5 to 7 times higher than
in the IRZ. These high levels are indicative of superequilib-
rium OH, i.e. OH that has just been formed in a reaction zone
or transported only a short distance away from the reaction
zone. Further, fuel and air are not mixed to the global equiv-
alence ratio at these positions [3] so that reactions are likely
to occur at ϕ ≈1 with ﬂame temperature around 2200 K and
correspondingly higher OH levels than in the IRZ. In order
to assess the inﬂuence of superequilibrium OH concentra-
tion for different equivalence ratios, calculations for premixed
CH4/air ﬂames have been performed using the “PREMIX”
code with the GRI 3.0 mechanism. The calculations have been
performed for ϕ = 0.75 and 1.0 for CH4/air at T = 300 K. In
addition, typical mixtures of CH4, air and exhaust gas in the
temperature range from 750–1500 K were also used as input
parameters. These gas mixtures were determined as follows:
For the ϕ = 0.75 and 1.0 the adiabatic equilibrium compo-
sition, including NO and the radicals O, H, and OH, and
temperature were calculated. In the next step, several compo-
sitions of burnt gas (at adiabatic equilibrium) and fresh gas
(at 300 K, same ϕ) were calculated in such a way that the re-
sulting temperatures of the mixtures were 750, 1000, 1250,
and 1500 K. These compositions were taken as the input data
for the PREMIX calculation. The resulting OH mole frac-
tions are displayed in Fig. 6 as a function of time. All curves
show a fast rise of OH at the onset of the ﬂame reactions fol-
lowed by a slower decay towards equilibrium. For ϕ = 1.0
the maximum OH mole fraction is ≈0.0075, which is about
2.5 times the equilibrium concentration. It is also seen that
the different gas mixtures with the same ϕ yield nearly the
same OH levels. At ϕ = 0.75 the maximum OH mole frac-
tion is ≈0.005and the equilibrium value is ≈0.001.From the
Raman measurements it is known that the exemplary gas mix-
tures chosen for the calculation are representative values in
the near ﬁeld of this ﬂame [3]. Thus, the calculation demon-
strates that the OH level can vary signiﬁcantly depending on ϕ


--- Page 7 ---

SADANANDAN et al. Simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements in a gas turbine model combustor
615
FIGURE 6
Dependence of superequilibrium OH concentration on different
temperature and equivalence ratio combinations
and superequilibrium state. In the core of the IRZ the OH con-
centrations are expected to be close to equilibrium and with
ϕ ≈ϕglobal = 0.75 the OH mole fraction should be close to
0.001 according to the calculation. In the outer region of the
instantaneous OH-PLIF distribution of Fig. 5b (r = −30 to
40 mm) the OH-LIF level is approximately 2–3 times higher
than in the IRZ, probably due to the transport of OH from the
reaction zones that has not yet reached equilibrium. For ex-
ample, for an axial velocity of approximately 15 m/s at burner
exit, the superequilibrium OH will travel a distance of ap-
proximately 15 mm from the reaction zone in 1 ms.
Figure 7 shows the corresponding gradients of the OH-
LIF distribution in Fig. 5b. The largest gradients most likely
correspond to reaction zones, the smaller gradients to bound-
ary layers between hot and cold gases. This interpretation
is, however, subject to some ambiguity because the orienta-
tion of the OH layers with respect to the laser sheet is not
known. The angle of intersection between the OH bound-
ary layer and the laser sheet has, of course, an inﬂuence of
the deduced gradient. Here, the smaller gradients are masked
by selecting a threshold value (5% of the maximum value,
arbitrarily chosen) and displaying only the gradients above
this threshold value. From the visual similarity of these im-
ages with the CH-PLIF images, commonly used to visualise
reaction zones, shown in Fig. 8, measured under identical
FIGURE 8
Two examples of instantaneous CH-PLIF
images. For details refer to [24]
FIGURE 7
Approximate spatial position and structure of the reaction zone
deduced from the OH-PLIF distribution in Fig. 5b. Inset: zoomed in views of
regions marked A and B
operating conditions [24, 36], it can be seen that it is reason-
able to use the gradient OH-PLIF images as an approximate
marker of the reaction zone. The strongly wrinkled contours
in the gradient plot give a good impression of the turbulence
present at the burner exit. In most of the single shot OH-PLIF
images reaction zones are continuous over a few centime-
ters in the measured 2D plane like the ﬂames in the ﬂamelet
regime. Paths with large gradients (reaction zones) often go
over in lines with small gradients where reactions have pre-
sumably ceased shortly before the image was taken. Besides
regions that are presumably ignition (marked A) and extinc-
tion (marked B) events were often seen in the single shot
OH-PLIF images, highlighting the strong interplay between
turbulence and chemical reactions. The “breaks” in the re-
action zone can be an outcome of the interaction with small
scale vortical structures where the increasing strain can inﬂu-
ence the residence times available for thermal runaway and
thereby leading to local extinction via ﬁnite rate chemistry ef-
fects. However, one need to be careful in the interpretation of
such images in view of the three dimensional nature of the
ﬂow–ﬂame interactions. The diminished gradient seen in the


--- Page 8 ---

616
Applied Physics B – Lasers and Optics
FIGURE 9
a Simultaneous OH-PLIF and velocity distributions; b velocity distributions overlapped over the gradient image deduced from the same
OH-PLIF image
measured 2D plane could also simply mean that the the reac-
tion zone may be connected out of plane. In addition, from
the studies by Meier et al. [3], one sees that the investigated
ﬂame (and also other ﬂames typical of gas turbine combus-
tion) exhibit a wide range of mixture fraction and temperature
combinations under such operating conditions. These stem
from the large variety of mixtures of fuel, air and exhaust gas.
As a result of these disparate mixture fraction temperature
combinations, reactions can be initiated by spontaneous igni-
tions and the ﬂame front can move through a premixed gas
mixture for some distance, and interact with the ﬂowﬁeld.
3.2
Simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements
One example of a simultaneously measured OH-
PLIF and PIV image is shown in Fig. 9a with the PIV plot
overlapped over the OH-PLIF image. The spatial position
and structure of the reaction zone with respect to the ﬂow-
ﬁeld is displayed in Fig. 9b, where the PIV plot overlapped
over the gradient image that was deduced from the same OH-
PLIF image. Again, one can see the corrugated shape of the
OH distribution and the different levels of OH concentrations.
Furthermore, one can clearly witness ﬂame stabilisation in
regions of high velocities at the burner exit. Reaction zones
are formed at the outer and inner shear layers where the hot
burned gases from the outer and inner recirculation zones mix
with the fresh fuel/air mixture (region C and D, respectively).
However the formation of reaction zones in regions where hot
gases mix with fresh fuel/air mixture is not continuous. For
example in region E, where almost identical ﬂow conditions
exist as in region D, the gradients are weak or the presence of
a strong reaction zone is hardly visible. This could be possibly
a case of local ﬂame extinction due to the presence of high
local strain rates which in turn will result in a relatively small
residence time available for a successful kinetic runaway.
Figure 10 shows another example of simultaneously
measured OH-PLIF and velocity ﬁelds. Here, a very broad re-
gion of high OH concentration is visible in region marked F.
The broad OH distribution seen here should be due to the
transport of “young” OH at superequilibrium conditions from
a nearby reaction zone. This assumption is reasonable as the
burner is operated at lean conditions and atmospheric pres-
FIGURE 10 Simultaneous OH-PLIF and velocity distributions
sure. However, this does not seem to be the case in the region
marked G, although one can see a broad region of high OH
concentration in this region also. The direction of the ﬂowﬁeld
is from top to bottom and there is no indication of a reaction
zone in the upstream of this region when one follows the vel-
ocity vectors towards larger heights. But the amount of OH
concentration present in this region, as shown by the colour
scale, indicates superequilibrium OH. A reasonable guess is
that this OH stems from a reaction zone outside the LIF plane.
However, for a more accurate interpretation of the local ﬂow–
chemistry interactions, one needs additional information in
the third dimension (stereo PIV images for example) or high
speed OH-PLIF images.
Figure 11 show four examples where the inﬂuence of ﬂow
dynamics on the orientation of the reaction zone is demon-
strated. The inﬂuence of small scale vortical structures on
the structure of the ﬂame front is shown in Fig. 11a and b
where selected streamlines are plotted along with the OH-
PLIF gradient and velocity vectors for better visualisation.
The instantaneous streamline plots of the ﬂowﬁeld in Fig. 3b
showed the existence of small scale vortical structure in re-
gions close to the shear layer much in contrast to the time
averaged stream line plots. The small regions of the ﬂame


--- Page 9 ---

SADANANDAN et al. Simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements in a gas turbine model combustor
617
FIGURE 11 Examples showing the inﬂuence of ﬂow dynamics on reaction
zone orientation
front shown in Fig. 11a and b show varying levels of inter-
action of these vortical structures on the reaction zone. For
example in Fig. 11a, the reaction zones lie on the circum-
ference of the vortical structures. Or in other words, there
is a roll up of the ﬂame front due to these vortices, thereby
increasing the ﬂame surface area and correspondingly the
reaction rates. Interactions of such nature where a defor-
mation of the ﬂame front with vortical structures occurred
were often seen in our studies in the different single shot
images. However, Fig. 11b shows interactions of different na-
ture. When compared to Fig. 11a, here the reaction zone ap-
pears to have been less affected by the vortex ﬂow. This may
be due to the small size of the vortex and the correspond-
ing weak vorticity. For high kinematic viscosities associated
with high ﬂame temperature, the local vorticity destruction
by local gas expansion could play against the convective roll
up process of the ﬂame front by small vortices. The strong
vortices can alter the ﬂame front only if they succeed in
weakening the ﬂame by stretch effects [37]. Similar ﬁnd-
ings were reported by Donbar et al. [15] in turbulent non-
premixed jet ﬂames studies, where it was seen that small
eddies appear to play no role in the wrinkling of the ﬂame
surface.
Figure 11c and d highlight the different orientations of
the reaction zone with respect to the ﬂowﬁeld. In Fig. 11c the
reaction zone is oriented parallel to the ﬂowﬁeld. Here reac-
tion zone is formed at the interface where the hot gases from
the IRZ or ORZ mix with the fresh inﬂow. This was seen
to be the case in most of the instances. However, Fig. 11d
shows a case where the orientation of the reaction zone is
perpendicular to the ﬂowﬁeld direction. At the velocity of
≈15 m/s prevailing in this region, the reaction zone is con-
vected by the ﬂowﬁeld and ﬂame displacement is of minor
importance. Thus, the reaction zone must have been formed
shortly before (≤1 m/s) near the burner exit. Because of
this short residence time, there must have been high tempera-
tures in the region where the ﬂame front was established.
Cases similar to (d) were relatively seldom observed in the
measurements.
4
Summary and conclusions
Simultaneous OH-PLIF and PIV measurements
have been performed in a gas turbine model combustor with
good optical access, operating under atmospheric conditions.
A conﬁned swirling CH4/air ﬂame with an overall equi-
valence ratio of 0.75 and a thermal power of 10.3 kW was
investigated. The time averaged streamline images showed
ﬂowﬁelds typical of enclosed swirl burners, namely an inner
recirculation zone and an outer recirculation zone. However,
the instantaneous stream line images showed the existence
of small vortical structures close to the shear layers. The
approximate position and structure of the transient reac-
tion zone in the combustor was identiﬁed by deducing
the gradient of the OH-PLIF images. This deduction pro-
cess makes use of the existence of superequilibrium OH
radicals at high concentrations in the reaction zone, cre-
ating a high OH concentration gradient along the reaction
zone during the gradient calculation process, thereby ef-
fectively marking the position and structure of the reaction
zone.
Reaction zones were predominantly formed at the outer or
inner shear layers where the hot burned gas from the outer or
inner recirculation zones mixes with the fresh fuel/air mixture
from the burner nozzle. This intense mixing between the hot
and cold gases was seen to play a vital role in the stabilisa-
tion of the ﬂame at regions of high ﬂow velocities. The ﬂame
front in the instantaneous OH-PLIF images are strongly wrin-
kled reﬂecting the strong local turbulence present. Though
the reaction zones were continuous over some centimeters,
isolated regions, presumably of ignition and extinction, were
often visible in the single shot OH-PLIF images, emphasiz-
ing the existence of ﬁnite rate chemistry effects. Numerical
simulations were performed using the PREMIX code with
the GRI 3.0 mechanism to evaluate the dependence of su-
perequilibrium OH concentrations on equivalence ratios and
mixture temperature. The simulations showed that the OH
levels depend mainly on local ϕ and less on the degree of
mixing between fresh and burned gas. Superequilibrium OH
concentration up to approximately ﬁve times the equilib-
rium value are likely to occur in this type of ﬂame. From
the simultaneous measurements it was seen that the small
scale vortical structures close to the shear layer sometimes
inﬂuence the reaction zone structure by rolling up the reac-
tion zone. However, this process seem to depend greatly on
the strength of the vortices as weak vortices did not have
any inﬂuence on the reaction zone structure. Though the
orientation of the reaction zone was parallel to the ﬂow-
ﬁeld in most of the 2D images, cases where the orienta-
tion of the reaction zone being perpendicular to the ﬂowﬁeld
were also visible in some regions of the ﬂow. Consider-
ing the large variety of thermochemical states present in
this ﬂame, as known from previous Raman measurements,
and the highly corrugated turbulent ﬂowﬁeld structure, it
becomes obvious that this type of ﬂames are governed by
a rather complex interplay between turbulence and chemical
kinetics.


--- Page 10 ---

618
Applied Physics B – Lasers and Optics
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The work has been supported under
the DLR research project “Mehrskalen-Verbrennungs-Simulation” (MVS).
The authors would also like to thank Dr. Marina Braun-Unkhoff for perform-
ing the calculations with PREMIX.
REFERENCES
1 W. Meier, P. Weigand, X.R. Duan, R. Giezendanner-Thoben, Combust.
Flame 150, 2 (2007)
2 K.J. Syed, E. Buchanan, Proc. ASME Turbo Expo, GT-2005-68070
(2005)
3 W. Meier, X.R. Duan, P. Weigand, Combust. Flame 144, 225 (2006)
4 J.J. Keller, AIAA J. 33, 2280 (1995)
5 A.H. Lefebvre, Gas Turbine Combustion (Taylor & Francis, Philadel-
phia, 1999)
6 T. Sattelmayer, J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power 125, 11 (2003)
7 T. Lieuwen, Turbomachinery International 44, 16 (2003)
8 N. Syred, Prog. Energ. Combust. Sci. 32, 93 (2006)
9 K. Kohse-Höinghaus, J. Jeffries (Eds.), Applied Combustion Diagnostics
(Taylor & Francis, New York, 2002)
10 A.C. Eckbreth, Laser Diagnostic for Combustion Temperature and
Species (Gordon and Breach, Netherlands, 1996)
11 J.J. Frank, P.A.M. Kalt, R.W. Bilger, Combust. Flame 116, 220 (1999)
12 B. Böhm, D. Geyer, A. Dreizler, K.K. Venkatesan, N.M. Laurendeau,
M.W. Renfro, Proc. Combust. Inst. 31, 709 (2007)
13 T.R. Meyer, G.J. Fiechtner, S.P. Gogineni, J.C. Rolon, C.D. Carter,
J.R. Gord, Exp. Fluids 36, 259 (2004)
14 C.D. Carter, J.M. Donbar, J.F. Driscoll, Appl. Phys. B 66, 129 (1998)
15 J.M. Donbar, J.F. Driscoll, C.D. Carter, Combust. Flame 125, 1239
(2001)
16 J.E. Rehm, N.T. Clemens, Proc. Combust. Inst. 27, 1113 (1998)
17 D. Han, M.G. Mungal, Combust. Flame 132, 565 (2003)
18 K.A. Watson, K.M. Lyons, J.M. Donbar, C.D. Carter, Combust. Flame
117, 257 (1999)
19 J. Hult, U. Meier, W. Meier, A. Harvey, C.F. Kaminski, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 30, 701 (2005)
20 P. Petersson, J. Olofsson, C. Brackmann, H. Seyfried, J. Zetterberg,
M. Richter, M. Alden, M.A. Linne, R.K. Cheng, A. Nauert, D. Geyer,
A. Dreizler, Appl. Opt. 46, 3928 (2007)
21 M. Tanahashi, S. Murakami, G.-M. Choi, Y. Fukuchi, T. Miyauchi, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 30, 1665 (2005)
22 R. Giezendanner-Thoben, O. Keck, P. Weigand, W. Meier, U. Meier,
W. Stricker, M. Aigner, Combust. Sci. Technol. 175, 721 (2003)
23 X.R. Duan, P. Weigand, W. Meier, O. Keck, B. Lehmann, W. Stricker,
M. Aigner, Prog. Comput. Fluid Dynam. 4, 175 (2004)
24 W. Meier, X.R. Duan, P. Weigand, Proc. Combust. Inst. 30, 835 (2005)
25 X.R. Duan, W. Meier, P. Weigand, B. Lehmann, Appl. Phys. B 80, 389
(2005)
26 R. Giezendanner-Thoben, P. Weigand, X.R. Duan, W. Meier, U. Meier,
M. Aigner, B. Lehmann, J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power 127, 492 (2005)
27 P. Weigand, W. Meier, X.R. Duan, R. Giezendanner-Thoben, U. Meier,
Flow Turbul. Combust. 75, 275 (2005)
28 R. Giezendanner-Thoben, U. Meier, W. Meier, M. Aigner, Flow Turbul.
Combust. 75, 317 (2005)
29 R. Giezendanner-Thoben, U. Meier, W. Meier, J. Heinze, M. Aigner,
Appl. Opt. 44, 6565 (2005)
30 P. Weigand, W. Meier, X.R. Duan, W. Stricker, M. Aigner, Combust.
Flame 144, 205 (2006)
31 M. Cao, H. Eichhoff, F. Joos, B. Simon, ASME Propulsion and Energet-
ics, 70th Symposium, Proc. AGARD Conference 422 (1987) 8.1
32 J. Tobai, T. Dreier, J.W. Daily, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 4030 (2002)
33 M.C. Drake, R.W. Pitz, M. Lapp, C.P. Fenimore, R.P. Lucht,
D.W. Sweeney, N.M. Laurendeau, Proc. Combust. Inst. 20, 327 (1984)
34 R.S. Barlow, R.W. Dibble, J.-Y. Chen, R.P. Lucht, Combust. Flame 82,
235 (1990)
35 B. Jähne, Digital Image Processing (Springer, Berlin, 2005)
36 R. Giezendanner-Thoben, PhD thesis, University of Stuttgart (2006)
37 C.J. Mueller, J.F. Driscoll, D.L. Reuss, M.C. Drake, M.E. Rosalik, Com-
bust. Flame 112, 342 (1998)
