
--- Page 1 ---

Flame dynamics
Moshe Matalon *
Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
1206 West Green Street, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Abstract
This lecture describes recent theoretical developments associated with the dynamics of ﬂames, obtained
primarily by exploiting the various temporal and length scales involved in the combustion process. In pre-
mixed ﬂames the focus is on ﬂame–ﬂow interactions that occur during the nonlinear development of hydro-
dynamically unstable large-scale ﬂames, or during the propagation of curved ﬂames in two-dimensional
channels. The second part of the paper deals with non-premixed and partially premixed ﬂames, where
the focus is on understanding the nature of diﬀusive-thermal instabilities including the eﬀect of thermal
expansion, and on stabilization mechanisms of edge ﬂames, which possess characteristics of both premixed
and diﬀusion ﬂames. The results presented in this talk illustrate how simpliﬁed models, when analyzed to
their extreme, yield predictions of qualitative nature with physical insight that have advanced our under-
standing of combustion. This insight can be used to guide the experimental eﬀorts, explain observations
and validate large-scale numerical simulations.
 2009 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Flame dynamics; Flame instability; Diﬀusion ﬂames; Hydrodynamic theory; Edge ﬂame
1. Introduction
Theory has made a strong impact on combus-
tion science and will continue to play an impor-
tant role in the foreseeable future. The recent
advances in experimental methods, in particular
laser diagnostic techniques, and in computational
capabilities, including the accessibility of comput-
ers and the eﬃciency of numerical tools, are pro-
viding combustion scientists with ample data
that require understanding and interpretation.
Fundamental understanding is best achieved by
constructing simpliﬁed models that retain the
main features of the phenomena being considered
and ﬁnding solutions to these models, either ana-
lytically or numerically, in a manner that makes
transparent the physical interactions occurring in
the various regions of the ﬂow ﬁeld and the eﬀects
that these have on the overall process.
Modeling combustion systems involves the
entire gamut of complexities associated with
multi-component ﬂows, heat and mass transfer
and chemical reactions, further complicated by a
large number of elementary chemical reactions
and the multidimensional and time-dependent
nature of the ﬂow. Such processes, however, occur
over a wide range of temporal and spatial scales.
The chemical reactions occurring in mixtures
commonly used in combustion devices evolve over
disparate time scales that are relatively short com-
pared to the ﬂow or diﬀusion time scales, which
imply that the chemical activity is conﬁned to thin
reaction layers. The reaction zones are embedded
in the ﬂame, where diﬀusion, heat conduction and
1540-7489/$ - see front matter  2009 The Combustion Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.proci.2008.08.002
* Fax: +1 2172446534.
E-mail address: matalon@uiuc.edu
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
www.elsevier.com/locate/proci
Proceedings
of the
Combustion
Institute


--- Page 2 ---

viscous dissipation take place. The ﬂame thick-
ness, normally a fraction of a millimeter, is small
when compared with the hydrodynamic length
scale associated with the geometrical dimensions
of the vessel within which combustion occurs.
And on a yet larger scale, there is a nonlinear
interaction with the acoustic ﬁeld generated, for
example, at the combustor’s inlet. Resolving such
problems, in a way that faithfully represents the
underlying
physico-chemical
processes
on
all
scales, small and large, is computationally inten-
sive. It is not surprising, therefore, that the tech-
niques of asymptotic analysis are the primary
tools that have been used to derive and analyze
simpliﬁed mathematical models of ﬂames.
Perturbation or asymptotic methods are used
to replace a complicated problem by a simpler
one, taking advantage of the relative magnitude
of the diﬀerent controlling parameters and/or
the disparate scales in the problem. The neglected
terms are clearly delineated and, in principle, can
be incorporated in higher order corrections by
systematically constructing a scheme of successive
approximations with improved results. Such an
approximation is referred to as a rational approx-
imation and is one of the most eﬀective tools avail-
able to scientists and engineers for constructing
reliable solutions that provide deep physical
insight. Van Dyke [1] provides a remarkable list
of very useful approximations in ﬂuid mechanics
that he calls irrational approximations, namely
that are not deduced by a limit process expansion.
In contrast to asymptotic methods, the success of
such an approach is not known a-priori and there
is no clear process by which the results can be
improved. Attempting such an approximation
requires ingenuity and deep physical insight and
therefore should not be discarded a-priori. Its
merit clearly lies on whether it produces sensible
results that compare favorably with experiments.
Often the asymptotic nature of an ad-hoc approx-
imation is revealed in future studies. An example
in combustion is the inﬁnitely fast chemistry limit
used in diﬀusion ﬂames, which was ﬁrst intro-
duced by Burke and Schumann [2]. The recogni-
tion
that
the
solution
corresponds
to
the
asymptotic limit of an inﬁnite Damko¨hler num-
ber, namely when the chemical reaction time is
much shorter than the ﬂow time, was discovered
much later. This systematic approach also identi-
ﬁes the relative thickness of the reaction zone
and leads to an appropriate formulation of its
internal structure with solutions that smoothly
connect the discontinuous slope across the sheet.
Because of the complexity and the highly non-
linear nature of the governing equations of com-
bustion problems, simpliﬁcations that appear
quite dubious a-priori are often introduced. In
studying diﬀusion ﬂames in concentric ducts,
Burke and Schumann [2] assumed that the axial
mass ﬂux throughout the duct remains constant.
They eﬀectively introduced a constant-density
approximation in order to decouple the hydrody-
namic from the transport equations. The con-
stant-density formulation can be systematically
obtained as an asymptotic limit when the heat-
release parameter is small. In real systems, how-
ever, the heat release is never small and density
varies signiﬁcantly across the ﬂame. Nevertheless,
the approach is useful in elucidating some of the
intricacies
associated
with
thermo-diﬀusive
aspects of the combustion process. The ﬂame
shapes and heights predicted by Burke and Schu-
mann [2], for example, are in remarkably good
agreement with experimental results. The stability
of a planar premixed ﬂame is another example
where the constant-density approximation has
been used to ﬁlter out hydrodynamic disturbances
and provide unequivocal results about the role of
diﬀusion on the onset of instabilities in the form of
cells and/or oscillations [3]. These results were
instrumental later on in constructing a more com-
prehensive stability theory that includes the previ-
ously
missing
hydrodynamic
eﬀects
[4–6],
previously discovered by Darrieus and Landau.
Asymptotic treatments of combustion prob-
lems lead to simpliﬁed models that occasionally
can be solved analytically, but otherwise require
a
numerical
approach.
An
argument
often
expressed is that since a numerical solution is
sought, one should then use the more complete
governing equations that include detailed chemis-
try and transport. This suggestion is shortsighted.
Even if a reliable numerical strategy is available
and integration over a suﬃciently long time is pos-
sible, which is rare in combustion problems, the
inclusion of everything that is likely to be of quan-
titative importance will signiﬁcantly increase the
number of parameters in the model and will not
necessarily provide better understanding. The sim-
pliﬁed problem possesses several advantages when
the goal is to identify the key physics underlying a
particular phenomenon. It is usually not as
numerically intense as the complete problem,
and since it contains fewer parameters, it is possi-
ble to obtain full parametric solutions rather than
solutions that are restricted to only a set of
parameters.
It also
provides deeper physical
insight by more easily identifying cause and eﬀect.
In addition, asymptotic solutions may be useful in
guiding and validating large-scale computations
of the more complete governing equations. In this
respect, asymptotic and numerical methods com-
plement each other.
A prominent theme in this lecture will be to
describe how reduced models, when analyzed to
their extreme without being distracted by the
adopted simpliﬁcations, provide physical insight
that have advanced our understanding of combus-
tion. This insight has been used to guide experi-
mental eﬀorts, explain observations and validate
large-scale numerical simulations. The problems
58
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 3 ---

discussed below are concerned with the dynamics
of premixed ﬂames, non-premixed (diﬀusion) and
partially premixed ﬂames. The paper, however, is
not a review on ﬂame dynamics; it complements
related talks given at previous symposia [7–9],
with a selection of topics that reﬂects the author’s
own interest. References are only cited when
directly
relevant
to
the
discussion,
with
no
attempt to exhaustively cover all the pertinent lit-
erature on the subject.
2. Premixed ﬂames
When a combustible gas mixture is ignited by a
heat source within a ﬂow ﬁeld, a deﬂagration
wave, or premixed ﬂame, propagates relative to
the ﬂow into the unburned gas consuming the
reactants and leaving behind hot products. The
simplest problem in premixed combustion is the
planar unconﬁned ﬂame that propagates steadily
into a quiescent mixture. The ﬂame then depends
on two parameters, which are characteristics of
the combustible mixture: the adiabatic ﬂame tem-
perature T a, achieved when the mixture burns to
completion under isobaric and adiabatic condi-
tions, and the laminar ﬂame speed SL, which is
the speed that the (planar) ﬂame travels into the
mixture in the absence of heat losses. In combus-
tion applications ﬂames seldom behave in such an
idealized way; they are typically corrugated and
propagate in a non-steady manner. The tempera-
ture and propagation speed vary along the ﬂame
front and depend on nonuniformities in the mix-
ture composition, heat losses, the diﬀusivity of
the various species comprising the mixture and
the local ﬂow conditions ahead of the ﬂame.
It is commonplace in theoretical studies of
combustion problems to describe the complex
reaction scheme involved in a particular fuel oxi-
dation by one-step Arrhenius kinetics. The adia-
batic
ﬂame
temperature
obtained
from
an
overall
energy
balance
is
then
given
by
T a ¼ T u þ QY u=cp, where T u is the temperature
of the fresh unburned gas, Y u the mass fraction
of the deﬁcient reactant in the fresh mixture (fuel
in a lean and oxidizer in a rich mixture), Q the
heat released per unit mass of (deﬁcient) reactant
and cp the speciﬁc heat of the mixture (at constant
pressure). The determination of the ﬂame speed
requires solving the appropriate mass and energy
conservation equations. But despite the one-
dimensional simpliﬁcation, exact solutions of
these highly nonlinear equations are not available.
Approximate expressions for the ﬂame speed date
back to Mallard and Le Chatelier [10], but a sig-
niﬁcant breakthrough was due to Zel’dovich and
Frank-Kamenetsky [11] who, using physical argu-
ments, obtained an expression for the ﬂame speed
valid for large activation energy. The realization
more than 30 years later that the problem can be
solved formally using matched asymptotic expan-
sions [12], and the subsequent review article by
Williams [13] that advocated the use of this formal
approach, paved the way to much of the theoret-
ical development that has taken place in recent
years.
The asymptotic treatment considers that both,
the Damko¨hler number representing the ratio of
the ﬂow to the chemical reaction times and the
non-dimensional activation energy, or Zel’dovich
number, are large parameters related by an appro-
priate distinguished limit. As a consequence,
chemical reaction is conﬁned to a thin layer that
separates the preheat and equilibrium zones, and
is negligible elsewhere. The reaction diﬀusion bal-
ance yields, through asymptotic matching, jump
conditions across the reaction zone that enable
an explicit solution across the entire ﬂame includ-
ing an expression for the laminar ﬂame speed. The
formal approach permits deriving more accurate
expressions for SL by retaining higher order terms
in the expansions. More importantly these results
can be generalized and used, through multi-
parameter expansions and appropriate distin-
guished limits, to describe the structure, speed
and temperature of multi-dimensional and time-
dependent ﬂames [14,15,5]. This has been an
essential development in advancing the hydrody-
namic theory of ﬂame propagation, which in its
primitive form dates back to Darrieus [16] and
Landau [17], with implications on numerous areas
of combustion research.
2.1. Hydrodynamic theory
The mathematical description of multi-dimen-
sional premixed ﬂames can be presented at vari-
ous levels of detail. Viewed on the representative
ﬂuid-ﬂow length scale, the whole ﬂame, where
chemical reactions, diﬀusion, heat conduction
and viscous dissipation take place, is relatively
thin. The ﬂame may then be considered an inter-
face that separates the unburned fresh mixture
from the hot combustion products. The ﬂow ﬁeld
on either side of the ﬂame sheet, whether laminar
or turbulent, is determined by hydrodynamic
equations and must satisfy appropriate jump con-
ditions across the sheet, consistent with the con-
servation laws of mass, momentum and energy.
The hydrodynamic model was ﬁrst introduced
by Darrieus [16] and Landau [17] who examined
in this manner the stability of a planar ﬂame
front. They solved the Euler equations on either
side of the perturbed ﬂame surface, and connected
the solutions on each side by using the Rankine–
Hugoniot relations. To complete their formula-
tion, they assumed that the ﬂame sheet propagates
at a constant speed relative to the ﬂow immedi-
ately ahead of the ﬂame surface. The Darrieus–
Landau model ignores the transport phenomena
and thus fails to properly account for the inﬂuence
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
59


--- Page 4 ---

of diﬀusion on the propagation. A great deal of
work was done in the years that followed to
improve on this model; notable is the study of
Markstein [18] who assumed a dependence of
the ﬂame speed on the local curvature of the ﬂame
front through a phenomenological constant that
has become known as the Markstein length (or
Markstein number, when expressed in units of
the diﬀusion length).
The more rigorous treatments [5,6,4] exploit
the multi-scale nature of the problem character-
ized by two disparate length scales: the diﬀusion
length scale lf representing the ﬂame thickness,
where lf ¼ Dth=SL with Dth the thermal diﬀusivity
of the mixture, and the hydrodynamic length scale
L associated, for example, with the average size of
the wrinkles on the ﬂame front or with the geo-
metrical dimensions of the vessel within which
combustion takes place. In the limit lf=L ! 0,
the ﬂame is conﬁned to a sheet on either side of
which the ﬂow is described by solving the incom-
pressible Navier–Stokes equations with diﬀerent
densities and viscosities, qu; lu for the unburned
and qb; lb for the burned gas, respectively. The
internal ﬂame structure is resolved on the diﬀu-
sion scale with asymptotic matching providing
expressions that relate the pressure and velocities
across the entire ﬂame, and an equation for the
speed, or equivalently for the instantaneous shape
of the ﬂame front. The jump conditions take the
form of generalized Rankine–Hugoniot relations,
namely with corrections on the order of the ﬂame
thickness that account for accumulation of mass
and momentum inside of, and transverse mass
and momentum ﬂuxes through, the thin ﬂame
zone. The ﬂame speed depends on the local curva-
ture of the surface and on the underlying hydro-
dynamic strain, eﬀects that are said to stretch
the ﬂame surface. The entire formulation is then
a nonlinear free-boundary hydrodynamic problem
with conditions at the free surface that describe
the inﬂuences of the diﬀusion processes occurring
within the ﬂame zone. The theory accounts for
density variations, eﬀects of diﬀerential and pref-
erential
diﬀusion
with
temperature-dependent
transport coeﬃcients, and eﬀects due to stoichi-
ometry and arbitrary reaction. In its most general
form the mathematical formulation was given by
Matalon et al. [19]. Here, we only comment on
selected ﬂame characteristics; further details can
be found in the referenced paper.
The ﬂame speed is unambiguously deﬁned in
the present context as the propagation velocity
of the sheet relative to the unburned gas. It is
given by
Sf ¼ SL  LK
ð1Þ
where L is the Markstein length and K is the (lo-
cal) ﬂame stretch rate. Flame stretch is a measure
of the ﬂame front deformation resulting from its
motion and nonuniformities in the underlying
ﬂow ﬁeld. It may be deﬁned, in general, as the pro-
portionate rate of change of the surface area of a
Langrangian ﬂame element [20]. Within the pres-
ent approximation it can be expressed as the com-
bined eﬀects of curvature and strain, namely
K  SLj þ Ks where j ¼ 1=R1 þ 1=R2 is the total
curvature, with R1; R2 the principle radii of curva-
ture, and Ks ¼ n  E  n is the hydrodynamic
strain, with E the rate of strain tensor [19]. An
equivalent useful formula, expressed in terms of
the local gas velocity v was given by Matalon
[21] in the form K ¼ V f$  n  n  $  ðv  nÞ,
where V f the velocity of the front (in a ﬁxed frame
of reference) and n a unit vector normal to the
sheet and pointing towards the burned gas region.
The dimensionless parameter lfK=SL is often re-
ferred to as the Karlovitz number.
The Markstein length, which measures the sen-
sitivity of the ﬂame speed to stretch, is given by
L ¼
r
r  1
Z r
1
kðsÞ
s
ds þ b Leeff  1
ð
Þ
2ðr  1Þ


Z r
1
kðsÞ
s
ln
r  1
s  1


ds

lf
ð2Þ
where r  qu=qb is the unburnt-to-burnt density
ratio,
or
thermal
expansion
parameter,
b  EðT a  T uÞ=RoT 2
a is the Zel’dovich number,
with E the overall activation energy of the chemi-
cal reaction and Ro the universal gas constant, and
k is the (dimensionless) thermal conductivity of
the mixture assumed to depend solely on temper-
ature. Here the state of the fresh unburned gas is
chosen
as
reference
so
that
k ¼ kðsÞ
with
s ¼ T=T u. The eﬀective Lewis number of the mix-
ture, Leeff, is a weighted average of the individual
Lewis numbers, LeF and LeO, representing the ra-
tios of the thermal diﬀusivity of the mixture to the
mass diﬀusivities of the fuel and oxidizer, respec-
tively. It is given by
Leeff ¼
LeOþð1~/ÞLeF
2~/
lean
LeFþð1þ~/ÞLeO
2þ~/
rich
8
<
:
where ~/  bð/  1Þ with / the equivalence ratio.
For a stoichiometric mixture the eﬀective Lewis
number is the average of the individual Lewis
numbers of the two reactants. For an oﬀ-stoichi-
ometric mixture the deﬁcient component is more
heavily weighted such that for very lean/rich
mixtures the eﬀective Lewis number is practically
that of the fuel/oxidizer, respectively. Equation
(1) implies that a positively-stretched element of
the ﬂame surface propagates at a slower speed
than SL if L > 0, namely when Leeff is suﬃ-
ciently large as for lean hydrocarbon–air mix-
tures (except possibly for methane), and at a
faster speed than SL if L < 0 or when Leeff is
suﬃciently small as for rich hydrocarbon–air
mixtures. The reverse is true for a negative-
stretched element of the ﬂame surface.
60
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 5 ---

The Markstein length varies signiﬁcantly with
the mixture’s composition, as shown in Fig. 1.
The graph displays the dependence of the Mark-
stein number L=lf on equivalence ratio for diﬀer-
ent fuel–air mixtures, calculated from Eq. (2) with
k ¼ s1=2. For alcohol– and hydrocarbon–air mix-
tures the Markstein number is generally positive
and decreases monotonically as the mixture varies
from lean to rich conditions. The large variations
among the various fuels for lean conditions is due
to the diﬀerence in their diﬀusive properties. For
rich conditions the eﬀective Lewis number is prac-
tically that of oxygen and the relatively minor dif-
ference in the Markstein number among the
various mixtures is due to the diﬀerent values of
heat release. For mixtures of relatively light fuel,
such as methane–air and hydrogen–air mixtures,
L is found to decrease as the mixture varies from
rich to lean conditions, and may become negative
at suﬃciently low values of the equivalence ratio.
It should be noted that the Markstein length is
uniquely deﬁned in the asymptotic limit considered
here, i.e. when the whole ﬂame shrinks to a sur-
face that coincides with the reaction sheet. Real
ﬂames have a ﬁnite thickness and the Markstein
length is only known to within an amount propor-
tional to the ﬂame thickness. This requires careful
consideration when attempting to compare the
theoretical results with experimental data. Since
measurements are typically taken at a speciﬁc ref-
erence location inside the ﬂame, the Markstein
length L must be re-adjusted for this displace-
ment as discussed in [22,23]. The magnitude of
L decreases as a result of this adjustment and
for a reference location further upstream, meth-
ane–air mixtures may also have negative values
of L in suﬃciently lean mixtures. A comparison
between
these
predictions
and
representative
experimental data was presented in [23].
Variations of the ﬂame temperature T f from
the adiabatic value are also proportional to
stretch, but the deviation depends now on the
Lewis number of the limited component in the
mixture. For a lean mixture
T f ¼T aT u LeF 1
ð
Þ
Z r
1
kðsÞ
s ln
r1
s1


ds

 lf
SL
K;
ð3Þ
in a rich mixture the Lewis number is replaced by
LeO. These variations, however, are relatively
small, being not only proportional to lf, but also
to the deviation of the Lewis number from one.
The temperature of methane–air ﬂames, for which
the Lewis number is always near one, is close to
the adiabatic temperature for all stretch rates.
For slowly or highly diﬀusive fuels the tempera-
ture of positively stretched elements of the ﬂame
surface is slightly lower or slightly higher than
T a, respectively. Under near-stoichiometric condi-
tions it is possible for a fast-diﬀusing reactant ini-
tially in excess to be depleted ﬁrst in the reaction
zone, and hence to become the rate-controlling
species; these reﬁnements are discussed in [24].
Measurements of speed and temperature of
stretched ﬂames were found to correlate well with
expressions (1)–(3) for uniformly-stretched twin
ﬂames
in
a
counterﬂow
[25,26],
spherically
expanding ﬂames [27,28] and Bunsen burner
ﬂames [29,30], and were used to experimentally
determine the Markstein length that quantiﬁes
stretch eﬀects [31–33].
The hydrodynamic model exhibits a complex
interaction between the ﬂame and the surrounding
gas and retains much of the physics of real ﬂames.
The model is an appropriate framework in which
to study the development of instabilities and the
evolution of large-scale corrugated ﬂames. This
asymptotic theory has also spurred activities in a
number of other areas. It provided the basis of
the ﬂamelet concept that views a turbulent ﬂame
as an ensemble of stretched laminar ﬂamelets
embedded in a turbulent ﬂow, and helped identify
the diﬀerent regimes of premixed turbulent com-
bustion, including the corrugated-ﬂamelets regime
where the internal ﬂame structure is practically
unaﬀected by the turbulence, and the thin-reac-
tion-zone regime where small eddies of the size
of the Kolmogorov scale are able to penetrate
the preheat zone but not the reaction zone. It
has also inspired modeling eﬀorts of turbulent
ﬂames using the so-called G-equation, which
involves expressing Eq. (1) in terms of a function
Gðx; tÞ ¼ 0 that describes the instantaneous shape
and location of the ﬂame sheet [34,35].
There are limitations of the hydrodynamic
theory that are encountered when trying to model
ﬂames in real ﬂows. The theory is restricted to
weakly-stretched ﬂames and does not predict
quenching at high strain rates. It requires the
Fig. 1. The dependence of the Markstein number L=lf
on equivalence ratio for selected fuel–air mixtures, with
the reference location taken at the reaction sheet.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
61


--- Page 6 ---

ﬂame surface to consist of a single sheet, with no
holes or folds. Furthermore, diﬀusion inﬂuences,
which have been added as a perturbation, are
not properly resolved in regions where, to leading
order, there is a discontinuity in the slope of the
ﬂame front; for example near the tip of a Bunsen
ﬂame or where the ﬂame comes in contact with a
wall. The formulation in such cases is incomplete
and must be supplemented with additional condi-
tions that properly mimic the local description.
Attempts have been made to incorporate such
eﬀects in an ad-hoc manner, but more work is
needed in this area. Recently, the theory has been
generalized to account for volumetric heat losses
with provisions for local quenching when the
total integrated losses from the ﬂame zone are
excessive [36]. The resulting formulation for the
ﬂow ﬁeld remains unchanged if the ﬂame speed
is normalized by the speed of a planar non-adia-
batic ﬂame and lengths are scaled accordingly.
The only diﬀerence is that the Markstein length
now admits two separate values, one associated
with curvature and the other with strain, values
that can vary signiﬁcantly near the extinction
conditions. Another drawback that may be found
when trying to relate the theoretical results to
real ﬂames is the one-step Arrhenius kinetics
adopted in resolving the internal ﬂame structure.
In rich hydrocarbon ﬂames, for example, the fuel
may be partially oxidized to CO and H2 with no
oxygen left, leading to a Markstein length that
may
diﬀer
from
that
predicted
in
Fig.
1.
Although ﬂame structure analyses with reduced
chemistry models have been successful in repro-
ducing aspects of real ﬂames [37–40], they have
been limited to simple ﬂow conﬁgurations with
no attempt made to examine the inﬂuence of
chemistry on ﬂame dynamics. Possible extensions
of the hydrodynamic theory in this and other
directions have been already noted in a recent
review [9] prepared in honor of the 50th anniver-
sary of the Combustion Institute.
2.2. Linear stability analysis
Hydrodynamic models are extremely useful in
studies aimed at unraveling the intricate nature
of ﬂame instabilities. The complex nature of the
mathematical stability problem, which requires
examining the response of the ﬂame to arbitrary
initial conditions, disturbances of all possible
wavelengths, and a whole range of physical param-
eters is a formidable task that cannot be easily
accomplished by numerical means. The relative
simplicity of the hydrodynamic model yields ana-
lytical expressions for the dispersion relation that
describes the growth of arbitrarily small distur-
bances, and since the model contains parameters
that mimic the various physico-chemical processes
involved, the inﬂuence of these parameters on sta-
bility is clearly delineated.
2.2.1. Planar ﬂames
For a nominally planar ﬂame the dispersion
relation that describes the growth x of a distur-
bance with transverse wavenumber k is given by
x ¼ xDLSLk  lf B1 þ b Leeff  1
ð
ÞB2 þ PrB3
½
SLk2;
ð4Þ
xDL  r þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
r3 þ r2  r
p
r þ 1
:
Here Pr is the Prandtl number and the coeﬃcients
B1; B2; B3, which depend solely on r, are all posi-
tive. Explicit expressions for these coeﬃcients
can be found in [19].
The ﬁrst term in (4) was obtained by Darrieus
[16] and Landau [17] in an analysis that ignores
the ﬂame structure (practically assuming lf ! 0),
and does not account for diﬀusion processes at
the small scale. The conclusion that planar ﬂames
are unconditionally unstable, is known as the
hydrodynamic or the Darrieus–Landau
(DL)
instability. The physical origin of the instability,
which is due to thermal expansion, is illustrated
in Fig. 2. If the planar front is slightly perturbed,
such
that
y ¼ SLt þ uðx; tÞ,
the
Rankine–
Hugoniot relations across the ﬂame together with
the constant ﬂame speed hypothesis imply that
vþ ¼ v ¼ ut
uþ  u ¼ ðr  1ÞSLux
ð5Þ
where v; u are the induced velocities in the axial
and transverse directions y; x, respectively, and
the superscript  relate to conditions on the un-
burned/burned side of the unperturbed sheet.
The ﬁrst of these relations states that the ﬂame
front is convected by the ﬂow; the latter shows
that for r > 1 the jump in the transverse velocity
component is as shown in Fig. 2(a). For weak
thermal expansion the generation of vorticity in
the burned gas region is negligible and the ﬂow
ahead as well as behind the ﬂame is irrotational.
Vorticity is only concentrated along the sheet so
that the perturbed ﬂame is equivalent to a ﬂat vor-
tex sheet of nonuniform strength. The distribution
of vorticity is oriented such as to increase the ini-
tial ﬂame displacement as shown in Fig. 2(b). The
vorticity generated in the burned gas, which for
realistic values of thermal expansion may not be
neglected, does not have an adverse eﬀect on the
motion of the sheet, as the stability analysis shows
a posteriori.
The second term in (4), which is proportional
to lf was obtained more recently [5,6,4]; the three
elements in this expression describe respectively
the inﬂuences of thermal, molecular and viscous
diﬀusion occurring within the ﬂame on stability.
Thermal diﬀusion, which tends to smooth out
temperature diﬀerences, always has a stabilizing
inﬂuence. Due to the large change in viscosity
across the ﬂame, viscous diﬀusion also has a stabi-
lizing inﬂuence. On the other hand, the eﬀect of
molecular diﬀusion depends on the mixture com-
62
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 7 ---

position, or the eﬀective Lewis number of the
mixture.
For suﬃciently small values of the Lewis num-
ber, or speciﬁcally for Leeff < Le	
eff, the second
term in (4) becomes positive, implying that short
wavelength disturbances are ampliﬁed and the
hydrodynamic instability is enhanced by diﬀusion
eﬀects. Thus, even when the long wavelength dis-
turbances are excluded because of the ﬁnite size of
the burner, or damped as a result of gravity for
downward propagation,1 diﬀusion eﬀects do not
permit the ﬂame to remain ﬂat. This limit is
referred to as the diﬀusive-thermal instability.
Proper description of the resulting cellular ﬂame
requires including higher order terms in the dis-
persion relation (4) for short wave stabilization.
This was explored for weak thermal expansion,
r  1 
 1, giving rise to a dispersion relation
[41] of the form
x ¼ 1
2ðr1ÞSLk b
2SLlf Leeff Lecr
eff


k2 4Dthl2
f k4
ð6Þ
with the critical Lewis number, Lecr
eff  1  2b1,
slightly less than one. A similar expression for
arbitrary r is not available, but when Lecr
eff is esti-
mated from Eq. (4) for the realistic value r  6 it
yields much lower values, rarely exceeding 0.5.
This makes most common combustion mixtures
inaccessible to the instability except perhaps for
lean hydrogen–air ﬂames [42]. The critical Lewis
number Lecr
eff increases when heat losses are incor-
porated in the analysis and is closer to one near
the ﬂammability limit [43,44]. Cellular ﬂames
resulting from diﬀusive-thermal eﬀects may there-
fore be observed at near-extinction conditions, for
example near burners where heat losses are
unavoidable.
When the eﬀective Lewis number Leeff > Le	
eff,
which is clearly attainable in lean hydrocarbon–
air or rich hydrogen–air mixtures, diﬀusion acts
to stabilize the short wavelength disturbances.
Stable planar ﬂames may then result provided
the long wavelength disturbances are damped by
gravitational forces [17], stretched by hydrody-
namic strain [45], or excluded because of the pres-
ence of walls in the transverse direction. When the
long wavelength disturbances are not totally sup-
pressed a corrugated ﬂame results. The instability,
which is predominantly observed in large-scale
ﬂames where the stabilizing eﬀects of diﬀusion
are limited, is due to the hydrodynamic instability.
2.2.2. Spherical ﬂames
The onset of cells on spherically expanding
ﬂames more clearly illustrates the distinction
between the diﬀusive-thermal and hydrodynamic
instabilities. The problem was ﬁrst examined by
Istratov and Librovich [46] who considered a
DL model with a Markstein correction, and later
by Bechtold and Matalon [47] who incorporated
hydrodynamic and diﬀusion eﬀects in a more sys-
tematic way. Let the perturbed front of a spheri-
cally expanding ﬂame be expressed in the form
r ¼ RðtÞf1 þ AðtÞSnðh; uÞg, where R denotes the
radius of the unperturbed spherical ﬂame, A the
amplitude of the disturbance and Sn the spherical
surface harmonics with n an integer, the growth
rate is given by
1
A
dA
dt ¼
_R
R
~xDL  lf
R
~B1 þ b Leeff  1
ð
Þ~B2 þ Pr~B3
	



ð7Þ
with coeﬃcients ~xDL and ~B1; ~B2; ~B3 that depend on
r and n, and with the exception of the low values
of n are all positive [47]. Consistent with the
hydrodynamic description this result is valid for
R > R0, where R0 is the initial ﬂame radius as-
sumed larger than the diﬀusion length lf. The ﬁrst
term ~xDL represents the destabilizing eﬀect of
thermal expansion, whereas those multiplying lf
are, respectively, the inﬂuences of thermal, molec-
ular and viscous diﬀusion.
When Leeff < Le	
eff, a value that slightly diﬀers
from the corresponding value for a planar ﬂame,
the amplitude grows in time for all n, starting at
t ¼ 0. The instability must have developed when
the ﬂame radius was smaller than the initial radius
R0, and is diﬀusive-thermal in nature. Indeed,
spherically expanding ﬂames in rich hydrocar-
bon–air or lean hydrogen–air mixtures, character-
a
b
Fig. 2. Schematic showing the physical origin of the DL
instability. The jump in the transverse velocity across the
ﬂame shown in (a) implies that the perturbed ﬂame is
equivalent to a ﬂat vortex sheet of nonuniform strength
with vorticity orientation, as shown in (b), that causes an
increase in the initial ﬂame displacement. Also shown in
(b) is the deﬂection of streamlines that results from the
gas expansion and causes an expansion/contraction of
the streamtubes and consequently a pressure gradient
that increases an initial displacement of the ﬂame.
1 For downward propagation, the modiﬁcation of the
DL results shows that gravity acts to stabilize the long
wavelength disturbances, disturbances with wavelength
k > 2prS2
L=g.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
63


--- Page 8 ---

ized by a Lewis number suﬃciently less than one,
were observed to take on a cellular appearance
shortly after ignition [48,49]. When Leeff > Le	
eff,
the right-hand side of (7) for a given n changes
sign
when
the
ﬂame
reaches
a
critical
size
R ¼ Rc. All disturbances are initially damped
out: the hydrodynamic instability is suppressed
because of the large curvature of the front, and
since for suﬃciently large Leeff molecular diﬀusion
exerts stabilizing inﬂuences on the short wave-
length disturbances, a smooth (stable) ﬂame
results. As the ﬂame grows bigger, namely for
R > Rc, the ﬂame is hydrodynamically unstable.
Indeed, in lean hydrocarbon–air or rich hydro-
gen–air mixtures, the expanding ﬂame was seen
to remain smooth during the early stages of prop-
agation, but took on a cellular appearance once it
reached a critical size [50,51]. This has been more
clearly illustrated in experiments carried out at
diﬀerent pressure levels [52], as shown in Fig. 3.
At ﬁve atmospheres a spherically-expanding rich
hydrogen–air ﬂame, which is diﬀusively stable,
remains smooth for a signiﬁcant time after igni-
tion. Under similar conditions but at twenty
atmospheres the onset occurs at a much earlier
time. At high pressure the ﬂame is thinner, the sta-
bilizing inﬂuences of diﬀusion are minimized and
the hydrodynamic instability is enhanced.
Information about the size of the cells that are
likely to be observed during the initial stage of the
self-wrinkling phenomenon can be deduced from
the linear theory. Figure 4 shows the range of
unstable modes as a function of the Peclet number
Pe ¼ RSL=Dth or instantaneous ﬂame size. The
nose of the peninsular instability determines the
critical conditions for the onset of the instability.
Since the fastest growing disturbance corresponds
to nc  14, the ﬂame surface at the onset is instan-
taneously covered with a large number of cells. As
the ﬂame continues to expand, modes of higher
wavenumber n grow faster and more and more
cells develop on the ﬂame surface. Expected cell
sizes fall in the range kmin < k < kmax with the lar-
ger corrugations stabilized by stretch and distur-
bances with shorter wavelength stabilized by
diﬀusion. The smallest cell size, kmin ¼ 2pR=n 
2plf, is nearly a constant that depends on mixture
composition. The largest expected cell size, kmax 
2pR=n	 with n	  7 is proportional to R. This
implies that as the ﬂame expands the stretch rate
decreases and cells of larger and larger size are
able to develop on the ﬂame surface. Large cells,
however, are hydrodynamically unstable and have
the tendency to split into smaller cells. They are
also sensitive to external noise, which, when ampli-
ﬁed as a result of the hydrodynamic instability,
leads to the spontaneous appearance of small-scale
structures, or smaller-sized cells, superimposed on
the ﬂame surface.
The stability results have provided a frame-
work for interpreting experimental observations
[53,33,54]. The earlier results implied that the the-
ory underestimates the critical Peclet number cor-
responding to the appearance of cells, which has
prompted several improvements of the model
[55,56] with results that are more commensurate
with the experimental record. It should be noted
that the instability threshold is sensitive to the
physical parameters, so that a quantitative agree-
ment between theory and experiment requires a
sensible choice of ﬂame properties that depend
on the local experimental conditions. The evalua-
tion of the thermal diﬀusivity of the mixture, for
example, is subject to uncertainties in the choice
Fig. 3. Photographs of spherically expanding ﬂames in rich hydrogen–air mixtures at (a) 5 atm and (b) 20 atm,
respectively, captured 2 ms after ignition. In rich H2–air mixtures the eﬀective Lewis number is larger than unity and the
ﬂames are diﬀusively stable. The wrinkling of the ﬂame surface is a manifestation of the hydrodynamic instability which,
at high pressure, is observed at an earlier time because of the minimized inﬂuences of diﬀusion. The apparent increase in
propagation speed is the cumulative result of high pressure and developing instabilities. Courtesy of C.K. Law.
64
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 9 ---

of temperature and concentrations, as is the glo-
bal activation energy, which additionally depends
on the detailed reaction mechanism. With a judi-
cious choice of the parameters the predicted criti-
cal Peclet number was found to agree with the
experimental conditions under a wide range of
conditions [57,58]. Regarding cell sizes, the exper-
imental data determined from ﬂame visualization
and Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence images
of cells [54] fall generally within a peninsular of
instability, similar to that of Fig. 4.
2.3.
Nonlinear
evolution
of
hydrodynamically
unstable ﬂames
The linear stability results identify the critical
conditions for the inception of instabilities, and
clarify the physical mechanisms responsible for
their onset. Beyond the instability threshold, when
the unstable modes have grown to suﬃciently
large amplitudes, nonlinear eﬀects may no longer
be neglected. The hydrodynamic instability is
responsible for the formation of sharp crests that
are often seen pointing toward the burned gas
[59,60] or the roughened surface observed on cen-
trally-ignited expanding ﬂames [61, p. 432], the
description of which must be based on a nonlinear
analysis.
Theoretical progress on the nonlinear develop-
ment
of
hydrodynamically
unstable
ﬂames
ðLeeff > Le	
effÞ has relied primarily on simpliﬁed
models of a nominally planar front. One such
model is the Michelson–Sivashinsky (MS) equa-
tion [41,62] obtained in the weakly-nonlinear long
wave asymptotic limit, when the density diﬀerence
across the ﬂame is small. Attempts to extend the
model by including higher order terms [63,64],
produced results with only minor diﬀerences.
With
the
ﬂame
front
described
by
y ¼ SLt þ uðx; tÞ, the ﬂame displacement satis-
ﬁes the integro-diﬀerential equation
ou
ot þ SL
2 ð$uÞ2  SLL$2u
 r  1
8p2 SL
ZZ
jkjeikðx~xÞuð~x; tÞdkd~x ¼ 0:
On a ﬁnite domain of characteristic size L the
problem
depends
on
a
single
parameter
a ¼ L=ðr  1ÞL,
or
the
reduced
Markstein
number.
The MS equation with periodic boundary con-
ditions admits exact solutions, known as pole-
solutions [65], which correspond to cusp-like
structures (or cells) extended periodically in the
transverse directions that propagate at a constant
speed without change in shape. In two-dimensions
they take the form
u ¼ Uðr  1Þ2t þ UðxÞ;
U ¼ SL
2L
Z L
0
U2
x dx:
so that the incremental increase in propagation
speed is proportional to the fractional increase
in surface area of the ﬂame front. For a > 0 there
always exists a pole solution which is asymptoti-
cally stable [66,67]. The zero-pole solution corre-
sponds to a planar front and is the only stable
solution for a < 2. Higher order pole solutions
have similar shapes but higher amplitudes and
sharper peaks. Numerical integration of the MS
equation shows that, indeed, short-wavelength
corrugations introduced through initial distur-
bances merge forming bigger and bigger cells that
eventually coalesce into a single-peak structure
ﬁlling the entire interval [62,68]. This solution,
which coincides with the corresponding pole solu-
tion for the given value of a, continues to propa-
gate at a constant speed as time progresses with
no change in shape. The solution is easily ex-
tended to three-dimensions, where the ﬂame sur-
face Uðx; zÞ is now the superposition of two pole
solutions [69]. The propagation speed U in this
case is higher than the corresponding two-dimen-
sional case.
Numerical simulations of the Navier–Stokes
equations, without restriction on the thermal
expansion parameter, were carried out recently
within the framework of a hydrodynamic theory
[70,71]. Figure 5 shows the long-time development
of a perturbed planar front at consecutive time
intervals, for a ¼ 0:0025 and the realistic value
r ¼ 6. Similar to the predictions of the MS equa-
tion the ﬂame evolves into a single-peak structure
that spans the entire interval and propagates at a
constant speed. However, with realistic values of r
the ﬂame reaches a larger amplitude and propa-
gates at a higher speed. The incremental increase
in speed is shown in Fig. 6 as a function of 1=a
20
80
60
40
200
400
600
800
1000 1200
1400
1600
0
0
λ min
λ
λ
<
<
max
min
λ
2π
=
R/n ~ R
max
*
2π
=
R
2πlf
/n ~
Peclet number   Pe = R/lf
re
b
m
u
n
e
v
a
w
n
Pec
nc
λ
Fig. 4. Peninsula of instability for spherically expanding
ﬂames. The shaded region correspond to the range of
unstable modes for a given Peclet number, Pe, or ﬂame
size; corresponding to Leeff ¼ 1:23; Pr ¼ 0:7; r ¼ 6 with
k ¼ s1=2. The critical value Pec, which marks the onset of
the self-wrinkling phenomenon, assumes a smaller value
when the mixture is made richer.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
65


--- Page 10 ---

for increasing values of the density ratio r. The
intersection of these curves with the axis marks
the critical value of 1=a ¼ ðr  1ÞL=L, above
which
the
planar
ﬂame
is
hydrodynamically
unstable. In narrow domains the planar front is
the preferred mode of propagation, but in larger
domains a single-peak structure similar to the
one shown in Fig. 5 is the favored shape. The
incremental increase in speed of the evolving ﬂame
rises sharply beyond the bifurcation point and
tends rapidly to an asymptotic value, which, for
r ¼ 6, corresponds to a 15% increase. This behav-
ior is qualitatively captured by the MS equation
when
scaled
appropriately.
The
incremental
increase in speed varies linearly with thermal
expansion [71]. The hydrodynamical instability,
therefore, leads to corrugated structures with
transverse dimensions that are much larger than
those observed in the more common laboratory
cellular ﬂames, which are a consequence of a dif-
fusive-thermal instability. Moreover, the structure
and propagation speed of the evolving ﬂames are
practically independent of the domain size and
mixture composition.
When computations are carried out in suﬃ-
ciently large domains, so that a is relatively small,
the general structure of the solution is retained but
the evolving ﬂames do not settle to a steadily
propagating state. Rather, small-scale wrinkles
appear sporadically on the ﬂame surface, as
shown in Fig. 7, and the speed of propagation var-
ies continuously in time. The wrinkles appear ﬁrst
on the troughs (where the curvature is small),
propagate along the ﬂame surface and disappear
at the crests. This unsteady behavior, found in
both the MS as well as in the fully nonlinear
Navier–Stokes models is not a self-sustained phe-
nomenon, but rather a response to an ever-present
background noise (e.g. numerical noise). Indeed,
the appearance of small-wrinkles can be reduced
signiﬁcantly, or eliminated, if the numerical accu-
racy is increased. Moreover, small-scale wrinkles
that closely resemble those emerging from numer-
ical noise can be artiﬁcially created on a smooth
proﬁle of the MS equation, by introducing a low
amplitude external forcing that represents random
noise. In real ﬂames external noise may result, for
example, from a weakly turbulent ﬂow in the
incoming stream. The turbulence then provides a
permanent level of noise which, when ampliﬁed
by the hydrodynamic instability, results in small-
scale wrinkles that ‘‘contaminate” the ﬂame sur-
face. The appearance of a wrinkle leads to an
increase in surface area and consequently an
increase in propagation speed until it merges at
the crest. The disappearance of a wrinkle is asso-
ciated with a decrease in propagation speed which
continues until new wrinkles reappear on the
Fig. 5. The nonlinear evolution of a perturbed planar
front for a ¼ 0:0025 with a realistic r ¼ 6. The ﬂame
proﬁles uðxÞ, plotted at consecutive times from top to
bottom, correspond to the long-time behavior of the
solution after the initial transient has faded out. The
steadily-propagating single-peak structure that develops
is a consequence of the hydrodynamic instability.
Fig. 6. The incremental increase in speed of the single-
peak structure resulting from the hydrodynamic insta-
bility as a function of the parameter 1=a for increasing
values of the density ratio r.
Fig. 7. The long-time development of a perturbed
planar front for a ¼ 0:001, with r ¼ 6, as a result of
the hydrodynamic instability. The ﬂame proﬁles uðxÞ are
plotted at consecutive times, from top to bottom. The
spontaneous appearance of small wrinkles is clearly seen
as they develop near the trough and propagate along the
surface towards the crest.
66
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 11 ---

ﬂame front. This is illustrated in Fig. 8 which
shows the unsteady nature of the propagation
speed relative to the speed of the corresponding
steadily propagating single-peak structure, and
the ﬂame proﬁles at four instances in time relative
to the smooth uncontaminated proﬁle. The ﬂame
proﬁles have been superimposed on top of each
other in order to show the associated increase in
surface area which explains the increase in speed.
Note that the average incremental speed of the
unsteady evolving ﬂame is nearly twice the lami-
nar ﬂame speed.
Direct numerical simulations of the low Mach
number reactive conservation equations were
recently carried out by Grcar and Matalon [72]
to describe the nonlinear evolution of a nominally
planar ﬂame and the consequences of the DL
instability.
These
intensive
computations
are
based on an adaptive mesh reﬁnement algorithm
that was extended to model detailed kinetics and
variable transport [73,74]. Each calculation begins
with a randomly wrinkled ﬂame extending across
the width of the region. The width of the domain
of integration was treated as a parameter with the
length taken ﬁve times larger. The inﬂow is con-
trolled to keep the mean ﬂame location three
domain widths above the lower boundary [75].
The simulations were carried out for methane–
air (equivalence ratio 0.8) with the reduced
scheme DRM-19 (corresponding to 19 species
and 84 reactions) derived from GRIMech-1.2 by
Kazakov and Frenklach [76], along with its asso-
ciated thermodynamics and transport databases.
In accord with the asymptotic results, the DNS
show that a ﬂat ﬂame results in a narrow box,
and a single-peak structure spanning the entire
width is obtained in wider boxes. A more detailed
discussion, including ﬂame shape and speed,
appears in the referenced paper.
The experimental record reveals similar behav-
ior. Lind and Whitson [77] performed experiments
of large expanding ﬂames propagating in lean
hydrocarbon–air mixtures. The mixture was ini-
tially ﬁlled in 5–10 m radius thin plastic hemi-
spherical bags. The plastic ﬁlm tore quickly after
ignition and the entire hemisphere rose vertically.
The expanding ﬂame ﬁrst appeared as a blue
hemisphere, but as its size increased, the surface
became rough with a pebbled appearance. The
corrugations increased in size to about 0.4–1.0 m
with a ﬁner structure superimposed. Pressure
waves were barely detectable so that the ﬂame
expanded freely at essentially constant pressure.
The measured propagation velocities were 1.6–
1.8 times the laminar ﬂame speed and the results
were nearly the same for all ﬁve fuels studied.
Bradley et al. [78] reported on measurements of
large-scale explosions of methane– and propane–
air mixtures carried out to radii just beyond 3 m.
Self-wrinkling
was
observed
when
the
ﬂame
reached a size of approximately 0.5 m, and cells
as large as 40 cm were detected for both mixtures
with no signiﬁcant diﬀerence discerned between
methane and propane.
126
128
130
132
134
136
138
140
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
0.21
0.22
t
U
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
x
a
b
Fig. 8. The unsteady nature of the evolving ﬂame in large domains ða ¼ 0:0035Þ: (a) time-history of the (scaled)
incremental increase in speed U, relative to the corresponding smooth single-peak structure (dashed line) and (b) ﬂame
proﬁles uðxÞ at the four marked instances, superimposed on top of each other, relative to the ﬂame shape of a smooth
single-peak structure (dashed curve). The appearance of a small wrinkle at the trough (on the right side) traveling along
the ﬂame surface is associated with the recorded increase in speed until its disappearance at the crest.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
67


--- Page 12 ---

2.4. Flame propagation in channels
Another problem that involves ﬂame–ﬂow
interaction, for which signiﬁcant advances have
been made, is the propagation of a curved ﬂame
in a two-dimensional channel. The analysis was
carried out within the context of a constant-den-
sity model, namely assuming that the density is
independent of temperature so that the ﬂow ﬁeld
not aﬀected by the ﬂame may be prescribed a-pri-
ori. The transport equations were solved numeri-
cally for a one-step global reaction with ﬁnite-
rate kinetics and veriﬁed against asymptotic
results in special limits. The results illustrate the
eﬀects of channel width, conductive heat losses,
diﬀerential diﬀusion and a convective ﬂow on
the combustion characteristics.
When a quiescent combustible gas mixture
contained in a channel is ignited at one end, a
ﬂame propagates through the gas. Under adia-
batic conditions and when the channel is suﬃ-
ciently
narrow,
the
ﬂame
is
planar2
and
propagates at the laminar ﬂame speed SL. Results
for non-adiabatic walls [79] are presented in
Fig. 9, where the heat ﬂux through the walls is
assumed proportional to the temperature diﬀer-
ence between the gas and the walls with an appro-
priately deﬁned heat transfer parameter kc. It
ranges from kc ¼ 0, corresponding to adiabatic
conditions, to kc ! 1, corresponding to cold iso-
thermal walls. The graph shows the dependence of
the propagation speed on heat losses for various
channel widths. The parameter d ¼ d=lf repre-
sents the channel width d measured in units of
the laminar ﬂame thickness. The propagation
speed is seen, in general, to decrease with increas-
ing kc. In narrow channels, total extinction is
brought about when kc exceeds a critical value.
The propagation speed at extinction is nearly
60% the value of the laminar ﬂame speed. The
ﬂame in this limit is quasi-one-dimensional and
the extinction conditions are well captured by
those deduced from the asymptotic results of a
planar ﬂame with volumetric heat loss [34]. The
graph illustrates that total extinction by heat loss
would
only
occur
when
d < 15,
implying
a
quenching diameter dq  15lf which agrees with
experimental observations. In wider channels
burning persists even in the extreme case of iso-
thermal walls maintained at the temperature of
the fresh mixture, but the ﬂame survives only near
the center of the channel. The dead-space corre-
sponding to the distance near the walls where
the ﬂame is quenched can be as large as 6lf in
accord
with
experimentally
reported
values
[80,81]. For suﬃciently large values of d, the walls
have a very limited inﬂuence on the ﬂame, which
then propagates at a speed close to the laminar
ﬂame speed. Results on the quenching radius for
ducts of circular cross-section and its dependence
on the mixture’s Lewis number were reported by
Kurdyumov and Ferna´ndez-Tarrazo [82].
The eﬀect of a convective ﬂow on ﬂame prop-
agation was studied for adiabatic [83] as well as
non-adiabatic [79] walls. The ﬂow, assumed to
be Poiseuille ﬂow, can be directed from the
unburned towards the burned gas or vice versa,
with the ﬂame either opposed or assisted by the
ﬂow, respectively. When opposed by the ﬂow,
the ﬂame shape is as shown in Fig. 10(a), with
its central part pointing towards the burned gas
and its leading edge at the wall. At suﬃciently
low ﬂow rates, the ﬂame propagates to the left,
a condition referred to as ﬂashback. For critical
ﬂow conditions the ﬂame is stabilized, but beyond
criticality it propagates to the right, a condition
referred to as blowoﬀ. When assisted by the ﬂow
the ﬂame is always blown oﬀand propagates to
the left. Its shape is as shown in Fig. 10(b), namely
with its central part pointing toward the unburned
gas and its leading edge at the centerline. The
graphs in Fig. 10 illustrate the eﬀect of the chan-
nel’s width on the structure of a ﬂame (a)
opposed, or (b) supported by the ﬂow. Each panel
displays reaction rate contours in the range
0 < x < xmax, with the maximum value quoted.
10–2
10–1
100
101
102
0.6
0.8
1
U/SL
=1,2,4
13
15.4
20
=40
kc
Fig. 9. Flame propagation in channels of various width
d ¼ d=lf. The graph shows the dependence of the
propagation speed as a function of conductive heat
losses, represented by kc, for diﬀerent values of d.
2 Beyond a certain channel width the ﬂame is curved,
which is a manifestation of the hydrodynamic instability.
In the present context, however, because thermal
expansion is assumed negligible, this eﬀect is absent.
68
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 13 ---

The increase in ﬂame surface area in the presence
of a convective ﬂow is associated with an increase
in total burning rate. In both cases the burning
rate increases but the rate of increase is slightly
higher when the ﬂame is opposed by the ﬂow, as
can be also deduced from the ﬁgure; the ﬂame
length and xmax are both larger in this case.
Graphs similar to those shown in Fig. 10 were
obtained for non-adiabatic walls and various ﬂow
conditions [79]. Results indicate that the ﬂame is
more vulnerable to heat losses when it is opposed
by the ﬂow than when assisted by the ﬂow. In par-
ticular, the critical ﬂow conditions for ﬂame sta-
bilization decreases with increasing kc, implying
that it is easier to stabilize a ﬂame in the presence
of heat losses as is well known from experience
with burners.
Figure 10 also illustrates the eﬀect of channel
width on ﬂame propagation under adiabatic con-
ditions. In narrow channels, with dimensions
comparable to the ﬂame thickness, the ﬂame is
broader and ﬂattens out, and the burning intensity
decreases. The burning rate of these relatively
thick ﬂames is found to be proportional to the
square of the mean ﬂow velocity and is therefore
not aﬀected by the ﬂow direction. And unlike thin
ﬂames, the burning rate is not aﬀected by varia-
tions in Lewis numbers. Transverse diﬀusion in
the preheat zone becomes comparable to axial dif-
fusion, diﬀerential diﬀusion is not accentuated
and the burning rate tends to the laminar burning
rate for all Lewis numbers [84]. This may have an
implication on turbulent combustion, suggesting
that Lewis number eﬀects may be more relevant
in the ﬂame sheet regime, where the representative
turbulent length scale is larger than the ﬂame
thickness, than in the reaction sheet regime where
the two length scales are comparable.
Diﬀerential diﬀusion has also an inﬂuence on
the nature of propagation. When the eﬀective
Lewis number of the mixture is suﬃciently large,
which can be realized by reducing the mass diﬀu-
sivity of the deﬁcient reactant, for example by
adding to the mixture an appropriate diluent, a
pulsating mode of propagation is observed [85].
Near the bifurcation point the oscillations have
a sinusoidal behavior and the ﬂame propagates
as a whole with an average speed that is close to
the laminar ﬂame speed. For larger values of the
Lewis number, however, the ﬂame performs relax-
ation oscillations characterized by intermittent
long-time intervals, where the ﬂame is nearly
quenched, separated by short-time intervals where
the reaction rate increases rapidly to cause a for-
ward motion with a speed that signiﬁcantly
exceeds the laminar ﬂame speed. The dependence
of a convective ﬂow and of heat loss at the walls
on the onset and nature of the oscillations were
also examined in [85]. Recent experimental work
has revealed ﬂame dynamics that is particular to
small or ‘‘meso”-scale ducts, namely of diameter
which is on the order of the ﬂame thickness
[86,87]. In these circumstances the tube wall
becomes thermally active relatively fast in all of
its length and conducts heat from the ﬂame to
the cold gas upstream. The competing eﬀects of
the additional heat input to the fresh mixture with
the natural tendency of ﬂame quenching at such
small scales leads to ﬂame oscillations or a period-
ically repeated extinction/re-ignition phenomena
[88]. Attempts to theoretically describe this behav-
ior have been presented in [87,89].
Figure 11 illustrates
another phenomenon
associated with diﬀerential diﬀusion. The sub-ﬁg-
ures correspond to ﬂames opposed by the ﬂow for
mixtures with Lewis numbers less than one, such
as rich hydrocarbon–air (except for methane)
mixtures, under adiabatic conditions. Moving
from the left panel to the right the eﬀective Lewis
number decreases, or the hydrocarbon–air mix-
ture is made richer. One observes that when the
Lewis number becomes suﬃciently small, the tip
opens up and the opening increases when the
Lewis number is further reduced. Despite the sig-
niﬁcant drop in reaction rate near the tip, there is
no leakage of the deﬁcient reactant and the ﬂame
survives along the entire interface as discussed by
Kagan and Sivashinsky [90]. (Local extinction
with incomplete combustion near the tip is only
possible in the presence of radiative losses). Dif-
ferential diﬀusion is responsible here for the non-
uniform burning pattern along the curved ﬂame,
which is more intense along the sides than near
the tip. Indeed, ﬂame tip opening has been exper-
imentally observed in the closely-related problem
of Bunsen ﬂames [91,26] for rich, but not lean
propane air mixtures, and in numerical simula-
tion of H2–air Bunsen ﬂames [92]. Finally, when
the ﬂame is supported by the ﬂow the opening
0
1
0
0.5
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
max = 2.28
max = 1.53
max = 2.15
x
Unburned
gas
0
1
0
0.5
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
max = 2.03
max = 2.06
max = 1.52
x
Unburned
gas
–1
–1
–1
–0.5
–1
–1
–1
–0.5
Fig. 10. Flame propagation in a channel with adiabatic
walls (a) opposed by and (b) aligned with a Poiseuille
ﬂow. Shown in the ﬁgures are reaction rate contours that
identify the ﬂame shape and broadness. For the reported
calculations the ﬂame always propagate to the left and
its leading edge is set at the origin. The ﬁgure illustrates
the
eﬀects
of
channel
width
with
d ¼ 20; 7; 3,
respectively.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
69


--- Page 14 ---

occurs near the walls, namely at the ﬂame’s lead-
ing edge.
3. Diﬀusion ﬂames
When fuel and oxidizer initially separated are
brought together, mixing and reaction occur
simultaneously in the reaction zone. The ﬂame is
commonly known as a diﬀusion ﬂame, since diﬀu-
sion is the rate-controlling process. Unlike pre-
mixed ﬂames, diﬀusion ﬂames do not have a
characteristic speed; the burning rate is deter-
mined by the rate at which the fuel and oxidizer
are transported from opposite sides in the right
proportions to sustain the chemical reaction.
Flat premixed ﬂames are readily established in
the laboratory in a carefully controlled uniform
ﬂow kept equal to the laminar ﬂame speed. In
contrast, a steady planar diﬀusion ﬂame in a truly
one-dimensional setting, with one of the reactants
supplied far upstream and the other far down-
stream, is not possible. For a steady diﬀusion
ﬂame to exist, one must have nonzero ﬂuxes of
fuel and oxidizer toward the ﬂame, and this can-
not be produced in a one-dimensional ﬂow
because the net ﬂux of the reactant originating
at the downstream end must remain ﬁxed.3 A
one-dimensional model—the chambered diﬀusion
ﬂame—can be formulated if one of the reactants is
supplied at a ﬁnite location [93,94]. In the present
discussion fuel is fed from the bottom of the
chamber at a constant rate, and oxidizer diﬀuses
uniformly from the top of the chamber against
the ﬂow of products. To sustain a steady ﬂame,
conditions at the top must be maintained con-
stant, which has been realized in the idealized-con-
struct by a fast ﬂowing stream of oxidizer across
the exit of the chamber; see Fig. 12(a). However,
it is experimentally diﬃcult, if not impossible, to
retain a uniform concentration of oxidizer at the
top of the chamber and ensure the removal of
product gases. This experimental diﬃculty has
been overcome only recently by Lo Jacono et al.
[95] in a novel experimental design. In this burner
the oxidizer is introduced into the chamber
through an array of hundreds of closely spaced
hypodermic needles, spaced equally to allow the
hot combustion products to escape vertically
between the needles. The inhomogeneity near the
exit plane of the needles is limited to a layer of
thickness comparable to the needle spacing and
the desired uniform conditions are realized just
beyond this layer. Figure 12(b) shows a side-view
photograph of a planar unstrained ﬂame. The
measured strain rates at the ﬂame front were less
than 0:5 s1 and these resulted from ﬂow non-uni-
formities caused by heat loss to the chamber walls
[96]. These imperfections were circumvented in the
latest design of the chamber [97], which has been
also improved to permit better control of the mag-
nitude and direction of the bulk ﬂow. In the new
symmetric design both reactants are supplied
through hypodermic needles which allows the cre-
ation of a ‘‘pure” diﬀusion ﬂame with no net ﬂow
across the ﬂame.
The
experimental
realization
of
a
planar
unstrained diﬀusion ﬂame opens the realm possi-
bilities for the exploration of fundamental ques-
tions related to diﬀusion ﬂames, and for the
0
1
0
–1
–1
–1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
y
x
x
x
ω     = 3.97
max
ω     = 2.2
max
ω     = 7.68
max
Fig. 11. Flame propagation opposed by Poiseuille ﬂow for mixtures with a Lewis number less than one. The ﬁgure
illustrates the phenomenon of tip opening when the Lewis number becomes suﬃciently small.
3 Planar diﬀusion ﬂames are commonly established in
the ﬂow ﬁeld of two impinging jets issued from opposing
nozzles. However, the underlying ﬂow ﬁeld in this
conﬁguration is two-dimensional and the ﬂame is
strained.
Fig. 12. The chambered diﬀusion ﬂame: (a) the theoret-
ical model, and (b) side view photograph of a planar
unstrained ﬂame sustained by a stream of CO2-diluted
hydrogen fed from the bottom with oxygen diﬀusing
from the top against the stream. Courtesy of P.
Monkewitz.
70
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 15 ---

experimental validation of theoretical and numer-
ical models. It provides for the ﬁrst time a valida-
tion of the results on ﬂame instabilities, which
have been primarily based on the chambered dif-
fusion ﬂame model [98–100] as described below.
In addition, the unstrained planar ﬂame can be
potentially used for experimental studies of the
structure, including oxidation mechanisms and
transport rates of diﬀusion ﬂames in their purest
form, i.e. where mass transport is by diﬀusion
only, and where the ﬂames are free of the imped-
ing eﬀects of ﬂuid dynamic strain, or curvature.
3.1. Reaction sheet model
The
mathematical
description
of
diﬀusion
ﬂames dates back to Burke and Schumann [2],
who introduced the inﬁnitely fast-chemistry limit.
They hypothesized that chemical reaction is con-
ﬁned to a sheet that separates a region where there
is fuel but no oxidizer, from a region where there
is oxidizer but no fuel. Fuel and oxidizer ﬂow into
the reaction sheet in stoichiometric proportions, a
condition that along with the requirement of com-
plete consumption of reactants determines the
combustion ﬁeld including the shape and location
of the reaction sheet, or stoichiometric surface.
The latter depends on the fuel and oxidizer con-
centrations at the supply boundaries, or initial
mixture strength /, and on the diﬀusivity of the
reactants, or Lewis numbers LeF and LeO. For-
mally, the Burke and Schumann solution corre-
sponds to the limit D ! 1, where D is the
Damko¨hler number [101–103]. The thin reaction
zone is ‘‘passive” and except for smoothly con-
necting the discontinuity in slopes it imposes no
restrictions on the solution.
A signiﬁcant advancement in the analysis of
diﬀusion ﬂames is due to Lin˜a´n [104] who re-
examined the structure of the reaction zone in
the context of a counterﬂow ﬂame assuming that
both the Damko¨hler number and the activation
energy parameter are large but related in an
appropriate distinguished limit. The structure of
the reaction zone now depends on the reduced
Damko¨hler number d, that measures the intensity
of the chemical reaction, or the departure from
equilibrium conditions. Integration across the
reaction zone shows that the reaction–diﬀusion
balance is sustained only when d P dc. The criti-
cal value dc determines the lowest possible value
of the Damko¨hler number, Dext, that corresponds
to ﬂame extinction.4 For the counterﬂow ﬂame
Dext determines the maximum possible strain rate
above which extinction occurs; for a spherical
ﬂame it determines the critical size below which
extinction occurs. Figure 13 shows the relevant
part of the S-response curve that characterizes
the solution which extends from complete com-
bustion down to extinction, or Dext 6 D < 1.
The graph illustrates the dependence of the ﬂame
temperature T f on D. As D ! 1 the curve
asymptotes to the Burke–Schumann solution cor-
responding to complete combustion with the
ﬂame temperature equal the stoichiometric tem-
perature T s. The intensity of the reaction dimin-
ishes when D is reduced; as a consequence the
ﬂame temperature drops and there is signiﬁcant
leakage of unburned reactants through the reac-
tion zone. Extinction occurs when the leakage
becomes excessive and the ﬂame temperature
drops signiﬁcantly below T s.
In a recent development that parallels Lin˜a´n’s
seminal
work,
Cheatham
and
Matalon
[98]
derived a general asymptotic formulation that is
not restricted to any particular geometry and
allows for non-unity Lewis numbers. Chemical
reaction is conﬁned to a sheet which is near, but
does not necessarily coincide with the stoichiome-
tric surface. The internal structure of the reaction
zone depends on the auxiliary parameters d and c.
The parameter d is associated with the intensity of
the reaction and controls the total amount of heat
generated in the reaction zone. The parameter c
determines the amount of heat needed on each
side of the sheet to sustain combustion. At any
point along the sheet these parameters are deter-
mined by the local ﬂow, temperature and concen-
tration conditions. Numerical integration of the
reaction
zone
provides
through
asymptotic
matching jump conditions in terms of c and d, that
permit the determination of the combustion ﬁeld
as well as the shape and location of the sheet itself.
These conditions include the extent of fuel and
oxidizer leakages Y 	
F and Y 	
O, which for c > 0 are
proportional to the functions S1 and S2 shown
in Fig. 14; for c < 0 the roles of S1 and S2 are
interchanged. Both functions vanish as d ! 1, a
limit corresponding to the Burke–Schumann solu-
tion for which Y 	
F ¼ Y 	
O ¼ 0. The amount of fuel
and/or oxidizer leaking through to opposite sides
of the reaction zone increases as D, which is
related to the parameter d decreases, with the fuel
preferred5 when c > 0 and oxidizer when c < 0.
The leakage of one of the reactants becomes
excessive as D ! Dext, and a further reduction
in D leads to extinction. Explicit formulae for S1
4 It is often convenient to use the mixture fraction
Zðx; tÞ as one of the coordinates [35]; the extinction
condition then depends on the scalar dissipation rate
j$Zj2.
5 The preferred reactant that leaks through the reac-
tion zone in this one-step activation energy asymptotic
approximation does not always agree with experiments.
For hydrocarbon–air ﬂames rate–ratio asymptotic
approximation of reduced chemistry models provides
better results, but such analysis have been limited at the
present to one-dimensional ﬂame structure studies.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
71


--- Page 16 ---

and S2, which represent the numerical results with
suﬃcient accuracy, are presented in the referenced
article, and were used in a number of studies to
facilitate the analysis circumventing the need to
integrate the structure equation numerically for
every set of conditions [98–100,105].
The entire formulation is a nonlinear free-
boundary problem for the combustion ﬁeld,
including the location of the reaction sheet, with
conditions that permit incomplete combustion
with diﬀerent degrees of reactant consumption.
It is therefore appropriate for analyses of multi-
dimensional and time-dependent problems. The
theory predicts local extinction along the sheet
and hence the possible creation of holes. However,
it does not provide information about the evolu-
tion of holes where combustion is presumably
governed locally by the characteristics of edge
ﬂames, a topic that will be further discussed
below. Modeling eﬀorts on the dynamics of holes
have been recently initiated for the simple case of
circular ﬂame holes [106], but more work is
needed in this area.
3.2. Flame instabilities
Studies of ﬂame instability have been predom-
inantly concerned with premixed combustion,
but there is ample experimental evidence of insta-
bilities in diﬀusion ﬂames6 The ﬁrst known study
is due to Gardside and Jackson [107] who
observed that the surface of a hydrogen–air jet
ﬂame often comprises of triangular cells in the
shape of a polyhedron. Later Dongworth and
Melvin [108] observed that under certain condi-
tions the straight base of a hydrogen–oxygen dif-
fusion ﬂame on top of a splitter-plate burner
becomes
cellular.
Similar
observations
were
reported in recent studies of a Wolfhard–Parker
burner [109], jet [110,111] and counterﬂow [112]
diﬀusion ﬂames. A common feature of all these
observations is that the instability results at suf-
ﬁciently high ﬂow rates, or at near-extinction
conditions. Another feature is that cells form
when at least one of the Lewis numbers is suﬃ-
ciently small; for example, in hydrogen–oxygen
ﬂames diluted in CO2, N2 or Ar, in which case
LeF  0:33–0:35, but not when diluted in He
because LeF is near one and LeO is quite large.
Similarly they form in methane–air diluted with
SF6, in which case LeF; LeO  0:4–0:5, but not
when diluted in He or N2 because the Lewis
numbers are again near or larger than one. The
propensity of diﬀusion ﬂames to form cells is
increased when decreasing the initial mixture
strength /, deﬁned as the fuel-to-oxidizer mass
supplied in their respective streams normalized
by their stoichiometric proportions [111].
Another form of instability that appears in
non-premixed systems is spontaneous ﬂame oscil-
lations. Oscillations were observed in condensed-
phase fuels [113], candle and large suspended fuel
droplets in a microgravity environment [114,115],
jet diﬀusion ﬂames [116], spray ﬂames [117] and
ﬂame spreading over liquid beds [118,119]. The
nature of the oscillation in each of these experi-
ments is quite diﬀerent: The droplet ﬂame exhibits
radial oscillations and the jet ﬂame expands and
contracts as a whole during a cycle. For the micro-
gravity candle ﬂame the edge is seen to move back
and forth along the hemispherical ﬂame surface.
In ﬂame spreading the oscillations are also pri-
marily seen near the edge, decaying along the
trailing diﬀusion ﬂame.
The
underlying
hydrodynamics
in
the
reported
experiments
is
generally
non-trivial,
involving multidimensional shear and strained
ﬂows that produce nonuniform conditions over
the ﬂame surface and complicate comparison
with theoretical predictions. The recent realiza-
tion of an unstrained planar diﬀusion ﬂame pro-
vides
the
opportunity
to
investigate
ﬂame
instabilities in their simplest form. Results on
the onset of cellular ﬂames in a CO2-diluted
hydrogen–air system have been already reported
[95]. The oxidizer concentration is set by control-
ling the oxygen injected from the hypodermic
needles, and the hydrogen mass fraction in the
fuel stream is gradually decreased by increasing
the CO2 concentration in the incoming stream.
The ﬂame appears ﬁrst ﬂat, but when reducing
the fuel concentration below a critical value it
takes on a cellular appearance as shown in
Fig. 15. The cellular structure is retained when
the hydrogen concentration is continuously low-
ered down to a limiting value where ﬂame extinc-
D ext
D
Tf
Damkohler number
..
Flame temperature
D*
Tf = Ts
Fig. 13. The dependence of the ﬂame temperature of a
diﬀusion ﬂame on the Damko¨hler number (upper
portion of the familiar S response curve). The turning
point D ¼ Dext corresponds to ﬂame extinction. The
dashed segment corresponds to states that, depending on
the Lewis numbers and the initial mixture strength, may
be unstable; the critical value D	 is the marginally stable
state.
6 The focus here is on intrinsic instabilities associated
with the combustion process itself. Combustion studies
that favor an unstable underlying ﬂow that promotes
mixing are often of interest, but are not considered here.
72
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 17 ---

tion occurs. Cellular ﬂames are observed over a
signiﬁcant range of H2
concentration, corre-
sponding to initial mixture strengths / < 1 and
for Lewis numbers in the range LeO  0:97–1:33
and LeF  0:22–0:29. This range narrows when
increasing /, and for / > 1 the systematic reduc-
tion of hydrogen concentration led directly to
extinction. The observed cells at the transition
are  0:7–1 cm wide, with the smaller size seen
when the transition occurred near the extinction
limit. More recent results by Robert and Monke-
witz [97] are reported in a paper presented in this
symposium.
3.3. Cellular and oscillating ﬂames
Stability analyses of diﬀusion ﬂames have
predominantly used a planar ﬂame as a basic
(unperturbed) state [98–100,120–123]. Although
the models used by various investigators diﬀer
slightly by the boundary conditions imposed,
these minor diﬀerences do not aﬀect the results
in
any
signiﬁcant
way.
The
most
elaborate
results are obtained using the reaction sheet for-
mulation, further assuming that the density is
constant in order to ﬁlter out hydrodynamic dis-
turbances. An explicit dispersion relation can be
derived but due to its transcendental nature,
ﬁnding roots for the growth rate in the complex
plane requires substantial numerical computa-
tions
[98,99].
The
free-boundary
eigenvalue
problem was also solved numerically [100] and
together with the analytical results yielded com-
prehensive results that included the critical con-
ditions
for
the
onset
of
instability
and
a
characterization of the possible patterns that
are likely to be observed beyond the instability
threshold.
The Burke–Schumann solution of complete
combustion is unconditionally stable. If the pla-
nar ﬂame is slightly perturbed, the requirement
of complete reactant consumption forces the reac-
tion sheet back to its planar form which, for the
given parameters, is the only stoichiometric sur-
face. Instabilities can only exist when there is
appreciable reactant leakage, or when the Dam-
ko¨hler number is suﬃciently low (the dashed seg-
ment in Fig. 13), i.e. in the range Dext 6 D < D	.
Since the characteristic ﬂow time for the cham-
bered ﬂame is lD=U, where lD ¼ Dth=U is the dif-
fusion length and U is the bulk ﬂow velocity, this
corresponds to relatively high ﬂow rates or near-
extinction conditions. The marginally stable state
D	 and the nature of the instability when D is
0.0
0.5
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
S1
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
S2
Fig. 14. The functions S1 and S2 associated with the reactant leakage through the reaction sheet as a function of the
parameters d and c. The degree of reactant consumption depends on d with complete consumption occurring when
d ! 1. For c ¼ 0 there are equal amounts of fuel and oxidizer leaking though the sheet from opposite directions; more
fuel leaks through the sheet when c > 0 and more oxidizer leaks through the sheet when c < 0.
Fig. 15. Photograph (taken in an oblique angle) of a
cellular diﬀusion ﬂame. The nominally planar ﬂame was
sustained by a stream of CO2-diluted hydrogen fed from
the bottom with oxygen diﬀusing from the top against
the stream. The cellular ﬂame is obtained by reducing
the H2 concentration in the feeding stream. Courtesy of
P. Monkewitz and E. Robert.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
73


--- Page 18 ---

reduced below D	 depend on the mixture compo-
sition and on the mobility of the reactants.
The diagram in Fig. 16 shows the various pat-
terns that are likely to be observed at the instabil-
ity threshold in the Lewis numbers parameter
plane. The dashed vertical line separates regions
of relatively lean (to the left) and rich (to the right)
mixtures, and shifts to the right as the initial mix-
ture strength / decreases. Stationary cells occur in
the region below the solid curve shown in the sta-
bility
diagram
that
encompasses
the
square
0 < LeF < 1, 0 < LeO < 1. This region stretches
out to include a wider range of LeO when reducing
/, implying that leaner mixtures are more suscep-
tible to cellularity. Characteristic cell size at the
onset
of
the
instability
are
in
the
range
k  3–12lD, depending on the mixture strength
and the ﬂow rate [100]. For conditions associated
with the CO2-diluted hydrogen-oxygen cham-
bered ﬂame, the predicted cells are 0.5–2 cm wide.
The smaller cells are expected near the extinction
limit, or when D	 is suﬃciently near Dext, in which
case the analysis must be reconsidered to incorpo-
rate small wavelength perturbations comparable
to the reaction zone thickness that evolve on the
fast chemical reaction time [121]. The theoretical
predictions of the critical conditions, including
ﬂow rate, mixture strength and Lewis numbers,
for the onset of cellular ﬂames as well as the char-
acteristic cell size are in agreement with the exper-
imental record.
Planar pulsation occurs in the upper right cor-
ner of the stability diagram and is associated with
suﬃciently large Lewis numbers. Since the dashed
vertical line shifts to the left as / increases, oscil-
lations are favored in relatively rich mixtures. Pla-
nar pulsation for the chambered diﬀusion ﬂame
has been recently observed in rich mixtures with
one of the Lewis numbers suﬃciently large. The
conditions concerning the onset of oscillations
appear also commensurate with other experimen-
tal observations [116]. Oscillations were observed
for propane-air jet ﬂames diluted in nitrogen when
/ P 1:32, in which case LeF varies from 1.1 to 1.8
with LeO  1, but were not observed in the rela-
tively lean system with / 6 0:76 despite the
large-fuel Lewis number that resulted from the
N2 dilution. These conditions fall within the pre-
dicted regions [100] for the corresponding value
of /. To examine the development beyond the
instability threshold, Cheatham [124] carried out
a bifurcation analysis and obtained amplitude
equations that lead to either time-periodic solu-
tions corresponding to sustained oscillations, or
unbounded solutions that imply premature extinc-
tion or blowoﬀ. The dependence of these results
on the parameters was discussed in [125].
Although cellular structures and ﬂame oscilla-
tion are the predominant forms of instability,
other possible patterns, such as oscillating cells
or competing modes of comparable and/or dispa-
rate scales, may exist in the transition regions
between various domains or for extreme values
of the parameters. Mixed modes of instability
were reported, for example, in jet diﬀusion ﬂames
in the form of travelling, or rotating cells [110] and
long cells were reported in a recent study of non-
premixed tubular ﬂame [126].
The mathematical consequence of non-unity
Lewis numbers on the combustion ﬁeld is that it
yields temperature and concentration proﬁles that
are non-similar. Physically non-unity Lewis num-
bers represents the competing eﬀects of heat con-
duction away, and diﬀusion of fuel and oxidizer
toward the reaction zone. Volumetric heat loss,
which aﬀects the temperature but not the concen-
tration ﬁelds, also generates non-similar proﬁles
that can promote diﬀusive-thermal instabilities.
In the presence of gas-phase radiation, for exam-
ple, it was found that ﬂame oscillation can be trig-
gered by appreciable heat losses even when the
Lewis numbers are identically equal to one [127],
and that the instability is enhanced by heat losses
when the conditions already favor oscillations
[99]. Indeed, oscillations were observed in jet
ﬂames when a fraction of the fuel supplied was
introduced in the form of liquid droplets that
extract heat from the gaseous phase for their
vaporization [117]. Under similar conditions, but
with the droplets content replaced by fuel vapor,
the ﬂame was stable. Further compelling evidence
of the role of heat loss was provided when water
droplets were injected instead of the fuel droplets
leading to oscillations of similar frequencies.
The eﬀect of thermal expansion on the stability
of a planar diﬀusion ﬂame has been considered
only recently by Metzener and Matalon [128].
Because thermal expansion is not the driving
competing
instability
modes
pulsations
Oscillatory
cells
1
1
LeF
LeO
high-frequency
instability
high-frequency
instability
stationary cells
Fig. 16. Typical stability diagram illustrating the vari-
ous patterns that are likely to be observed at the onset of
an instability of a nominally planar diﬀusion ﬂame. The
dashed vertical line separates regions of relatively lean
(to the left) and rich (to the right) mixtures, and shifts to
the right as / decreases; the solid curve which always
includes the point LeF ¼ LeO ¼ 1 stretches out as /
decreases.
74
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 19 ---

mechanism for instability, the general character-
ization described above remains qualitatively cor-
rect even when realistically accounting for density
variations. In particular, the Burke–Schumann
state of complete combustion remains uncondi-
tionally stable. The main eﬀect of thermal expan-
sion is varying the degree of instability and
consequently shifting the marginal state D	. In
particular, it is found to play diﬀerent roles on
the various mode of instability. The growth rate
in the parameter range corresponding to cellular
ﬂames increases with increasing thermal expan-
sion, implying that thermal expansion acts to fur-
ther destabilize the ﬂame. The induced ﬂow
resulting near a cellular structure involves regions
of concentrated vorticity upstream of the reaction
surface with extrema near the crests and troughs
(Fig. 17). The vortical motion enhances the trans-
port of fuel to these regions, which sustains the
corrugated structure. The onset of cellular ﬂames
occurs at a value D	 signiﬁcantly larger than that
predicted by the constant-density model, which
implies that a wider range of physical states are
susceptible to cellularity. On the other hand, the
growth rate associated with planar pulsation
decreases when increasing the thermal expansion
parameter. Since the ﬂame remains planar and
its back and forth motion is towards denser ﬂuid,
thermal expansion has a damping inﬂuence on the
oscillations. The marginal state D	 is signiﬁcantly
lower than the value predicted by the constant-
density model, which implies that a narrower
range of physical states are susceptible to pulsa-
tion. Overall, although thermal expansion has a
marked inﬂuence of the dynamics of diﬀusion
ﬂames, it does not play a crucial role as it does
for premixed ﬂames.
4. Edge ﬂames
The planar deﬂagration and chambered diﬀu-
sion ﬂames are two fundamental structures that
have been traditionally used to gain understand-
ing into the more complex ﬂame behaviors that
occur in real applications. They constitute two
extremes in which fuel and oxidizer are either well
mixed before introduced into the combustion
chamber, or supplied from diﬀerent origins with
mixing and combustion taking place simulta-
neously. The edge ﬂame is another fundamental
structure, albeit a two-dimensional one, which is
associated with partially premixed conditions
and thus has characteristics of both premixed
and nonpremixed ﬂames. A representative edge
ﬂame formed in the wake of splitter plate separat-
ing two parallel streams, one containing fuel and
the other oxidizer, is shown in Fig. 18(b). Partial
mixing occurs behind the tip of the plate and com-
bustion takes place in the stratiﬁed medium, once
the mixture is ignited. The edge ﬂame has a tri-
brachial structure (also referred to as a triple
ﬂame) which consists of a highly curved premixed
ﬂame with lean and rich branches, and a diﬀusion
ﬂame trailing behind consuming the remaining
unburned reactants.
Edge ﬂames occur in variety of situations. At
low speeds, a fuel jet injected into an oxidizer
environment burns, when ignited, along a diﬀu-
sion ﬂame attached to the nozzle. At high ﬂow
rates, the ﬂame is stabilized further downstream
within the jet. Lifting the ﬂame base oﬀthe nozzle
has the advantage of avoiding thermal contact
Fig. 17. The vorticity ﬁeld in the vicinity of a cellular ﬂame at the instability threshold, calculated for a density ratio  3.
The solid curve denotes the reaction sheet. The concentrated vortical motion near the crests and troughs enhances the
transport of fuel to these regions, thus sustaining the cellular structure.
fuel
oxidizer
oxidizer
fuel
oxidizer
oxidizer
diffusion flame
edge-flame
Fuel
Oxidizer
Fig. 18. (a) Lifted jet diﬀusion ﬂame, calculated for
stoichiometric conditions and Pe  RU=Dth ¼ 5, where
Pe is the Peclet number based on the radius R of the
nozzle and a representative gas velocity U. (b) A sketch
of the local structure of the edge ﬂame near the nozzle
illustrating its tri-brachial structure.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
75


--- Page 20 ---

between the ﬂame and the rim and enhancing mix-
ing. The lifted ﬂame has an edge as shown in
Fig. 18, which has been also observed experimen-
tally [129,130]; see also the more recent review
article by Chung [131]. Edge ﬂames also occur
near holes poked in turbulent diﬀusion ﬂames as
a result of excessive thermal gradients or high
strain. Through the hole, fuel and oxidizer come
in contact and a stratiﬁed pocket of premixed
gas varying from lean to rich conditions is formed.
When thermal gradients increase well above the
quenching limit through turbulent ﬂuctuations,
the gas mixture can ignite and propagate in the
form of an edge ﬂame. The edge ﬂame can either
propagate inwards into the pocket of fresh gases,
reestablishing the ﬂame and reducing the size of
the hole, propagate outwards, spreading extinc-
tion to other parts of the ﬂame, or ‘‘holding” in
some way those parts of the ﬂame that did not
extinguish. This has been observed experimentally
near the axisymmetric hole created in a counter-
ﬂow diﬀusion ﬂame [132–134]. An edge ﬂame
has been also observed in the weakly nonuniform
straining ﬁeld created in an opposed slot-jet bur-
ner with nonparallel jet exits [135]. The diﬀusion
ﬂame is sustained in the region where the strain
rate is suﬃciently low but is quenched, and thus
terminates with an edge, when the strain rate is
above a critical value.
4.1. Mathematical description
The earliest analytical attempt to describe the
structure of an edge-ﬂame was made by Ohki
and Tsuge [136], but the interest in such problems
started a few years later and have focused on
ﬂame propagation in weakly stratiﬁed mixtures
[137–140]. Analytical considerations were based
on perturbation of the planar premixed ﬂame,
neglecting the eﬀect of thermal expansion. From
these studies expressions for the speed of the
edge-ﬂame were obtained and the dependence on
the imposed concentration gradient was identiﬁed.
A one-dimensional model that describes the tran-
sition between burning and non-burning states
along the axis of a ﬂame sheet has been proposed
as a paradigm of an edge ﬂame [141], providing
results that illustrate
some
characteristics
of
observed edges. However, an edge ﬂame is an
intrinsically two-dimensional conﬁguration and
the one-dimensional setting requires modifying
the reaction term in the governing equations in
order to emulate transverse diﬀusion that is an
essential element in the physical description.
Recent advances have, therefore, relied on numer-
ical computations.
4.2. Edge ﬂames in a mixing layer
Numerical study of a model problem that
involves an edge ﬂame in a non-premixed system,
has been carried out by Buckmaster and Zhang
[142]. A ﬂat diﬀusion ﬂame is assumed to exist
along an axis, with fuel and oxidizer supplied at
two opposing ends in the transverse direction.
The edge results from cutting-oﬀthe fuel supply
arbitrarily at a ﬁnite position. The calculations
illustrate the onset of spontaneous oscillations in
mixtures for which the fuel Lewis number is suﬃ-
ciently larger than one (the oxidizer Lewis number
was assumed equal to one) when the Damko¨hler
number is suﬃciently low; see also [143] and the
references therein.
The more realistic problem of an edge ﬂame in
a mixing layer was treated by Kurdyumov and
Matalon [144–147]. Combustion occurs down-
stream of the trailing edge of a plate, held at a
constant temperature, and separating fuel and
oxidizer streams. The earlier work assumes that
the streams, of equal and constant velocities,
remain unperturbed by the ﬂow. In the more
recent results the ﬂow ﬁeld is calculated based
on the Navier–Stokes equations7 with upstream
proﬁles that emulate the local behavior of the
boundary layers near the trailing edge of the plate,
as illustrated in Fig. 18(b). The velocity gradients
on either side of the plate are assumed equal and
characterized by U=lBL, where U is a representa-
tive velocity and lBL is the boundary layer thick-
ness.
The
ﬂame
standoﬀ
distance
depends
primarily on the ﬂow rate, or on the Damko¨hler
number D which is inversely proportional to U 2.
At low ﬂow rates (large D) the edge is attached
to the plate. It lifts oﬀwhen the ﬂow rate increases
and stands at a well-deﬁned distance from the tip
of the plate. The position ðxw; ywÞ depends on the
mixture
composition,
or
the
initial
mixture
strength, and the mobility of the reactants, or
the Lewis numbers. When there is no preferential
diﬀusion, LeF ¼ LeO, and when the reactants are
in stoichiometric proportions, / ¼ 1, the edge
ﬂame is symmetric with respect to the axis of the
plate. Otherwise it leans towards the fuel or oxi-
dizer sides; for / > 1 with LeF ¼ LeO, for exam-
ple, the edge ﬂame is on the oxidizer side with
the trailing diﬀusion ﬂame nearly aligned with
the stoichiometric surface.
Representative solutions calculated for equal
and unity Lewis numbers, but with / ¼ 5, are
shown in Fig. 19. A comparison of the two ﬁgures
illustrates the eﬀect of thermal expansion, which
was neglected in (a) but fully accounted for in
(b). In the ﬁrst case the streamlines remain parallel
7 Although the boundary layer approximation can be
used to describe the mixing process between the two
streams, there is a region near the tip of the plate where
the ﬂow ﬁeld must satisfy the full Navier–Stokes
equations. This region is embedded in the lower deck
of the much larger triple deck region that describes the
ﬂow near the plate’s trailing edge.
76
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 21 ---

and symmetric with respect to the axis. The
change in slope at the station x ¼ 0 is associated
with the acceleration experienced by the ﬂuid ele-
ments entrained into the mixing layer. The ﬂame
leans towards the oxidizer side, as expected, with
its edge located very close to the tip of the plate
and the trailing diﬀusion ﬂame aligned (approxi-
mately) with the stoichiometric surface. Thermal
expansion causes a deﬂection of the streamlines
crossing the premixed segments and a lateral dis-
placement of the streamlines near the diﬀusion
ﬂame. At suﬃciently far distances the ﬂow is no
longer aﬀected by the ﬂame and becomes parallel
again. The edge is seen located further down-
stream when compared to the case displayed in
(a), but this is simply a scaling issue as discussed
in greater detail in [147].
The most comprehensive results on ﬂame
dynamics were obtained using a constant-density
model [146], which consists of solving the trans-
port equations with the prescribed ﬂow shown in
Fig. 19(a). The steady-form of the equations were
integrated ﬁrst in order to obtain all possible solu-
tions—stable and unstable. The time-dependent
version was then solved to determine whether a
given state is stable or not. Figure 20 shows results
corresponding to a wide range of Lewis numbers
assumed equal for the fuel and oxidizer, and
denoted by Le, with / ¼ 1. For these conditions
the ﬂame remains symmetric with respect to the
axis and its position is characterized solely by
xw. The graph displays the standoﬀdistance of
the edge ﬂame as a function of D. The curves
are generally multi-valued; for large values of Le
the turning point occurs at a large xw that is out-
side the domain of integration. The turning point
marked by the symbol  identiﬁes the lowest pos-
sible Damko¨hler number Dbl for ﬂame stabiliza-
tion.
When
reducing
D
below
Dbl
or,
equivalently, when increasing U the ﬂame is
blown
oﬀ
by
the
ﬂow.
The
upper
branch
(dashed–dotted segments) correspond to unstable
states that cannot be realized physically. We note
1.2
1.
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.
-5
0
5
10
-5
0
5
10
-10
-5
0
5
10
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-10
-5
0
5
10
a
b
Fig. 19. An edge ﬂame stabilized in a mixing layer calculated for a ﬁxed value of D, LeF ¼ LeO ¼ 1 and / ¼ 5, with
thermal expansion neglected in (a) but fully accounted for, in (b). In (b) the thermal expansion parameter was taken as
r ¼ 5. The graphs display reaction rate contours that identify the ﬂame shape and standoﬀdistance and streamlines that
show their displacement when thermal expansion has not been neglected.
50
=1.7
=1.5
Le=0.8
Damkohler number D
10
0
8
6
4
2
101
100
103
102
100 150
5
4
3
2
1
w
Standoff distance x
Le=1
Le =1.2
Le
Le
Le=1.45
Le=1.5
..
Fig. 20. The dependence of the standoﬀdistance of the
edge ﬂame on the Damko¨hler number for distinct values
of the Lewis numbers assumed equal (denoted by Le).
The dashed–dotted segments correspond to unstable
states; the symbol  marks the turning point, or blowoﬀ
conditions. The dashed segments correspond to oscilla-
tory states and the symbol  marks the marginally-stable
states.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
77


--- Page 22 ---

that Dbl is signiﬁcantly lower for mixtures with
small values of Le. It is easier, therefore, to stabi-
lize a hydrogen ﬂame burning in air near the tip of
the plate than it is to stabilize a hydrocarbon
ﬂame. The hydrogen ﬂame remains near the plate
when increasing the ﬂow rate to suﬃciently high
values, conditions under which the hydrocarbon
ﬂame would not have survived; the ﬂame would
have been already blown oﬀwith a much lower
value of the ﬂow rate. We also note that a hydro-
carbon ﬂame can be lifted to suﬃciently large dis-
tances in contrast to a hydrogen ﬂame that can
only be stabilized in the vicinity of the plate [129].
The dashed segments of the response curves in
Fig. 20, seen primarily for relatively large values
of Le, correspond to unstable states. The instabil-
ity here is associated with ﬂame oscillation. At
large D the ﬂame is close to the plate and is stabi-
lized by heat loss to the plate. When D is lowered
below a critical value, D	, the ﬂame undergoes
spontaneous oscillations with the edge moving
back and forth along the axis dragging with it
the trailing diﬀusion ﬂame. It is primarily the edge
of the ﬂame that oscillates; the oscillations are
weakened further downstream along the diﬀusion
ﬂame sheet and are damped at suﬃciently large
distances. For Le ¼ 1:7, the onset occurs when
D is reduced just below D	  450 and the oscilla-
tions persist for all values of D < D	 (within the
computation
domain).
For
the
lower
value
Le ¼ 1:5, the oscillatory states are limited to the
range D	 < D < D	; the edge ﬂame is re-stabilized
when reducing D below D	 or, equivalently, by
increasing the ﬂow rate to a suﬃciently high value.
Stabilization here is apparently achieved at a
point xw where the edge speed is balanced by the
gas velocity just in front. The time evolution of
slightly perturbed states, corresponding to values
of D just ahead, behind and within the unstable
range, is shown in Fig. 21. After an initial tran-
sient the solution evolves either to the steady state
or to a limit cycle. The re-stabilization phenome-
non has been examined in more details in a similar
problem—the ﬂat porous-plug burner ﬂame—
which, because of its simplicity, is amenable to a
complete stability analysis [148]. One also sees in
Fig. 20 that the range of oscillatory states shrinks
as Le is reduced below 1.5 and disappears when it
is less than 1.45. Oscillations are not observed in
mixtures with Le less than a critical value near
one. Finally we note that when the combustion
ﬁeld is non-symmetric, the oscillations are associ-
ated with both coordinates varying periodically in
time, and the edge-ﬂame moves back and forth
along a surface that coincides approximately with
the stoichiometric surface [145].
Volumetric heat loss, such as radiative losses,
have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the combustion ﬁeld.
The edge ﬂame stands farther away from the tip
when heat losses are accounted for, than it would
under adiabatic conditions, and the trailing diﬀu-
sion ﬂame is of ﬁnite extent. More importantly,
heat losses can trigger oscillations under condi-
tions when, in their absence, the ﬂame is stable.
For example, when the losses are appreciable the
ﬂame
may
undergo
spontaneous
oscillations
[144] even in the absence of diﬀerential diﬀusion
(i.e. when Le ¼ 1).
As a ﬁnal comment we note that edge ﬂames also
occur in premixed systems. The edge forms in front
of a relatively sharp temperature gradient, with the
trailing wings supported by a straining ﬁeld [149–
153]. This has been observed experimentally in the
weakly nonuniform straining ﬁeld created in an
opposed slot–jet burner with nonparallel jet exits
[154]. The ﬂame is sustained in the region where
the strain rate is suﬃciently low but is quenched
when the strain rate is above a critical value; the
edge-ﬂame describes the transitional state between
the burning and non-burning states.
5. Concluding remarks
Because of the high cost of Direct Numerical
Simulations, limitations in memory and speed of
available computers, theoretical and numerical
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
D=27
xw
t
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
D=40
xw
t
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
D=100
xw
t
Fig. 21. Time evolution of the edge ﬂame position for
three values of D, showing the evolution to a stable state
when D ¼ 100, onset of oscillations when D ¼ 40, and
re-stabilization when D ¼ 27. Calculated for Le ¼ 1:5.
78
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 23 ---

modeling will remain at least in the foreseeable
future essential tools for extending our under-
standing of combustion and addressing the chal-
lenging problems of increasing eﬃciency and
reducing pollutant emissions. The techniques of
asymptotic analysis, which systematically exploit
the various length and time scales involved in a
process, are the primary tools available to derive
systematic and reliable models of ﬂames. The
hydrodynamic theory of premixed ﬂames, for
example, was shown capable of describing the
propagation of multi-dimensional ﬂames with
results that compare favorably with experimental
observations. Similarly, the reaction sheet model
was shown capable of describing time-dependent
and multi-dimensional diﬀusion ﬂames and pro-
viding stability results over a wide range of param-
eters, including thermal expansion. In either case,
the theory can be extended to accommodate for
more complex reaction schemes and for holes cre-
ated on the ﬂame or reaction surface, which at the
present seem to be its main drawbacks.
The paper also illustrates that limiting behav-
iors, when carried out systematically, can provide
valuable predictions that should not be discarded
a-priori based only on physical intuition. The
results of the MS equation, valid for weak thermal
expansion, remain valid even when density varia-
tions are accounted for. These were consequently
used in guiding and validating the more intense
Direct Numerical Simulations. The wealth of
results
obtained
under
the
constant-density
assumption for ﬂame propagation in channels
and for edge ﬂames share many characteristics of
real ﬂames and is a source of physical understand-
ing of the complex ﬂame-ﬂow interactions that
occur in combustion systems. Attempts to reexam-
ine these problems while allowing for density vari-
ations are surfacing only now, with results that
appear consistent with the constant-density pre-
dictions at least in some range of the parameters.
Theoretical results have been often used to
guide experimental eﬀorts. The linear relationship
between ﬂame speed and stretch for weakly
stretched ﬂames, has been tested in many circum-
stances and used in correlating experimental data
in order to determine the Markstein number that
quantiﬁes the eﬀects of strain and curvature. A
more recent example is the experimental realiza-
tion of a planar unstrained diﬀusion ﬂame which
has been motivated by stability predictions that
have been based on the idealized chambered diﬀu-
sion ﬂame model.
Acknowledgments
It is a great pleasure to thank Professors M.
Smooke and H. Kobayashi for their invitation
to prepare and deliver this lecture.
The paper has beneﬁted from invaluable dis-
cussions with many colleagues, in particular John
K. Bechtold, Joe Grcar, Dimitrios C. Kyritsis,
Vadim Kurdyumov, Chung K. Law, Philippe
Metzener, Peter A. Monkewitz, Carlos A. Pant-
ano-Rubino, Norbert Peters and Grisha I. Siva-
shinsky to whom I am extremely grateful. This
work has been supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grants CBET-0733146 and
DMA-0708588 and by the US-Israel Bi-National
Science Foundation under Grant 2004069.
References
[1] M. Van Dyke, Perturbation Methods in Fluid
Mechanics, annotated ed., Parabolic Press, 1975.
[2] S.P. Burke, T.E.W. Schumann, Ind. Eng. Chem. 20
(1928) 998.
[3] G.I. Sivashinsky, Combust. Sci. Technol. 15 (1977)
137–145.
[4] M.L. Frankel, G.I. Sivashinsky, Combust. Sci.
Technol. 29 (1982) 207–224.
[5] M. Matalon, B.J. Matkowsky, J. Fluid Mech. 124
(1982) 239–259.
[6] P. Pelce, P. Clavin, J. Fluid Mech. 124 (1982) 219–
237.
[7] P. Clavin, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28 (2000) 569–585.
[8] G.I. Sivashinsky, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002)
1737–1761.
[9] J.D. Buckmaster, P. Clavin, A. Lin˜a´n, et al., Proc.
Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 1–19.
[10] E. Mallard, H.L. Le Chatelier, Ann. Mines 4
(1883) 274–388.
[11] Y.B. Zel’dovich, D.A. Frank-Kamenetsky, Z.
Fizich. Khim. 12 (1) (1938) 100–105.
[12] W.B. Bush, F.E. Fendell, Combust. Sci. Technol. 1
(1970) 421–428.
[13] F.A. Williams, Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 3 (1971)
171–188.
[14] J.D.
Buckmaster,
G.S.S.
Ludford,
Theory
of
Laminar Flames, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1982.
[15] P. Clavin, F.A. Williams, J. Fluid Mech. 116
(1982) 251.
[16] G. Darrieus, Propagation d’un front de ﬂamme,
presented at La Technique Moderne (Paris) and in
1945 at Congre`s de Me´canique Applique´e, Paris,
1938 (unpublished work).
[17] L.D. Landau, Acta Physicochim. USSR 19 (1944)
77–85.
[18] G.H. Markstein, Nonsteady Flame Propagation,
The Macmillan Company, New York, 1964.
[19] M. Matalon, C. Cui, J.K. Bechtold, J. Fluid Mech.
487 (2003) 179–210.
[20] F.A. Williams, A review of some considerations of
turbulent ﬂame structure, in: M. Barrere, (Ed.),
Analytical and Numerical Methods for Investigation
of Flow Fields with Chemical Reactions, Especially
Related to Combustion. AGARD Conf. Proc. No.
164, 1975.
[21] M. Matalon, Combust. Sci. Technol. 31 (1983)
169–181.
[22] J.H. Tien, M. Matalon, Combust. Flame 84 (1990)
238–248.
[23] J.K. Bechtold, M. Matalon, Combust. Flame 127
(2001) 1906–1913.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
79


--- Page 24 ---

[24] E.S. Antoniou, J.K. Bechtold, M. Matalon, SIAM
J. Appl. Math. 64 (2004) 1434–1456.
[25] C.K. Wu, C.K. Law, Proc. Combust. Inst. 20
(1984) 1941–1949.
[26] C.K. Law, Combustion Physics, Cambridge Uni-
versity press, Cambridge, 2007.
[27] D.R. Dowdy, D.B. Smith, S.C. Taylor, A. Wil-
liams,
Proc.
Combust.
Inst.
(1990)
325–
332.
[28] D. Bradley, P.H. Gaskell, X.J. Gu, Combust.
Flame 104 (1–2) (1996) 176–198.
[29] T. Echekki, M.G. Mungal, Proc. Combust. Inst. 23
(1990) 455–461.
[30] C.W. Choi, I.K. Puri, Combust. Flame 126 (2001)
1640–1654.
[31] S. Kwon, L.K. Tseng, G.M. Faeth, Combust.
Flame 90 (1992) 230–246.
[32] U.C. Mu¨ller, M. Bollig, N. Peters, Combust. Flame
108 (1997) 349–356.
[33] D. Bradley, R.A. Hicks, M. Lawes, C.G.W.
Sheppard,
R.
Woolley,
Combust.
Flame
115
(1998) 126.
[34] F.A. Williams, Combustion Theory, The Benjamin/
Cummings Publishing Company Inc., Menlo Park,
CA, 1985.
[35] N. Peters, Turbulent Combustion, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 2000.
[36] M.
Matalon,
J.K.
Bechtold.
A
multi-scale
approach to the propagation of non-adiabatic
premixed
ﬂames.
J.
Eng.
Math.,
in
press,
doi:10.107/s10665-008-9228-0.
[37] M. Bui-Pham, K. Seshadri, F.A. Williams, Com-
bust. Flame (1992) 343–362.
[38] K. Seshadri, N. Peters, F.A. Williams, Combust.
Flame 96 (1994) 407–427.
[39] K. Seshadri, Proc. Combust. Inst. 26 (1996) 831–
846.
[40] K. Seshadri, X.S. Bai, H. Pitsch, N. Peters,
Combust. Flame 113 (1998) 589–602.
[41] G.I. Sivashinsky, Acta Astronaut. 4 (1977) 1177–
1206.
[42] P. Clavin, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 11 (1985) 1–
59.
[43] G. Joulin, P. Clavin, Combust. Flame 35 (1979)
139–153.
[44] T.L. Jackson, A.K. Kapila, Combust. Sci. Technol.
49 (1986) 305–317.
[45] Y.D. Kim, M. Matalon, Combust. Sci. Technol. 69
(4–6) (1990) 85–97.
[46] A.G. Istratov, V.B. Librovich, Astronaut. Acta 14
(1969) 453–467.
[47] J.K. Bechtold, M. Matalon, Combust. Flame 67
(1987) 77.
[48] J. Manton, G. von Elbe, B.J. Lewis, J. Chem.
Phys. 20 (1952) 153–157.
[49] A. Palm-Leis, R.A. Strehlow, Combust. Flame 13
(1969) 111–119.
[50] D.M. Simon, E.L. Wong, J. Chem. Phys. 21 (1953)
936.
[51] E.G. Groﬀ, Combust. Flame 48 (1982) 51.
[52] C.K. Law, Combust. Sci. Technol. 178 (2006) 335–
360.
[53] D. Bradley, C.M. Harper, Combust. Flame 99
(1994) 562.
[54] D. Bradley, C.G.W. Sheppard, R. Woolley, D.A.
Greenhalgh, R.D. Lockett, Combust. Flame 122
(2000) 195.
[55] R. Addabbo, J. Bechtold, M. Matalon, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 29 (2002) 1527–1535.
[56] J.K. Bechtold, C. Cui, M. Matalon, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 30 (2004) 177–184.
[57] G. Jomaas, C.K. Law, J.K. Bechtold, On Transi-
tion to Cellularity in Expanding Spherical Flames:
Experiment
and
Theoretical
Comparison,
43rd
ASM Meeting and Exhibit, Number AIAA 2005-
0713, 2005.
[58] C.K. Law, G. Jomaas, J.K. Bechtold, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 159–167.
[59] M.S. Uberoi, A.M. Kuethe, H.R. Menkes, Phys.
Fluids 1 (2) (1958) 150–158.
[60] S.S. Sattler, D.A. Knaus, F.C. Gouldin, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 29 (2002) 1785–1792.
[61] R.A.
Strehlow,
Combustion
Fundamental,
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1984.
[62] D.M. Michelson, G.I. Sivashinsky, Acta Astro-
naut. 4 (1977) 1207–1221.
[63] V. Bychkov, Phys. Fluids 10 (1998) 2091–2098.
[64] K.A. Kazakov, M.A. Liberman, Phys. Fluids 14
(2002) 1166–1181.
[65] O. Thual, U. Frisch, M. He´non, J. Phys. 46 (9)
(1985) 1485–1494.
[66] D. Vaynblat, M. Matalon, SIAM J. Appl. Math.
60 (2) (2000) 679–702.
[67] D. Vaynblat, M. Matalon, SIAM J. Appl. Math.
60 (2) (2000) 703–728.
[68] S. Gutman, G.I. Sivashinsky, Physica D 43 (1990)
129–139.
[69] D.M.
Michelson,
G.I.
Sivashinsky,
Combust.
Flame 48 (1982) 211–217.
[70] Y. Rastigejev, M. Matalon, Combust. Theory
Model. 10 (3) (2006) 459–481.
[71] Y. Rastigejev, M. Matalon, J. Fluid Mech. 554
(2006) 371–392.
[72] J.F. Grcar, M. Matalon, Direct simulation of
hydrodynamically unstable premixed ﬂames, in
preparation.
[73] A.S. Almgren, J.B. Bell, P. Colella, L.H. Howell,
M.L. Welcome, J. Computat. Phys. 142 (1998) 1–
46.
[74] M.S. Day, J.B. Bell, Combust. Theory Model. 4 (4)
(2000) 535–556.
[75] J.B. Bell, M.S. Day, J.F. Grcar, M.J. Lijewski,
Commun. Appl. Math. Comput. Sci. 1 (2) (2005)
29–52.
[76] A. Kazakov, M. Frenklach, Reduced Reaction
Sets Based on GRI-Mech 1.2, http:www.me.berke-
ley.edu/drm, 1994.
[77] C.D. Lind, J.C. Whitson, Explosion Hazards
Associated with Spills of Large Quantities of
Hazardous Materials, Technical Report CG-D-
85-77, Department of Transportation, U.S. Coast
Guard Final Report, ADA 047585, 1977.
[78] D. Bradley, T.M. Cresswell, J.S. Puttock, Com-
bust. Flame 124 (2001) 551–559.
[79] J. Daou, M. Matalon, Combust. Flame 128 (2002)
321–339.
[80] C.W. Clendening, W. Shackleford, R. Hilyard,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 18 (1981) 1583–1590.
[81] P.W. Fairchild, R.D. Fleeter, F.E. Fendell, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 20 (1985) 85–90.
[82] V. Kurdyumov, E. Ferna´ndez-Tarrazo, Combust.
Flame 128 (2002) 382–394.
[83] J. Daou, M. Matalon, Combust. Flame 124 (2001)
337–349.
80
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82


--- Page 25 ---

[84] C. Cui, M. Matalon, J. Daou, J. Dold, Combust.
Theory Model. 8 (2004) 41–64.
[85] C. Cui, M. Matalon, T.L. Jackson, AIAA J. 43 (6)
(2005) 1284–1292.
[86] F. Richecoeur, D.C. Kyritsis, Proc. Combust. Inst.
30 (2005) 2419–2427.
[87] K. Maruta, T. Kataoka, N. Kim, S. Minaev, R.
Fursenko, Proc. Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 2429–
2436.
[88] C.J. Evans, D.C. Kyritsis, Proc. Combust. Inst. 32
(2009) 3107–3114.
[89] T.L. Jackson, J. Buckmaster, Z. Lu, D.C. Kyritsis,
L. Massa, Proc. Combust. Inst. 31 (2007) 955–962.
[90] L. Kagan, G.I. Sivashinsky, Phys. Rev. E 53 (6)
(1996) 6021–6027.
[91] B. Lewis, G. von Elbe, Combustion, Flames and
Explosions of Gases, Academic Press Inc., Orlan-
do, 1987.
[92] V.R. Katta, W.M. Roquemore, Combust. Flame
102 (1992) 21–40.
[93] L.L. Kirkby, R.A. Schmitz, Combust. Flame 10
(1966) 205–220.
[94] M. Matalon, G.S.S. Ludford, J. Buckmaster, Acta
Astronaut. 6 (1979) 943–959.
[95] D. Lo Jacono, P. Papas, M. Matalon, P.A.
Monkewitz, Proc. Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 501–
509.
[96] E.
Robert,
P.A.
Monkewitz.
Thermo-diﬀusive
Instabilities
in
a
Low-strain,
Planar
Diﬀusion
Flame, Fifth US Combustion Meeting, San Diego,
2007.
[97] E. Robert, P.A. Monkewitz, Proc. Combust. Inst.
32 (2009) 987–994.
[98] S. Cheatham, M. Matalon, J. Fluid Mech. 414
(2000) 105–144.
[99] S. Kukuck, M. Matalon, Combust. Theory Model.
5 (2001) 217–240.
[100] P.
Metzener,
M.
Matalon,
Combust.
Theory
Model. 10 (4) (2006) 701–725.
[101] A. Lin˜a´n, On the Structure of Laminar Diﬀusion
Flames, Ph.D. Thesis, Caltech, 1963.
[102] F.E. Fendell, J. Fluid Mech. 21 (1965) 305–
331.
[103] D.R. Kassoy, F.A. Williams, Phys. Fluids 11
(1968) 1343–1351.
[104] A. Lin˜a´n, Acta Astronaut. 2 (1974) 1009.
[105] H.Y. Wang, J.K. Bechtold, C.K. Law, Int. J. Heat
Mass Transfer 51 (3–4) (2008) 630–639.
[106] C. Pantano, D.I. Pullin, J. Fluid Mech. 480 (2003)
311–332.
[107] J.E. Gardside, B. Jackson, Nature 168 (1951) 1085.
[108] M.R. Dongworth, A. Melvin, Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol. 14 (1976) 177–182.
[109] R. Chen, G.B. Mitchell, P.D. Ronney, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 24 (1992) 213–221.
[110] D. Lo Jacono, P. Papas, P.A. Monkewitz, Com-
bust. Theory Model. 7 (2003) 634–644.
[111] D. Lo Jacono, P.A. Monkewitz, Combust. Flame
151 (2007) 321–332.
[112] S. Ishizuka, H. Tsuji, Proc. Combust. Inst. 18
(1981) 695–703.
[113] W. Chan, J.S. Tien, Combust. Sci. Technol. 18
(1979) 139–143.
[114] H. Ross, R.G. Sotos, J.S. T’ien, Combust. Sci.
Technol. 75 (1991) 155–160.
[115] V. Nayagam, F.A. Williams. Dynamics of Diﬀusion
Flame Oscillations Prior to Extinction During Low
Gravity Droplet Combustion. Seventh International
Conference on Numerical Combustion, York, UK,
1998.
[116] M. Fu¨ri, P. Papas, P.A. Monkewitz, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 28 (2000) 831–838.
[117] B. Golovanevsky, Y. Levy, J.B. Greenberg, M.
Matalon, Combust. Flame 117 (1999) 373–383.
[118] H.D. Ross, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 20 (1)
(1994) 17–64.
[119] D.N. Schiller, H.D. Ross, W.A. Sirignano, Com-
bust. Sci. Technol. 118 (1996) 203–255.
[120] J.S. Kim, F.A. Williams, P.D. Ronney, J. Fluid
Mech. 327 (1996) 273–301.
[121] J.S. Kim, Combust. Theory Model. 1 (1997) 13–40.
[122] R. Vance, M. Miklavcic, I.S. Wichman, Combust.
Theory Model. 5 (2001) 147–162.
[123] M. Miklavcic, A.B. Moore, I.S. Wichman, Com-
bust. Theory Model. 9 (2005) 403–416.
[124] S. Cheatham, On the Structure and Stability of
Diﬀusion
Flames,
Ph.D.
Thesis,
Northwestern
University, Evanston, 1997.
[125] H.Y. Wang, J.K. Bechtold, C.K. Law, Combust.
Flame 145 (2006) 376–389.
[126] Y. Wang, S. Hu, R.W. Pitz, Proc. Combust. Inst.
32 (2008) in press.
[127] S. Cheatham, M. Matalon, Proc. Combust. Inst. 26
(1996) 1063–1070.
[128] P. Metzener, M. Matalon, The eﬀect of thermal
expansion on the stability of a planar diﬀusion
ﬂame, submitted for publication.
[129] B.J. Lee, S.H. Chung, Combust. Flame 109 (1997)
163–172.
[130] S.H. Chung, B.J. Lee, Combust. Flame 86 (1991)
62–72.
[131] S.H. Chung, Proc. Combust. Inst. 31 (2007) 877–
892.
[132] V.S. Santoro, A. Linan, A. Gomez, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 28 (2000) 2039–2046.
[133] P. Papas, A.G. Tomboulides, Combust. Sci. Tech-
nol. Commun. 1 (2000) 1–17.
[134] G. Amantini, J.H. Frank, A. Gomez, Proc. Com-
bust. Inst. 30 (2005) 313–321.
[135] M.L. Shay, P.D. Ronney, Combust. Flame 112
(1998) 171–180.
[136] Y. Ohki, S. Tsuge, Dynamics of reactive systems,
Prog. Astronaut. Aeronaut., 1986, 105–114 (J.R.
Bowen, J.C. Leyer, R.I. Soloukhin (Eds.)).
[137] J.D. Buckmaster, M. Matalon, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 22 (1988) 1527.
[138] J.W. Dold, Combust. Flame 76 (1989) 71–88.
[139] J.W. Dold, L.J. Hartley, D. Green, Dynamics of
laminar triple-ﬂamelet structures, in: P.C. Fife, A.
Linan, and F.A. Williams (Eds.), Dynamical Issues
in Combustion Theory, 83 (1991) 105.
[140] L.J. Hartley, J.W. Dold, Combust. Sci. Technol. 80
(1991) 23–46.
[141] J.D. Buckmaster, J. Eng. Math. 31 (1997) 269.
[142] J. Buckmaster, Yi Zhang, Combust. Theory Model.
3 (1999) 547–565.
[143] J. Buckmaster, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 28
(2002) 435–475.
[144] V. Kurdyumov, M. Matalon, Proc. Combust. Inst.
29 (2002) 45–52.
[145] V. Kurdyumov, M. Matalon, Combust. Flame 139
(2004) 329–339.
[146] V. Kurdyumov, M. Matalon, Proc. Combust. Inst.
31 (2007) 909–917.
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
81


--- Page 26 ---

[147] V. Kurdyumov, M. Matalon, Proc. Combust. Inst.
32 (2009) 1107–1115.
[148] V. Kurdyumov, M. Matalon, Combust. Flame 153
(2008) 105–118.
[149] T.G. Vedarajan, J. Buckmaster, Combust. Flame
114 (1998) 267–273.
[150] T.G. Vedarajan, J. Buckmaster, P.D. Ronney,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 27 (1998) 537–544.
[151] J. Daou, A. Lin˜a´n, Combust. Theory Model. 2
(1998) 449–477.
[152] J. Daou, A. Lin˜a´n, Combust. Flame 118 (1999)
479–488.
[153] J. Daou, M. Matalon, A. Lin˜a´n, Combust. Flame
121 (2000) 107–121.
[154] J.B. Liu, P.D. Ronney, Combust. Sci. Technol. 144
(1999) 21–45.
82
M. Matalon / Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 (2009) 57–82
