
--- Page 1 ---

NOx Emission
and PIV Residence Time Evaluation
in a Conical Bluff-Body Burner
D. Giordano, S. Giammartini,
E. Giacomazzi, F. Manfredi
ENEA - C. R. Casaccia
Sec. ENE-IMP
Rome, Italy
XXIV Event of the Italian Section
of the Combustion Institute
16-19 September 2001
S. Margherita Ligure, Italy


--- Page 2 ---

NOx Emission and PIV Residence Time Evaluation in a
Conical Bluff Body Burner
D. Giordano, S. Giammartini, E. Giacomazzi, F. Manfredi
ENEA - Casaccia - Dipartimento di Energia Via Anguillarese n.301
00060 S. Maria di Galeria  (Roma) Italy
ABSTRACT
Front flame properties of a conical bluff body burner have been investigated with PIV
technique. The experimental data analysed in our study consist of a couple of Mie scattering
images (acquired with a 768x484 CCD camera while the seeding is lighted by a double pulsed
Nd:Yag laser), the corresponding row velocity field and burner pollutant emission
measurements in a range of Reynolds number:4000<Re<15000 and equivalence ratio:
0.6<Žå<1.2.
The axial bluff body generates the so called recirculation zone, due to a ring like vortex that
steady evolves at the exit of the burner (in the operative range above mentioned). This hot
ŌĆ£bubbleŌĆØ is crossed and heated  by the exhaust gasses coming out from the flame front.
The continuous presence of a hot axial zone inside the flame has positive and negative effects.
Firstly, it preheats the fuel-air mixture (coming borderly from the base of the reactive jet) with
a consequent anchorage of the flame base at the exit of the burner. Secondly, it causes a
permanency of the exhaust gasses that have a direct effect on thermal NOx emission.
The ratio between the extension of the recirculation zone L and the downward inner vortex
crossing velocity vdw gives us the crossing time value tco. The tco dependence on Reynolds
number (Re) and equivalence ratio (Žå) has been studied to point out the stability range of  a
model of industrial burner for gas turbine applications.
NOx and CO emissions have been measured in the range 0.6<Žå<1.2, and constant
Re=10000. Crossover time and consequently residence time evaluations allow us to calculate
thermal NOx emission in each regime in good agreement with the experimental data.
As a matter of fact, it is possible to preview or diagnose nitric oxide emission by means of a
simple and fast PIV result analysis.
INTRODUCTION
Actually researchers are continuously studying new techniques finalised to reduce pollution
and thermal NOx emissions above all.
Aim of our study is to find a range of stability for a conical bluff  body (a model of industrial
gas turbine burner), respect to Reynolds number (Re) and equivalence ratio (Žå), characterised
by low CO and NOx emissions.
We apply and use PIV technique to pick out the burner dependence on Re and Žå. Firstly, we
analyse instantaneous velocity field, to evaluate hot gasses residence time in the recirculation
zone evolving downstream the conical bluff body burner. Secondly, we find the maximum
operative efficiency of the same burner.
EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP
The application of two dimensional PIV to industrial unswirled burners has been made
possible by means of the experimental configuration, consisting of: two Nd:Yag pulsed laser


--- Page 3 ---

(Quanta System) with 532 nm wave length, an axial symmetrical test chamber (with a cross
section diameter 40 times the burner diameter and an height of 1100 mm), two optical
branches (for CCD camera and laser head), a cross-correlation unit type Dantec PIV-2000, a
CCD camera type Kodak 80c42 (768x484 pixels), two monitors, a personal computer
Pentium 3, with PIV synchronisation software (Flow Map 2.01), a conical bluff body burner
(fig. 1), an alumina seeder system (5 ╬£m mean diameter), a Liquid Propane Gas (LPG) and a
methane gas bottles, each one with an own pressure-reducer and an high pressure air feeding
system (with pressure stabiliser and reducer too). The flow rates are metered by two Venturi
tubes: one for the air and one for the fuel. The burner is formed by two parts, the base
(premixing zone) and the top (out-letting zone). The base consists of a Bunsen burner
modified for the forced inletting air. The air (preseeded with alumina particles) gets in along
the vertical walls and crosses the  below incoming fuel.
Fig.1: Global burner shape      Fig.2: Inner recirculation zone in a PIV measurement
        (Re=10000, , Žå=1)
The exit of the burner  (fig.1) is formed by two parts: an  external  pipe  with  a  diameter of
23.4 mm and an inner inverted cone fixed to a 7 mm axial rode coming from the outletting
zone. The maximum diameter of the bluff body is d= 0.015 m. The value of the geometrical
blockage ratio Bg =(d/De)2, used in our measurements, is: Bg = 0.41.
The length of the burner is five times greater than the  diameter of the external pipe (D = 23.4
mm).
PIV RESULTS AND CROSSOVER TIME
In our experiences we use the same burner geometry in the operative range: 4000<Re<15000
and 0.6<Žå<1.2. To point out recirculation zone properties respect to non dimensional
numbers (singularly),  we vary fuel and air flow to act directly on Žå and Re respectively.
During this experiences we focalise our attention on the recirculation zone behaviour, to
evaluate exhaust gas residence time.
We define as crossover time tc [1] the time elapsed when the exhaust gasses cross the inner
recirculation zone, along the axis. It is possible to obtain its value through the exam of PIV
results, evaluating the ratio between recirculation vortex extension L (fig. 2) and mean
downward velocity Vdw (fig. 2).  The evaluation of the extension L is made with the
measurement of the axial distance A-B, through the PIV results. Between these points the
recirculation velocities change direction from the horizontal to the vertical. As it is possible to
see in the following, tco is streactly connected with residence time tr. The experimental data
relative to  this  parameter, showed two characteristic properties regarding its relation with Re
and stoichiometry [1], that we have to summarize, for the sake of brevity.
D = 24 mm
 d = 14 mm
10
20
30
40
Y (mm)
0
10
20
30
40
X (mm)
A
B
VDW


--- Page 4 ---

Re
10000
10000
10000
Žå
1.15
1
0.6
╬ż (┬░╬Ü)
1400
1300
1050
Vd (m/s)
3.3
2.8
5
L (mm)
20
17
30
tc (ms)
6
6
6
Table I: Crossover time and equivalence ratio data with constant Reynolds
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1 0
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1 0
t c o  (m illis e c o n d s )
U m  (m /s )
Equivalence  ratio dependency
Measurements made with the same Reynolds number (Re=10000) and different  values of the
fuel-air ratio show a crossing time independent of the stoichiometry  and equal to 6
milliseconds (table I).
The recirculation zone extension (L) depends on the equivalence ratio and assumes the
minimum value when Žå=1. Jointing these results with those discussed above (on the
dependency on the topology from the chemistry) we can conclude that the inner V shape front
generates inner burning velocity, perpendicular to itself, that increase the inner vorticity and
facilitates the ring vortex formation downstream the bluff body. This phenomenology is
strongly enphasized (L minimum) when the fuel-air ratio is equal to the stoichiometric one
(due to  maximum flame temperature). In fact, the maximum speed of the exhaust gasses
causes the maximum front opening too. The reduction of Tmax (depending on Žå) involves less
values of velocity gradient and, consequently, moves the top of  the vortex  (L) and the front
away.
Reynolds number dependency
The comparison among PIV flame measurements made with similar values of the equivalence
ratio and different values of  Reynolds number (summed up in table II), shows a linear
variation of the crossover time tco respect to the mean outletting velocity Um. This dependence
can be expressed by the experimental linear approximation [1]:
65
.
14
4132
.1
+
Ōŗģ
ŌłÆ
=
m
c
U
t
(1)
and plotted like in figure 3.
Finally, higher values of ŌĆ£hot bubbleŌĆØ extension have been found in the burning regime
characterized by Žå<<1 or Žå >>1.
NO EMISSION: COMPARISON BETWEEN THEORY AND PRACTICE
Crossover time depends on Re and Žå as the residence time tr [2]. The relation existing
between  tr  and  NO is  represented  by  Roffe and VenkataramaniŌĆÖs expression [3]:
Table II: Crossover time and equivalence
Fig. 3: Crossover time and
 ratio data  with constant Žå
            velocity plot
Re
7000
10000
15000
Žå
0.8
0.6
0.7
Vd (m/s)
2
5
7.5
L (mm)
18
30
30
tc (ms)
9
6
4
Um  (m/s)
2
6
9.1


--- Page 5 ---

’ŻĘ
’ŻĖ
’ŻČ
’Ż¼
’ŻŁ
’Ż½
ŌłÆ
+
ŌłÆ
=
’ŻĘ
’ŻĖ
’ŻČ
’Ż¼
’ŻŁ
’Ż½
38
8,2
28
,
72
ln
T
T
t
NO
(2)
quite independent of pressure over the range 0.5 to 3 MPa.
We substitute the tco values (instead of tr) and temperature values (both reported in table I) in
equation 2 (where   flame temperature has been measured with a thermocouple) to preview
NO emission corresponding to a burner operative regime. The result of this calculation is here
reported (fig.4) and compared with experimental NO data (measured with FTIR technique).
NO is the 90% forming part of NOx emissions. The succeeding in the theoretical previewing
of this pollutant, simply obtained with the analysis of PIV measurements, represents a
powerful improvement  in the research of  environment and emission diagnostic research.
Fig. 4:Comparison between theoretical and experimental NO emissions values
CONCLUSIONS
PIV technique furnishes good results when applied on a model of industrial burner for the
analysis of front flame evolution downstream the conical bluff body fixed axially. It has been
possible to introduce and measure the crossover time. It behaves in the same way of the
residence time, which  decreases with Re and it is quite constant with Žå. With tco
measurements it will be possible to preview NO emission and estimate burner efficiency and
emission.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially sponsorized by ŌĆ£Quanta SystemŌĆØ. We gratefully acknowledge
Professor Giulio Guj for his insightful comments on our work. . In addition, we are grateful to
Mr Livio Fabi of IECA Italia for his willing to help during our experimental activity and to
Miss  Rosa Gallodoro  for her factive contribute to improve the editing of the paper.
REFERENCES
1. 
Giordano, D., Giammartini, S., Manfredi, F.: Sixth International Conference on
Technologies and Combustion for a Clean Environment, Oporto, Portugal, July,
(2001).
2. 
Chomiak, J.: Combustion a Study in Theory, Fact and Application, Gordon and Breach
Science Publishers, p. 127 (1990)
3. 
Lefebvre A. H.: Gas turbine combustion, Mc Graw-Hill, (1983).
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
0
0 .5
1
1 .5
Žå
N O  ( p p m )
T h e o r e tic a l
N O x
M e a s u r e d
N O x
