
--- Page 1 ---

Jens Färber1
e-mail: jens.faerber@kit.edu
Rainer Koch
Hans-Jörg Bauer
Institut für Thermische Strömungsmaschinen,
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology—KIT,
Kaiserstr. 12,
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
Matthias Hase
Werner Krebs
SIEMENS AG Energy Sector,
Mellinghofer Str. 55,
45466 Mülheim an der Ruhr, Germany
Effects of Pilot Fuel and Liner
Cooling on the Flame Structure in
a Full Scale Swirl-Stabilized
Combustion Setup
The ﬂame structure and the limits of operation of a lean premixed swirl ﬂame were
experimentally investigated under piloted and nonpiloted conditions. Flame stabilization
and blow out limits are discussed with respect to pilot fuel injection and combustor liner
cooling for lean operating conditions. Two distinctly different ﬂow patterns are found to
develop depending on piloting and liner cooling parameters. These ﬂow patterns are
characterized with respect to ﬂame stability, blow out limits, combustion noise, and
emissions. The combustion system explored consists of a single burner similar to the
burners used in Siemens annular combustion systems. The burner feeds a distinctively
nonadiabatic combustion chamber operated with natural gas under atmospheric pres-
sure. Liner cooling is mimicked by purely convective cooling and an additional ﬂow of
“leakage air” injected into the combustion chamber. Both additional air ﬂow and the
pilot fuel ratio were found to have a strong inﬂuence on the ﬂow structure and stability of
the ﬂame close to the lean blow off (LBO) limit. It is shown by laser Doppler velocimetry
that the angle of the swirl cone is strongly affected by pilot fuel injection. Two distinct
types of ﬂow patterns are observed close to LBO in this large scale setup: While nonpi-
loted ﬂames exhibit tight cone angles and small inner recirculation zones (IRZs), sufﬁ-
cient piloting results in a wide cone angle and a large IRZ. Only in the latter case, the
main ﬂow becomes attached to the combustor liner. Flame structures deduced from ﬂow
ﬁelds and CH-chemiluminescence images depend on both the pilot fuel injection and
liner cooling. DOI: 10.1115/1.4000588
1
Introduction
Lean premixed swirl stabilized combustion is successfully ap-
plied in gas turbine combustion systems to maintain low NOx and
CO-emissions over a wide operating range. The ﬂow patterns in
these combustions systems are characterized by a conical main
ﬂow zone and an internal recirculation zone in which hot burnt
gases are recirculated. Stable combustion over a wide operating
range is ensured by the turbulent reacting shear layer formed be-
tween the hot recirculating gases and the unburnt fuel/air mixture
of the main ﬂow. Extensive work was performed to understand
swirl ﬂows and their effects in combustion processes. The work of
Gupta et al. 1 gives a comprehensive overview, while Meier et
al. 2 and Beck et al. 3 include recent advancements. Require-
ments to modern heavy duty gas turbine systems are low pollutant
emissions, safe operation, and a wide operating range. While low
NOx emissions require air/fuel mixtures close to the lean blow off
limit, the risks of thermo-acoustic instabilities and lean blow off
often can be avoided by choosing richer mixtures.
In the light of this contradiction, multifuel staged systems have
been introduced to increase the operating range of lean premixed
combustion systems. In the burners used in the annular combus-
tion chambers of Siemens heavy duty gas turbine series Fig. 1 a
lean premixed main fuel stage is combined with a central “pilot”
fuel stage, which provides a locally enriched air/fuel mixture at
the center of the burner outlet. This system extends the operating
range of the swirl ﬂame toward leaner conditions 5,6. The prop-
erties of combustion systems based on this staged burner concept
were investigated at various levels of abstraction from ﬁeld tests
7 to atmospheric single burner testing 8 and from simulations
covering speciﬁc details, such as mixing 9, to extensive large
eddy simulations including the entire combustion system 10.
Although many aspects of swirl stabilized lean combustion sys-
tems are known today, the effects of pilot fuel injection on the
overall ﬂow ﬁeld of this exemplary lean premixed combustion
system are not fully understood. Even though emission measure-
ments taken during ﬁeld tests 7 clearly indicate a potential to
reduce NOx emissions considerably by a reduction in the pilot fuel
ratio, the mechanism, which produces the stabilizing effect of the
pilot, is yet to be clearly identiﬁed. Previous experimental studies
using a quasi-adiabatic atmospheric combustion chamber were fo-
cused on the mechanisms leading to thermo-acoustic instabilities
under conditions richer than the design point 8,11–13. These
investigations indicated that the pilot neither had a measurable
effect on the thermo acoustic behavior nor on the lean blow off
limits.
In this context, a large scale test rig for a single staged burner
was designed, which has features similar to the quasi-adiabatic rig
studied earlier. The new setup includes a nonadiabatic liner con-
ﬁguration in order to bring the test case closer to the real engine.
The nonadiabatic test rig exhibited the desired effects of pilot fuel
injection 14. In this paper, detailed measurements of the ﬂow
ﬁeld inside the nonadiabatic combustion chamber will be pre-
sented in order to highlight some of the effects of pilot fuel injec-
tion. Wall heat ﬂux, noise, and emission measurements will be
used to link these effects to system performance.
2
Experimental Apparatus
The current setup consists of one staged burner mounted in an
atmospheric combustion chamber. Figure 2 shows a sketch of the
burner, the combustion chamber, and the corresponding coordi-
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the International Gas Turbine Institute of ASME for publication in
the JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING FOR GAS TURBINES AND POWER. Manuscript received April
6, 2009; ﬁnal manuscript received October 19, 2009; published online June 10, 2010.
Editor: Dilip R. Ballal.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 091501-1
Copyright © 2010 by ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 2 ---

nate system. The burner consists of two axis-symmetric swirlers.
The majority of the combustion air mass ﬂow m˙ B,a passes the
diagonal swirler where the main premix fuel ﬂow is added to the
combustion air. The reactants are intensively mixed before enter-
ing the combustion chamber 15. This main fuel stage provides a
lean premixed swirl stabilized main ﬂame with low NOx emis-
sions 7. In the order of 13% of the combustion air passes the
axial swirler to form a corotating inner vortex. Pilot fuel m˙ P,f
can be injected into this inner ﬂow. For operating conditions close
to the design point of the gas turbine, the main premixed stage is
stabilized using typically 2...10% of the overall fuel ﬂow as pilot
fuel. Details about load modulation of the gas turbine in the ﬁeld
are available in the literature 5,7. The combustion chamber has
inner dimensions, as studied previously 11: A cuboid combus-
tion chamber with square cross section is terminated by a trun-
cated pyramid, which forms the exhaust gas exit. The edge length
of the cross section is 3 times the burner outer diameter db. Its
surface area is similar to the surface area per burner available in
the equivalent gas turbine 8. In the same sense, the length of the
combustion chamber is 6·db in order to match the volume of the
test section to 1/24 of the volume of the annular combustion
chamber.
Previous work 8,12 used an entirely ceramic liner resulting in
quasi-adiabatic conditions in the combustion chamber. Wall sur-
face temperatures were in the order of 90% of the adiabatic ﬂame
temperature 9. This quasi-adiabatic test rig did not show any
dependencies of the stability margins on the pilot fuel mass ﬂow
under conditions close to lean blow off LBO 16. As the impact
of pilot fuel, as seen in gas turbines in the ﬁeld, was to be studied
in the present campaign, the boundary conditions associated to the
combustor liner were altered to represent the gas turbine condi-
tions more closely. The liner of the combustion chamber now
consists of three functional parts: ceramic surfaces, a metallic
liner structure providing a distinct heat ﬂux out of the combustion
chamber and a so-called “leakage air” system which allows to
inject cold air into the outer recirculation zone ORZ.
The metallic liner was introduced to make the present combus-
tion chamber distinctively nonadiabatic. The liner structure is
cooled using impinging jets on the outer surface. It stretches
around the whole perimeter and is 2.3·db long. The liner tem-
perature was found to be in the order of 40–70% of the nominal
adiabatic ﬂame temperature Tref. The heat ﬂux past the metallic
liner was found to vary between 7% and 15% of the nominal
thermal power Qref depending on the combustor load. The coolant
ﬂow of the liner was sealed against the combustor. This setup was
preferred to convectively cooled tiles found in common gas tur-
bine designs 17 because the gaps between the tiles usually vary
in width. Therefore, the boundary conditions of a tiled liner would
not have been known precisely 14.
However, the ﬂow of coolant air through these gaps was to be
mimicked as it inﬂuences the combustion process. To this end, a
row of holes is located at the upstream outer edge of the chamber
Fig. 2. Here, an additional air ﬂow termed leakage air L can be
injected into the combustion chamber. Figure 3 shows a compari-
son of the liner cooling conﬁguration implemented in the test
section and the tiled design commonly used in gas turbines.
Hence, in the current setup the combustion process and its sta-
bility margins are inﬂuenced by the heat ﬂux through the liner and
the leakage air ﬂow. While the wall heat ﬂux is given by material
properties, design features and the coolant mass ﬂow, the leakage
air ﬂow can be set independently.
2.1
Operating Conditions. The thermodynamic conditions of
the combustion air were kept constant throughout the campaign:
The burner air volume ﬂow and the burner air inlet temperature
673 K were set to match gas turbine conditions. As seen from
previous tests, the leakage air ﬂow takes part in the chemical
reaction 14. Hence, a global equivalence ratio glob is deﬁned. It
relates the overall fuel mass ﬂow m˙ B,f to the sum of the burner air
ﬂow m˙ a,B and the leakage air ﬂow m˙ L
glob = AFRst ·
m˙ B,f
m˙ B,a + m˙ L
1
Speciﬁc operating conditions were set using the relative pilot fuel
ﬂow rate  and the relative leakage air ﬂow rate L as additional
variables
 = m˙ P,f
m˙ B,f
,
L = m˙ L
m˙ B,a
2
Please note that  relates the pilot fuel mass ﬂow m˙ P,f to the entire
fuel ﬂow rate m˙ B,f and the leakage air ﬂow rate m˙ L,a is nondimen-
sionalized using the burner mass ﬂow rate m˙ B,a. These deﬁnitions
allow to set the variables glob, , and L independently.
3
Experimental Methods
Using the setup, as described in the last section, measurements
of the velocity and turbulence levels for the axial and tangential
velocity components u,v were carried out in a central planar cut
through the combustor y=0. Along with this planar information,
the wall heat ﬂux, the emissions, and the oscillating and stationary
pressure components were monitored.
3.1
Velocity Measurements by LDV. A standard two-
dimensional 2D-LDV setup with back-scattering receiving op-
Fig. 1
Annular combustion chamber of the Siemens SGTxF
type †4‡
Fig. 2
Schematic of burner and test rig
Fig. 3
Schematic of the cooled liner structures of this test
setup „left… and a common gas turbine „right…
091501-2 / Vol. 132, SEPTEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 3 ---

tics was used. Albrecht et al. 18 give a comprehensive overview
on the experimental techniques involved in laser Doppler veloci-
metry LDV. Details on appropriate seeding can be found in Ref.
19. The focal length of the system used in this study was 800
mm. The size of the measurement volume was 2.1 mm in the
direction of the optical axis and 120 m in directions perpendicu-
lar to the optical axis. Seeding of the whole air ﬂow was achieved
with magnesium oxide particles, which were fed into the plenum
upstream of the burner using a brush-type particle generator. Due
to design features of the burner, the ﬂow past the axial swirler
received considerably less particles compared with the main air-
ﬂow passing through the diagonal swirler. Using this system, data
rates of up to 5 kHz were achieved for coincided measurements of
the two velocity components in the main ﬂow zone at reasonable
signal-to-noise levels. Optical access was obtained by placement
of a water-cooled window system in the combustor wall located at
z/db=1.46. The window could be mounted along a slit, which was
introduced into the whole length of the metallic liner structure
giving access to one line of radial positions at a ﬁxed axial posi-
tion. This setup allowed the optical access to be comparatively
small in size. The wall surface area covered by the optical access
was quadratic and had an edge length of 1/4·db. The unused parts
of the slit were sealed using quasi-adiabatic ceramic bricks.
Figure 4 shows a schematic of the burner, the combustion
chamber, and the locations where velocity measurements were
taken. For the measurements in the region close to the burner
mouth, the optical axis was tilted by 25 deg with respect to the
radial direction. As a result, instead of measuring the axial veloc-
ity component ut, the velocity ut is measured in this region. It
differs slightly from the axial velocity. As only two components of
the velocity vector are measured, it is impossible to compute ut
from the measurement of ut and vt. Hence, the results derived
from axial velocity measurements close to the burner mouth
x/db0.8 are based on the velocity component ut, as
sketched in Fig. 4. Due to the distortion, the measured mean ve-
locity ux,0,z is smaller than the true axial velocity component
ux,0,z for z0. LDV measurements for z0 were carried out
to prove that the ﬂow ﬁeld is axis-symmetric with respect to the
burner axis. This was shown for the mean velocity components.
Statistical moments of higher order were not calculated for z0
as the data rate in this region was relatively low due to distortion
and absorption of the laser light in the ﬂame.
3.2
Emissions. For emission testing, ﬂue gas was sampled by
a probe. The probe inlet was situated at the center of the exit plane
of the combustion chamber. A nondispersive infrared NDIR de-
tector was used for the dry measurement of the concentration of
carbon monoxide. A ﬂame ionization detector was used to mea-
sure the concentration of unburnt hydrocarbons in the wet gases,
while nitrogen oxide emissions were detected by chemilumines-
cence of NO2.
3.3
Wall Heat Transfer. As the heat ﬂux through the ceramic
parts of the liner is considerably smaller than the ﬂux through the
metallic liner, only the latter was measured.
The surface-integrated wall heat ﬂux QW was deduced from the
enthalpy rise of the coolant air ﬂow. To this end, the coolant duct
was insulated with respect to the ambient. Thus, the conductive
heat ﬂux past the metallic liner equals the enthalpy rise of the
coolant air. This enthalpy rise was calculated from temperature
measurements using thermocouples, which were installed in the
coolant duct up- and downstream of the impingement cooling sys-
tem. To limit inﬂuences of inhomogeneities in the coolant ﬂow
ﬁeld, the temperature and velocity ﬁelds in the coolant duct were
simulated numerically and the thermocouple positions were cho-
sen accordingly.
Values of the heat ﬂux presented here are normalized using a
constant heat ﬂux Qref, which represents the heat released due to
the chemical reaction under nominal conditions A2 in Table 1.
3.4
Chemiluminescence. The measurements of the chemilu-
minescence of the CH* radical reported here were obtained using
an enlarged optical access and represent the time average of line
of sight images. Light was ﬁltered with a 432 nm bandpass ﬁlter.
A detailed description of the optical access used and of similar
measurements was published recently 14.
4
Flow Structures
The measurements to be discussed in this section were carried
out at four sets of operating conditions as listed in Table 1. Mea-
surement results shown in Table 1 will be discussed in Secs. 5 and
6. The parameters were chosen to represent a variation in the
pilot fuel ﬂow  and the leakage air ﬂow L close to the lean
blow off limit. The numbering of the sets of operating conditions
reﬂects increasing complexity of the operating conditions: Case
A1 is a nonpiloted premixed ﬂame without leakage air input. Its
piloted counterpart A2 also has no leakage air input. It is con-
sidered the nominal operating point as it is closest to the condi-
tions found in the quasi-adiabatic test rig studied previously 11.
The operating points with leakage air input are termed A3 not
piloted and A4 piloted.
The ﬂow ﬁelds for conditions with leakage air A3, A4 were
found to show less particularities. Therefore, they will be dis-
cussed ﬁrst. Differences between the nonpiloted A3 and the pi-
loted case A4 will be highlighted in detail. Next, ﬂow ﬁelds for
conditions without leakage air i.e., A1 and A2 will be presented.
To ease the comparison of the ﬂow ﬁeld data, the contour plots
shown here will contain data for two sets of operating conditions
each. While data sets for nonpiloted cases were plotted directly on
the positive z-axis, data sets for the respective piloted cases were
mirrored to be shown on the negative z-axis of the same plot.
Again, all data sets to be shown will depict values measured for
positive z-values.
The axial mean velocity component u/uref is shown in Fig. 5a
for A3 and A4. Normalization was carried out using the bulk axial
velocity at the burner mouth uref. In case of the piloted ﬂame
A4, the ﬂow emerging from the burner mouth diverges toward
the combustor liner forming a relatively wide cone in which the
main ﬂow is located. In consequence, a strong and large inner
recirculation zone IRZ is established and a relatively small outer
Fig. 4
Measurement locations and coordinate system for LDV.
Table 1
Operating conditions for LDV and scalar results
Operating conditions
Results
N
glob

%
L
%
QW
Qref
%
prms
prms,A2
%
p
pref
%
A1
0.525
0
0
7a
1.45a
3.3a
A2
0.525
6
0
9
1
3.5
A3
0.516
0
5
6
1.42
3.3
A4
0.516
6
5
9
1.05
3.5
aFor A1N.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 091501-3
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 4 ---

recirculation zone ORZ can be inferred. Please note that the
main ﬂow zone becomes attached to the metallic liner. This ﬂow
structure was also present in the quasi-adiabatic equivalent of this
test rig as reported previously 8. In contrast, the nonpiloted case
A3 shows a signiﬁcantly different ﬂow ﬁeld: The swirling main
ﬂow does not clearly break down. It forms a very narrow cone
angle and is not attached to the combustor liner. Consequently, the
ORZ is relatively large. Still, the ORZ does not exhibit high ve-
locities. The IRZ is limited in size, and the absolute velocities in
the IRZ are small with respect to the piloted case. This ﬂow struc-
ture was not found as a stable operating condition in the quasi-
adiabatic test rig 8.
The corresponding plots of the tangential mean velocity are
given in Fig. 5b. The sense of rotation is counterclockwise in all
cases. As the ﬂow does not signiﬁcantly diverge in the nonpiloted
case, the absolute tangential velocities remain comparatively high
in the main ﬂow zone. It can be seen that the ﬂow ﬁeld of the
nonpiloted ﬂame features a relatively wide main ﬂow zone with
velocity gradients being considerably smaller than in the piloted
case.
To illustrate turbulence and possible oscillations in the ﬂow
ﬁeld, the rms-value of the axial velocity is shown in Fig. 6. The
plot contains lines of constant mean axial velocity for orientation.
Because of the low seeding densities in the ﬂow downstream of
the axial swirler, the rms-values close to the burner axis are hard
to interpret. Nonetheless, it can be seen from Fig. 6 that turbu-
lence levels are highest in the shear zone between the main ﬂow
and the IRZ in both the piloted and nonpiloted case. The nonpi-
loted case A3, however, exhibits an area of increased turbulence
levels which matches the region of increased tangential velocity,
as shown in Fig. 5b.
In summary, the cases in which signiﬁcant leakage air is fed
into the combustion chamber exhibit two distinctively different
ﬂow ﬁelds. To ease further discussion, the two types of ﬂow ﬁelds
will be termed “wide” A4 and “narrow” A3 according to the
shape of the main ﬂow zones.
The measurements reported were repeated for increased leak-
age air ratios of L=10%. Again, wide and narrow ﬂow ﬁelds were
detected depending on the pilot fuel ratio. The ﬂow ﬁelds were
similar compared with their counterparts with L=5% and will not
be discussed in further detail.
The last set of LDV measurements in the entire center plane
shown here depicts the ﬂow ﬁelds without leakage air L=0,
Fig. 7. For the piloted case A2, a wide ﬂow ﬁeld was detected.
Its main ﬂow features are similar to the respective case with leak-
age air A4. Differences between A2 and A4 are restricted to
small zones only and are attributed to local aerodynamic and ther-
mal effects of the leakage air input. For A1, nonuniform results
were found, as displayed in the lower half of Fig. 7. Velocity
measurements for x/db0.8 were taken early in the course of the
measurement campaign. According to this subset of the data, a
wide ﬂow ﬁeld is present for the pure premixed ﬂame termed
A1W. In contrast, later measurements carried out for x/db0.8,
indicate that the ﬂow stabilizes in the narrow shape, as known
from A3 Fig. 5a, termed A1N. Changes in natural gas compo-
sition or absolute humidity of the combustion air might be the
reason for this change in ﬂow pattern but were not monitored
during the campaign. This high susceptibility of the ﬂow pattern
on minor changes in system parameters will be addressed in
Sec. 5.
5
Transition of Flow Patterns and LBO
As two fundamentally different types of swirl ﬂow patterns
were found for the four operating conditions, the transition of the
ﬂow ﬁeld between these patterns was studied. To this end, the
Fig.
5
Normalized
mean
velocity
for
A3
and
A4
„glob=0.516, L=5%…: „a… axial and „b… tangential component.
Isolines represent u in both plots
Fig.
6
rms
of
axial
velocity
urms
for
A3
and
A4
„glob=0.516, L=5%… with isolines of u
Fig.
7
Normalized
mean
velocity
for
A1
and
A2
„glob=0.525, L=0%…: „a… axial and „b… tangential component.
Isolines represent u in both plots.
091501-4 / Vol. 132, SEPTEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 5 ---

pilot gas ratio  was gradually changed in steps of 1% to obtain a
transition from A1N to A2 and from A3 to A4 and vice versa.
Each step change in any operating parameter resulted in
changes in heat ﬂux and surface temperatures. These transient
processes were allowed to settle by waiting for a minimum of
10 min after each step change. Monitoring of the ﬂow ﬁeld was
carried out by measurement of the radial velocity proﬁle at
x/db=1.3.
For increasing pilot fuel ﬂow rates, and no leakage air, the
transition from A1N to A2 is shown in Fig. 8. Proﬁles of the mean
axial velocity u/uref are given for the positive z-axis radial coor-
dinate. For A1N, the peak mean axial velocity is situated at radial
positions close to the burner outer radius z/db=0.6, which
clearly indicates the narrow ﬂow pattern A1N. An increase in
pilot fuel ratio  does not signiﬁcantly change the ﬂow pattern up
to =2%. Subsequently, diverting only 1% of the overall fuel
input from the premixed ﬂame to the pilot fuel makes the ﬂow
pattern shift dramatically from the narrow to the wide shape.
Maximum axial velocities are now located at z/db1.1. A further
increase in  up to =6% results in only slight changes of the
ﬂow ﬁeld.
The transition between the two ﬂow patterns occurred suddenly
during the course of the experiment and was tracked by the rig’s
monitoring system, as shown in Fig. 9. While the wall heat ﬂux
QW reacts with a delay caused by thermal inertia, the combustor
pressure drop p exhibits a step change. At this moment, a change
in noise emissions of the ﬂame was also audible. Please refer to
Table 1 for typical steady-state values for p and QW.
The behavior discussed for the transition from A1N to A2 was
found to be typical to all those measurement series, which showed
a change in ﬂow pattern and did not show lean blow off right after
the change. No operating condition was found to exhibit succes-
sive changes from one ﬂow pattern to the other. Still, at different
days or under different wall boundary conditions i.e., transient
boundary conditions, certain operating points exhibited one or
the other ﬂow pattern, as discussed for A1 in Sec. 4. It was found
that all transitions were reversible by setting the boundary condi-
tions to the values present at the start of the experiment. Due to
the signiﬁcant thermal inertia of the system, an investigation of
possible hysteresis effects was not carried out.
The ﬂow pattern was also found to depend on the equivalence
ratio: In the nonpiloted cases A1N and A3, the narrow ﬂow pat-
tern was transformed into the wide ﬂow pattern by increasing the
fuel input. Under piloted conditions A2 and A4, the wide ﬂow
pattern was seen to change into the narrow shape for reduced
overall fuel ﬂow.
However, this transition did not always result in stable combus-
tion. Events of LBO took place immediately after or within sev-
eral minutes after the transition. An example is shown in Fig. 10.
At the beginning of the experiment, the ﬂame was operated with
pilot gas at condition A2 wide ﬂow pattern. In the course of the
experiment, the total fuel input was reduced in steps. After each
step pointwise LDV measurements were carried out starting at the
burner axis z/db=0. This process was repeated without signiﬁ-
cant changes in the ﬂow ﬁeld until =0.465 was reached. This
represents a reduction of 12% in the fuel ﬂow rate. Then a further
reduction of only 2.2% of the fuel ﬂow triggered the transition to
the narrow ﬂow ﬁeld. However, this state of the ﬂame was not
stable and LBO occurred 3 min after the transition. In this pe-
riod of time, the measurement of the velocity proﬁle could not be
completed for all locations. So, velocity values are available for
z/db0.5 only. These values ﬁt well to the proﬁles of the narrow
ﬂow ﬁeld, as plotted Fig. 9. For comparison, a velocity proﬁle for
a richer mixture with reduced pilot fuel, as presented in Fig. 9, is
reproduced in Fig. 10.
Hence, in the case discussed in Fig. 10, LBO was preceded by
a change from the wide ﬂow ﬁeld to the narrow ﬁeld. In general,
LBO was only observed in combination with the narrow ﬂow ﬁeld
being present immediately before LBO. If the fuel supply was
reduced at operating points, which exhibit the wide ﬂow ﬁeld, a
transition to the narrow ﬂow ﬁeld preceded LBO. Evidently, this
behavior cannot be tracked if the gradients of the transient pro-
cesses are too large.
It was concluded that the narrow ﬂow ﬁeld represents a less
stable ﬂame. This is supported by measurements of the sound
pressure in the plenum upstream of the burner p˜ The measure-
ment location is shown in Fig. 2. The rms-value of the sound
pressure prms for the narrow ﬂow ﬁeld was found to be 40%
higher than typical values for the wide ﬂow ﬁeld. This increase in
sound emissions was due to weak thermo acoustic oscillations in a
frequency band of 100–200 Hz superimposed to broadband noise
in a frequency band of 20–500 Hz. Hence, the narrow ﬂow ﬁeld
was found to be affected by acoustics and stochastic effects. In
contrast, the introduction of leakage air had a signiﬁcantly smaller
Fig. 8
Change of ﬂow ﬁeld with : u/uref at x/db=1.3 for a
transition from A1N to A2
Fig. 9
From the narrow to the wide ﬂow pattern: time trace of
combustor pressure drop and wall heat ﬂux
Fig.
10
Change
of
piloted
ﬂow
ﬁeld
with
:
u/uref
at
x/db=1.3 for reduced fuel mass ﬂow „=6%, L=0. Values for
„=0.525, =2%, L=0%… plotted for reference.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 091501-5
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 6 ---

effect on noise. Noise levels of piloted ﬂames operated at
L=10% are only 16% higher than the equivalent ﬂame without
leakage air. A comparison of typical sound pressure levels is in-
cluded in Table 1.
6
Wall Heat Flux and Emissions
Along with the LDV measurements, emissions of CO, NOx,
and unburnt hydrocarbons UHC as well as the wall heat ﬂux QW
were recorded. It was found that the wall heat ﬂux is a reliable
indicator for the ﬂow pattern in the combustor. Generally, wall
heat ﬂux is inﬂuenced by the adiabatic ﬂame temperature i.e., 
and the ﬂow ﬁeld, which determines the temperature distribution
in the combustor: Fig. 11 shows the wall heat ﬂux for three series
of lean blow off tests at constant pilot and leakage ratios. The
equivalence ratio was set to relatively rich levels and was reduced
in steps until the ﬂame was extinguished. For large equivalence
ratios, the heat ﬂux was approximately proportional to the equiva-
lence ratio for all cases. This is attributed to the inﬂuence of the
equivalence ratio on the temperature level in the combustion
chamber. Furthermore, the piloted cases shown in Fig. 11 exhibit
a higher heat ﬂux compared with the nonpiloted case, which is
explained by the main ﬂow being attached to the liner in a wide
ﬂow ﬁeld. Comparison of the heat ﬂux values for the two piloted
test series presented in Fig. 11 reveals that injection of cold leak-
age air into the ORZ reduces the wall heat ﬂux. This is attributed
to the gas temperatures in the vicinity of the liner being reduced
due to the injection of leakage air.
For equivalence ratios close to LBO the heat ﬂux decreases
dramatically when reducing  for the piloted cases. It drops to
values similar to the heat ﬂux present for the nonpiloted case close
to LBO. The behavior of the piloted ﬂames is attributed to a
transition of the ﬂow ﬁeld from wide to narrow. Hence, the wall
heat ﬂux is considered a good indicator for imminent lean blow
out. This could be explored in practical applications as the instru-
mentation needed does not have contact with the hot gases. Fur-
thermore, the case without leakage air exhibits a leaner LBO limit
compared with the cases with L=10%. However, this behavior
could not be reproduced to a satisfactory extent.
Coincident with the wall heat ﬂux measurements presented in
Fig. 11 are the emissions tests, as shown in Fig. 12. UHC concen-
trations were below the detection limit, except for the piloted case
without leakage air, where the time traces of UHC concentrations
showed spikes. The resulting increase in the mean value for lean
mixtures
is
given
in
Fig.
12.
For
the
same
case,
CO-
concentrations exhibited high emissions for extremely lean condi-
tions, as reported in the ﬁeld tests 7. In cases with signiﬁcant
leakage air, CO-concentrations were found to show only a slight
increase close to the lean blow off limit. Close to LBO, CO-
emissions did not necessarily show an increase as it might be
expected to be triggered by local quenching due to low ﬂame
temperatures. Increases of nitrogen oxide concentrations were de-
tected for increasing ﬂame temperatures in all cases, which is in
accordance with the Zeldovich-mechanism of NOx-formation. As
shown in Fig. 12 the measured emissions of CO and NOx were not
independent of piloting and leakage air. As expected from ﬁeld
tests 7, the NOx generation was found to be promoted by pilot
fuel injection.
7
Flame Structure
Changes in the position and shape of the ﬂame were also ob-
served using the chemiluminescence of OH and CH radicals. The
observations discussed here were evident from both the OH and
CH-chemiluminescence signals. Only the latter set of information
shall be discussed.
Figure 13 shows the time-averaged CH-chemiluminescence of
the ﬂame close to the burner mouth. The burner and the ceramic
liner of the combustor back wall are visible in the images because
the hot combustor walls also emit light at the wavelength of the
chemiluminescence signal. It can be seen that the nonpiloted
ﬂame emits a comparatively weak chemiluminescence signal near
the burner. In particular, the piloted ﬂames showed a conical struc-
ture based at the axial swirler outlet, which was not visible for any
nonpiloted ﬂame. This conical structure might be called a “pilot
ﬂame.” Still, there is no evident boundary separating this structure
from the main combustion zones. For all cases, the main combus-
tion zones were detected downstream of the ﬁeld of view depicted
in Fig. 13. They showed higher intensities for piloted cases. It is
concluded that piloting shifts parts of the heat release to the coni-
cal zone close to the burner. At the same time, the volume of the
zone with high heat release i.e., ﬂame is reduced. Quantitative
investigations of the heat release as a function of piloting and
leakage air based on measurements of the temperature ﬁeld in the
combustion chamber will be presented in the near future. These
data sets will be interpreted together with the data presented to
allow for a more detailed explanation of the effects described
here.
Fig. 11
Wall heat ﬂux as a function of glob
Fig. 12
Emissions of CO, NOx, and UHC as a function of glob
Fig. 13
CH*-chemiluminescence at the burner outlet for
=0.5 and ﬁeld of view
091501-6 / Vol. 132, SEPTEMBER 2010
Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm


--- Page 7 ---

8
Conclusion
It was demonstrated that the positive effects of pilot fuel injec-
tion on the stability and the lean blow off limit of an industrial
lean premixed combustion system can be reproduced using a dis-
tinctively nonadiabatic test setup. A similar but quasi-adiabatic
combustion system tested earlier 13 did not show effects of pi-
loting on the ﬂame properties. As the current nonadiabatic test rig
exhibits such effects, the importance of wall heat ﬂux for investi-
gations on stability of lean premixed ﬂames is emphasized.
The shape of the reacting ﬂow ﬁeld within the nonadiabatic
combustor was severely affected by pilot fuel injection. Two ﬂow
patterns were detected. They differ in the width of the cone angle
of their main ﬂow zone and the resulting size of the inner recir-
culation zone. The wide ﬂow pattern occurred at high load, sufﬁ-
cient piloting, and/or reduced leakage air ﬂow. It did coincide with
a more stable and more silent combustion process. For lower load,
reduced piloting and/or increased leakage air, a sudden transition
to the narrow ﬂow ﬁeld was observed. This transition results in
changes of the pressure loss in the system, the wall heat ﬂux and
the pollutant emissions. The studies revealed that the wall heat
ﬂux is an easily accessible indicator for the shape of the ﬂow
pattern and hence for the stability of the ﬂame. It was seen from
chemiluminescence imaging that piloting shifts the reaction zones
toward the burner. As lean blow off did only occur if the narrow
ﬂow ﬁeld was present before the LBO, it was concluded that the
ﬂame stability is severely affected by the change in the ﬂow struc-
ture.
Acknowledgment
The work presented here was funded by Siemens Energy, Ger-
many and the German federal state of Baden-Württemberg in the
framework of “KW21,” which is gratefully acknowledged.
Nomenclature
Latin Letters
AFRst  air-fuel ratio for stoichiometric conditions
db  diameter of burner mouth m
L  leakage air ﬂow ratio Eq. 2
m˙  mass ﬂow kg/s
p  pressure Pa
QW  wall heat ﬂux W
x,y,z  spatial coordinates m
u,v,w  time average of velocity components m/s
...  volumetric concentration
Greek Letters
glob  global equivalence ratio Eq. 1
  pilot fuel ratio Eq. 2
Subscripts
a  air
b  burner
f  fuel i.e., natural gas
L  leakage air system
NW  cone of main ﬂow narrow wide
P  pilot
ref  reference value
rms  root mean square
References
1 Gupta, A., Lilley, D., and Syred, N., 1984, Swirl Flows, ABACUS, Tunbridge
Wells, UK.
2 Meier, W., Weigand, P., Duan, X., and Giezendanner-Thoben, R., 2007, “De-
tailed Characterization of the Dynamics of Thermoacoustic Pulsations in a
Lean Premixed Swirl Flame,” Combust. Flame, 1501–2, pp. 2–26.
3 Beck, C. H., Koch, R., and Bauer, H.-J., 2009, “Identiﬁcation of Droplet Burn-
ing Modes in Lean, Partially Prevaporized Swirl-Stabilized Spray Flames,”
Proc. Combust. Inst., 32, pp. 2195–2203.
4 Lechner, C., and Seume, J., 2003, Stationäre Gasturbinen, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
5 Streb, H., Prade, B., Hahner, T., and Hoffmann, S., 2001, “Advanced Burner
Development for the Vx4.3A Gas Turbines,” ASME Paper No. 2001-GT-0077.
6 Hermsmeyer, H., Prade, B., Gruschka, U., Schmitz, U., Hoffmann, S., and
Krebs, W., 2002, “V64.3A Gas Turbine Natural Gas Burner Development,”
ASME Paper No. GT-2002-30106.
7 Prade, B., Steb, H., Berenbrink, P., Schetter, B., and Pyka, G., 1996, “Devel-
opment of an Improved Hybrid Burner—Initial Operating Experience in a Gas
Turbine,” ASME Paper No. 96-GT-45.
8 Schildmacher, K.-U., and Koch, R., 2005, “Experimental Investigations of the
Interaction of Unsteady Flow With Combustion,” ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power, 127, pp. 295–300.
9 Dannecker, R., Schildmacher, K.-U., Noll, B., Koch, R., Hase, M., Krebs, W.,
and Aigner, M., 2007, “Impact of Radiation on the Wall Heat Flux at a Test
Bench Gas Turbine Combustion Chamber: Measurements and CFD Simula-
tion,” ASME Paper No. GT2007-27148.
10 Sengissen, A., Giauque, A., Staffelbach, G., Porta, M., Krebs, W., Kaufmann,
P., and Poinsot, T. J., 2007, “Large Eddy Simulation of Piloting Effects on
Turbulent Swirling Flames,” Proc. Combust. Inst., 31, pp. 1729–1736.
11 Schildmacher, K.-U., Koch, R., Wittig, S., Krebs, W., and Hoffmann, S., 2000,
“Experimental Investigations of the Temporal Air-Fuel Mixing Fluctuations
and Cold Flow Instabilities of a Premixing Gas Turbine Burner,” ASME Paper
No. 2000-GT-84.
12 Schildmacher, K.-U., Koch, R., and Bauer, H.-J., 2006, “Experimental Char-
acterization of Premixed Flame Instabilities of a Model Gas Turbine Burner,”
Flow, Turbul. Combust., 76, pp. 177–197.
13 Schildmacher, K.-U., Hoffmann, A., Selle, L., Koch, R., Schulz, C., Bauer,
H.-J., Poinsot, T., Krebs, W., and Prade, B., 2007, “Unsteady Flame and Flow
Field Interaction of a Premixed Model Gas Turbine Burner,” Proc. Combust.
Inst., 31, pp. 3197–3205.
14 Färber, J., Koch, R., Bauer, H.-J., Krebs, W., and Hase, M., 2008, “The Effects
of Piloting and Liner Boundary Conditions on Flame Locations and Stability
Margins of an Industrial Size Premixed Flame,” Proceedings of the Eighth
European Conference on Industrial Furnaces and Boilers, Villamoura, Portu-
gal.
15 Schlüter, J., and Schönfeld, T., 2000, “LES of Jets in Cross Flow and Its
Application to Gas Turbine Burners,” Flow, Turbul. Combust., 652, pp. 177–
203.
16 Schildmacher, K.-U. and Koch, R., 2003, “Experimental Investigations of the
Interaction of Unsteady Flow With Combustion,” ASME Paper No. GT2003-
38644.
17 Schulz, A., Wittig, S., and Martiny, M., 2000, “Effusion Cooled Combustor
Liners of Gas Turbines—An Assessment of the Contributions of Convective,
Impingement, and Film Cooling,” Proceedings of the Symposium on Energy
Engineering in the 21st Century (SEE2000), Vol. 1.
18 Albrecht, H., Borys, M., Damaschke, N., and Tropea, C., 2003, Laser Doppler
and Phase Doppler Measurement Techniques, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
19 Melling, A., 1997, “Tracer Particles and Seeding for Particle Image Velocim-
etry,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 8, pp. 1406–1416.
Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power
SEPTEMBER 2010, Vol. 132 / 091501-7
Downloaded 15 Jan 2011 to 129.137.89.240. Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright; see http://www.asme.org/terms/Terms_Use.cfm
