389
4.4-1 Introduction
 
The thermal efﬁ ciency and speciﬁ c output of a gas turbine are primarily 
dependent on two major cycle parameters: the pressure ratio and the turbine 
inlet temperature1. In an ideal Brayton cycle, thermal efﬁ ciency increases up 
to stoichiometric temperatures and high-pressure ratios, without considering 
losses, particularly, those associated with turbine cooling. Since turbine airfoil 
materials melt at temperatures much lower than the stoichiometric temperatures, 
hot gas-path components, such as turbine airfoils, must be cooled and attention 
must be given to cycle parasitic losses. 
 
The recognition of material temperature limitations has led to the 
continuous turbine development programs for cooling technologies, material 
development, and related multi-disciplinary disciplines of ﬂ uid dynamics, heat 
transfer, aerodynamic performance, and structures, all aimed at the durability 
of turbine hot-gas-path components. The pursuit of improved turbine materials 
began long ago when the initial temperature limitations were found to be at 
about 1500°F (800°C)2. Following this initial period, an intensive development 
period took place when nickel-based alloys were developed and characterized 
as having high creep resistance characteristics. Material improvements relaxed 
temperature limitations by about 300°F (167°C)3. Further development of turbine 
airfoil manufacturing techniques, such directionally-solidiﬁ cation castings 
and single-crystal castings led to higher metal temperature capability. More 
recently, numerous testing evaluations have been conducted to characterize new 
hot-gas path material superalloys in terms of tensile, rupture, fatigue, creep, 
toughness, corrosion and oxidation resistances, producibility, processing, and 
other thermophysical properties4. Following extensive laboratory testing, actual 
operating experience is gained with engine testing subject to real operational 
environments culminating in mature levels of technology readiness levels for 
production. 
Today, many modern turbine airfoils use single crystal superalloys. 
These are two-phase alloys with a large volume fraction of       precipitates, 
based on the intermetallic compound, Ni3 Al, interspersed in a coherent face-
centered cubic    matrix comprised of nickel, Ni, with smaller weight percent 
of various other elements in solid solution5. These elements include: cobalt, 
Co, aluminum, Al, chromium, Cr, tungsten, W, molybdenum, Mo, tantalum, 
Ta, hafnium, Hf, rhenium, Re, and ruthenium, Ru. The elements Re and Ru are 
introduced in the latest generation of single crystal alloys. All these elements 
have different attributes which can be summarized as follows: Cr, Al, and 
Hf are used as surface protection elements, Mo, W, and Ta are used in solid 
solution strengthening, and Re and Ru are used for high creep strength6.
 
The strength of these single crystal alloys is mainly a function of the 
size and the percentage of      precipitates. Experimentally, it has been determined 
that the peak creep strength is achieved with a volume fraction of    of 60%-
65%7. Much of the behavior of these alloys can be explained on the basis 
that high volume fraction    alloys deformation occurring by shearing of the 
precipitates. The high volume fraction of precipitates precludes dislocation 
bypass at low and intermediate temperatures forcing precipitate shearing. 
However, the energies resisting dislocation shearing of the precipitates are 
those required to form a local reversal of Al-Ni order or antiphase boundary 
in stacking fault of the Ni3 Al superlattice. The energies associated with the 
anti-phase boundary in the superlattice stacking faults determine the strength, 
fatigue, and fracture characteristics of these alloys8. This is also evident by the 
increase in yield strength at moderate to high temperatures before a monotonic 
decrease in yield strength. As a result, the excellent high-temperature creep and 
fatigue resistance of the superalloys is a result of a combination of solid-solution 
strengthening, absence of deleterious grain boundaries, and high volume fraction 
of precipitates that act as barriers to dislocation motion. It should be pointed-
out, however, that fatigue crack initiation also depends on the microscopic 
389
4.4
Heat Transfer Analysis
Frank J. Cunha, Ph.D., P.E.
Pratt & Whitney
United Technologies Corporation
5 Bruce Lane
Avon, CT 06001
Phone: (860) 565-8909
Email: frank.cunha@pw.utc.com

390
defects, which can be categorized as intrinsic defects and deviant material defects. Intrinsic defects include carbides, undissolved 
eutectic pools, and associated micro-porosity, concentrated in interdendritic regions of the casting.  Even though the intrinsic defects 
are normal features of the alloy microstructure, deviant defects, such as crystallographic defects related to low and high angle grain 
boundaries, freckles and silver grains, and porosity, are considered rejectable defects in the material quality that exceeds speciﬁed 
limits. Modern single crystal superalloys are face-centered single crystal superalloys with cubic symmetry. As a result, there are 
three independent mechanical properties that characterize the material behavior: the modulus of elasticity, E, the shear modulus, G, 
and the Poisson ratio, v9. The mechanical and thermal-physical properties are also a function of temperature and change with crystal 
orientation leading to anisotropic behavior of the material. After the casting process, a series of standard heat treatments, such as, 
solution annealing, coating heat treatment, and precipitation heat treatment, are used to optimize microstructures of the material10. 
 
In parallel to base material development, coatings were also developed to protect the base material from corrosion and 
oxidation attack11. These coatings were designated as metallic bond coatings characterized as diffusion and overlay type coatings. 
The substantive difference between the overlay and diffusion type coatings relies on the how the coating constituents are supplied. 
For diffusion type coatings, the major constituents are supplied by the base metal; whereas, for overlay coatings, the constituents 
are supplied by external coating sources. The advantage of overlay coatings is that more varied corrosion and oxidation resistant 
compositions can be applied with increased bonding thickness. The surface roughness of bond coatings allow for the deposition 
of ceramic type thermal barrier coatings. The addition of these coating systems onto single crystal superalloy substrate has further 
relaxed the temperature limitations associated with the turbine inlet conditions. As the material development of coatings and base 
material reach a culminating point, further increases in turbine inlet temperatures can only come from advanced airfoil cooling. Thus, 
cooling and material technologies have permitted designs with turbine inlet conditions in excess of 3100°F (1700°C) with interface 
bond-to-metal temperatures topping at 2050°F (1121°C) for durability requirements of oxidation, creep life, and fatigue cycles12. 
 
Two of the most relevant parameters for measuring and assessing cooling performance of turbine airfoils are the cooling 
effectiveness parameter and heat load parameter. By deﬁnition, this parameter is a dimensionless temperature ratio of gas-to-metal 
temperature difference over the gas-to-coolant temperature difference13:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
 
 
         (1)
Clearly, if the cooling effectiveness is non-existent, or zero, there is no cooling effect; whereas, if the cooling effectiveness is equal to 
unity, the airfoil metal and coolant temperature are the same. These two extreme values of either zero or unity are considered as outer 
limits for cooling effectiveness parameter. In general, the cooling effectiveness lies in-between these two limits and characterizes the 
performance of the cooling circuit inside the turbine airfoil. 
 
The other parameter denoted as the heat load parameter is deﬁned as the ratio of internal heat to the external heat ﬂuxes as 
follows14:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
    
         (2)
 
Figure 1 illustrates cooling effectiveness for typical cooling conﬁgurations as a function of heat load parameter simpliﬁed here 
just by the variable in cooling ﬂow15. The cooling effectiveness is naturally a function of many design variables, that is, the cooling 
conﬁguration, and the coolant ejection requirements. It also a strong function of the amount of cooling medium used, usually measured 
as percentage of the mainstream gas. As illustrated in ﬁgure 1, the cooling effectiveness increases rapidly with small amounts of 
coolant. Then, the cooling effectiveness increases monotonically at a lower rate. This implies that for demanding thermal applications, 
where the thermal load parameter is high, large amounts of coolant may be required. For state-of-the-art engines, turbine cooling air 
and leakage may be as high as 25-30% of engine mainstream ﬂow. In terms of efﬁciency, and since the cooling air is drawn from the 
compressor, which is driven by the turbine, it represents a direct loss of efﬁciency. In general, a very approximate rule-of-thumb of 1% 
cooling air may represent a loss of a fraction of that percentage in speciﬁc fuel consumption. This leads to the obvious conclusion that 
turbine cooling needs to be minimized. Clearly, this is not the only loss mechanism in the engine. Other losses may include mixing and 
aerodynamic losses, such as proﬁle drag, skin-friction, gas diffusion, secondary ﬂows, tip clearance, boundary-layer separation, shocks, 
losses due to off-design airfoil incidence angles, trailing edge vortex shedding, and blockage losses16. All these losses of engine cycle and 
turbine efﬁciencies have to be set against the gains in running the engine at higher turbine inlet temperatures for maintaining required 
output. Therefore, it is always necessary to reduce and optimize the cooling air requirements for a gas turbine engine design.
 
In ﬁgure 1, the simplest cooling conﬁguration is characterized by the lowest cooling effectiveness. For instance, the radial 
cooling holes in the middle of the airfoil cross-section will not permit air to eject from the airfoil walls into the gas mainstream, avoiding 
ﬁlm cooling and corresponding ejection mixing losses. However, forced convection through the radial holes may not be sufﬁcient for high 

391
thermal load applications, and even at low thermal loads, 
this simple cooling arrangement is likely to induce high 
temperature gradients between the airfoil surface and the 
cooling hole locations. An improved cooling arrangement 
over the radial cooling hole arrangement is the multi-pass 
serpentine cooling conﬁguration. In serpentine cooling 
arrangements, coolant enters the airfoil through the blade 
root inlet; passes though multiple circuits, cooling the 
mid-body of the airfoil before ejecting out of the airfoil 
through main body ﬁlm holes or trailing edge slots. The 
leading edge, with high thermal loads, may be cooled with 
dedicated cooling circuits. If the leading edge and the 
mid-body circuits are combined and coupled together, one 
can refer to these arrangements as cold-bridge or warm-
bridge designs depending on the feed source. If the feed 
coolant comes from the mid-body with freshly supplied 
coolant, we have a cold-bridge cooling design; whereas, if 
the feed comes from the mid-body with warmed coolant, 
naturally after heat pick-up from the mid-body serpentine 
arrangement, we have a warm-bridge cooling design. Since 
the serpentine cooling circuits have large wet perimeters in 
the turbine airfoil cross-section, it is possible to introduce trips on the airfoil internal wall to promote turbulence and enhance internal 
coolant heat pick-up. Many trip conﬁgurations have been designed throughout the years of cooling technology development. These 
include normal trips, skewed trips, and angled “chevron” trips with different orientations relative to the ﬂow, different trip heights, 
different height-to-pitch ratios, different relative positioning with respect to each other, either in a staggered or in-line arrangements. 
These different arrangements lead to different heat transfer characteristics enhancing heat pick-up by the coolant ﬂowing in the serpentine 
passages tailored to minimize the effects of local external heat loads. 
 
Further cooling improvements are obtained by the introduction of peripherally cooled airfoil designs. This is done to maintain 
the greatest thermal gradient within a thin outer layer of the airfoil wall. In addition, the coolant can be ejected at many points around 
the surface of the airfoil. This concept leads to an increase of convective cooling efﬁciency by means of peripheral cooling circuits. 
This new parameter can also be regarded as a dimensionless temperature ratio of the difference between the exit coolant to inlet coolant 
temperatures relative to the difference of metal to coolant inlet temperatures17:
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                      (3)
If this ratio is non-existent, or zero, it is implied that exit coolant temperature and inlet temperature are the same, and thus, no heat 
pick-up in the circuit. If the ratio is unity, then the exit coolant temperature and the metal temperature are the same. In this case, it is 
said that the cooling circuit is 100% efﬁcient convectively. In general, serpentine cooling may be in the order of 15-30% efﬁcient. 
However, dedicated airfoil peripheral cooling may be 30-60% efﬁcient. This is about 2X the convective efﬁciency values of typical 
serpentine cooling. In addition to the improved convective characteristics, ﬁlm cooling can be used in many points of the airfoil. The 
ﬁlm effectiveness is also a dimensionless parameter deﬁned as 18:
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        (4)
The overall cooling effectiveness, being a function of both the convective and ﬁlm cooling effectiveness, can be optimized for 
any cooling arrangement. If the ﬁlm exit shape is optimized to cover the airfoil as much as practical, one can obtain overall cooling 
effectiveness in excess of 75% with ﬁlm coverage and convective efﬁciency in excess of 50%. Simply stated, the peripheral airfoil 
circuits will pick-up heat by convection in a very effective manner and then eject from ﬁlm openings with high coverage designs to 
further reduce the thermal load to the part. 
 
It should be noted that the thermal load can be reduced externally by the effect of thermal barrier coating. This is a ceramic 
coating that is applied on top of the metallic bond coating. The net result is the ability to increase the inlet turbine temperature to values 
in excess of 3100°F (1700°C) while maintaining interface bond-to-metal temperatures at 2050°F (1121°C) for desired life requirements 
of oxidation, creep life, and thermal-mechanical fatigue cycles19. In the limit, combination of peripheral convective cooling and ﬁlm 
may lead to airfoil transpiration cooling which would occur in micro-porous surface to form a continuous ﬁlm blanketing of the airfoil 
surface as illustrated in ﬁgure 1.
Fig. 1. Cooling effectiveness illustration for different modes of cooling 
Source:  See note 1.
Frank J. Cunha

392
 
Regarding the different cooling schemes, peripheral cooling and conventional serpentine cooling arrangements may include 
several internal design features for augmenting internal heat transfer. These internal features may be small posts connected to both sides of 
the coolant passage, as pedestals, or may project to only about half of the coolant passage, as pin-ﬁns20. Fundamentally, both features act 
in a similar manner, by turbulating coolant ﬂow ﬁeld and by exposing more surface area to the coolant. These synergistic cooling effects 
lead to higher internal heat transfer coefﬁcients, which can be regarded as a measure of heat pick-up by the coolant. It should also be noted 
that there are conduction paths integrated directly with the walls of the airfoil for further cooling. The disadvantage of such augmentation 
devices is that they increase the coolant ﬂow blockage, which in turn increases the coolant pressure drop. Since the coolant supply pressure 
may be limited, attention must be given to these blockage effects so as to assure sufﬁcient pressure at the ﬁlm openings and overcome 
external gas pressure. The internal-to-external pressure ratio is usually referred to as the back-ﬂow-margin with minimum values established 
for the leading edge and mid-body of the airfoil. On the other hand, if the internal coolant pressure is much higher than the external 
pressure at the ﬁlm exits, then the ﬁlm jets may actually penetrate through the external boundary layer setting out “blow-off” conditions. 
Blowing the coolant out nearly normal to the airfoil surface with high velocity is likely to lift the coolant right off the blade and allow the 
hot mainstream gas to move below the coolant jets making contact with the airfoil surface. This is an adverse ﬁlm effect that needs to be 
prevented. To prevent blow-off conditions, the geometrical attributes of ﬁlm openings need to reduce the ejection velocity by introducing 
cooling hole shapes, angles, tapering, or diffusion zones while maintaining a high degree of cooling hole ﬁlling21. Externally in the main 
ﬂow ﬁeld, a mismatch between the gas mainstream and the coolant jet velocities will give rise to mixing losses. In this way, ﬁlm ejection 
may trip or further energize the external boundary layer; thus, increasing the external heat transfer coefﬁcient or thermal load to the part. 
 
Figure 2 and 3 illustrates typical airfoil cooling schemes. Typically, for the ﬁrst vane, the coolant is fed into the casing plenum 
chamber, and from there into the leading edge impingement bafﬂe. From the leading edge bafﬂe, the coolant impinges on the leading edge 
target surface and is ejected into the external gas-path through 
several close-spaced rows of holes known generally as shower-
head holes. For this component, the highest temperature occurs 
at the leading edge where the stagnation point is located22. The 
balance of the coolant ﬂow in this vane will pass through a 
small gap between the bafﬂe and the internal wall of the airfoil 
leading to other ﬁlm holes or slots in the main body or trailing 
edge. Note that internal cooling is done by convective and 
impingement cooling. At the trailing edge pedestals may be 
placed to enhance internal cooling, heat pick-up, and decrease the 
metal temperature23.  The ﬁrst blade shown in ﬁgure 3 is only an 
example of a wide variety of serpentine cooling conﬁgurations. 
Stators and rotor blades of downstream stages will often have 
multi-pass cooling of the type shown in ﬁgure 2. The coolant ﬂow 
is led through a series of serpentine passages and makes several 
passes along the span before ﬁnally ejecting at the trailing edge. 
 
The purpose of turbine cooling is solely justiﬁed 
by the need to have turbine components withstand adverse 
environments while maintaining life targets. Liﬁng and 
durability of airfoils require a synthesis of mission cycle, range of 
operating conditions and time spent at each condition, including 
the number of transients between conditions.  Overall cooling 
effectiveness is a function of the design, which is reﬂected by 
two other relevant parameters: the convective efﬁciency and 
the ﬁlm effectiveness. The overall cooling effectiveness should 
balance the external heat load to the part. In turn, all cooling 
parameters need to be balanced with their effects of aerodynamic 
and cycle performance. For blades, the mechanical load, due 
to centrifugal effects, need to be determined in conjunction 
with the blade bulk metal temperature distributions to evaluate 
its creep capability.  The next sections will describe turbine 
airfoil requirements for the purposes of converting energy to 
produce shaft power output, or speciﬁc core power in a manner 
where the ﬁgure of merit associated with thrust speciﬁc fuel 
consumption is optimized with the thrust-to-weight ratio in the 
case of aircraft engine applications.  In this context, external 
and internal heat transfer details are explicitly listed and 
discussed. A section on durability is presented to describe most 
of the design problems and possible solutions. Conclusions are 
then derived based on current assessment methods for airfoil 
cooling technology advancements.
 
Fig. 2. Typical airfoil cooling schemes for a two-stage high 
pressure turbine  illustrating different modes of cooling.
Source: See Note 1.
Fig. 3. Typical airfoil cooling schemes for high-pressure 
turbine  blade.
Source: See Note 30.
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis

393
4.4-2 Heat Transfer Requirements
 
The primary components of gas turbine engines used in aircraft operations comprise the inlet duct, fan, compressor(s), 
combustors, turbine(s), and nozzle24. Many engines have two turbines: the high and the low-pressure turbine. The high-pressure turbine 
is required to drive the high-pressure compressor. Together with the combustor, these high-pressure, high-temperature, and high rotating-
speed components make up the gas generator portion of the engine. The high-pressure turbine is the most challenging component of 
the engine design. Most of the attention given in this section covers the turbine limits, and the cooling required to withstand extremely 
hot, corrosive, and unsteady environments. The low-pressure turbine drives the fan and the low-pressure compressor. The low-pressure 
turbine is subjected to much cooler gas temperatures. In power applications, another turbine may be added to drive a rotor, a generator, 
a pump, or a gas compressor. In land-based gas turbine applications, the compressor work is extracted from the ﬁrst rotor stages, while 
the other stages produce useful shaft work transformed into electrical power by the electrical generator connected in tandem.
In traditional power generating plants, there are three fundamental  elements: (1) the heat source, (2) the heat utilizer, 
and (3) the waste heat reservoir25. To produce useful work heat is supplied by a working ﬂuid from the heat source. The utilizer 
is required to convert portion of the heat supplied by the working ﬂuid into useful power. Since not all heat can be converted to 
useful power, a waste reservoir is required to dispose of the remainder of heat. These are the elements of a modern steam plant which 
can be divided into two major sub-parts: One half consists of the boiler or nuclear reactor as the heat source with its auxiliaries; 
and the other, the turbine cycle, consisting of turbine generator, condenser, pumps and feed-water heaters. The major components 
in the turbine cycle are the heat utilizer and the refrigerator or water heat reservoir. In general steam comes from the boiler drum 
or nuclear reactor, passes through the turbine, which produces mechanical power on the turbine shaft to drive a generator of 
electrical energy for distribution.  Thermodynamic performance is reﬂected in the overall cycle efﬁciency, often times designated 
as the plant heat balance, which is a measure of thermal energy conversion to electrical generation output in BTU per KW-hr. 
 
In land-based power-producing applications, recent improvements in cycle heat balance have being achieved by combining the 
operations of steam and gas turbines together in the same plant26. In these combined cycle plants, the elevated exhaust gas temperature 
is used in heat recovery steam-generator to create steam before expanding through a train of steam turbines. Intermediate pressure steam 
is then used as cooling medium in the gas turbine topping cycle. This is done in a closed loop circuit with reheated steam from the gas 
turbine being returned to the steam turbine cycle for further expansion. In this layout, all gas turbine stationary and rotating airfoils were 
designed with steam cooling in a closed-loop system. The main reason for this closed cooling system is to avoid losses associated with 
coolant ejection onto the main gas stream from airfoil locations. Combined power plants operate at thermodynamic cycle efﬁciencies 
as high as 60 percent or a heat balance as low as 5700 BTU/KW-hr. One such unit is the GE H-class machine operating at just under 60 
percent at Baglan Bay power plant in Wales, UK27. This is remarkable, since current advanced nuclear generating plants operate at an 
overall cycle efﬁciency of 32.5 percent or at a heat balance of about 10,500 BTU/KW-hr. 
4.4-3 Gas Heat Transfer
 
Regardless of the type of power plant cycle, it is common knowledge that a design of the turbine engine is very challenging, and 
it requires a mix of technical disciplines: cycle analysis, aerodynamic, heat transfer, combustion, ﬂuid dynamics, and turbine mechanical 
design and manufacturing. The basic cycle parameters deﬁne the engine capability for all operating modes. The overall design is selected 
in concert with performance and mechanical design constraints. For instance, in gas turbine design, the average heat transfer design 
point parameters are dependent upon a set of performance parameters deﬁned at different points in the gas turbine thermodynamic cycle, 
such as inlet conditions, at cycle point no 2, engine core ﬂow, at cycle point no. 2.5, compressor discharge conditions of temperature 
and pressure, at cycle point no. 3; turbine inlet conditions of temperature and pressure, at cycle point no. 4; high pressure rotor inlet 
conditions of temperature and pressure, at cycle point no. 4.1; low pressure inlet conditions of temperature and pressure,  at cycle point 
no. 4.5; and high and low rotor speeds for different ambient conditions.  
4.4-4  Gas Temperature Transverse Quality
 
The gas turbine combustor exit gas temperatures are further reﬁned with pattern and proﬁle factors consistent with the burner 
characteristics28. The combustion process that takes place in the burner requires that incoming air be separated into primary and secondary 
streams for adequate combustion. The primary air is mixed with the fuel at nearly stoichiometric proportions at the center of the burner, 
and the combustion produces extremely hot core gaseous products. Secondary air is injected from the sides of the combustion chamber 
and separates the very hot gases from the structure. The secondary air dilutes and cools the products of combustion to acceptable 
levels before leaving the burner. Because of the size limitations, the burner may not be sufﬁciently large to give gases time to mix 
homogeneously, and as a result, the turbine may experience gas temperature variations which give rise to pattern and proﬁle factors29:
Frank J. Cunha

394
         
         Fig. 4. Illustration of thermal load distribution for the high-pressure turbine components.
         Source: See Note 30.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
         (5)
 
 
       
                
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (6)
 
 
 
For the ﬁrst vane, the peak temperature is obtained from pattern factor and this information is used for thermal-mechanical 
design. It should be noted current combustor exit temperatures are in excess of 3000°F (1650°C) with expected growth towards 3800°F 
(2100°C). As the ﬂow passes through the turbine components, the temperature proﬁle retains the same basic form of the high temperature 
in the center region and lower temperature at the outside region, but it is also affected by the processes that take place during turbine 
expansion, such as mixing, tip leakage, and development of secondary ﬂows. Figure 4 illustrates the thermal load distribution for the 
high-pressure turbine components30. The primary gas temperature of interest in blade design is the total temperature relative to the 
blade31:
 
 
     
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.
c
2Jg
W
r
c
2Jg
V
T
T
p
c
2
p
c
2
gas
relative
gas,
+
−
=
                   
 
 
         (7)
At the inlet to the rotor, the relative velocity W is smaller than the absolute velocity V, and the relative gas temperature should reﬂect the 
effect of Mach number through the recovery factor,              32.
 
 
The effect of secondary ﬂows on streamline migration and the effect of ﬁlm ﬂow should be reﬂected in the stage Mach number 
distributions. In addition to these considerations, there are margins or adders that lead to increments imposed on the gas temperature 
values. These are used to account for the following design tolerances: engine-to-engine variation, deterioration, overshoot, and production 
scattered tolerance to sustain thrust guarantee33. It should be noted that ﬁlm, or external surface to gas, thermophysical properties required 
to determine heat transfer coefﬁcients, for instance, should be calculated using Eckert’s reference temperature34. Other dimensionless 
ratios used to characterize stage local conditions, such as relative-to-total temperatures and pressures can be assumed nearly constant for 
operating conditions at idle and above in high-pressure turbine design35. 
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis
Pattern Factor = 
Proﬁle Factor =
.

395
4.4-5  Airfoil Thermal Load
 
Externally to the turbine airfoil, gas static pressure and gas stream velocity distributions are used for determining the external 
heat transfer coefﬁcients. The external heat transfer depends on the development of the boundary layers on the airfoil. The external 
boundary layer is subject to several factors, which make this calculation difﬁcult. These factors include, pressure and temperature 
gradients, turbulence level, surface curvature, surface roughness, laminar-to-turbulent transition, and ﬂow unsteadiness. Separation 
bubbles near the airfoil leading edge could also have a major inﬂuence on the development of the boundary layer. These could be caused 
by rapidly changing the curvature or during off-design conditions when incidence angles may be high. If, however, pressure gradient is 
favorable and strong enough, a turbulent boundary may re-laminarize with subsequent reduction in the heat load. It should be noted that 
the presence of ﬁlm cooling will invariably trip or energize the boundary layer. Standard relations for ﬂow over ﬂat plate with suitable 
modifying factors to account for these effects, can be used to calculate external heat transfer rate to the airfoil as follows36:
 
 
 
                 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (8)  
The empirical correlation factor is obtained by matching test data. 
 
Despite their simplicity, the ﬂat plate correlations provide a good estimate of heat transfer. Figure 5(a) and 5(b) are examples 
for the pressure and suction sides37. The Nusselt number calculated are based on measurements of static pressure, from which the 
distribution of the Reynolds number is obtained. On the downstream region of the suction side, with fully turbulent ﬂow, the heat transfer 
coefﬁcient is predicted well. On the pressure side, the turbulent ﬂat plate correlation predicts heat transfer well on downstream region 
towards the trailing edge; but on the upstream region, the heat transfer prediction is low. In this upstream region the ﬂow is very unsteady 
causing very large heat transfer coefﬁcients.  Fortunately, heat transfer coefﬁcients are predicted using boundary layer codes, such as 
those of reference38, which account for curvature effects, transition and surface roughness on the airfoil external wall. 
 
                  
      
 
        (a)                                                    (b)
 
Fig. 5. Flat plate correlations estimate of heat transfer on the pressure (a) and suction (b) sides of the high-pressure turbine airfoil in terms 
of Nusselt numbers versus Reynolds numbers.
Source: See Note 37.
 
Besides, main-body airfoil thermal load calculations, airfoil tip and blade platform thermal loads need to be determined as 
well. Tip heat transfer is difﬁcult to determine due to the complexities associated with leakage ﬂows over a relatively small gap between 
rotating blades and stationary shrouds. However, references listed in note 39 can be consulted for determining the external heat transfer 
coefﬁcients of different tip conﬁgurations39. Similarly, platform heat transfer is also complex due to the secondary ﬂow and leakage 
effects associated with inter-segment gaps. In this regard, note 40 can be consulted for determining the external heat transfer coefﬁcients 
associated with these difﬁcult situations40.
Frank J. Cunha
.

396
4.4-6  Leading Edge Thermal Load
 
At the leading edge, effects related to unsteadiness due to the row of upstream airfoils lead to high heat transfer coefﬁcients and 
empirical correction factors are usually applied as follows41:
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (9)
where all variables are deﬁned in the nomenclature with 
80.
 
 
 
 0
<
<θ
 
Turbine airfoils are optimized for aerodynamic performance and heat load to improve airfoil life. The ideal heat transfer 
objectives, during the conceptual airfoil design, include the following considerations: (1) blunt leading edges to minimize heat transfer 
coefﬁcients at the airfoil stagnation points, (2) minimize blade count to minimize cooling surface. (3) minimal pressure diffusion to 
minimize separation and high external heat transfer coefﬁcients, (4) increase mid-body airfoil thickness to reduce losses in internal 
cooling serpentine cooling arrangements, (5) avoid low trailing edge wedge angles that lead to large distances from the trailing edge and 
the pressure side coolant ejection (ﬁlm) bleeds. Some of these considerations may be in conﬂict with aerodynamic objectives, and, in 
general, a compromise is reached between cooling and aerodynamic design groups.
4.4-7 Coolant Heat Transfer
The overall cooling effectiveness,      , as a dimensionless metal temperature is a function of the other cooling parameters, such 
as the convective efﬁciency,     , and the ﬁlm effectiveness,      , for a given heat load,     , to the part . The relationship between these 
cooling parameters can be expressed in a simple relationship, derived from one-dimensional heat transfer analysis as follows42:
 
 
                                               
 
 
 
   
 
 
       (10)
If a metal temperature at a point in the airfoils is limited to a required value for a speciﬁed thermal load,      ; then, the overall cooling 
effectiveness,       , as a measure of metal temperature, is set for the design, and the design process begins with a search of the required 
internal convective efﬁciency and ﬁlm effectiveness. 
4.4-8  Film Cooling
Film cooling takes the cooling medium and discharges it in a carefully designed pattern of openings in the blade surface to 
form a protective ﬁlm over the airfoil surface. This ﬁlm blanket reduces the external heat load to the airfoil by reducing the driving 
temperature from the local gas temperature to the ﬁlm temperature, as shown in Figure 6. The ﬁlm cooling effectiveness is a function 
of injection geometry on the airfoil including the hole diameter, 
h
d
, hole spacing, 
n
x
 , effective slot height,                               , 
surface distance from the ﬁlm row, x, inclination of the ﬁlm hole axis to the surface in terms of in-plane and out-of-plane angles, blowing 
parameter,                                 , density ratio,  the ratio of x/(Ms), and ﬁlm coverage, Cov43. Film coverage is a fraction of the length 
along the row of ﬁlm holes which is covered by the footprint of the breakout of the holes and is usually given by the ratio of ﬁlm hole 
breakout, b, to the ﬁlm hole pitch, p, or Cov=b/p. Film effectiveness can then be expressed analytically as:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (11)
    
where, the empirical constants, 
1
C
and 
2
C
, are determined by ﬁtting the test data for different ﬁlm cooling conﬁgurations. In general, 
the exponent 
2
C
is about the same order of magnitude for the pressure and suction sides of the airfoil. However, coefﬁcient 
1
C
is about 
an order of magnitude different between the pressure and suction side of the airfoil with the pressure side ﬁlm decaying  much faster on 
the pressure side of the airfoil. It should be noted that when the empirical constants of equation (11) are matched with test data, most of 
the density ratio for the data reported in the literature is about unity, and this data needs adjustment for typical engine environments. 
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis

397
         
The use of diffuser shaped holes for ﬁlm cooling 
reduce the penalties associated with ﬁlm of blowing ratios, 
M.  Shaped holes also provide increased coverage, as 
shown in ﬁgure 744. In the past, shaped holes were almost 
eliminated in favor laser drilled round holes, but it is now 
apparent that they should be used due to superior cooling 
advantage over laser drilled holes.   For a given coolant 
ﬂow, laterally averaged ﬁlm cooling effectiveness from 
staggered double row of holes is usually higher than from 
a single row of holes. However, for the same coolant ﬂow, 
the double row hole diameters may be expensive to make. 
The injection of coolant from succeeding rows of ﬁlm holes 
results in a cooler ﬁlm temperature than if only one row 
of holes were blowing. Film temperatures superposition 
produced by coolant injection from multiple rows of 
ﬁlm holes can be evaluated by successive heat balance 
stations. This procedure is repeated for blowing from all 
N successive rows of holes upstream of the heat balance 
station as follows45:
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
     
    
 
 
 
       (12)
Computer programs are developed to superimpose the ﬁlm cooling effectiveness distribution downstream from several rows 
of ﬁlm holes having individual levels of coolant injection, temperature, and ﬂow rate to provide the effective distribution of cumulative 
ﬁlm cooling effectiveness; and, hence, ﬁlm temperature along the airfoil surfaces. 
           
4.4-9  Trip Strips or Turbulence Promoters for Cooling Passages
If the ﬁlm effectiveness,          , is known for a particular design, due to the number and arrangement of ﬁlm cooling holes; then 
the only unknown in equation (10) is the convective efﬁciency,        . This convective efﬁciency has a fundamental solution, which can 
be given, in simple terms, by the relation:
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
        
 
       (13)
In this expression, the convective efﬁciency,        , is related to the internal heat transfer coefﬁcient, wetted surface area, and coolant ﬂow 
rate. Expression (13) allows for design features to be evaluated in terms of this performance parameter. That is, for a required convective 
efﬁciency,        , limited by the required cooling effectiveness,        ; then a required product of internal heat transfer coefﬁcient with the 
wetted surface area, 
c
cA
h
 can be evaluated as a fundamental requirement for the cooling design. 
 
In a general, it is the goal of the design to obtain the largest 
c
cA
h
 product, for the least amount for coolant ﬂow rate, m , 
possible. Insofar as the airfoil internal cooling features are concerned, there may be a large number of conﬁgurations that can be explored 
in the design space as noted in the reference provided by Han, et al.46. These would include conﬁgurations with internal cooling features, 
such as pedestals or turbulating trip strips just to mention just a few.  
Fig. 6. Film blanket reduces the external heat load to the airfoil by reducing the 
driving temperature from the local gas temperature to the ﬁlm temperature.
Frank J. Cunha
Fig. 7. The use of diffuser shaped holes for ﬁlm cooling provide 
increased ﬁlm coverage in terms of ﬁlm effectiveness versus hole 
locations.

398
 
Patankar and Spalding observed that in the near the internal wall of the airfoil, the convection associated with the primary ﬂow 
direction can be neglected, the so-called Couette ﬂow assumption47. However, for the speciﬁc case of predicting the boundary layer 
behavior under the inﬂuence of rotation, this assumption may not be applicable. The boundary layer equations for momentum and energy 
can be written as:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (14)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
       (15)
 
The ﬁrst term of the right-hand-side of equation (14) represents the shear stress at the wall. The second term represents the crosswise 
convective mass ﬂux, where the velocity is taken as the mean velocity component normal to the wall, in the near wall region. This cross-
wise component exists due to rotational Coriolis inﬂuences on the boundary layer. The third term represents the axial pressure gradient 
on the boundary layer. The variable, y, is taken as the cross-stream coordinate away from the wall. All other symbols are provided in the 
nomenclature.
 
The relations given by equations (14) and (15) are written in dimensionless form by using the traditional groups of 
+
+
+
p
and
,
y
,
v
deﬁned in the nomenclature. When these groups are substituted into (14) and (15), the following new relationships are 
obtained;
 
 
 
 
                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (16)
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
       (17)
 
 
Using the diffusion laws, the effective (laminar and turbulent) shear stress and heat ﬂux are written in dimensionless form as 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
      
 
       (18)
and  
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (19)
where      is the dynamic viscosity,       is the effective viscosity, and         is the effective Prandtl number.
 
Two ordinary differential equations describing momentum and energy transport in the boundary layer can be obtaining by 
equations (16) and (17) with equation (18) and (19), respectively. If the mixing-length hypothesis is used for the viscosity ratio as , as   
 
 
 
 
          
 
            described by Crawford and Kays48, the resulting set of equations become
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (20)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
       (21)
where the effective sub-layer 
+
A =26 was used proposed by White49. The boundary conditions are:             
Equations (20) and (21) can be solved numerically for given Prandtl numbers to yield the desired proﬁles for the velocity and temperature 
near the wall.  Typical results are succinctly summarized as the law of the wall correlations:
 
                                     
 
 
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (22)
and 
 
 
 
                                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (23)
where, E and P can be regarded as constant factors for a smooth wall condition and given Prandtl numbers. These are used to calculate 
the Stanton number at the wall, which is given by the relation:
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis

399
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (24)
Note that the Nusselt number is related to the Stanton number by the relation; Nu =(Re) (Pr) (St). Solutions (22) through (24) are 
applied for smooth channels; however, these correlations have been modiﬁed to account for non-smooth roughened walls. Typical 
representations of dimensionless velocity and temperatures have catalogued by Han for a series of conﬁgurations50. These relationships 
can assume the form
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (25)
and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (26)
 
 
 
 
The functions R and G are the momentum and thermal roughness functions determined experimentally. All other variables are described 
in the nomenclature. 
 
In blade cooling passages, repeated roughness elements in the form of regularly spaced ribs are used to increase heat transfer 
rates. As a by-product of the desired increases in heat transfer rates, the pressure losses through the channel also increase. It is usually 
necessary to determine the best combination of heat transfer rate increases with the lowest possible pressure losses. As an example, 
several trip strips conﬁgurations in a cooling channel are shown in ﬁgure 8. These are described as follows:
(a) Parallel 90 degree  ribs
(b) Parallel inclined ribs
(c) Parallel v-shaped (Chevron) ribs
(d) Criss-crossed inclined ribs
 
 
 
 
 
     
The pertinent parameters to consider include the dimensionless heat transfer coefﬁcient, the Stanton Number, the friction factor, and 
the thermal performance index. Figure 9 illustrates the geometrical parameters for the trip-strip conﬁgurations.
 
The ribbed channel pressure losses were originally modeled using the “law of the wall” similarity  by Nikuradse for sand grain 
roughness51. The correlating parameter  became known as the roughness function, R, which, for rectangular channels,  is deﬁned as: 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (27)
Frank J. Cunha
Fig. 8. Several trip strips conﬁgurations in cooling channels. 
 Fig. 9. Illustrates the geometrical parameters for the trip-strip 
conﬁgurations.

400
where: e is the rib height, f is friction factor, and 
h
d
is the channel hydraulic diameter. The friction factors and the roughness function 
for the rib conﬁgurations (a)-(d) of ﬁgure 8 are given in Table I.
 
    Table I. Friction factor and momentum roughness function for the conﬁgurations of Figure 8.
 
 
                  Friction factor  
 
                    Roughness function        
 Sources:  
 
  (a) See Note 52. 
 
  (b) Han, J.C., J.S. Park, and C.K. Lei, “Heat transfer enhancements in channels with turbulance promoters”, Trans. ASME J.  
 
        Eng. Gas Turbine and Power, Vol. 107, 628-635,1985.
 
  (c) Han, J.C., Y.M. Zhang and V.P. Lee, “The inﬂuence of surface heat ﬂux ratio on heat transfer augmentation in square  
 
 
        channels with parallel, crossed and V-shaped angled ribs”, ASME Paper 91-GT-3, 1991.
 
 (d) Lau, S.C., R.T. Kukreja and R.D. McMillin, “Effects of V-shaped rib arrays on turbulent heat transfer and friction of 
 
        fully developed ﬂow in square channel”, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 34, 7, 1605-1616, 1991.
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis

401
 
Using the Reynolds analogy between momentum and heat transfer, Dipprey and Sabersky developed a thermal analog to the 
roughness function to correlate heat transfer data in sand roughened channels52.  Webb et al., extended the analysis to rib roughened 
channels53. The thermal roughness function was given by:
 
 
 
 
2
f
1
2St
f
R
G
−
+
=
                                                       
 
 
 
       (28)
The corresponding heat transfer correlations for geometries (a) – (d) of ﬁgure 8 are given in Table II.
Table II. Stanton Number and thermal roughness function for the conﬁgurations of Figure 8
 Sources:  
 
  (a) See Note 52. 
 
  (b) Han, J.C., J.S. Park, and C.K. Lei, “Heat transfer enhancements in channels with turbulance promoters”, Trans. ASME J.  
 
        Eng. Gas Turbine and Power, Vol. 107, 628-635,1985.
 
  (c) Han, J.C., Y.M. Zhang and V.P. Lee, “The inﬂuence of surface heat ﬂux ratio on heat transfer augmentation in square  
 
 
        channels with parallel, crossed and V-shaped angled ribs”, ASME Paper 91-GT-3, 1991.
 
 (d) Lau, S.C., R.T. Kukreja and R.D. McMillin, “Effects of V-shaped rib arrays on turbulent heat transfer and friction of 
 
        fully developed ﬂow in square channel”, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 34, 7, 1605-1616, 1991.
 
The motivation for placing the ribs in a channel is to increase the rate of heat transfer from the channel walls to the bulk ﬂuid. 
This is accomplished by two distinct mechanisms. First, the placement of ribs act as turbulators to break-up the near wall ﬂow increasing 
the turbulence level and enhancing the exchange of ﬂuid in the near wall region with the core ﬂow by action turbulent diffusion. While 
this increases the heat transfer, it also increases the wall friction resulting in higher pressure losses. A second heat transfer mechanism 
is active if the ribs are inclined to the core ﬂow direction. In this case, the ribs induce secondary ﬂows in the core ﬂow, which can 
circulate ﬂuid from the middle of the channel towards the walls thus increasing the heat transfer along these walls. The secondary ﬂows 
have a smaller effect on the pressure losses, thus they are more beneﬁcial of increasing the thermal performance of the cooling channel. 
 
The ﬂow in a ribbed channel can be divided conceptually in a main core ﬂow and near wall ﬂow. The ﬂow structures that 
have been observed in the vicinity of the ribbed wall are shown in Figure 1054. This structure varies primarily upon the geometrical 
ratio of p/e.  As an example, when p/e>7, three different separated ﬂows regions are observed: (1) In front of the rib, a separated 
Frank J. Cunha

402
recirculation zone exists; (2) on top of each rib a separation bubble 
forms due to upstream facing step; (3) following the back side of 
the rib, a separated recirculation region exists which can extend up 
to 7 rib heights downstream before the ﬂow reattaches. From this 
point the boundary layer re-develops until the next separated region 
is encountered upstream of the rib. When p/e<7, the two separated 
regions which lie between the pair of ribs combine. On top of each 
rib a separation bubble exists. When p/e=7, the boundary layer 
between the separation zones and preceding the up and downstream 
ribs does not have a chance to develop. Separation occurs on the top 
of each rib. When p/e=10, the separation bubble at the top of the 
rib may not re-attach on the top surface of the rib but it may extend 
past the back of the rib and combine with the separation region 
following the rib.  The re-attachment occurs between ribs. This is 
believed to be the optimum conﬁguration. However, the effects of 
the Reynolds number may determine the validity of these results. 
 
The core ﬂows develops rapidly in a ribbed channel 
compared to a smooth one. Friction factors become constant after 
the 3rd rib or 4 diameters downstream. The Nusselt number shows 
similar behavior.  The presence of the ribs increase turbulence and 
induce secondary ﬂows that tend to move ﬂuid from the main core 
towards certain walls and away from the others. Similar core ﬂuid 
ﬂow and heat transfer enhancements are found in rotating channels 
caused by Coriolis as illustrated in ﬁgure 11. This is particularly true 
for channels with aspect ratio of unity. Sources listed in note 55 can 
be consulted for determining the effects of rotation on internal heat 
transfer coefﬁcients where rotational and buoyancy numbers are the 
fundamental dimensionless parameters55. The thermal performance 
can be deﬁned by the parameter of 
1/3
St/f
 as given by Webb and 
Eckert56. It relates the heat transfer to friction factors or pressure loss 
in the channel. 
4.4-10 Impingement Cooling for Cross-
Over Holes and Inserts
 
The impingement conﬁgurations have been used extensively 
in the gas turbine industry. In general, there are two locations in airfoil 
design where impingement cooled has been used. The ﬁrst location 
is used for leading edge cooling. Dedicated cooling air is allowed 
to pass through rib cross-over openings leading to jet impingement 
on the inner wall of the airfoil leading edge57. After impingement 
cooling the air ﬂow passes through a series of ﬁlm holes forming 
a shower-head arrangement through the airfoil the leading edge. 
Internal jet impingement, convective cooling through the ﬁlm holes, 
and ﬁlm cooling become very effective means to cool this section of 
the airfoil with very high heat loads. The other location is for trailing 
edge cooling. In this case, the cooling air is allowed to pass through 
a series of rib cross-over openings58. Jet impingement occurs after 
each cross-over hole. The air impinges on each subsequent ribs and 
surrounding walls before discharging at the trailing edge exit slots. 
Many references can be consulted for obtaining impingement heat 
transfer coefﬁcients for these two conﬁgurations59.  
 
For high-pressure vanes, inserts or bafﬂes can be used 
to cool the airfoil with impingement cooling. There are several 
references that can be consulted in this regard60. Each impingement 
correlation for this type cooling will be dependent on the cross ﬂow 
degradation from upstream impingement jets. A useful correlation 
has been provided by Floerschuetz et al as follows61:
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis
    
      Fig. 10. Observed ﬂow structures in the vicinity of the ribbed wall.
      Source: See Note 53. 
Fig. 11. Core ﬂuid ﬂow and heat transfer enhancements are 
found in rotating channels caused by the rotating vortices inside 
the cooling passages.
Source: See Note 30.
 
 

403
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (29)
where 
 
 
 
C
x
n
y
n
z
n
A
1.180
-0.944
-0.642
0.169
M
0.612
0.059
0.032
-0.022
B
0.437
-0.095
-0.219
0.275
N
0.092
-0.005
0.599
1.040
The different variables are described in the nomenclature. The validity of correlation is the deﬁned by the following parameter range: 
 
 
 
 
It should be noted that for the calculation of the Reynolds number in correlation (29) needs to be determined for the ﬂow passing 
through the insert impingement holes. Flow through these openings is a result of pressure differences which can be obtained from an 
overall ﬂow network analysis.
4.4-11  Pin-Fin or Pedestals for Trailing Edge Cooling
In trailing edge designs, typically two rows of cross-over holes 
are used for cooling. The ﬂow acceleration is high through these cross-over 
impingement openings. The coolant ﬂow Mach number proﬁles follows 
that of the coolant static pressure proﬁle in that it assumes almost step-
wise proﬁles as the cooling ﬂow crosses through  these openings. The 
step-wise proﬁles are undesirable as they lead to relative high peaks in 
internal heat transfer coefﬁcients at the walls of the blade as illustrated 
in ﬁgure 12. In other words, there are regions in the airfoil trailing edge 
walls, which attain relative lower metal temperatures due to high internal 
heat transfer coefﬁcients. Meanwhile, other areas attain relatively higher 
metal temperatures due to lower internal heat transfer coefﬁcients. These 
metal temperature differences can lead to high thermal strains, which in 
conjunction with transient thermal response during take-off or power 
loading can, in turn, lead to undesirable thermal-mechanical fatigue damage. 
 
It is, therefore, desirable to use a trailing edge cooling design, 
which improves the internal proﬁles for Mach number, static pressure drop, 
and internal heat transfer coefﬁcient distributions along the airfoil trailing 
edge. In that regard, internal features, such as pedestals provide design 
advantages. Optimum designs may include internal pedestals with many 
different cross-sectional areas, such as: circular, oval, racetrack, square, 
rectangular, diamond cross-sections, just to mention only a few. In the 
illustrative example that follows, attention is given to the most simplest 
form of an internal cooling feature: such as round pedestals. 
Frank J. Cunha
Fig. 12. Localized heat transfer enhancement on 
different segments in trailing edge cavities.
Source: See Note 58.
m

404
The relevant cooling characteristics of round pedestals could easily be extended to other cross-sectional area pedestals for 
speciﬁc applications.  In this context, for a staggered array of round pedestals the internal unobstructed trailing edge channel area will 
have a cross-sectional area, A=WH, where W  is the width and H  is the channel height. The corresponding perimeter becomes Per = 
2 (W+H) , and the hydraulic diameter is given by 
4A/Per
d H =
. The surface area becomes
2WL
A duct =
, where L  is the length of 
the channel. The surface of the plate not being covered by the pedestals becomes                                                                        , where 
T
L
N
 
and
 
N
are the number of pedestals in the longitudinal and transverse directions of the trailing edge channel. It should be noted that 
the number of pedestals can be given by
p
L
n
T
L/S
N
 
and
 
W/S
N
=
=
, where 
p
n
S 
and
 
S
 are the transverse and longitudinal pitches, 
respectively. With these geometrical parameters, the Reynolds number, associated with the pin diameter, is calculated as follows:  
 
 
      , where 
)
V(A/A
V
min 
max =
with         
   
      . In this case, the coolant velocity, V , is the free 
stream inlet velocity. With the knowledge of the pin Reynolds number, the following relationships for the Nusselt number from table III 
can be obtained, following Zukauskas62.
Table III. Pedestal Nusselt numbers [17].
For the area not affected by the pedestals, the plate Nusselt number is given by                                          
63.The pin ﬁn efﬁciency is 
obtained from the relationship Ishida et al  [65]:
                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (30)
where all variables are described in the nomenclature.
The overall internal heat transfer with pedestals is then based on the following two contributions: (1) the plate contribution, and (2) the 
pin contribution as follows:
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
       (31)
The corresponding heat transfer multiplier, HM, normalized by the Dittus-Boelter correlation64,  
        
                , is then given 
by 
                                                   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (32)
The  pressure drop calculations through a bank of pedestals is given by Ishida et al. and are presented here for completeness as follows
65.                   
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (33)
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis

405
The corresponding friction multiplier, FM , normalized with Blasius resistance formula,      
 
  , becomes
                               
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     (34)
Relationships provided by equations (32) and (34) can be used to design a trailing edge cooling channel with round pin-ﬁns. These were 
provided here to represent a design procedure; however, many other empirical correlations can be obtained for other type of internal 
features as described by Han et al.66. The overall procedure for obtaining heat transfer and friction multipliers would follow the steps 
outlined here. In many instances, plots of FM/HM  versus ReH are used to compare the performance of different conﬁgurations. One 
such plot is shown in ﬁgure 13, based on mass-transfer augmentation, from Chyu67. By mass-transfer to heat transfer analogy, the results 
of this plot are directly related to heat transfer assessment. Figure 13 allows for comparison and determination of which conﬁguration 
would provide the best heat transfer for the least pressure drop.  Plots similar to that of ﬁgure 13 are usually called performance index 
plots and become useful early in the design process. 
 
 
   
                                (a)                                       
(b)
 
Fig. 13. Pedestal trailing edge conﬁguration and test results; (a) transparent view of blade showing pedestal bank  
 
at trailing edge (b) effect of Reynolds number on performance index (HM/FM) in straight pins with ﬁllets.
 
Source: See Note 20.
4.4-12  Bulk Temperatures for Cooling Passages 
To estimate airfoil cavity cooling ﬂow, one needs to consider the inlet coolant ﬂow rate, at the root of the blade passage, denoted 
here as mRoot, as well as the cooling ﬂow rate at the several ﬁlm holes, denoted as mﬁlm, and ﬂow variation through the cavity. The linear 
function of cooling ﬂow rate distribution from the root as ﬂow exits the airfoil cavity leads to the following ﬂow relationship68:
(35)
with LH as the blade span radial height to the ﬁlm hole location.  The temperature of the coolant inside the cavity is obtained by 
considering an inﬁnitesimal small control volume, dr, in the supply cavity. This consideration leads to the following energy balance69:
Frank J. Cunha

406
(36)
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (37)
where Q denotes the total heat transfer onto the corresponding section of radial span, LH. The coolant ﬂow rate is then introduced in 
equation (36). The resulting expression is integrated from root to a radial section of the airfoil. This yields an expression for the coolant 
temperature increase in terms of heat transfer, and rotational pumping, as a function coolant ﬂow rate. The result is:
4.4-13 Thermal-Mechanical Aspects of Durability
 
Once the internal and external heat transfer 
loads have been assessed, the gas and coolant 
temperatures, together with the internal and external 
heat transfer coefﬁcients, will form a set of boundary 
conditions for a heat conduction analysis to predict 
the metal temperatures and stresses in the airfoil. 
Usually, this analysis begins with the modeling of a 
3D section of the blade as a solid model and then 
proceeds by using a ﬁnite element code, such as 
ANSYS70, for completing the thermal-stress analysis. 
An example is provided here for illustrative purposes. 
It was taken from the NASA report71 for the E3 HPT 
blade.  The blade solid model and the corresponding 
ﬁnite element ANSYS model are shown in ﬁgure 
14. As can be seen from the transparent solid model 
of ﬁgure 14, this blade is cooled by convection 
with cavity wall trip strips, not shown, and with a 
set of pedestals in the trailing edge. While external 
surfaces are locally ﬁlm cooled from the leading 
edge with three rows of showerhead holes, there 
are no ﬁlm cooling holes on either the pressure or 
suction surfaces of the airfoil. The trailing edge has a 
centerline cooling ﬂow ejection.  
 
The NASA E3 HPT blade is used as a vehicle 
to demonstrate the thermal-mechanical analysis for a 
typical uncoated anisotropic turbine component. The 
3D model of ﬁgure 14, using ANSYS, is composed 
of 21567 elements, 13494 of which are 3D-10 
node tetrahedral structural solid elements in the 
trailing edge, while 8073 are 3D-20 node structural 
solid elements in the rest of the airfoil. This hybrid 
ﬁnite element model was selected to improve the 
meshing of the pedestals in the trailing edge region 
of the airfoil. This modeling technique is common in 
durability assessment of turbine airfoils.                      
 
The thermal boundary conditions set-up for 
a blade model is a very laborious process. On the 
external side, computational ﬂuid dynamic codes 
can be used to set-up external pressure and Mach number distributions for free-stream conditions with speciﬁed turbulence intensity 
levels. Boundary layer programs are used to establish the external heat transfer coefﬁcients based on expected wall roughness. Gas 
recovery temperatures and ﬁlm cooling effectiveness, usually obtained from previous testing, are used to determine the adiabatic wall 
(ﬁlm) temperatures. In the end, external heat transfer coefﬁcients and ﬁlm temperatures are speciﬁed as external boundary conditions 
for the model. Inside the airfoil, ﬂow network models are used to determine internal pressure drops and Mach number distributions. 
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis
Fig. 14. NASA 
3
E
blade solid model and the corresponding ﬁnite element 
ANSYS model.
Source: See Note 23.

407
Heat transfer correlations, based on previous testing, can be used 
to determine the internal heat transfer characteristics of the blade 
cooling system under the effects of rotation. Thus, the network 
ﬂow analysis provides the means to determine internal heat 
transfer coefﬁcients and coolant temperatures as internal boundary 
conditions for the model. The thermal results are shown in ﬁgure 
15, which illustrates a region on the suction side with high metal 
temperatures corresponding to high thermal loads due to ﬂow 
acceleration.
 
In this example selected for illustrative purposes, the 
mechanical boundary conditions for the model are such that the 
bottom plane must remain ﬁxed in the direction of the blade 
stacking axis or the z-direction. One node near the middle of an 
aft internal rib remains ﬁxed in space for all three directions, and 
one other node near the leading edge is ﬁxed in the y-direction. The 
top plane nodes are constrained to remain coupled and planar. The 
primary crystal coordinate system has the z-axis coincident with 
pull direction of the centrifugal force experienced by the blade at 
rated design speed. In order to simulate this, a uniformly distributed 
load is applied normally to the top face of the blade section. The 
planar boundary condition applied this way is a ﬁrst approximation 
to boundary conditions that may be experienced by the blade 
section. The assumption is that there is sufﬁcient constraint of the 
surrounding blade material to counteract bending moments seen 
as a result of temperature gradients and non-uniform deformation 
rates72.  The blade deformation will largely be controlled by the 
conditions at the ends of the blade. At the root, the blade will 
experience a relatively lower and more uniform temperature. Thus, 
if the root of the blade experiences a more uniform temperature, 
any other cross-section will be forced to deform at a uniform rate73. 
Therefore, to a ﬁrst approximation, the constraint of planar sections 
has been applied in the blade model. The results of this structural 
analysis are shown in ﬁgure 16 in terms of von Mises total strains. 
It should be noted that the analysis provided here could be applied 
to a more complex blade model as well. The strain results can be 
used for fatigue assessments. In general, strain range versus cycles 
to crack initiation are available for the material under consideration 
leading to assessment of the airfoil fatigue life.
 
The allowable stress in the blade depends on its temperature 
and the target life. The link between these considerations is the 
behavior of the blade material in creep. Although the maximum 
stress occurs at the root, this airfoil section may not be the most 
critical area for creep life. This is because even though the stress 
may largest at the root, the metal temperature is the lowest. The critical section is then where combination of stress and temperature will 
make the blade reach the creep limit ﬁrst. References listed in note 73 present approaches to take the combination of metal temperature 
and stress in assessing the creep life74.  For aircraft propulsion engine mission cycles are characterized by takeoff, climb, cruise; whereas 
for power-generation engine the mission cycle is simpler with long periods of running at constant conditions between starts and stops. 
At each segment of the mission cycle, the engine will run at different speed and temperature conditions, so that the overall life needs to 
be considered as the cumulative effect of the life expended in each mission segment.  For each set of conditions, a thermal and structural 
analysis needs to be made, and the results, together with material data, will be used to estimate the creep life of the component. 
 
When the turbine airfoil is subjected to repeated loads, the airfoil may incur fatigue damage75. Whereas creep occurs through 
initially elastic and plastic bulk deformation of the material, fatigue starts at localized plastic points due to defects, inclusions, corrosion 
and oxidation damage.  As soon as cracks exist in the component, the stress is transferred to the remaining material through load 
shakedown. Eventually, if cracks reach critical size sound material will not be sufﬁcient to support the load leading to failure.  As a result, 
crack initiation, and not propagation, is the preferred way to design for fatigue. In general the total strain, similar to the strain distribution 
of ﬁgure15, can be used with material data to determine the number cycles that the component can withstand. This leads to the concept 
of damage, D, which is deﬁned as the mission actual cycles relative to the material cyclic capability under the same operating conditions. 
The overall damage is the accumulated sum of the damage from all ﬂight segments or types. The same deﬁnition can be applied for creep 
damage; but instead of cycles, actual hot time becomes the variable. In the end, the total damage of participating modes should be less 
than unity as described by the following damage summation equation:
Frank J. Cunha
 Fig. 15.  NASA
3
E
blade thermal results.
Source: See Note 23.
         Fig. 16.  NASA
3
E
blade thermal strain results.
         Source: See Note 23.

408
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (38)
 
There are other relevant modes of damage, such as high cycle fatigue, corrosion, and oxidation; but discussion of these topics 
would be beyond this subject matter. Sufﬁce to say that metal temperature, steady and unsteady stresses for the turbine component are 
extremely relevant for all damage modes. As a result, one should strive for obtaining representative and accurate turbine component heat 
transfer analysis and preparation for component life analysis.
4.4-14 Conclusions
Aircraft propulsion engines, land-based power generation, and industrial machines have, as a primary component, the turbine as 
means to produce thrust or generate power. In the turbine section of the engine, airfoil components are subjected to extremely complex 
and damaging environments. The combination of high gas temperatures and pressures, strong gradients, abrupt geometry changes, 
viscous forces, rotational forces, and unsteady turbine vane/blade interactions, all combine to offer a formidable challenge in terms 
of turbine durability.  Nevertheless, the ultimate goal is to maintain or even improve the highest level of turbine performance and 
simultaneously reduce the amount of ﬂow needed to achieve this end. Coolant ﬂow is a penalty to the cycle and thermal efﬁciency, 
and requires management by characterizing of the turbine airfoil thermal loads and the requirements for ﬁlm cooling. Despite being a 
difﬁcult situation to assess, relatively simple correlations can be used to determine the airfoil overall cooling effectiveness in terms of 
thermal heat load, convective efﬁciency and ﬁlm effectiveness. In this context, existing design approaches were presented to characterize 
airfoil thermal loads and existing airfoil cooling schemes. Emphasis was given to the general characteristics of turbine cooling including 
ﬁlm cooling, impingement cooling, and convective cooling for different parts of the airfoil such as leading edge, mid-body, trailing 
edge, tip and endwalls. Convective cooling is presented in terms of fundamental cooling enhancements. The heat transfer phenomena 
associated with turbulating trip strips and pedestals were presented and discussed in some detail. In the end, internal and external heat 
transfer conditions are used to determine the durability of the airfoils in terms of oxidation, creep life and fatigue cycles. Recent literature 
dealing with these topics is listed to provide more in-depth overview of the subject matter.
4.4-15 Notes
________________________
 
 
1. J. Moustapha, M.F. Zelesky, N. Baines, and D. Japikse, Axial and Radial Turbines, Concepts NREC, 2003 
 
2. Ibid. 
 
3. Ibid. 
 
4. D.P. DeLuca and C.G. Annis Jr, “Fatigue in Single Crystal Nickel Superalloys,” Ofﬁce of Naval research (ONR)   
 
 
    FR-23800, Aug. 1995; N.J. Arakere, “High-Temperature Properties of Single Crystal Superalloys in Air and Hydrogen,”  
 
    ASME IGTI 2001-GT-0585, New Orleans, June 2001; R.A. Naik, D.P. DeLuca, and D.M Shah,  “Critical Plane Fatigue  
 
    Modeling and Characterization of Single Crystal Nickel Superalloys,” ASME IGTI 2001-GT-30300, Trans. ASME  
 
    Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, 2004; D.W. Maclachlan and D.M. Knowles, “The Effect of Material  
 
    on the Analysis of Single Crystal Turbine Blades: Part I – Material Model,” Fatigue and Fracture Engineering Material  
 
    Science 25 (2002): 385-398;D.W. Maclachlan and D.M. Knowles, “The Effect of Material on the Analysis of Single  
 
 
    Crystal Turbine Blades: Part II – Component Analysis,” Fatigue and Fracture Engineering Material Science   
 
    25 (2002): 385-398. 
 
5. V. Seetharaman, “Thickness Debit Properties of PW1484,” Pratt and Whitney Materials and Processes Engineering,  
 
 
    Interim Report, Nov. 2002. 
 
6. C.T. Sims, N.S. Stoloff, and W.C. Hagel,  Superalloys II, (John Wiley & Sons, 1980). 
 
7. T.L. Dame,  “Anisotropic Constitute Model for Nickel Base Single Crystal Alloys: Development and Finite Element  
 
 
    Implementation,” PhD Thesis, University of Cincinnati, 1985. 
 
8. F.R.N. Nabarro and H.L. deVillers,  The Physics of Creep, (Taylor and Francis, 1995). 
 
9. F.J. Cunha, M.T. Dahmer, and M.K. Chyu,  ”Thermal-Mechanical Life Prediction System for Anisotropic Turbine  
 
 
    Components,” ASME GT2005-68108, Reno, NV, 2005, Trans. ASME Journal of Turbomachinery, 2006. 
 
10. See note 5 above. 
 
11. J.E. Heine, J.R. Warren, and B.A. Cowles,  “Thermal Mechanical Fatigue of Coated Blade Materials,” Wright-Patterson   
 
      Final Report ERDC-TR-89-4027, Sept. 1988. 
 
12. See note 1 above. 
 
13. L. Torbidoni and J.H. Horlock,  “ A New Method to Calculate the Coolant Requirements of a High Temperature Gas  
 
 
      Turbine Blade,” ASME Paper GT2004-53729, Vienna, Austria, 2004. 
 
14. Ibid. 
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis
1
    
     
}
 
D
 
 
 
D
 
 
   
{
 
Cycles
Load
Creep
1
i
Creep
Cycles
Fatigue
1
i
Fatigue
Cycle
Mission
Overall
1
k
=
+ ∑
∑
∑
=
=
=

409
 
15. See note 1. 
 
16. H. Schlichting, Boundary-Layer Theory, (McGraw-Hill, 7th Edition, 1979). 
 
17. See note 13. 
 
18. Goldstein, R.J., “Film Cooling”, Advances in Heat Transfer, Vol. 7, pp. 357-358. 
 
19. See note 1.  
 
20. M.K. Chyu,  “Heat Transfer and Pressure Drop for Short Pin-Fin Arrays with Pin-Endwall Fillet.” Trans. ASME Journal   
 
      of Heat Transfer 112 (1990): 926-932; A.A. Zukauskas,  “Heat Transfer from Tubes in Cross Flow,” Advances in Heat  
 
      Transfer  8 (1972): 116-133. 
 
21. R.J. Goldstein, E.R.G Eckert, and F. Burggraf, “Effects of Hole Geometry and Density on Three-Dimensional Film  
 
 
      Cooling,” Trans. ASME J. Heat Transfer, 1974.  
 
22. J.E. Albert, D.G. Bogard, and F. Cunha,  “Adiabatic and Overall Effectiveness for a Film Cooled Blade,” IGTI-ASME  
 
 
      GT2004-53998, Vienna, Austria, 2004.  
 
23. F.J. Cunha,  M. Dahmer, and M.K. Chyu,  ”Analysis of Airfoil Trailing Edge Heat Transfer and Its Signiﬁcance in  
 
 
      Thermal Mechanical Design and Durability,” ASME GT2005-68107, Trans. ASME Journal of Turbomachinery, 2006. 
 
24. See note 1. 
 
25. J.K. Salisbury, Steam Turbines and Their Cycles (Malabar, FL:  R.E. Krieger Publishing Co., 1950). 
 
26. F.J. Cunha,  “Integrated Steam/Gas Cooling System for Gas Turbines,” US Patent No. 5,340,274, 1994; A. Jacala, R.M.   
 
      Davis, M.A. Sullivan, R.P. Chyu, and F.  Staub,  “Closed Circuit Steam Cooled Bucket,” US Patent No. 5,536,143,  
 
      1996; F.J. Cunha, D.A. DeAngelis, T.A. Brown, S. Chopra, V.H.S. Correia, and D.R.  Predmore,  “Turbine Stator Vane  
 
      Segments Having Combined Air and Steam Cooling Circuits,” US Patent No. 5,634,766, 1996. 
 
27. L. Langston, “A Year of Turbulence”, Power and Energy, ASME Magazine, June, 2004. 
 
28. A.H. Lefebre, Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor and Francis, 2nd Ed., 1999. 
 
29. Ibid. 
 
30. J.C. Han, “Turbine Blade Cooling Studies at Texas A&M University ~ 1980-2004”, The 2004 AIAA Thermophysics  
 
 
      Award Lecture, 2005. 
 
31. See note 16. 
 
32. Ibid. 
 
33. See note 1. 
 
34. See note 16. 
 
35. See note 1. 
 
36. W.M. Kays and M.E. Crawford, Convective Heat and Mass Transfer, McGraw-Hill, 1980, 2nd Ed. 
 
37. F.O. Soechting and O.P. Sharma,  “Design Code Veriﬁcation of External Heat Transfer Coefﬁcients,” Paper No.  
 
      AIAA-88-3011, 1988. 
 
38. W.M. Kays and M.E. Crawford, “STAN5 - A Program for Numerical Computation of Two-Dimensional Internal and  
 
 
      External Flows,” NASA CR-27-42, 1976. 
 
39. R.L. McKnight, J.H. Laﬂen, and Spamer, “Turbine Blade Tip Durability Analysis”, NASA CR-165268, Feb. 1981; J.  
 
 
      Christophel, K.A. Thole, and F.J. Cunha,  “Measured Adiabatic Effectiveness and Heat Transfer for Blowing from Tip of   
 
      a Turbine Blade,” Trans.  ASME Journal of Turbomachinery 127, (2005): 251-262; J. Christophel, K.A. Thole, and F.J.  
 
      Cunha, “Cooling the Tip of a Turbine Blade Using Pressure Side Holes – Part I. Adiabatic Effectiveness Measurements,”  
 
      Trans. ASME Journal of Turbomachinery 127 (2005): 270-277; J. Christophel, K.A. Thole, and F.J. Cunha,  “Cooling the  
 
      Tip of a Turbine Blade Using Pressure Side Holes – Part II: Heat Transfer Measurements,” Trans. ASME Journal of  
 
      Turbomachinery 127 (2005): 278-286; E. Couch, J. Christophel, E. Hohlfeld, K.A. Thole, and F.J. Cunha,   
 
      “Comparison of Measurements and Predictions for Blowing from Tip of a Turbine Blade,” AIAA J. of Propulsion and  
 
      Power 21 (2005): 335-343. 
 
40. M.F. Blair, “An experimental Study of Heat Transfer and Film Cooling on Large-Scale Turbine Endwall,” Trans. ASME   
 
      J of Heat Transfer 96 (1974): 524-529; R.A. Graziani, M.F. Blair, J.R. Taylor, and R.E. Mayle,  “An Experimental Study   
 
      of Endwall and Airfoil Surface Heat Transfer in a Large Scale Turbine Blade Cascade,” Trans. ASME J. Eng. Gas  
 
      Turbine Power 102 (1980): 257-267; O.P. Sharma and T.C. Buttler, “ Reynolds Stresses and Dissipation Mechanisms  
 
      Downstream of a Turbine Cascade,” Trans. J of Turbomachinery 109 (1987): 229-236; R.J. Goldstein and R.A. Spores,  
 
      “Turbulent Transport on the Endwall in the Region Between Adjacent Turbine Blades,” Trans. J of Turbomachinery 110  
 
      (1988): 862-869; J.T. Chung and T.W. Simon,  “Effectiveness of the Gas Turbine Endwall Fences in Secondary Flow  
 
      Control at Elevated Freestream Turbulence Levels,” ASME Paper 93-GT-51, 1993; Y. Yu and M.K. Chyu,  “Inﬂuence of  
 
      Gap Leakage Downstream of the Injection Holes on Film Cooling Performance,” Trans. J of Turbomachinery 120 (1998): 
 
      541-548; W.W. Ranson, K.A. Thole, and F.J. Cunha,  “Adiabatic Effectiveness Measurements and Predictions of Leakage  
 
      Flows Along a Blade Endwall, AIAA J. of Propulsion, Nov. 2005. 
 
41. F. Kreith, Principles of Heat Transfer , IEP- A Dun-Donneley Pub., 1976, 3rd Ed. 
 
42. See note 13.  
 
43. See note 18. 
 
44. See note 21. 
 
45. See note 18. 
Frank J. Cunha

410
410
 
46. J.C. Han, S. Dutta, and S. Ekkad, Gas Turbine Heat Transfer and Cooling Technology, Taylor and Francis, 1st Ed., Ch. 1,   
 
      2000.
 
47. Patankar, S.V., and Spalding, D.B., Heat and Mass Transfer in Boundary Layers, CRC Press, Cleveland, 1968.
 
48. See note 36.
 
49. F.M. White, Viscous Fluid Flow, McGraw-Hill, 2nd Ed, 1991.
 
50. See note 41.
 
51. J. Nikuradse, (1933) “ Laws of ﬂ ow in rough pipes,” VDI Forsch.. 361(1933) English Translation. NACA TM-1292  
 
 
      (1965).
 
52. J.C. Han, “Heat transfer and friction in channels with two opposite rib-roughnened walls,” Trans. ASME Journal of Heat   
 
      Transfer 106 (1984): 774-781.
 
53. R.L. Webb, E.R.G. Eckert, and R.J. Goldstein, “Heat transfer and  friction in tubes with repeated-rib roughness,” 
 
      Int. J. Mass Transfer 14 (1971): 601-617; R.L. Webb and E.R.G. Eckert, “Application of rough surfaces to heat exchanger 
 
      design,” Int. J. Mass Transfer 15 (1972): 1647-1658.
 
54. Ibid.
 
55. F.J. Cunha,  “Numerical Prediction of Heat Transfer in Internal Cooling Passages of Gas Turbine Blades,” IGTI- ASME   
 
      Cogen Turbo Power  8 (1993): 307-316; F.J. Cunha,  “A Calculation procedure to Analyze Three Dimensional Parabolic 
 
      Flow Problems of Heat Transfer with Rotation,” ASME HTD 300 (1994): 123-137; D.G.N. Tse and Steuber, “Flow in a 
 
      Rotating Square Serpentine Coolant Passage with Skewed Trips,” ASME Paper 97-GT-529, 1997; J.H. Wagner. B.V. 
 
      Johnson, R.A. Graziani, and F.C. Yeh,  “Heat Transfer in Rotating Serpentine Passages with Trips Normal to the Flow,” 
 
      ASME Paper 91-GT-265, Transactions ASME, 1992.
 
56. See note 53.
 
57. U. Uysal, P. Li, M.K. Chyu,  and F.J. Cunha,  “ Heat Transfer on Internal Surfaces of a Duct Subjected to 
 
      Impingement of a Jet Array with Varying Jet Hole-Size and Spacing,” ASME GT2005-68944, Trans. ASME Journal of  
 
 
      Turbomachinery, 2006; R. Gardon and J. Cohonpue, “Heat Transfer Between a Flat Plate and Jet Air Impinging on It,” 
 
      ASME/AICHE International Heat Transfer Conference Proceedings, 1962; H. Martin, “Heat and Mass Transfer Between 
 
      Impingement Gas Jets and Solid Surfaces,” Advances in Heat Transfer 13, 1977.
 
58. M.K. Chyu, U. Uysal, and P-W Li,  “Convective Heat Transfer in a Triple-Cavity Structure Near Turbine Blade Trailing   
 
      Edge,”  Proceedings of IMECE’02, International Mechanical Engineers Congress, New Orleans, Nov. 17-22, 2002.
 
59. See note 46. 
 
60. D.M. Kercher and W. Tabakoff,  “Heat Transfer by Square Air Jets Impinging Perpendicular to a Flat Surface Including   
 
      the Effect of Spent Air,” ASME Paper 69-GT-4, Trans. ASME Journal of Engineering for Power, 1970; L.M. Florschuetz, 
 
      C.R. Truman, and D.E. Metzger,  “ Streamwise Flow and Heat Transfer Distributions for Jet Array Impingement with 
 
      Crossﬂ ow, Trans. ASME Journal Heat Transfer, March, 1981. 
 
61. Ibid (Florschuetz).
 
62. See note 20 (Zukauskas).
 
63. See note 20 (Chyu).
 
64. F.W. Dittus and L.M.K. Boelter, University of California at Berkely Publications in Engineering 2 (1930): 443.
 
65. K. Ishida and K. Hamabe, “Effect of Pin-Fin Aspect Ratio and Arrangement on Heat Transfer and Pressure Drop of Pin   
 
      Fin Duct for Airfoil Internal Cooling Passage,” ASME Paper 85-WA/HT-62, 1985.
 
66. See note 46.
 
67. See note 20 (Chyu).
 
68. See note 23.
 
69. Ibid.
 
70. ANSYS User’s Manual, Swanson Analysis Systems, Inc., Volumes I,II,III,IV, Revision 5.0.
 
71. R.D. Thulin and D.C. Howe,  “Energy Efﬁ cient Engine High-Pressure Turbine Design Report”, NASA CR-165608,  
 
 
      PWA-5594-171, March 1982.
 
72. See note 4 (Maclachlan, 2002).
 
73. Ibid.
 
74. F.R. Larson and J. Miller, “A Time-Temperature Relationship for Rupture and Creep Stress,” Transactions of the ASME   
 
      (1952): 765-775; F. Garafalo, Fundamentals of Creep and Creep-Rupture in Metals, The Macmellan Co.,1965; D.C.  
 
 
      Stouffer and L.T. Dame,  Inelastic Deformation of Metals Models, Mechanical Properties and Metallurgy, John Wiley & 
 
      Sons, 1st Ed.,1996.
 
75. D. Burgreen, “Structural Growth Induced by Thermal Cycling,” Journal of Basic Engineering, ASME 68-WA/Met-14,  
 
 
      1968; F.O. Soechting, ”Turbine Low Cycle Fatigue Design Program,” Wright-Patterson Final Report AFWAL-TR-86- 
 
 
      2124, 1985; also see note 21.
4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis

4.4 Heat Transfer Analysis
Frank J. Cunha, Ph.D., P.E.
Pratt & Whitney
United Technologies Corporation
5 Bruce Lane
Avon, CT 06001
phone: (860) 565-8909
email: frank.cunha@pw.utc.com
Dr. Cunha has worked in the area of turbine cooling design and analysis, heat transfer and mechanical 
design for a period spanning 25 years.  During this time, Dr. Cunha assumed lead design responsibilities at 
several original equipment manufacturers, including Siemens-Westinghouse, General Electric, and Pratt and 
Whitney and has received 25 US patents for design of turbine engine hot gas path components.  Throughout 
his career, Dr. Cunha has continued to apply recent advances in cooling technology to both commercial and 
military engine programs to achieve the highest rotor inlet temperature level in the aerospace industry.  Dr. 
Cunha has been a leader in developing advanced testing cooling programs at a consortium of Universities, 
and has published numerous journal and symposium technical papers on turbine cooling technologies. 
BIOGRAPHY  
