233
233
Trapped Vortex Combustion
3.2.1.4.1
3.2.1.4.1-1 Trapped Vortex Combustion
Beneﬁ ts to IGCC Gas Turbines of Trapped Vortex Combustion 
 
The Trapped Vortex Combustion (TVC) technology has the potential to:
• 
Burn a wide variety of medium and low-BTU gases including hydrogen-rich 
gasiﬁ ed coal, biomass products, and landﬁ ll gas;
• 
Operate in a low NOx, lean premixed mode combustor environment on 
hydrogen-rich syngas to accommodate the high ﬂ ame speed that is a 
characteristic of these fuels;
• 
Achieve extremely low NOx emissions without the added expense of exhaust 
gas after-treatment;
• 
Eliminate the costly requirement for high pressure diluent gas (nitrogen, 
steam or carbon dioxide) for NOx emissions control;
• 
Accommodate more types of gas turbines for IGCC applications by decreasing 
the mass ﬂ ow through the turbine section;
• 
Improve the overall cycle efﬁ ciency of the gas turbine by decreasing the 
pressure drop through the combustor; and
• 
Extend the lean blowout limit offering greater turndown, (load following), 
with improved combustion and process stability.
3.2.1.4.1-2 The Challenges of IGCC Gas Turbine   
 
 
Combustion
 
The Integrated Gasiﬁ cation Combined Cycle (IGCC) is emerging as a best 
available technology to utilize low quality energy resources, such as coal or oil, and 
meet emission limits not achievable by other conventional or advanced competing 
technologies. However, the success of the IGCC in the energy sector requires 
continuous enhancement in performance and reduction in capital costs. New, more 
efﬁ cient, gasiﬁ cation technologies are in demonstration; hot gas cleanup is improving; 
and gas turbines for IGCC applications are advancing in efﬁ ciency, capability and 
reliability.
 
Commercially available gas turbines have been developed for the use of 
natural gas, (i.e. a methane-rich fuel with high caloriﬁ c values of 800 to 1200 BTU/
scf).  The gas turbines for these IGCC power plants have been adapted to burn syngas, 
a hydrogen-rich fuel1 with low caloriﬁ c values of 100-300 BTU/scf, but their design 
features are not generally optimized for these fuel applications.
 
The gas turbine encounters two major changes when transitioning from 
natural gas to syngas:
• 
For the same fuel heat input, the fuel mass ﬂ ow is four to ﬁ ve times greater 
than for natural gas, due to the lower heating value.
• 
Premixed natural gas and air combustion systems have become common 
place for controlling NOx emissions. These systems are not used with syngas 
due to the high content of hydrogen and the potential for ﬂ ashback of the 
ﬂ ame into the fuel injection system. Diffusion ﬂ ame or “non-premixed” 
combustors are used with syngas to control the NOx emissions by diluting 
the syngas with nitrogen, steam or carbon dioxide.  The diluent reduces the 
ﬂ ame temperature and consequently the formation of NOx.
 
These two factors, greater fuel ﬂ ow and the addition of diluent for NOx 
emissions control, substantially increase the overall mass ﬂ ow through the turbine. 
This increase in ﬂ ow creates backpressure to the compressor and can bring the engine 
close to surge conditions.  Some gas turbines such as the GE 9001 EC are able to 
accommodate the increase in mass ﬂ ow through the turbine expander.  Unfortunately, 
the majority of gas turbines are not able to accept the overcapacity to the turbine 
expander.
Robert Charles Steele
Ramgen Power Systems
11808 Northup Way, Suite W-190
Bellevue, WA  98005
425-828-4919, ext. 288
rsteele@ramgen.com

234
3.2.1.4.1-3 Combustion of Syngas
 
NOx emissions from coal based IGCC plants are as low or lower than those from the best conventional coal ﬁred power plants. 
Nevertheless, NOx emissions from syngas gas ﬁred turbines are inevitably compared to those of natural gas ﬁred gas turbines without a 
good understanding of the differences in composition of the two fuels2.
 
Dry (i.e. no addition of steam or water) Low NOx (DLN) combustors can achieve less than 10 ppmvd (parts per million by 
volume, dry, at 15% Oxygen) NOx emissions with natural gas fuel.  DLN combustors rely on the premix principle that reduces the ﬂame 
temperature, and subsequently the NOx emissions. DLN combustors are able to achieve much lower NOx emissions than diluted non-
premixed combustors because of an increase in premixing time prior to entering the combustion region.
 
The high hydrogen content (up to 60% by volume) in syngas results in a ﬂame speed that is up to six times faster than typical 
natural gas.  The high ﬂame speed of syngas makes the use of a DLN combustion system impossible because the ﬂame will draw back 
into the premix zone and destroy the fuel injection hardware.
 
The diluted non-premixed combustors have a chemical kinetic limit when too much diluent is added for further reduction of 
NOx emissions.  The increase in diluent will cause ﬂame instabilities in the combustion zone and eventual engine ﬂame-out.  The best 
case, practical NOx reduction limit for syngas combustors is between 10 and 20 ppmvd NOx.  
 
In order to further reduce NOx emissions in an IGCC power plant, the popular selective catalytic reduction (SCR) post-
combustion control method will be required.  Unfortunately, the SCR method which is very effective for sulfur-free natural gas, will not 
work if the sulfur cannot be removed from the syngas.  Unlike natural gas, syngas does contain some sulfur which can be converted in 
the SCR to sulfur compounds and subsequently be deposited on the tube surfaces of the heat recovery steam generator.
 
As an example, the Polk IGCC power plant located in Florida, owned by Tampa Electric Company, has experienced some sulfur 
deposits on the tube surfaces.  The DOE reported that any additional deposits that would be generated by the addition of a SCR system 
would make the Polk plant inoperable on syngas in its current conﬁguration.
3.2.1.4.1-4 DOE NETL IGCC Turbine Program
 
In response to the challenges of burning syngas in IGCC gas turbines, the DOE has initiated a new multiyear program (Enabling 
Turbine Technologies for High-Hydrogen Fuels: DE-PS26-05NT42380) that will fund the development of technologies and products to 
serve the central station power generation market.
 
The program will address key technologies needed to enable the development of advanced gas turbines and gas turbine-based 
systems that will operate cleanly and efﬁciently when fueled with coal-derived syngas.  This is an investment in securing future U.S. 
electric power production through the use of the Nation’s largest fossil fuel energy resource.
 
In order to address these technical challenges the participants in the program will pursue new combustor design approaches that 
include hydrogen premixing, catalytic combustion, and novel concepts such as TVC. 
3.2.1.4.1-5 Trapped Vortex Combustion – Breakthrough Technology
 
Trapped Vortex Combustion technology holds tremendous 
promise for IGCC gas turbine applications with improved efﬁciency, 
lower emissions, greater ﬂame stability, added fuel ﬂexibility, increased 
durability, and reduced capital costs.  
 
The TVC concept was originally conceived in the early 1990s for 
aero-propulsion applications with high through-put velocity requirements. 
It was not until the early 2000s that research and development organizations 
initiated the ﬁrst design concepts for industrial applications. 
 
The TVC technology has the potential for product insertion 
into a wide variety of industrial applications including gas turbine power 
generation, manufacturing processing, chemical process heating, steam 
boiler systems, and incineration. 
 
The requirements of low fuel consumption and low pollutant 
emissions are paramount for all types of combustors, with the combustor 
primary zone airﬂow pattern of prime importance to ﬂame stability, 
combustion efﬁciency, and low emissions.  Many different types of 
airﬂow patterns are employed by non-TVC concepts, but one common 
feature to all is the creation of a toroidal ﬂow reversal that recirculates 
(ﬁgure 1) and entrains a portion of the hot combustion products to mix 
with the incoming air and fuel to stabilize the ﬂame.  Although these 
designs have long been used in many practical combustion devices, there 
are limitations, especially for lean premixed applications.
Fig. 1. Non -TVC Swirl Stabilized Combustion 
(Courtesy of National Combustion Equipment, Inc.)

235
 
Flame stability is achieved though the use of recirculation 
zones to provide a continuous ignition source which facilitates the 
mixing of hot combustion products with the incoming fuel and air 
mixture. Swirl vanes are commonly employed (ﬁgure 2) to establish 
the recirculation zones. This method creates a low velocity zone of 
sufﬁcient residence time and turbulence levels such that the combustion 
process becomes self-sustaining. The challenge, however, is selection 
of a ﬂame stabilizer which ensures that both performance (emissions, 
combustor acoustic and pattern factor) and cost goals are met. 
 
In contrast to conventional combustion systems which rely on 
swirl stabilization, the TVC employs cavities (ﬁgure 3) to stabilize the 
ﬂame and grows from the wealth of literature on cavity ﬂows. Much 
of the historical effort examines the ﬂow ﬁeld dynamics established by 
the cavities, as demonstrated in aircraft wheel wells, bomb bay doors 
and other external cavity structures. Cavities have also been studied as 
a means of cooling and reducing drag on projectiles and for scramjets 
and waste incineration. 
 
The actual stabilization mechanism facilitated by the TVC is 
relatively simple. A conventional bluff or fore body is located upstream 
of a smaller bluff body - commonly referred to as an aft body. The ﬂow 
issuing from around the ﬁrst bluff body separates as normal, but instead 
of developing shear layer instabilities which in most circumstances is 
the prime mechanism for initiating blowout, the alternating array of 
vortices are conveniently trapped or locked between the two bodies. 
 
In a TVC concept, the re-circulation of hot products into the 
main fuel-air mixture is accomplished by incorporating two critical 
features.  First, a stable recirculation zone must be generated adjacent 
to the main fuel-air ﬂow.  If the vortex region, or cavity region, is 
designed properly, the vortex will be stable and no vortex shedding 
will occur.  This stable vortex is generally used as a source of heat, or 
hot products of combustion.  
 
The second critical design feature involves transporting and mixing the heat from the vortex, or cavity, region into the main 
ﬂow.  This is accomplished by using wake regions generated by bodies, or struts, immersed in the main ﬂow.  This approach ignites 
the incoming fuel-air mixture by lateral mixing, instead of a back-mixing process.  By using geometric features to ignite the incoming 
fuel-air mixture, instead of pure aerodynamic features, the TVC concept has the potential to be less sensitive to instabilities and process 
upsets.  This is particularly important near the lean ﬂame extinction limit, where small perturbations in the ﬂow can lead to ﬂame 
extinction.
 
The very stable yet more energetic primary/core ﬂame zone is now very resistant to external ﬂow ﬁeld perturbations, yielding 
extended lean and rich blowout limits relative to its simple bluff body counterpart.  Early research has demonstrated that the TVC 
conﬁguration can withstand through-put velocities near Mach 1.  This unique characteristic of the TVC technology provides a ﬂuid 
dynamic mechanism that can overcome the high ﬂame speed of hydrogen-rich syngas and potentially allow IGCC gas turbines to operate 
the combustor in premixed mode.   
 
This system conﬁguration also has greater ﬂame holding surface area and hence will facilitate the more compact primary/core 
ﬂame zone essential to promoting high combustion efﬁciency and reduced CO emissions.
3.2.1.4.1-6 TVC Development
 
Several TVC approaches from government research organizations and private companies are reviewed.  Each design shares in 
the common fundamental features of the TVC technology but also exhibit the unique features that set them apart from each other.
1. Air Force Research Laboratory
 
The Air Force program started in the early 1990s at the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) in Dayton, Ohio.
Robert Charles Steele
Fig. 2.  Industrial Fuel/Air Swirler 
(Courtesy of National Combustion Equipment, Inc.)
Fig. 3.  Trapped Vortex Combustion

236
 
The phenomena of locked or trapped vortices has been known to reduce aerodynamic drag for years3, and the geometric features 
required to produce a locked or trapped vortex are the same features used to minimize drag.  Hsu et al. in 1995 was ﬁrst to report using 
this feature to stabilize reactions in gas turbine combustors for aero-propulsion applications4.  Since then, several papers and patents have 
described the results from using this TVC concept to achieve stable and low combustor emissions5.  The AFRL continues to investigate 
potential TVC applications for advanced military gas turbine engines6.  The AFRL TVC development efforts have focused primarily on 
liquid fuel burning aero-propulsion applications and not on industrial natural gas or syngas burning applications.
 
The developmental evolution of the TVC concept at the AFRL is extremely well summarized by Roquemore et al.7.  The 
ﬁrst generation TVC is shown in ﬁgure 4.  The cavity is formed between the two disks in tandem.  Katta and Roquemore used a time-
dependent, axisymmetric model to predict the results of reducing the drag of bluff-bodies in non-reacting ﬂow and the experimental 
results of the ﬁrst generation TVC8.
 
The second generation TVC design, shown in ﬁgure 5, was an axisymmetric can-type conﬁguration with the cavity on the 
outside of the main burner.  The depth of the cavity was approximately the same as that for the optimum ﬁrst generation TVC.  
 
The third generation TVC shown in ﬁgures 6 and 7 was a two-dimensional sector designed for easy replacement and optical 
viewing of the cavities.  The objective of the design effort was to develop a liquid fuel burning TVC concept for gas turbine engine 
applications.    
3.2.1.4.1 Trapped Vortex Combustion
Fig. 4.  AFRL First Generation TVC
Source:  See note 5 (Ren, Egolfopoulos, and Tsotsis 2002).
Fig. 5.  AFRL Second Generation TVC
Source:  Same source as for ﬁg. 4.
COMBUSTION
CHAMBER
FLAMEHOLDERS
MAIN  FUEL & AIR

237
 
The development program at AFRL concluded that the TVC offers signiﬁcant improvements to aircraft gas turbine engines in 
lean blow out (LBO) and altitude relight when compared to conventional swirl stabilized combustors.   Also, a wider operating range and 
the potential to achieve lower NOx emissions were demonstrated.  The TVC concept can operate in a staged, main-pilot mode as well 
as in a rich burn–quick quench–lean burn (RQL) mode.  Even though encouraging rig results have been obtained to date, no full engine 
test as been completed with an integrated TVC concept.
2. General Electric Company
 
The General Electric (GE) Company has been developing TVC concepts for gas turbine engines since the mid 1990’s.   At least 
ten GE TVC patents have been either ﬁled and/or cleared since 1995.  The majority of the patent work has been in the area of military 
gas turbine engines.  More recently, GE has ﬁled two TVC patents for low NOx emissions industrial gas turbine engine applications.  The 
invention was made with support from the U.S. DOE.
Aircraft Application
 
GE Aircraft Engines and the AFRL have been jointly developing a 
novel TVC concept for military gas turbine engines since 19969.  This effort 
represents an extension of earlier AFRL research with the third generation TVC 
concept.  The work led to the fabrication of a rectangular sector test rig shown 
in ﬁgure 8 with a pressure capability of up 20.5 atmospheres and temperatures 
as high as 900 K.  The performance evaluation covered all aspects of a gas 
turbine engine.  The operating conditions with JP-8 fuel provided simulations 
of current commercial and military aircraft gas turbine engine cycles as well as 
some advanced cycles.  Data was also obtained at selected conditions for the 
LM2500 marine Navy duty cycle using #1 Diesel.  
 
The TVC test rig demonstrated that ignition, blow out, and altitude re-
light were up to 50% improved over current swirl stabilized combustors.  The 
NOx emissions were in the range from 40% to 60% of the U.N. International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standard.  The combustion efﬁciency 
was maintained at or above 99% over a 40% wider operating range than a 
conventional aircraft gas turbine engine combustor.
 Industrial Application
 
GE Research is pursuing the application of TVC concepts to industrial gas turbine engines that can meet sub-9 ppmv NOx 
emissions.  The objective of DOE Contract No. DE-FC26-01NT41020 is to explore advanced combustor concepts that show promise to 
meet future emissions requirements.  The results of this DOE program are not published at this time.  Any further information from GE 
regarding their low emissions TVC development effort was unavailable.
 3. DOE National Energy Technology Laboratory
The U.S. DOE is developing technologies for ultra-clean energy plants with efﬁciency and emission goals that are well beyond the 
capability of current gas turbine power plants.  The DOE reports that ninety-percent of new power plants currently under construction 
will be fueled by a natural gas-based fuel.  A key feature of these future power plants will be fuel diversity and ﬂexibility.  The gas turbine 
combustor designs will require the capability to operate on a wide range of fuels including hydrogen-rich synfuels.  The DOE has also 
selected the TVC concept as a promising technology for future gas turbine combustor designs. 
Fig.  6. AFRL Third Generation TVC 
Source:  Same source as ﬁg. 4.
Fig. 7. AFRL Third Generation TVC Cavity
Source:  Same source as ﬁg. 4.
Robert Charles Steele
Fig. 8. GE TVC Sector Rig 
Source:  See note 9 (Phillips).

238
 
A collaborative effort began in 1999 between the AFRL and the NETL 
to evaluate the TVC concept for stationary power applications.  The project 
was co-sponsored by the DOE Advanced Turbine Systems (ATS) program 
and the DOD Strategic Environmental Research and Development Program 
(SERDP).  
 
The primary intent was to assess the low-emissions capabilities of 
a novel RQL staged combustor shown in ﬁgure 910.  The goal was to achieve 
NOx and CO emissions that are comparable to other commercial natural gas 
burning DLN systems.  High BTU-fuels and fuels containing signiﬁcant 
amounts of fuel-bound nitrogen were evaluated. 
 
NETL has continued to pursue the development of TVC concepts 
and combustor conﬁgurations with their own internal research program and 
through separate collaborative projects with GE  and Ramgen Power Systems 
(RPS).  The recently released multi-year turbine development program (DE-
PS26-05NT42380) is evidence that the DOE is committed to the advancement 
of novel combustor designs such as the TVC concept.
 
NETL and RPS with support from the California Energy Commission 
(CEC Contract # 500-02-025) completed in early 2005 a series of rig tests 
that demonstrated less than 3 ppmv NOx at industrial gas turbine operating 
conditions without the need for a stabilizing catalyst or exhaust after-
treatment.
 
The potential use of the RPS Advanced Vortex Combustion (AVC) technology with industrial gas turbines can best be described 
in the spring 2005 edition of the DOE Clean Coal Today:
Researchers at NETL’s high pressure test combustion facility, in collaboration with Ramgen Power Systems, have 
completed testing of a fuel-ﬂexible Advanced Vortex Combustion (AVC) concept that can achieve NOx emissions of 
less than 3 ppmv, and combustion efﬁciencies of over  99 percent.  The Advanced Vortex Combustor is dynamically 
stable over a wide range of operating conditions, which makes this approach signiﬁcantly more attractive than other 
lean premixed combustion approaches.  In addition, the pressure drop associated with this combustion approach is 
signiﬁcantly lower than a conventional gas turbine combustor, which translates into an improvement in the overall 
cycle efﬁciency.  The relatively high velocities and low pressure drops achievable with this technology make the AVC 
approach an attractive alternative for hydrogen fuel applications.
4. Ramgen Power Systems
 
RPS is pursuing the development of its unique AVC technology that has tremendous promise for improved efﬁciency, lower 
emissions, greater ﬂame stability, fuel ﬂexibility, increased durability, and reduced manufacturing costs.  RPS is evaluating the potential 
for product insertion into a wide variety of industrial applications including gas turbine power generation and mechanical drive, 
manufacturing processing, chemical process heating, steam boiler systems, and incineration.  The immediate AVC application is for low 
emissions stationary gas turbine engines.
 
In 2002, RPS tested the ﬁrst AVC concept 
(ﬁgure 10) with support from the DOE NETL (Contract 
No. DE-FC26-00NT40915) and achieved 9 ppmv NOX 
emissions on natural gas in lean premixed mode11. 
The testing was conducted at the GASL facility in 
New York.   The development of AVC concepts for 
gas turbine applications has continued since the test 
program at GASL.  RPS and NETL with support from 
the CEC have recently completed a joint project that 
has shown tremendous promise for the AVC technology 
for extremely low emissions and acoustically stable 
combustion.
 
These test results indicate the potential to achieve unprecedented emissions levels of 1 ppmv NOx and 9 ppmv CO at industrial 
gas turbine operating conditions.  At these levels, the AVC technology offers the potential to meet the stringent emission requirements 
in such regions as California and New York without further exhaust after-treatment.
 
The tests were conducted in the NETL Low Emissions Combustion Test and Research (LECTR) facility at 10 atmospheres 
with combustor inlet temperature of 625°F.  The combustor is air-cooled to closely simulate actual gas turbine conditions.  The series 
of parametric tests allowed for variation in inlet pressure, fuel ﬂow, air ﬂow loading, lean blowout and pressure dynamics.  A 4inch-by-
4inch quartz window allowed for ﬂame visualization up to 5 atmospheres.
3.2.1.4.1 Trapped Vortex Combustion
Fig. 9. NETL RQL TVC
Source:  See note 10.
Fig. 10. RPS AVC Conﬁguration 
Source:  See note 11 (Little, Jr.).

239
The test results can be summarized as follows:
• 
Data taken at 10 atmospheres and 625°F
• 
Air-cooled combustor functioned as designed and without incident
• 
Combustor ignited at ambient conditions
• 
System was stable throughout start-up and shut-down
• 
Flame structure was observed and recorded by video through the quartz window
• 
Overall combustor pressure drop was less than 2.6%
• 
NOx emissions are not pressure dependent under ultra-lean conditions
• 
Lowest measured NOx with acceptable CO emissions:  3 ppmv NOx and 20 ppmv CO
• 
Combustion efﬁciencies greater than 99.9%
• 
Recorded combustion pressure oscillations with high frequency probe were insigniﬁcant  
 
RPS will continue to advance the development of its AVC technology and identify product insertion opportunities in industrial 
applications including gas turbine power generation and mechanical drive applications.  The AVC technology is scalable to various sizes 
and heat load capabilities.
5. ALM Turbines
Many turbine and combustor experts, including those at ALM, are increasingly optimistic about the promise of TVC12. It is ALM’s 
position that the TVC concept has many real potential advantages over both diffusion ﬂame and DLN combustors, including lower 
emissions, multi-fuel capability, better ﬂame stability, uniformity of ﬂame,  better dynamics, greater lean blowout limit offering greater 
turndown, higher efﬁciency due to lower combustor pressure drop losses, compactness, and lower manufacturing costs. Over the last 
few years, ALM has designed, manufactured and tested a number of proprietary prototype TVCs that have demonstrated many of the 
above mentioned advantages. 
ALM has been developing and testing its own proprietary version of TVC for both microturbines and large MW scale industrial turbines. 
In 2003, ALM and Alturdyne successfully designed, manufactured, and incorporated a TVC combustor into a Sunstrand T-62 APU. 
ALM has also designed, manufactured and rig tested two MW scale prototypes at ambient conditions that meet GE 7E 85MW operating 
conditions.  
The ALM TVC consists of two autonomous sections – a thermal nozzle 
and vortex (ﬁgure 11). The time of complete fuel burning, at the primary 
combustion temperature, is less than 2 milliseconds. ALM has achieved 
combustion at very low temperatures without use of any catalysts. The 
ALM design is notably different from all other TVC concepts.  The 
concept utilizes its vortex and manages the recirculation ﬂows in a 
different manner.  The combustion mainly takes place in the thermal 
nozzle and not in the vortex. 
ALM uses a laminar boundary layer between the recirculation vortex 
ﬂow and the fuel air mixture ﬂow, to create certain desirable chemical 
reactions, and in turn a thermal nozzle effect which signiﬁcantly 
improves the combustion process over other combustor designs. This 
laminar boundary layer, along with ALM’s unique use of the vortex 
distinguishes the ALM TVC from other TVC designs.
3.2.1.4.1-7   Notes  
__________________________________
1. G. A. Richards, and  J. Ciferno, “Carbon Dioxide Capture and Management in Energy Generation,” 4th Joint Meeting – U.S.  
 
           Sections of the Combustion Institute, Philadelphia, PA, March 2005.
2. D.N. Anderson,  “Effect of Hydrogen Injection on Stability and Emissions of an Experimental Premixed Prevaporized    
    Propane Burner,” NASA Report # TM X-3301, October 1975; D.N. Anderson, “Emissions of Oxides of Nitrogen from an  
           Experimental  Premixed-Hydrogen Burner,” NASA Report # TM X-3393, May 1976; J.Y. Ren, W. Qin, F.N. Egolfopoulos, and  
    T.T.  Tsotsis, “Strain-Rate Effects on Hydrogen-Enhanced Lean Premixed Combustion,” 2001, Combustion and Flame 124 
    (2001): 717-720; J.Y. Ren, F.N. Egolfopoulos, and T.T. Tsotsis,  “NOx Emission Control of Lean Methane-Air Combustion  
           with  Addition of Methane Reforming Products,”  Combustion Science and Technology  174, No. 4 (2002): 181-205; G.S.  
           Jackson, R.  Sai,  J.M. Plaia, C. Boggs, and K.T. Kiger,  “Inﬂuence of H2 on the Response of Lean Premixed CH4 Flames to  
Robert Charles Steele
Fig. 11. ALM TVC Concept
Source:  See note 12 (Mair).

240
240
           Highly Strained Flows,” 2003, Combustion and Flame  132 (2003): 503-511; R.W. Schefer, D.M. Wicksall, and A.K. Agrawal, 
           “Combustion of Hydrogen Enriched Methane in a Lean Premixed Swirl-Stabilized Burner,” Proceedings of the Combustion 
           Institute 29 (2002): 843-851; T. Sidwell, K. Casleton, D. Straub, D. Maloney, G. Richards, S. Beer, and D. Ferguson,      
 
           “Operation of a Pressurized Lean-Premixed Research Combustor and the Effects of Hydrogen Addition on NOx and Lean 
    Extinction,” ASME Paper # GT2005-68752; J.N.Phillips, and R.J. Roby, “Enhanced Gas Turbine Combustor Performance    
 
           Using H2-Enriched Natural Gas,” ASME Paper # 99-GT-115; Q. Zhang, D.R. Noble, and T. Lieuwen, “Characterization of  
 
           Fuel Composition Effects in H2/CO/CH4 Mixtures Upon Lean Blowout,” ASME Paper # GT2005-68907.
3. B.H. Little Jr., and R.R. Whipkey, “Locked Vortex Afterbodies,” AIAA Journal of Aircraft  16, no. 5 (1979): 296-302; W.A. 
           Mair, “The Effect of a Rear-Mounted Disc on the Drag of a Blent-Based Body of Revolution,” The Aeronautical Quarterly    
    (November 1965): 350-360.
4. K.Y. Hsu, L.P. Goss, D.D. Trump, and W.M.Roquemore, “Performance of a Trapped-Vortex Combustor,” AIAA Paper # 95-   
    0810.
5. K.Y. Hsu, L.P.Goss, and W.M. Roquemore,  (1998), “Characteristics of a Trapped Vortex Combustor,” Journal of Propulsion 
           and Power 14, no. 1 (1998): 57-65; V.R. Katta, and W.M. Roquemore, “Numerical Studies on Trapped Vortex Combustion 
    Concepts for Stable Combustion,” Journal of engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 120  (January 1998): 60-68;  Katta, 
    V.R., Roquemore, W.M., “Study on Trapped-Vortex Combustor – Effect of Injection on Flow Dynamics,” Journal of Propulsion 
    and Power, Vol. 14, No. 3, May-June 1998, pp. 273-281; G.J. Sturgess and K.Y. Hsu, “Entrainment of Mainstream Flow in a  
    Trapped-Vortex Combustor,” AIAA Paper # 97-0261; C. Stone and S. Menon, “Simulation of Fuel-Air Mixing and Combustion 
    in a Trapped-Vortex Combustor,” AIAA Paper # 2000-0478;K.Y. Hsu, C.D. Carter, V.R. Katta, and W.M. Roquemore, 
           “Characteristics of Combustion Instability Associated with Tarpped-Vortex Burner,” AIAA Paper # 99-0488; W.M. Roquemore, 
           et  al. (2001), “Trapped Vortex Combustor Concept For Gas Turbine Engines,” AIAA Paper 2001-0483.
6. J. Zelina, D.T. Shouse, and R.D. Hancock,  “Ultra-Compact Combustors for Advanced Gas Turbine Engines,” ASME Paper # 
    GT2004-53155; R.C. Hendricks, R.C. Ryder, A. Brankovic, D.T. Shouse, W.M. Roquemore, and N.S. Liu,  “Computational 
    Parametric Study of Fuel Distribution in an Experimental Trapped Vortex Combustor Sector Rig,” ASME Paper # GT 2004-
    53225; V.R. Katta and W.M. Roquemore, “Simulation of PAHS in Trapped-Vortex Combustor,” ASME # GT2004-54165; G. 
    Sturgess, J. Zelina, D. Shouse, and W.M. Roquemore, “Emissions Reduction Technologies for Military Gas Turbine Engines,” 
    Journal of Propulsion and Power 21, no. 2 (March-April, 2005): 193-217.
7. See note 5 (Roquemore, Shouse, Burrus, Johnson, Cooper, Duncan, et al.).
        8. See notes 3 and 5 (Katta and Roquemore, Jan 1998).
        9. D.L. Burrus, A.W. Johnson, W.M. Roquemore, and D.T. Shouse,  “Performance Assessment of a Prototype Trapped Vortex  
 
            Combustor Concept for Gas Turbine Application,” ASME Paper # 2001-GT-0087.
       10. D.L. Straub, T.G. Sidwell, D.J. Maloney, K.H.  Casleton, G.A. Richards, W.A. Rogers,  and G.M. Golden, “Simulations of a   
             Rich Quench Lean (RQL) Trapped Vortex Combustor,” presented at the 2000 American Flame Research Committee (AFRC)    
             International Symposium, Newport Beach, CA; D.L. Straub, K.H. Casleton, R.E. Lewis, T.G. Sidwell, D.J. Maloney, and G.A. 
             Richards, “Assessment of a Rich Quench Lean (RQL) Trapped Vortex Combustor,” ASME Paper #GT2003-38569.
       11. J. Bucher, R.G. Edmonds, R.C. Steele, D.W. Kendrick, B.C. Chenevert,  and P.C. Malte,  “The Development of a Lean- 
 
             Premixed Trapped Vortex Combustor,” ASME Paper #GT2003-38236.
       l2.  M. Kalin, “Overview of the ALM TVC Combustor,” private communication with CEO of ALM Turbines, June, 2005.
3.2.1.4.1 Trapped Vortex Combustion

3.2.1.4.1  Trapped Vortex Combustion
Robert Charles Steele
Ramgen Power Systems
11808 Northup Way, Suite W-190
Bellevue, WA  98005
phone: 425-828-4919, ext. 288
email: rsteele@ramgen.com
Dr. Steele has almost 20 years experience in gas turbine combustion fundamentals and applications. 
He was the Combustion team leader for the Mars SoLoNOx engine at Solar Turbines.  He joined 
Ramgen in 2000 and has been involved in the development of lean premixed “trapped” or “advanced” 
vortex combustion designs for gas turbine applications.  He holds a M.S. in Aeronautics and 
Astronautics and a Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Washington.  Having 
authored 30 technical publications, Dr. Steele is a prior member of the Combustion Institute, a 
member of the Combustion and Fuels committee of the ASME, and an Afﬁ liate Adjunct Professor 
at the University of Washington.
BIOGRAPHY  
