363
363
4.3-1 Introduction
          The aerodynamics of the ﬂ ow in a turbine stage (stator/rotor) 
is rather complex and is still the subject of many ongoing research 
activities in the gas turbine community.  The ﬂ ow is inherently 
three dimensional due to the vane/blade passage geometry 
with features such as twisting of the vane/blade along the span, 
clearance between the blade tip and the shroud, ﬁ lm cooling holes, 
and end wall contouring1.  The passage ﬂ ow is characterized 
by boundary layer effects, secondary ﬂ ows generated by the 
passage pressure gradients, and vortical ﬂ ow structures such as 
the leading edge horse-shoe vortices, tip-leakage ﬂ ow vortices, 
and corner vortices2. The effects of centrifugal-buoyancy, shock-
boundary layer interaction, and ﬂ ow interactions between the 
stator and rotor rows complicate the passage ﬂ ow ﬁ eld even 
further.  Along the end walls, the ﬂ ow structure is strongly three-
dimensional with the passage vortex and coolant injection on the 
hub side and the tip-leakage vortex on the tip side.   In the mid-
span regions located away from the passage walls and outside 
the viscous shear layer, the radial ﬂ ow is almost negligible and 
the ﬂ ow is effectively two dimensional.  The ﬂ uid dynamics in 
this region can then be based on two dimensional planar cascade 
ﬂ ow studies without any signiﬁ cant loss of information.  The 
three dimensional complex ﬂ ow structures near the hub endwall 
region and in the blade tip-shroud clearance have been simulated 
in annular vane/blade passages with and without rotating blade 
row3.  Studies of the complex end-wall ﬂ ows have also been 
performed in stationary cascades with three dimensional airfoil 
shapes4.  The qualitative features of the passage ﬂ ows, which 
comprise mainly of the passage crossﬂ ow (ﬂ ow from the pressure 
side of vane/blade to suction side of adjacent vane/blade) and 
vortical ﬂ ows induced by the leading edge, the corners, and the 
injected coolant ﬂ ows have been studied in detail in stationary 
cascades and are considered to be similar in both stationary and 
rotating blade rows. The primary difference in the secondary ﬂ ow 
structure between the blade passage and vane passage is that the 
vortical ﬂ ows and cross ﬂ ows in the blade passage are stronger 
because of higher turning of the ﬂ ows along the blade passage. 
Secondary ﬂ ows are the major source of aerodynamic losses, 
which account for 35%-40% of all losses5 and thermal loading 
in the turbine passage, and thus require special considerations by 
the turbine designers.
          The primary objectives of this chapter are to present and 
analyze the features of the ﬂ ow ﬁ eld in the turbine vane/blade 
passage near the hub endwall and mid-span locations of the blade. 
Toward this effort, reported measurements and computations of 
pressure, velocity distributions, ﬂ ow turning angles, turbulence 
intensity, and vorticity distributions in the cascade test section 
are presented.  Recent efforts to reduce the secondary ﬂ ows by 
structural modiﬁ cations in the passage are discussed.  In this 
chapter, basic ﬂ uid dynamic principles and mathematical models 
of the ﬂ ow in the passage are not discussed, and the reader is 
referred to notes 1, 2, and 6 for additional details6.  Also details 
on the aerodynamic design methodology for the vane/blade 
passage are not presented.
4.3 
Turbine Blade 
Aerodynamics
Louisiana State University
CEBA 1419B, Mechanical 
Engineering Department
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
phone: (225) 578-5809
email: acharya@me.lsu.edu
Sumanta Acharya
Gazi Mahmood 

364
4.3-2 Flow Field in the Mid-span Region
 
Figure 1 shows the streamlines and static pressure distribution along the mid-span plane of the blade passage.  Flow along the 
blade passage at the mid-span locations turns with the passage contour and essentially follows the ideal ﬂow behavior except very close 
to the blade walls.  At zero degree angle of incidence, the streamline splits at the stagnation point corresponding to the blade leading 
edge with one leg moving along the pressure side and the other leg moving along the suction side of the blade.  The pressure gradient 
from the pressure side to the suction side leads to the development of secondary ﬂows.  These secondary ﬂows and the endwall boundary 
layer produce deviations to the nearly-inviscid mid-span streamlines shown in ﬁgure 2. The ﬂow turning angle, known as the yaw 
angle relative to the axial +X direction, at the mid-span plane through the blade passage is shown in ﬁgure 2.  The yaw angle is nearly 
uniform along a constant pitch line from the pressure side to the suction side, and also changes uniformly along the axial length of the 
passage.  The high yaw angle near the leading edge occurs because of the stagnation region where the streamlines sharply turn around 
the blade suction side.  Figure 3 shows the distribution of the static pressure coefﬁcient, Cp, which is determined from the difference of 
blade surface pressure and reference pressure at the passage inlet normalized by the passage inlet dynamic pressure.  The lowest Cp on 
the suction surface corresponds to the location at the passage throat area where the ﬂow velocity is the highest.  The highest Cp is the 
stagnation point location on the blade section at the mid-span height.  The pressure distribution does not change along most of the blade 
span or height except near the hub or tip region.  The blade loading or lift that provides work on the turbine shaft is determined based on 
the area circumscribed by such pressure curves as shown in ﬁgure 3.  The pressure side velocity increases steadily as the Cp decreases on 
the pressure side from the leading edge to the trailing edge.  Along the suction surface, the velocity initially increases toward the throat, 
but starts to decline when it encounters the adverse pressure gradients downstream of the throat in a subsonic ﬂow.  The peak velocity in 
ﬁgure 3 corresponds to the location of the minimum Cp on the suction surface.
          Due to the adverse pressure gradient on the suction surface downstream of the minimum Cp, there is the potential of boundary 
layer separation from the suction-side blade surface near the trailing edge and this represents a major source of proﬁle losses in the blade 
passage.  Boundary layer separation at the blade trailing edge can also occur due to a ﬁnite trailing-edge thickness and can lead to a 
distinct wake region.  For blade proﬁles with high loading, ﬂow separation is a major issue.  With increased loading on the blade surface, 
suction surface pressures are reduced, and the velocity and Mach number over the suction surface increases with the local Mach number 
reaching supersonic values.  This leads to local shocks as schematically depicted in ﬁgure 3, and creates additional aerodynamic losses 
such as shock losses or wave drag7.  Downstream of the shock, suction surface pressure rises in the adverse pressure gradient region and 
Fig. 1. Streamlines and static pressure distribution in the mid-span plane 
along blade passage.
Source: See Note 56 (Acharya).
Fig. 2. Flow yaw angle (deg) contours in mid-span plane 
along blade passage.
Source: See Note 56 (Acharya).

365
boundary layer separation can occur earlier leading to increased 
proﬁle losses for the highly loaded blade.  Refer to notes 5 and 8 
for discussion on the limiting pressure and velocity distributions 
on the blade surfaces and provide guidelines to limit the wake 
region over a very small region at the trailing edge in the blade 
design8.
4.3-3 Flow Field in the Endwall Region
          The ﬂow ﬁeld near the hub endwall region of the blade 
passage is dominated by the boundary layer, strong pressure 
gradients, and cross ﬂow in the pitchwise direction from the 
pressure side to the suction side.  The resulting near-wall ﬂow 
ﬁeld is complex and consists of strong secondary ﬂows and vortex 
roll-up9.  When the endwall boundary layer approaches the blade 
row, a vortex is formed near the junction of the blade leading edge 
and the endwall.  This vortex is termed as the leading edge horse-
shoe vortex.  The horse-shoe vortex splits at the leading edge, and 
propagates downstream into the passage on both the pressure side 
and the suction side of the blade passage forming two legs of the 
early passage vortex ﬂows.  Corner vortices are also induced in 
the corner formed by the blade and the hub endwall.
          The streamlines slightly above the endwall in ﬁgure 4 show 
some distinct features of the endwall boundary layer ﬂow.  These 
features are identiﬁed by the separation lines in the ﬁgure.  The 
streamlines along the blade leading edge bifurcate as they approach 
the saddle point.  The saddle point is the location on the endwall 
where the zero degree incidence line meets the separation line and 
corresponds to the lowest friction velocity.  The incoming endwall 
boundary layer detaches along the separation line, and secondary 
vortical ﬂows are formed in the regions immediately downstream 
and adjacent to the separation line.  This is indicated by the 
high concentration of the streamlines adjacent to the separation 
line.  The strong reverse ﬂow in the vortex regions counter the 
boundary layer streamlines causing them to be concentrated more 
densely near the separation line.  The leading edge horse-shoe 
vortex immediately downstream of the saddle point is clearly 
evident in ﬁgure 4.  The region between the separation line and 
the blade suction side in ﬁgure 4 represents the suction-side leg 
of the horse shoe vortex10.  The region along the separation line 
directed from the pressure side to the suction side represents 
the pressure-side leg of the horse-shoe vortex11, and is driven 
by the passage pressure gradients.  The suction side leg vortex 
and pressure side leg vortex meet together in the mid-passage 
region where the two separation lines in the passage merge.  This 
location occurs close to the suction surface, and the merger of the 
two vortices forms a stronger vortex known as the passage vortex. 
The passage vortex then travels along the blade suction surface 
toward the passage exit.  The axial development and structures 
of these vortex ﬂows will be analyzed further in Section 4.3-4. 
 Downstream of the pressure side separation line, the endwall 
boundary layer region is very thin and skewed toward the suction 
side.  This is evidenced by the streamline concentration being 
sparse in this region as they turn from the pressure side to the 
suction side.  The strong vortical motions of the pressure side leg 
vortex entrain most of the ﬂuid from the incoming boundary layer 
and a new boundary layer forms downstream.  Comparing the 
streamlines in ﬁgure 4 with those in the mid-span regions in ﬁgure 
1, it is clear that the turning of the streamlines inside the blade 
passage and around the leading edge is much greater near the 
Fig. 3. Pressure and velocity distribution on blade surface at 
different spanwise locations.
Source: See Note 56 (Acharya).
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 4. Streamlines showing separation lines in a near endwall 
plane of a linear blade passage.
Source: See Note 56 (Acharya). 

366
endwall region which causes the cross ﬂow here to be stronger. 
The ﬂow yaw angle contours along the passage in ﬁgure 5 show 
the higher magnitudes of the ﬂow turning near the endwall 
compared to the ﬂow turning in the mid-span regions away from 
the endwall.
          The endwall pressure gradients are shown in ﬁgure 6. 
The suction side pressure magnitudes along the endwall are 
higher compared to the suction side pressure values in the free-
stream region (see ﬁgure 1).  This results in smaller pressure 
gradients in the endwall from the pressure side to the suction 
side as shown in the line plot of ﬁgure 6.  The magnitude of 
ΔP in the ﬁgure is the pitchwise pressure difference between 
two points at the same axial chord location, one located on the 
pressure side and the other on the suction side.  As mentioned 
earlier, the turning of the boundary layer ﬂuid in the endwall 
region is much higher compared to the turning of the free-stream 
in the passage, which seems to contradict the results in ﬁgure 6. 
According to Niehuis, et al., in the free-stream ﬂows away from 
the endwall, equilibrium exists between the pitchwise pressure 
gradient and centrifugal force on the ﬂuid elements at the curved 
streamlines12.  This equilibrium breaks down in the endwall 
region because the centrifugal force on the ﬂuid elements in 
the low velocity boundary layer reduces.   As such, the weak 
endwall region streamlines easily turn to a greater degree with 
relatively smaller pressure gradients as those in ﬁgure 6.
Fig. 5. Flow yaw angle (deg) contours in a plane near endwall 
along a linear blade passage.
Source: See Note 56 (Acharya).
Fig. 6. Surface pressure distribution at endwall of a blade passage in linear cascade.
Source: See Note 56 (Acharya).
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics

367
 
The axial pressure distributions along the blade 
surface (ﬁgure 3) change with the span location.  The 
region below 14% span can be considered to be the 
boundary layer region in the ﬁgure.  The difference 
between the free stream static pressure coefﬁcient and 
endwall region static pressure coefﬁcient Cp on the 
pressure surface is small and almost uniform.  This 
suggests that pressure gradient on the pressure surface 
occurs mostly in the axial direction rather than in the 
spanwise direction.  The differences in the suction 
surface Cp between the 50% span and below 14% span 
in ﬁgure 3 are signiﬁcant and occur because of the strong 
cross ﬂow from the pressure side to the suction side in 
the endwall boundary layer and the vortex leg along the 
suction surface13.  The locations of the lowest Cp within 
the boundary layer occurs further downstream of the 
lowest Cp location in the mid-span free-stream region. 
The endwall cross ﬂow drives the low momentum 
boundary layer ﬂuid toward the suction surface-endwall 
junction and causes these observed differences in the 
Cp distributions.   This is also the reason why the axial 
location of the lowest Cp in the boundary layer and the 
lowest Ps on the endwall are different.  Also note that Cp 
magnitude decreases signiﬁcantly from the endwall (i.e. 
4.4% span) to the boundary layer edge (i.e. 13.5% span) 
all along the axial direction.  Such spanwise pressure 
gradient drives the boundary layer ﬂuid and the endwall 
region secondary ﬂows toward the mid-span direction 
near the suction surface.  The implications of such 
migrations are realized in the Heat Transfer Analysis 
section.
          The velocity distribution on the blade surface 
near the endwall is also shown in ﬁgure 3.  The suction 
surface velocity in the endwall region is lower compared 
to the free-stream velocity in mid-span because of the 
inﬂuence of strong secondary ﬂows and higher Cp 
around the suction side edge (i.e. at 4.4% span).  As 
with the lowest Cp location, the associated peak suction 
surface velocity in the endwall region also moves down 
the axial direction relative to the peak velocity location 
at the mid-span.  The difference in velocity distribution 
on the pressures side is opposite to what is observed on 
the suction surface between the mid-span location and 
endwall region.  This can be attributed to the smaller 
pressure surface Cp near endwall as well as the thin 
boundary layer, which is also skewed and thicker 
toward the suction surface, downstream of the endwall 
separation line.
          With the knowledge of velocity and pressure distribution on the blade surface at the mid-span and near endwall, it is now appropriate 
to discuss the three dimensional ﬂow on the blade surface as a whole.  It is apparent by now that the blade suction surface ﬂow near 
the endwall wall region becomes skewed and three dimensional due to the interaction of the boundary layer and ﬂow separation on the 
suction surface and endwall.  The ﬂow visualization on the suction surface of a two dimensional linear blade in ﬁgure 7, as observed in 
Hodson and Dominy, clearly shows the near surface ﬂow behavior14.  The ﬂow on the pressure surface is two dimensional for most part 
of the span as the oil streaklines indicating the surface streamlines are parallel to the endwall in the upper ﬂow visualization of ﬁgure 
7.  The uniform pressure distribution along the pressure surface span (see ﬁgure 3) and very weak interaction of the boundary layers 
between the pressure surface and endwall are responsible for such ﬂow behavior.  However, the laminar boundary layer near the pressure 
surface leading edge may diffuse with a rise in surface pressure when the incoming ﬂow is at high speed.  In this case, the boundary 
layer separates along the line S6 and re-attaches along the line R6 creating a closed separation bubble along most of the span near the 
leading edge.  The laminar boundary layer accelerates following the re-attachment and continues to grow along the pressure surface 
toward the trailing edge.  The two-dimensional separation bubble has no apparent inﬂuence on the secondary ﬂows on the endwall. 
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 7. Surface oil-ﬂow visualization on a linear blade surface and end-wall 
in a linear cascade.  LE= leading edge, TE= trailing edge, and BL= boundry 
layer
Source: See Note 14.

368
Near the leading edge at the endwall, the pressure surface streamlines are inclined toward the endwall indicating the ﬂow is driven by 
the horse-shoe vortex.
          The separation lines created by the oil streaklines on the suction surface of ﬁgure 7 reveals some interesting features of the boundary 
layer behavior.  The separation lines divide the ﬂow on the suction surface into three regimes: (i) two dimensional laminar boundary 
layer regime, (ii) turbulent boundary layer regime, and (iii) three dimensional ﬂow regime.  (i)  Two dimensional laminar regime: This 
regime extends from the leading edge to the lowest suction pressure on the suction surface and between the S2s separation lines near 
the two endwalls in ﬁgure 7.  The surface streamlines are seen to be nearly parallel to the endwall in this regime.  The laminar boundary 
layer starting at the leading edge undergoes a high acceleration on the suction surface.  According to Hodson and Dominy, the over-
acceleration in the boundary layer causes a two dimensional separation bubble near the blend point of the circular leading edge and the 
suction surface15.  This separation bubble extends across most of the span, but it is not apparent in the bottom surface ﬂow visualization 
of ﬁgure 7.  The suction surface leading edge separation bubble is shown by the ﬂow visualization in Gregory-Smith et al.16.  Following 
the re-attachment behind the separation bubble, the laminar boundary layer accelerates along the suction surface and continues to grow 
until the separation line S3s.  (ii) Turbulent regime:  This regime is limited by the re-attachment line following the separation at S3s and 
trailing edge and between the S2s lines.  The laminar boundary layer separates at the lowest suction pressure located at axial distance at 
S3s because of the adverse pressure gradient (see ﬁgure 3) and forms another closed separation bubble.  The boundary layer undergoes 
transition and becomes turbulent as it re-attaches behind the separation bubble on the suction surface.  The turbulent boundary layer 
grows along the suction surface and may separate again due to the adverse pressure gradient near the trailing edge to form the trailing 
edge wake.  (iii) Three dimensional ﬂow regime:  This regime is indicated by the region between the separation line S2s and endwall. 
The regime begins at the location where the suction side leg of the leading edge horse-shoe vortex and pressure side leg vortex from 
the adjacent blade meet on the suction surface.  The pair then emerges as the passage vortex which then moves toward the mid-span as 
it follows the suction surface toward the passage exit.  The suction surface boundary layer separates along the S1s and S2s lines near 
endwalls in ﬁgure 7 as the passage vortex and suction side leg vortex climbs up the suction surface.  The distinct appearance of the 
separation line S2s indicates that the suction side leg vortex maintains its existence in the axial development of the passage vortex which 
will also be shown in further detail in the next section.  The inclination of the surface streamlines toward the mid-span in this regime is 
caused by the entrainment of the boundary layer ﬂuids (both at the endwall and the suction surface) by the passage vortex.  Note that 
the surface streamlines are symmetric about the mid-span of the blade surface in ﬁgure 7.  The patterns become asymmetric in three-
dimensional cascade by the inﬂuence of radial forces as will be shown in further sections.
          The locations of the separation bubbles and separation lines on the blade surface are strongly inﬂuenced by the inlet ﬂow angle 
and Reynolds number or Mach number of the incoming ﬂow.  For the high speed compressible ﬂow (with the Mach number>0.70), the 
ﬂow expands and accelerates along the passage creating local supersonic region at the passage throat17.  As a result, a series of weak 
compression fans are developed at the suction surface near the throat.  Detemple-Laake also shows that at transonic and supersonic ﬂow, 
shocks are formed across the span at the trailing edge of the blade surface18.  The shock at the suction surface trailing edge is deﬂected 
by the wake from the adjacent blade trailing edge.  The shock at the pressure side trailing edge is reﬂected at the adjacent blade suction 
surface as a sequence of compression-expansion-compression waves.  At all Mach numbers tested (exit Mach number ranges between 
0.70 and 1.3), schlieren photographs show that ﬂow separates locally from the blade pressure surface and suction surface forming 
separation bubbles similar to the subsonic ﬂow pattern19.  The separation lines for the suction side leg vortex and the passage vortex on 
the suction surface move nearer to the mid-span as the Mach number is increased.  The suction side leg vortex is deﬂected by the shock 
from the adjacent blade pressure side trailing edge and moves closer to the passage vortex at supersonic ﬂow.  The endwall pressure 
distributions for high speed compressible ﬂows show the same behavior as that at the low speed ﬂows.  Static pressure on the endwall 
increases slightly at the trailing edge due to the expansion at the trailing edge.
    4.3-4 Development and Structure of Secondary Flows in the Passage 
 
We have shown in the earlier section that the secondary ﬂows in the turbine vane/blade passage are dominated by the vortex 
ﬂows located in the hub endwall region.  So far, these vortex ﬂows have been deduced from pressure distributions, near-wall streamlines 
and saddle points or surface oil-ﬂow visualizations.  The vortex ﬂows have been identiﬁed as the suction side leg and the pressure side 
leg originating from the leading edge horse-shoe vortex that eventually merge in a complex way to form the passage vortex. The three 
vortex structures (horse-shoe, pressure side leg, suction side leg) are the primary sources of the vortex ﬂows in the passage.  In addition, 
smaller corner vortices are induced at the corner of blade edge at the endwall. Vortices are also induced on the suction side near the 
meeting point of the pressure side leg vortex and suction side leg vortex ﬂows and are advected with these legs along the suction surface 
toward the passage exit.  This section will discuss the structure and development of the three primary vortex ﬂows along the passage at 
different axial locations by presenting the ﬂow visualization images, streamlines, pressure losses, vorticity, turbulence intensity, and ﬂow 
turning angles. The induced vortex ﬂows will be identiﬁed later in the section. 
Leading edge horse-shoe vortex:      
 
The leading edge horse-shoe vortex is formed at the junction of an endwall and the blunt leading edge of the blade.  As the ﬂow 
approaches the leading edge stagnation line, static pressure rises across the ﬂow from the endwall.  The static pressure increases more 
in the free-stream region above the boundary layer since the free-stream velocity is higher compared to the velocity in the boundary 
layer20. This spanwise pressure gradient in the vicinity of the leading edge causes a vortex roll-up, known as the leading edge horse-shoe 
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics

369
vortex.  The vortex is conﬁned in a region which is smaller than 
one boundary layer thickness from the endwall21. The endwall 
location where the reverse ﬂow in the horse-shoe vortex meets 
the incoming boundary layer ﬂow is termed as the saddle point 
which is generally located along the line corresponding to the zero 
degree incidence-angle as shown in ﬁgure 4.  The center of the 
horse-shoe vortex is located in between the saddle point and the 
blade leading edge.  The exact locations of the saddle point and 
horse-shoe vortex center depends on the radius of curvature of the 
blade leading edge and the oncoming boundary layer thickness. 
The ﬂow visualization in ﬁgure 8 shows the typical formation of 
an instantaneous horse-shoe vortex at the blade leading edge in a 
linear cascade22.  In the ﬁgure, the roll-up of the vortex is in the 
counter-clockwise direction.  Periodically, a pair of horse-shoe 
vortices form that have the same relative size and the same sense 
of rotation.  The time-averaged structure of the horse-shoe vortex 
obtained from a numerical simulation at the same blade leading 
edge is also shown in ﬁgure 8.  The vortex structure is similar to 
the leading edge horse-shoe vortex in front of a cylinder23.  The 
vortex center in ﬁgure 8 is located at the point of the maximum 
kinetic energy.  At the corner of the leading edge, a small counter 
rotating vortex is induced by the large horse-shoe vortex.  This 
clockwise rotating vortex is known as the leading edge corner 
vortex.
Pressure side leg and suction side leg vortices:      
 
 
The path of the leading edge horse-shoe vortex is along 
the separation line shown in ﬁgure 4, and is driven by the endwall 
region pressure gradient and cross ﬂow.  The horse-shoe vortex 
essentially splits near the leading edge with one leg moving along 
the pressure side and the other leg moving along the suction side. 
These two primary legs of the horse-shoe vortex represent the 
origin of the major secondary ﬂow system that develops in the 
blade passage.  The two legs rotate opposite to each other.  The 
pressure side leg of the horse-shoe vortex is driven along the 
separation line across the passage from the leading edge to the 
adjacent blade suction side.  The suction side vortex leg wraps 
around the suction side from the leading edge along the separation 
line in ﬁgure 4.  The vortices are termed as the right side clockwise 
and left side counter-clockwise vortices, respectively, in the ﬂow 
visualization images in ﬁgure 924.  The vortices in the ﬁgure are 
being viewed in the ﬂow direction in pitchwise planes at different 
axial locations.  The pressure side and suction side of the blade 
passage in the study are located on the right and left hand side, 
respectively, in the images.  At location A, which represents the 
pitchwise plane going through the leading edge, a pair of vortex 
structures appears along both the pressure side leg and suction 
side leg of the vortex system.  As with the leading edge horse-
shoe vortex pair, these pairs form periodically from a single 
pressure side and suction side leg vortex.  The vortices are very 
close to the passage pressure side and suction side at plane A.  As 
the vortex legs advect to farther downstream locations at planes 
B, C, and D in the passage in ﬁgure 9, the endwall cross ﬂow 
and pressure gradient from the pressure side to the suction side 
sweeps the pressure side leg of the vortex toward the suction side 
of the passage.  As a result, the pressure side vortex approaches 
closer to the suction side leg vortex from the adjacent blade at 
the downstream locations.  Nearly half way down the passage at 
location D, the two vortex legs merge to form a single structure 
Fig. 8. Typical horse-shoe vortex and corner vortex at a blade lead-
ing edge.  HS=horse-shoe, LE=leading edge, and Tke=turbulent 
kinetic energy.
Source: See Notes 22, 56 (Acharya).
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 9. Flow visualization of pressure side leg and suction 
side leg vortices from.  Vph= pressure side leg vortex and 
Vsh=suction side leg vortex.
Source: See Note 9.

370
of counter-rotating vortices.  At the merging point, the clockwise 
pressure side leg vortex is larger and stronger compared to the 
smaller suction side leg vortex.  Note that the vortices remain 
close to the endwall from the leading edge location to their 
merger location half way through the passage.
          The time-averaged vortex structures, as shown in ﬁgure 
10, are obtained at a pitchwise plane near the leading edge for 
a much higher Reynolds number than that used for the ﬂow 
visualization25.  Even though the blade geometries are different 
for the data in ﬁgures 9 and 10, the basic structure of the vortices 
such as the sense of rotation and relative locations are similar. 
The positive axial vorticity in ﬁgure 10 signiﬁes a clockwise 
rotation of the pressure side leg vortex, while the negative axial 
vorticity indicates a counter-clockwise rotation of the suction side 
leg vortex.  The small vortex located at the edge of the pressure 
side and rotating counter-clockwise is termed as the pressure 
side leading edge corner vortex in Wang, et al. 26.  This vortex is 
induced by the leading edge horse-shoe vortex and driven along 
the pressure side leg vortex.
Passage vortex and induced vortices:       
 
The passage vortex is comprised of the pressure side leg 
vortex and suction side leg vortex as these vortex legs approach 
and merge with each other nearly half-way into the passage and 
along the suction side of the blade.  This is shown as a counter-
rotating vortex pair at location D in Fig. 9.  As the pressure side 
leg vortex is much larger and stronger compared to the suction 
side leg vortex when they meet, the sense of rotation of the 
passage is considered be the same as the rotation of the pressure 
side leg vortex.  The passage vortex remain close the suction 
surface of the blade as it is driven toward the passage exit by the 
cross ﬂow and pressure gradient along the passage.  Figure 11 
shows the passage vortex formation in the same passage as in 
ﬁgure. 9 at locations downstream of plane D.  The suction side 
is located on the left hand side in the ﬂow visualization images27 
in ﬁgure 11.  At locations E and F, the passage vortex Vp is 
rotating counter-clockwise while the suction side leg vortex Vsh 
is rotating clockwise as they are viewed opposite from the main 
ﬂow direction.  As both the vortices funnel boundary layer ﬂuid 
and main ﬂow toward their centers, the passage vortex gradually 
grows larger in size and lifts above the endwall as it travels along 
the suction surface toward the passage exit.  The passage vortex 
movement toward the mid-span is caused primarily by the 
spanwise pressure gradient in the boundary layer on the suction 
surface.  Because of this movement of the passage vortex and as 
the endwall boundary layer ﬂuid is wrapped around the passage 
vortex, the endwall boundary layer becomes skewed and thicker 
toward the suction side.  The suction side leg vortex wraps 
around the passage vortex as it travels along with it.  This is 
evidenced in the ﬂow visualization in ﬁgure 11.  At location E, 
the suction side leg vortex Vsh is located at the top right hand 
corner of the Vp.  At the downstream F location, Vsh moves to 
the left side of the Vp.  At the passage exit, a study in Wang, et 
al. shows that Vsh moves around further and is located at the 
passage vortex bottom part near the suction surface28.
          In the plane F of ﬁgure 11, the small clockwise rotating 
vortex Vwip located adjacent to the suction surface and above 
the passage vortex is termed as the wall vortex.  This vortex 
is formed by the strong induction of the passage vortex and 
Fig. 10. Velocity vectors and axial vorticity representing pressure side 
leg vortex and suction side leg vortex near LE.  VpLc=pressure side 
LE corner vortex and ωx=axial vorticity.
Source: See Note 25.
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics
Fig. 11. Flow visualization of passage vortex and induced vortices.
Source: See Note 9.

371
originates at the same location where the passage vortex 
starts to form (merging point of the counter-rotating vortex 
legs).  The wall vortex stays above the passage vortex and 
is driven along with the passage vortex.
          The small corner vortex induced at the junction 
of blade leading edge and endwall (see ﬁgure 8) by the 
horse-shoe vortex is driven along the pressure side and 
suction side edge with the two main vortex legs.  In Wang, 
et al., they are identiﬁed as the pressure side leading edge 
vortex and suction side leading edge vortex, respectively29. 
They remain small as they travel inside the passage and 
their sense of rotation are opposite to the rotation of the 
main vortex legs they are associated with.  The pressure 
side leading edge corner vortex sticks along the pressure 
surface corner near the leading edge as shown in ﬁgure 10. 
When it enters the passage farther downstream, it is also 
driven toward the suction side of the adjacent blade along 
with the pressure side leg vortex by the endwall cross-ﬂow 
and pressure gradient.  The suction side leading edge corner 
vortex on the other hand remains adjacent to the suction 
side edge until it meets with pressure side leg vortex from 
the neighboring blade.  The corner vortices are not visible in 
the smoke ﬂow visualization as the large vortex legs entrain 
most of the smoke in the ﬂow and enough smoke is not 
available to generate their small patterns clearly.  The three-
dimensional structures of different vortex ﬂows in a blade 
passage sketched in ﬁgure 11 are adopted directly from 
Wang, et al.30.  The sketch shows two additional small vortex 
ﬂows located along the pressure surface corner and suction 
surface corner.  They originate about half way downstream 
in the passage.  The existence of such corner vortices is 
indicated by the high local mass transfer results at the blade 
surface-endwall corner in Goldstein et al.31.  These corner 
vortices rotate in the same direction as the rotation of the 
suction side leg vortex.
          The time-averaged structures of the passage vortex 
in the same ﬂow as in ﬁgure 10 are shown at two axial 
locations in ﬁgure 12.  The data presented is measured 
with a ﬁve-hole pressure probe32.  The velocity vectors are 
determined based on the resolved components33.  The plane 
H in ﬁgure 12 is located about half way down the passage 
and the plane I is located near the exit of the passage.  Unlike 
ﬁgure 11, the ﬂow is being viewed in the axial direction and 
therefore, the suction surface is on the left hand side in the 
plots of ﬁgure 12.  Thus, the rotation of the passage vortex 
is in the clockwise direction in the velocity vector plots. 
The existence of the suction side leg vortex is not apparent 
in the vector plots as it becomes weak in the downstream 
locations.  In a small region just above the passage vortex 
and adjacent to suction surface at plane I, the vectors seem 
to turn counter-clockwise indicating the presence of the 
wall vortex or suction side leg vortex.  However, the vortex 
is clearly apparent in the vorticity plots in ﬁgure 12.  The 
positive axial vorticity indicates the passage vortex while 
the negative axial vorticity located above the positive region 
indicates the suction side leg vortex or the wall vortex.  The 
same arrangement of the vortex systems in the downstream 
locations have been observed in the ﬂow visualization. 
The vortex center is located at the location of the maximum 
vorticity in congruence with the forced vortex motion. 
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 12. Velocity vectors and axial vorticity representing passage vortex 
at suction side.  SS=suction side, Z=pitchwise distance from pressure 
side, and ωx=axial vorticity.
Fig. 13. Axial vorticity downstream of passage exit in a linear blade cas-
cade.  VP= passage vortex, Vsh=suction side leg vortex, and Vwip= wall 
vortex.
Source: See Note 56 (Acharya).

372
Note that the passage vortex center in both the vector and 
vorticity plots moves farther away from the endwall (Y/S=0.0 
location) as the passage vortex travels from location H to I in 
ﬁgure 12.  This is also consistent with the ﬂow visualization 
in ﬁgure 11.  The axial vorticity magnitudes of the passage 
vortex in plane I are somewhat smaller than those in plane H. 
The ﬂow turns further away from the axial direction in plane 
I resulting in smaller component of vorticity in the axial 
direction.  However, the axial vorticity of the wall vortex 
increases in plane I as the intensity of this vortex grows as it 
is driven along with the passage vortex.  The high negative 
axial vorticity at the bottom left corner in plane I in ﬁgure 12 
indicates the suction side corner vortex34.  The corner vortices 
are less likely to develop if the blade surface-endwall corner 
is ﬁlleted.
          The induced wall vortex, corner vortices, and additional 
vortices due to the trailing edge wake can be clearly identiﬁed 
in the ﬂow downstream of a blade passage as in ﬁgure 13.  The 
data are obtained from the same passage ﬂow as in ﬁgure 12, 
but the location of the data is in a pitchwise plane, K, slightly 
downstream of the passage exit.  The projection of the trailing 
edge at this plane is located at Z/P=0.0 and the axial direction 
is into the plane of the data.  The positive axial vorticity and 
the negative axial vorticity just above the positive region in 
ﬁgure 13 also indicate the passage vortex and wall vortex, 
respectively.  The locations of these vortices are even higher 
above the endwall compared to those in ﬁgure 12.  In ﬁgure 
13, the negative trailing edge wake vorticities on the left of the 
passage vortex form due to the wake in the adverse pressure 
gradient region at the trailing edge (see ﬁgure. 3).  The corner 
vortices indicated by the negative vorticities about Z/P=0.0 
and just above the endwall are enhanced by the trailing wake 
ﬂows at this location.
          Figure 14 shows the inﬂuences of the various vortex 
structures on the ﬂow orientation near the exit plane of a 
blade passage35.  The uniformity of the ﬂow angles near the 
suction side is severely affected by the vortex ﬂow.  Both 
the pitch and yaw angles in ﬁgure 14 are referenced to the 
axial +X direction.  The blade turning angle at this location 
is about 65 degree.  The positive pitch angles in the ﬁgure 
indicate that the ﬂow is directed away from the endwall 
while the negative pitch angles indicate that the ﬂow is 
directed toward the endwall.  The under-turning of the ﬂow 
yaw angles, which is less than 59 deg near Y/S=0.20, is very 
high near the passage vortex center.  The high over-turning 
of the ﬂow yaw angles, which is greater than 69 degree near 
Y/S=0.25, in the vicinity of  the suction side occur because of 
the wall vortex or suction side leg vortex.  The over-turning 
of the yaw angles also occur in the endwall boundary layer 
region at Y/S<0.12 where the cross-ﬂow is very strong (see 
ﬁgure.4).  Such under- and over-turning of the exit ﬂows 
affect the blade loading and aerodynamic losses in the next 
row of blades in the turbine stage.
4.3-5 Pressure Loss 
          The vortex structures are a signiﬁcant source of 
pressure or aerodynamic losses across the blade passage. 
They entrain ﬂuid from the free stream ﬂow and enhance 
convective turbulent transport in the endwall region as well 
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics
Fig. 14. Flow turning angles in a plane near exit of a blade passage.
Fig. 15. Turbulent kinetic energy (Tke) and total pressure loss coefﬁcient 
Cpt along a blade passage.  SS=suction side, PS=pressure side, and 
∆Pt=Pt-Pref.
Source: See Note 25 (Saha).

373
as on the blade surface.  This also results in high local 
thermal loading on the turbine passage walls.  Figure 15 
shows the turbulent kinetic energy and total pressure loss 
generated by the secondary vortices at two axial locations 
of the blade passage of ﬁgure 12.  The total pressure loss 
is determined from the difference of local total pressure 
and the reference total pressure at the passage inlet.  The 
axial locations of ﬁgure 15 correspond to the pitchwise 
planes H and I in ﬁgure 12.    At Z/P<-0.30, in plane H, the 
magnitudes of Tke/V2 larger than 0.020 and Cpt larger than 
0.30 can be considered to be located within the secondary 
vortex ﬂow region.  In plane I, the secondary vortex ﬂow 
region is represented by the contours of Tke/V2 and Cpt for 
Z/P<-0.50.  Turbulent kinetic energy decreases from the 
axial location H to the location I in the secondary vortex 
ﬂow region because the ﬂow accelerates as it travels 
downstream.  Because of its size and the magnitude of 
the vorticity, the passage vortex is primarily responsible 
for the turbulent kinetic energy and the total pressure 
losses in the secondary ﬂow region near the suction 
side.  Note that in both the axial locations of ﬁgure 15 the 
high turbulent kinetic energy just above the endwall and 
outside the secondary ﬂow region occurs because of the 
boundary layer ﬂow.  Also it is important to realize that in 
the axial location I near the exit plane, the total pressure 
losses in the passage vortex core region are more than ﬁve 
times the total pressure losses in the free stream region 
with Cpt<0.20.
4.3-6 Aerodynamics of 2-D Vane 
Cascade 
          The results presented so far on the ﬂow structure 
in a blade passage are very typical of other linear blade 
cascade studies reported36.  The magnitudes of the ﬂow 
quantities are different from one study to the other, but 
the pattern and arrangement of the secondary ﬂows are 
similar.  The secondary ﬂow patterns in a two-dimensional 
vane cascade are also expected to be similar to that in a 
linear blade cascade.  This is because the formation of the 
leading edge horse-shoe vortex is inevitable for the vane 
passage as well.  The horse-shoe vortex is then driven 
by the endwall cross ﬂow and pressure gradient in the 
passage forming the suction side leg and pressure side leg 
vortices.  The secondary ﬂows are weaker and smaller in a 
linear vane passage than in a linear blade passage because 
of the smaller ﬂow turning and weaker endwall cross ﬂow 
in the vane passage37.  However, the same components 
of the secondary ﬂows are present in both the vane and 
blade passages.  Due to the weaker secondary ﬂows in 
the vane passage, the pressure losses are smaller relative 
to those across a blade passage.  Figure 16 presents the 
data measured in a linear vane cascade38.  The pressure 
side leg vortex (clockwise rotating) and the suction side 
leg vortex (counter-clockwise rotating) at plane SS-1 in 
ﬁgure 16 are located near the pressure side and adjacent 
to the suction side of the vane, respectively.  At a farther 
downstream location SS-3, the pressure side leg vortex is 
driven close to the suction side and pair up with counter-
rotating suction side leg vortex to form the passage 
vortex.  Like the blade passage ﬂow, the suction side leg 
Fig. 17. Static pressure and secondary velocity vectors across a plane in a 
vane passage of annular cascade.  PS=pressure side and SS=suction side.
Source: See Note 3. (Sieverding)
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 16. Secondary velocity vectors and streamwise velocity contours show-
ing vortex ﬂow formations in a linear vane cascade.  SS= suction surface 
and PS= pressure surface.
Source: See Note 33.

374
vortex clearly appears much weaker and smaller than the passage 
vortex at this location in the vane passage.  However, the relative 
arrangement of the passage vortex and suction side leg vortex 
at SS-3 in ﬁgure 16 is different than that observed at plane H in 
ﬁgure 12.  The evolution of the passage vortex structure along 
a linear vane cascade and downstream of a linear vane passage 
show qualitative similarity with those found in ﬁgures 12, 13, 
and 1639. 
4.3-7 Aerodynamics of 3-D Cascade   
      
  
A three-dimensional cascade is usually formed when the 
linear or twisted blade or vane proﬁles are stacked in an annular 
passage.  Thus, the ﬂow area in the cascade passage increases 
from the hub side to the tip side of the adjacent blades.  Because 
of this passage structure, a radial pressure gradient is added to the 
ﬂow everywhere in the annular passage40.  This radial pressure 
gradient directing towards the hub neutralize the radially outward 
centrifugal force experienced by the free-stream ﬂuid which is 
in equilibrium across the annular passage.  The radial pressure 
gradient increases from the pressure side to suction side41.  The 
data in ﬁgure 17, adopted from Sieverding et al., show the static 
pressure coefﬁcients and secondary velocity vectors across an 
axial plane slightly upstream of the passage exit of an annular 
vane cascade.  In the ﬁgure, the difference in static pressure 
coefﬁcient between the hub and casing is higher on the suction 
side than on the pressure side.  The effects of such pressure 
gradients are greater at the passage exit than within the passage. 
The vectors show the formation of the passage vortex near the 
hub and casing side.  The radial displacement of the vortex 
centers are mostly the consequence of the pitchwise cross ﬂow 
rather than the radial pressures as observed in a linear cascade. 
The total pressure losses near the hub and casing walls due to the 
two passage vortex structures are also nearly identical.  However, 
in the same study, the total pressure losses at the passage exit are 
found to be asymmetric with respect to the spanwise meridian 
unlike that observed across a linear cascade.  The total pressure 
losses downstream of the cascade are considerably higher near 
the hub wall than those near the casing42.  This is attributed to the 
inﬂuence of the radial pressure gradient.  Near the endwall in the 
passage, the streamwise velocity decreases in the boundary layer 
and the secondary ﬂow region.  As a consequence the centrifugal 
force generated from the circumferential component of the 
streamwise velocity decreases near the endwalls.  But, the radial 
pressure gradient remains unchanged.  Thus, the non-equilibrium 
behavior near the casing results in the reduced total pressure loss 
there.  
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics
Fig. 18. Total pressure loss coefﬁcients at exit plane of a linear and 
an annular cascade.
Source: See Note 13.* (Moustapha)
Fig. 19. Spanwise distribution of pitchwise averaged total pressure 
loss coefﬁcient for linear and annular cascades in Fig. 18.
Source: See Note 13.* (Moustapha) 
*The original version of this material was published by the Advisory 
Group for Aerospace Research and Development, North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (AGARD/NATO) in AGARD Conference Proceedings CP-
469 ”Secondary Flows in Turbomachines” in 1990.

375
A comparative study of a linear cascade and an 
annular cascade with the same two dimensional blade geometry 
employed is presented in ﬁgure 1843.  The total pressure losses 
in ﬁgure 18 are obtained at the same exit location relative 
to the blade trailing edge in the two passages.  It is clearly 
evident from the plots that the radial pressure gradient in the 
annular cascade plays a signiﬁcant role and alters the pressure 
loss distribution when compared to the linear passage which 
experiences no such pressure gradient.  The pressure losses in 
the linear cascade have two distinct high loss regions, located 
symmetrically about 50% blade span, near the suction surface. 
These are the signatures of passage vortices from the top and 
bottom endwalls.  In contrast, the annular cascade has one high 
total pressure loss region between 48% and 77% span.  In this 
loss region, the peak losses are 0.70 and 0.80 at 53% and 70% 
span, respectively, indicating that the cores of the hub side and 
casing side passage vortices are very close to each other.  
The plots in ﬁgure 19 determined from the local data 
in ﬁgure 18 compares the pitchwise averaged total pressure 
loss magnitudes between the linear cascade and the annular 
cascade.  The two peaks in ﬁgure 19 for the planar cascade are 
a consequence of the distinct passage vortex pair observed in 
the local data.  For the annular cascade, one peak in the average 
pressure loss distribution occurs because of a single high 
pressure loss region in the local data.  In general, the average 
total pressure losses are much higher for the annular cascade 
than for the linear cascade along most of the span.  Between 
20% and 40% span at the inner endwall side the average losses 
are higher for the linear rig as the passage vortex from this 
endwall is located in this region.
          The static pressure distributions on the annular endwalls 
as shown in ﬁgure 20 indicate different distributions for the 
casing wall and hub wall.  The pitchwise pressure gradient 
extends all the way down to the trailing edge for the casing 
wall.  While the cross pitch pressure gradient for the hub wall 
is high in the ﬁrst half of the passage, the gradient decreases 
signiﬁcantly in the latter half of the passage compared to that 
for the casing.  Such pressure distributions provide the radial 
pressure gradients between the two endwalls in the annular 
cascade which is responsible for the radial movement of the 
secondary ﬂows as explained previously.  The magnitudes of 
the static pressure coefﬁcient near the suction side in ﬁgure 
20 are higher for the hub wall than for the casing in the ﬁrst 
half of the passage.  In the second half of the passage, these 
magnitudes near the suction surface are higher for the casing 
wall.  Thus, the endwall cross ﬂow covers most of the casing 
wall, while it covers only the ﬁrst 3
2
rd of the hub wall.  Note the 
qualitative similarity of the contour distributions between the 
linear passage endwall (ﬁgure. 6) and annular passage casing 
wall (ﬁgure 20).
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 20. Static pressure coefﬁcients on endwalls in a blade passage 
in an annular cascade.
Source: See Note 13.* (Moustapha)
Fig. 21.  Surface ﬂow visualization on a vane suction surface in an 
annular cascade.
Source: See Note 45.
*The original version of this material was published by the Advisory 
Group for Aerospace Research and Development, North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (AGARD/NATO) in AGARD Conference Proceedings CP-
469 ”Secondary Flows in Turbomachines” in 1990.

376
          Blade surface pressure distributions on the pressure 
surface are about the same for the annular cascade and linear 
cascade44.  The radial pressure gradient on the pressure surface 
(annular cascade) is present only near at the hub side.  On 
the contrary, the radial pressure gradient is present along the 
entire span on the blade surface and is larger in the ﬁrst one-
third of the surface in axial direction compared to the rest of 
the surface.  When compared at the same corresponding radial 
location, the magnitudes of static pressure coefﬁcient on 
the suction surface are always higher in the annular cascade 
than in the linear cascade due to the radial pressure gradient. 
However, the suction surface pressure coefﬁcient distributions 
in the axial direction follow similar patterns in both types 
of cascade employing same blade geometry.  Thus, the two 
dimensional local separation bubbles also appear on the blade 
suction surface in an annular passage.
          The vane suction surface ﬂow pattern in an annular 
cascade is presented in ﬁgure 2145.  The visualization reveals 
the asymmetric surface streamlines relative to the spanwise 
meridian unlike the streamline patterns on the suction surface 
in a linear cascade.  In ﬁgure 21 also, the separation lines divide 
the near surface ﬂow behavior into three regions as has been 
observed in case of a linear passage.  The ﬁrst region is the two 
dimensional laminar region extending from the leading edge 
to the inclined separation line (spanwise) between passage 
vortex separation lines.  In the radial/spanwise direction this 
region is limited between the separation lines for passage 
vortex.  Near surface ﬂow simply follows the suction surface 
in the ﬁrst region.  The second region is the turbulent ﬂow 
region that extends behind the inclined re-attachment line to 
the trailing edge in ﬁgure 21.  Unlike that in the linear cascade 
(ﬁgure 7), the suction surface separation bubble formed here 
(ﬁgure 21) by these inclined separation and re-attachment 
lines is asymmetric.  The third ﬂow region, which is the three 
dimensional boundary layer region in ﬁgure 21 limited by the 
passage vortex separation line and endwall, is larger on the 
casing side than on the hub side.  The separation lines extend 
all the way to the trailing edge.   The separation line for the 
passage vortex at the casing is farther away from the casing 
than the separation line for the hub-end passage vortex line 
is from the hub wall.  This is in accordance with the passage 
vortex movement observed in ﬁgure 18 for the annular cascade 
and as described, is caused by the radial imbalance of the radial 
forces.  The inclination of the surface streamlines in the third 
region caused by the passage vortex funneling and entrapping 
ﬂuid is an indication of the vortex strength.
          The three dimensional vortex ﬂows near the hub and 
casing walls are enhanced in an annular rotor passage where 
the blades rotate relative to a stator passage.  In the blade 
stage, there is a gap between the blade tip and casing to allow 
for rotation.  Due to the pressure gradient from the blade 
pressure side to the suction side there is a leakage ﬂow from 
the pressure side to the suction side in the tip gap. The tip-
gap ﬂows generate an additional vortex ﬂows near the casing 
wall which develop and grow along with the casing side 
passage vortex in the rotor passage. The tip vortex inﬂuences 
the passage vortex from the casing wall.  Figure 22 shows 
the tip-clearance vortex and passage vortex structures near 
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics
Fig. 22. Measured secondary velocity vectors at rotor exit in an an-
nular passage.
Source: See Note 3. (Gallus)
Fig. 23. Relative total pressure contours in an annular rotor passage 
showing vortex ﬂows.  PS= pressure side and SS= suction side.
Source: See Note 47.

377
the casing wall and hub wall at the exit plane of a rotating 
rotor passage.  As indicated in the ﬁgure, the counter-rotating 
secondary ﬂows in the passage vortex near the casing wall are 
caused by the inﬂuence of the tip vortex.  According to Gallus 
et al., the ﬂow interactions between the rotor-stator rows 
change the static pressure distributions on the rotor surface 
periodically46.  The isobar contour lines in ﬁgure 23 show 
that the tip-clearance vortex strengthens the radial inward 
movement of the casing passage vortex in a rotor passage47. 
This occurs as the tip vortex grows and intensiﬁes along the 
passage and pushes the passage vortex in the radial direction. 
The size and strength of the passage vortices formed in the 
rotor passage ﬂuctuate depending on the position of the trailing 
edge wake and passage vortices from the stator row.  When the 
stator wake and passage vortices hit the rotor blade leading 
edge, the passage vortices in the rotor passage grow larger and 
stronger.  At the rotor exit, the locations of the passage vortices 
and trailing edge wake also ﬂuctuate depending on the wake 
and vortices from the upstream stator row48.  The tip-clearance 
vortex increases the suction side static pressure and decreases 
the pressure side static pressure at the tip region of the rotor 
blade.  This reduces the blade loading at the tip region in the 
rotor stage.
4.3-8 Aerodynamics With Passage 
Modiﬁcations
          Recently there have been a number of studies directed 
at structural modiﬁcations of the blade passage with the aim of 
reducing the secondary ﬂows in the passage.  The secondary 
ﬂows are the signiﬁcant sources of aerodynamic losses and 
increased thermal loading in the passage walls.  The large 
passage vortex structure also makes the exit ﬂow turning 
non-uniform across the entire passage exit plane.  This 
subsequently increases the noise level, secondary losses, and 
ﬂuctuations of the blade loading on the following blade row. 
Cold air is injected through tiny holes in the endwall to provide 
a protective ﬁlm on the endwall from the hot gas in the passage 
main ﬂow.  The effectiveness of ﬁlm cooling is adversely 
affected by the secondary ﬂows in the endwall.  The coolant 
air injected from the holes located upstream of and adjacent 
to the separation line (ﬁgure 4) is lifted up from the endwall 
by the passage/pressure side leg vortex and suction side leg 
vortex.  This exposes a large part of the endwall immediately 
downstream of the separation line to the hot gas.  The wake 
and exit passage vortices also affect the coolant ﬂow injected 
from the holes located in the platform between the two stages. 
The non-uniformity in the exit ﬂow angles alters the expected 
trajectories of these coolant paths.  The structural modiﬁcations 
of the passage are undertaken at or near the endwall that only 
affects the ﬂow in the boundary layer and, beneﬁcially alters 
the secondary ﬂow behavior.  Therefore the blade proﬁle 
remains unchanged for most of the blade span, and only the 
minimum change occurs in the blade loading.  The geometrical 
modiﬁcations are still the subject of ongoing investigations and 
include leading edge ﬁllet additions and endwall proﬁling. In 
the discussion below, attention will be focused on these two. 
Leading Edge Fillet:      This modiﬁcation is also termed as the 
leading edge contouring near the endwall.  Fillets are placed at 
the junction of the leading edge and endwall.  Several forms 
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 24. Different leading edge ﬁllet proﬁles employed in aerodynamic 
loss reduction studies
Source: See Notes 22, 25, 49.
Fig. 25. Leading edge horse-shoe vortex in a linear blade passage 
with leading edge ﬁllet.  Tke= turbulent kinetic energy.
Source: See Notes 22, 25.

378
of the ﬁllet proﬁles have been tested and are shown in ﬁgure 24. 
As can be seen in the ﬁgure, two types of basic construction of 
ﬁllet proﬁles can be identiﬁed: (i) proﬁle with varying height 
from the blade surface to the endwall and (ii) proﬁle of bulb with 
surface thickness at the outer periphery49.  The thickness of the 
type (i) ﬁllet proﬁles reduces to zero as they extend out from the 
blade surface to the endwall.  These ﬁllets may blend with either 
the endwall or blade wall or with both the endwall and blade 
surface as they wrap around the leading edge extending inside 
the passage.  The ﬁllet proﬁles of the type (ii) blend with the 
blade surface as they wrap around the leading edge, but meet the 
endwall with a ﬁnite thickness.  Type (ii) ﬁllets simply thicken 
the blade proﬁle near the leading edge at the endwall.  All types 
of ﬁllets studied until now have asymmetric proﬁle with respect 
to the leading edge and have their highest point located at the 
leading edge.  The height of this highest point from the endwall 
i.e. the maximum height of the ﬁllets is typically one boundary 
layer thickness of the incoming ﬂow.
          The studies mentioned above show that type (i) ﬁllets 
are the most effective in reducing the secondary ﬂows in the 
blade passage.  These ﬁllets reduce the size and strength of the 
leading edge horse-shoe vortex.  Consequently, the strength of 
the passage vortex is reduced.  The high total pressure losses due 
the passage vortex then also decrease across the blade passage. 
Figure 25 shows the horse-shoe vortex structure at the leading 
edge with a ﬁllet proﬁle of type (i) employed at the leading edge. 
The proﬁle height varies linearly to zero from the blade surface 
to the endwall and blends with the endwall and blade wall inside 
the passage on the pressure side and suction side (Fillet 150).  The 
blade passage is the same as that in ﬁgure 8.  The wedge shaped 
object on the left of the ﬂow visualization image of ﬁgure 25 is 
the ﬁllet proﬁle.  The size of the horse-shoe vortex is about half 
in the ﬂow visualization and about one-ﬁfth in velocity vector 
plot with the ﬁllet compared to the case without any ﬁllet.  Note 
that the ﬂow visualization is observed at a low speed to avoid 
any smearing and diffusion of smoke.  The ﬂow area at the 
leading edge is reduced in the passage with the ﬁllet.  For the 
incompressible ﬂow, this will cause the boundary layer ﬂuid to be 
displaced from the leading edge plane.  Also, the adverse pressure 
gradient along the leading edge plane (due to the stagnation) is 
reduced by the ﬁllet slope.  All these factors are responsible in 
reducing the size of the horse-shoe vortex with the ﬁllet.  The 
turbulent kinetic energy is also reduced signiﬁcantly in ﬁgure 25 
compared to what is observed without the ﬁllet.  This indicates 
that the strength of the horse-shoe vortex is also reduced by the 
ﬁllet.  There is also no apparent structure of the leading edge 
corner vortex in the secondary velocity vectors with the ﬁllet.
          As the horse-shoe vortex is reduced, the Fillet 1 is expected 
to reduce the passage vortex size and strength downstream in the 
blade passage.  Figure 26 shows the passage vortex at a plane 
92% axial chord (near the exit) with and without ﬁllet in the 
same blade passage.  Comparing the velocity vectors in ﬁgure 
12 (Plane I) and ﬁgure 26, it can be seen that the location of the 
passage vortex center with the Fillet 1 moves little higher above 
the endwall than without the ﬁllet.  In an upstream location near 
the suction side in the blade passage, the suction side leg vortex 
is reduced in size and weakens with the Fillet 1 compared to that 
without the ﬁllet51.  The signiﬁcant differences are observed in the 
total pressure loss contours of ﬁgure 26.  The high total pressure 
loss region (Cpt>0.45) can be considered as the signature of the 
passage vortex.  The Cpt contours presented here are measured 
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics
Fig. 26. Passage vortex and total pressure loss at 92% axial 
chord with and without ﬁllet.
Source: See Note 25.
Fig. 27. Secondary velocity vectors and turbulent kinetic energy 
(k) at pressure side (Plane PS1) of a linear vane cascade with and 
without ﬁllet.  PS= pressure side.
Source: See Note 49. (Zess)

379
with a ﬁve-hole pneumatic probe unlike the magnitudes in ﬁgure 15 
which are obtained from computations in the same passage with an 
incoming boundary layer of smaller thickness.  The total pressure 
losses in ﬁgure 26 are much lower at the bottom part of the passage 
vortex with the ﬁllet than without the ﬁllet.  This indicates that the 
Fillet 1 has reduced the passage vortex both in size and strength. 
Also revealed, the under-turning (yaw angle) of the exit ﬂow with 
the Fillet 1 occurs over a larger region in the passage vortex core52. 
Similar results about the passage vortex and associated total pressure 
losses are observed with other ﬁllet proﬁles of type (i)53.  Figure 27 
shows the effectiveness of another ﬁllet proﬁle of type (i) in reducing 
the passage vortex in a linear vane cascade.  The quantities in ﬁgure 
27 are measured in a plane normal to the vane pressure surface54. 
The velocity vectors in the ﬁgure show the structure of the pressure 
side vortex near the pressure surface.  As can be clearly seen, the 
pressure side leg vortex is not complete for the ﬁlleted vane unlike 
the vortex for the unﬁlleted case.  The spiral of the vortex is not 
complete in the same location for the ﬁlleted case as the passage 
vortex is weakened.  This will eventually make the passage vortex 
weaker down the passage for the ﬁlleted vane.  Also, the location 
of the passage vortex center appears to shift farther away from the 
pressure side for the ﬁlleted case compared to that for the unﬁlleted 
case.  The turbulent kinetic energy magnitudes in ﬁgure 27 are much 
smaller for the ﬁlleted vane than those for the unﬁlleted vane.  The 
k-contours indicate a well-deﬁned vortex core for the unﬁlleted case 
while the k-contours for the ﬁlleted case are much uniform in the 
y/P direction.  The ﬁllet causes the passage vortex in this plane to 
ﬂuctuate along y/P as the velocity component in this direction has 
the largest ﬂuctuations with the ﬁllet.  On the contrast, the large 
ﬂuctuations in the w-velocity component cause the passage vortex to 
ﬂuctuate in the z/S direction for the unﬁlleted vane.
Endwall Proﬁling:      Endwall proﬁling is achieved in two ways- 
axial proﬁling along the passage with no pitchwise variation and non-
axisymmetric proﬁling along the passage with proﬁle variations in 
both the axial and pitchwise directions.  The proﬁling is aimed either 
to accelerate the boundary layer ﬂuid at the endwall or to reduce the 
pitchwise pressure gradient at the endwall.
(i) Axial Proﬁling of the Endwall:      Since there is no variation of the 
proﬁle in the pitch direction, this proﬁling is also termed as the two 
dimensional axisymmetric contouring.  The proﬁling is employed on 
either of the endwalls in the passage, but not on the both endwalls. 
The height of the proﬁle increases over a smooth curve from the 
leading edge to the trailing edge such that aspect ratio of the exit 
plane or the throat area is unaffected as shown in ﬁgure 28.  This 
type of endwall proﬁle was studied in linear vane passages55.  The 
axisymmetric proﬁles of the endwall upstream of the blade/vane 
passage such as the proﬁle (b) of ﬁgure 28 are also studied56.  Upstream 
proﬁles in the ﬁrst stage nozzle guide vane are used for the gas path 
transition from the combustor chamber to the turbine inlet.  In any 
proﬁle shown in ﬁgure 28, the inlet velocity to the blade/vane passage 
decreases (due to increased passage area) and the ﬂow acceleration 
through the passage increases (due to decreased passage area).  This 
leads to a reduction in the boundary layer thickness and suppresses 
the growth of secondary ﬂows on the endwalls.  Also, the exit ﬂow 
angle is expected to undergo less under-turning and over-turning due 
to the higher ﬂow acceleration downstream with the endwall proﬁling 
extending through the passage.
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 28. Axisymmetric axial proﬁling of endwall: (a) endwall 
proﬁle through blade passage, (b) endwall proﬁle upstream of 
blade passage.
Fig. 29. Streamwise velocity and secondary velocity vectors at 
0.90Cax in a linear vane passage with endwall proﬁling through 
passage aft.
Source: See Note 55. (Burd)

380
          Figure 29 shows the effects of the endwall proﬁling through the 
passage aft of a vane cascade on the secondary ﬂows57.  The data are 
presented in a plane near the passage exit where the endwall proﬁle has 
become almost ﬂat.  The low streamwise velocity magnitudes adjacent 
to the pressure side in ﬁgure 29 are located within the boundary layer on 
this side.  The high velocities near the contour endwall are the results of 
ﬂow accelerations along the endwall.  The two concentrated low velocity 
regions (U/U2<0.90) adjacent to the suction side near the ﬂat and contour 
endwalls are located in the passage vortex at this plane.  The passage 
vortex region near the contour endwall is about half the size of that near 
the ﬂat endwall.  The velocity vector plot in ﬁgure 29 reveals that ﬂuids 
are being displaced from the contour endwall region toward the mid-span 
(y/S=0.50) as all the vectors in this region are pointing toward the mid-
span.  The vectors pointing toward the suction side near y/S=1.0 indicate 
that the cross-pitch ﬂow is much stronger at the ﬂat endwall than at the 
contour endwall.  As this component of the ﬂow is one of the major 
contributors for the growth of the passage vortex, the passage vortex is 
smaller near the contour endwall.  The passage vortices can be identiﬁed 
by the small turning vectors creating an apparent clockwise and counter-
clockwise motion near the contour endwall and ﬂat endwall, respectively. 
The static pressure distributions near the endwalls along the passage in 
ﬁgure 30 illustrate further the effects of the proﬁled endwall on the cross-
pitch and secondary ﬂows.  The contoured proﬁle for the data in ﬁgure 
30 is similar to that in ﬁgure 29 except the proﬁle now extends across the 
entire passage length.  The other endwall of the passage is ﬂat without 
any contouring.  In ﬁgure 30, the pressure distribution at the ﬂat wall is 
similar to what is observed on the non-proﬁled endwalls in a linear vane 
passage.  At the contoured endwall side, the contour lines of constant 
pressure near the leading edge are aligned more in the pitch direction 
than in the axial direction.  In contrast, the constant pressure lines at the 
ﬂat wall side near the leading edge are aligned more in the axial direction. 
The pressures at the contoured endwall are higher than those at the ﬂat 
endwall for the ﬁrst 40% axial chord.  The pressures then are lower at the 
contoured endwall than at the ﬂat endwall for the latter 60% axial chord. 
Thus, the pressure gradient at the contoured endwall is more parallel to 
the vane surface than to the pitch direction.  The pressure gradient at the 
ﬂat endwall is more parallel to the pitch direction than to the vane surface. 
As a consequence, the cross ﬂow in the pitch direction is stronger on the 
ﬂat endwall than on the contoured endwall.  The reduced strength of the 
endwall cross ﬂow then suppresses the growth of the passage vortex as 
mentioned earlier.
          The total pressure loss at the passage exit is reduced when the 
passage vortex near the contoured endwall is weakened and reduced in 
size.  This is illustrated in the total pressure measurements in ﬁgure 3158. 
The planar vane cascade in the ﬁgure employs ﬂat endwalls at both the 
hub and tip while the tip wall is axially contoured and the hub wall is 
ﬂat for the contoured vane cascade.  The contouring here extends across 
the entire passage length.  The data in ﬁgure 31 are presented in a plane 
located 10% axial chord downstream of the passage exit.  Hence, the 
endwall proﬁle is ﬂat at this location and the total passage height (z/S) 
is same for both the planar cascade and contoured cascade.  The passage 
vortex regions in the ﬁgure can be identiﬁed by the highly concentrated 
circular contour lines near the endwalls.  The parallel contour lines about 
y/P=0.50 indicate the wake region.  The loss distributions are almost 
symmetric about the mid-span location z/S=0.50 for the planar cascade 
and the passage vortices are located away from the endwall regions as 
expected.  While the loss distributions are asymmetric in the contoured 
cascade, the passage vortex loss region about z/S=0.10 from the ﬂat wall 
side is similar to the passage vortex loss region in the planar cascade. 
However, the core loss region of this passage vortex has shifted closer 
to the ﬂat wall side and further away from the suction side trailing edge. 
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics
Fig. 30. Static pressure distributions near endwalls in a 
linear vane passage with endwall proﬁling extending from 
leading edge to trailing.
Source: See Note 55. (Shih)
Fig. 31. Total pressure loss, Cpt distributions at 1.10Cax for 
a linear vane cascade with and without endwall proﬁling.
Source: See Note 55. (Dossena)

381
The loss contours due to the passage vortex from the contoured 
endwall side in the contoured cascade are located just adjacent 
to the contoured wall side at z/S=0.95.  Thus, the spanwise (z/
S) extent of the passage vortex at the contoured endwall side 
is smaller compared to those in the planar cascade.  Another 
important difference between the two cascades is identiﬁed 
by comparing the wake regions.  The pitchwise width of the 
wake region for the contoured cascade is smaller than that 
for the planar cascade.  This can be attributed to the velocity 
and pressure distributions on the vane suction surface in the 
contoured cascade.  The lowest pressure and consequently the 
peak velocity on the vane suction surface shifts toward the 
trailing edge in the presence of the contoured endwall.  Thus, 
the diffusion rate of velocity is lower over the suction surface 
in the contoured cascade59.  As a result the extent of the adverse 
pressure gradient region near the suction surface trailing edge 
decreases reducing the extent of the trailing edge wake.  Thus, 
the proﬁle loss in the contoured cascade also decreases.
          The effect of axial proﬁling of endwall in an annular vane 
passage was measured60.  The endwall contouring is employed 
at the tip wall in the last half of the passage.  The contouring 
affects the pressure distributions signiﬁcantly on the vane 
suction surface at the tip region.  The suction surface pressure at 
the tip region rises in the ﬁrst 50% of axial chord.  In the latter 
50% of axial chord, the pressure decreases on the suction surface 
and the maximum suction side velocity shifts toward the trailing 
edge at the tip region.  As a result, the adverse pressure gradient 
on the blade suction surface is reduced at the vane tip region.  In 
the annular ﬂow area, the static pressure and total pressure loss 
distributions are affected in the latter part of the passage where 
the tip contouring is located.  In the aft part of the passage, the 
radial pressure gradient directed toward the hub endwall in an 
annular passage with no tip wall contouring is inverted in the 
upper half span near the suction side when the tip contouring is 
employed.  Unlike the annular passage without tip contouring, 
the radial ﬂow angle at the exit plane is negative across most 
of the plane with the tip wall contouring.  Downstream of the 
passage exit the total pressure loss region due to wake reduces in 
the pitch/circumferential direction signiﬁcantly for the contoured 
annular passage (tip wall proﬁling) compared to that for the plain 
annular passage.  This occurs as the adverse pressure gradient 
at the vane surface trailing edge reduces for the contoured 
tip/casing endwall.  The same relative behavior for the wake 
region has been observed for the linear vane cascade with and 
without tip wall contouring61.  At the same downstream location 
as above, Boletis (1985) shows that the high total pressure loss 
region near the contoured casing wall (annular) is also reduced 
compared to that near the plain annular casing wall.  However, 
the magnitudes of the total pressure loss in this region are about 
the same for both type of casing walls.
(ii) Non-axisymmetric Proﬁling of Endwall:  In this case, the 
endwall proﬁle variations can be achieved by varying the height 
of the proﬁle over a smooth curve in the axial direction and over 
another smooth curve in the pitch direction.  The objective is to 
increase the endwall height near the passage pressure side and 
decrease the endwall height near the suction side with respect 
to a baseline ﬂat endwall.  The endwall region static pressure 
on such proﬁle is expected to decrease near the pressure side 
and increase near the suction side, thus reducing the pitchwise 
pressure gradient and the strength of the cross-pitch ﬂows at 
Blade LE
Pitchwise distance
Endwall
Endwall
profile
height
(m)
Pressure
side
Suction
side
Blade LE
Pitchwise distance
Endwall
Endwall
profile
height
(m)
Pressure
side
Suction
side
Fig. 32. Non-axisymmetric proﬁle of endwall employed in a linear 
blade cascade.
Source: See Note 62.
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 33. Measured static pressure and computed surface stream-
lines at a ﬂat endwall and at a non-axisymmetric contoured end-
wall in a linear blade passage.   Ps= wall static pressure.

382
the endwall.  Figure 32 shows the proﬁle of such an endwall that is 
employed62.  The ﬁgure also includes the proﬁle height variations 
across the passage.  Harvey et al and Hartland et al. provide guidelines 
for designing the non-axisymmetric contour proﬁles for the linear 
cascade63.
          The measured static pressure distributions and computed 
surface streamlines at a ﬂat endwall and at the contoured endwall 
of ﬁgure 32 are presented in ﬁgure 33 for a linear blade passage. 
The other endwall proﬁle of the passage is always ﬂat in this case. 
The surface static pressure Ps on the contoured endwall in ﬁgure 33 
increases near both the pressure side and suction side compared to 
the Ps at the same locations on the ﬂat endwall.  But, the pitchwise 
pressure gradient, that drives the cross-pitch ﬂow, in the ﬁrst 40% 
axial chord decreases for the contoured endwall compared to that 
for the ﬂat endwall.  This clearly affects the cross-pitch ﬂow on the 
endwall as shown in ﬁgure 33.  The turning of the streamlines near 
the leading edge is much lower on the contoured endwall than on the 
ﬂat endwall.  The distance of the saddle point from the leading edge 
is also smaller for the contoured endwall than for the ﬂat endwall. 
This indicates that the leading edge horse-shoe vortex is smaller in 
size above the contoured endwall.  Inside the passage, the streamlines 
are also turning less toward the suction surface and appear to be more 
parallel to the blade surface on the contoured endwall.  This occurs 
as the strength of the cross-pitch ﬂow near the contoured endwall is 
decreased.  The consequences of the results in ﬁgure 33 are weaker 
passage vortex and lower total pressure loss across the blade passage 
with the non-axisymmetric contoured endwall.  These will be shown 
next.
          Figure 34 shows the streamlines in a pitchwise plane located 
9% axial chord down the passage.  The blade proﬁle and contoured 
endwall proﬁle are identiﬁed as solid objects in the ﬁgure.  The 
structure of the pressure side leg vortex at this location is very clear 
near the pressure side of the ﬂat endwall case.  On the other hand, 
the streamlines near the pressure side for the contoured endwall case 
have not completed the full revolution to create a vortex structure. 
This happens as the pressure side leg vortex is weakened and reduced 
in size by the contoured endwall.  As the pressure side leg vortex is 
driven from the horse-shoe vortex, this also validates the assertion 
that the horse-shoe vortex reduces with the contoured endwall.  The 
passage vortex can be identiﬁed in ﬁgure 34 at the suction side where 
the total pressure loss coefﬁcients, Cpt are very high.  The extent of 
the passage vortex can be considered for Cpt>0.40 in this case.  Then, 
clearly the passage vortex size for the contoured endwall passage is 
about half of that for the ﬂat endwall linear cascade.  The magnitudes 
of Cpt also indicate that the passage vortex is much weaker for the 
contoured endwall as the Cpt are lower for the contoured endwall 
at the passage vortex location than for the ﬂat endwall.  As such, 
the mass-averaged total pressure loss across the passage reduces 
signiﬁcantly with the contoured endwall.  Several other proﬁles of the 
non-axisymmetric contoured endwall have been tested successfully 
in blade and vane passages64.  The results are similar to what we have 
discussed so far.  These endwall proﬁles reduce the total pressure loss 
across the blade passage by weakening the endwall cross ﬂows and 
passage vortex.
Endwall Film Injection:       Coolant air injected through tiny 
holes in the endwall covers the endwall with a layer of ﬁlm of cold 
air and protects the endwall from the hot gas streak in the blade 
passage (ﬁgure 35).  Wall static pressure changes in the vicinity of 
the coolant injection holes as the coolant jet blocks the boundary 
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics
Fig. 34. Streamlines and total pressure loss coefﬁcients with 
and without non-axisymmetric contoured endwall showing 
pressure side leg vortex and passage vortex.
Source: See Note 62.
Fig. 35. Coolant injection through holes in endwall for ﬁlm cool-
ing.  L= hole length and D= characteristic scale of hole shape.

383
layer and interacts with the boundary layer ﬂuid downstream 
of the hole.  Thus, the coolant jets signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the 
endwall pressure ﬁeld and the cross-pitch ﬂow in the blade 
passage.  As the coolant jets also interact with the vortex ﬂows, 
especially with the pressure side leg vortex and suction side leg 
vortex along the separation line, the secondary ﬂow dynamics 
changes along with the total pressure losses across the passage. 
As mentioned in the beginning of Section 4.3-7 that the coolant 
ﬁlm is lifted away from the endwall by these vortices, the 
separation lines in the passage is sometimes termed as the “lift-
off” line.  The physics of mixing and diffusion of the jets in the 
boundary layer and interactions between a coolant jet and the 
boundary layer or the vortices are frequently complicated by 
the action of neighboring coolant jets.  Such physics are studied 
under the subject of “Jets in Cross Flow” and hence, will not 
be discussed here.  The primary objective of this section is to 
discuss the effects of the ﬁlm injection on the secondary ﬂow 
ﬁeld and not the dynamics of the jets.
          The arrangement of the coolant holes in ﬁgure 35 is 
expected to provide coverage for the entire passage endwall and 
hence, sometimes is termed as the full-coverage ﬁlm cooling. 
The effective coverage of the endwall by the coolant depends 
on various factors like injection angle, coolant hole orientation, 
coolant hole shape, hole size, L/D ratio, relative locations of 
the holes, and mass ﬂux or local blowing ratio from individual 
hole.  These are also the fundamental characteristics of the 
coolant holes and must all play the role together when the 
coolant holes are employed.  The local blowing ratio is deﬁned 
as the ratio of the mass ﬂux of the coolant to the mass ﬂux of 
the passage ﬂow.  It is not always easy to measure the mass ﬂux 
of individual holes with accuracy.  Thus, an inlet blowing ratio, 
Minlet is deﬁned based on coolant ﬂow through an idealized, 
loss free hole at the passage inlet condition65.
inlet
inlet
inlet
o
plenum
o
inlet
P
P
P
P
M
−
−
=
,0
,
,
Here, Po,plenum is the stagnation pressure of the coolant supply 
plenum, Po,inlet is the stagnation pressure at the passage inlet, and 
Pinlet is the static pressure at the passage inlet.  The boundary 
layer is energized and strengthened with the properly ejected 
coolant jets.  This enables the boundary layer ﬂuid to withstand 
the pitchwise pressure gradient in the passage and cross-pitch 
ﬂow is weakened as a consequence.  Thus, with proper design 
and conﬁguration the endwall ﬁlm injection can also provide 
an effective structural modiﬁcation that reduces the secondary 
ﬂows and aerodynamic losses.  It is difﬁcult to generalize the 
ﬂow ﬁeld at the endwall when the coolant jets are ejected. 
Each geometric conﬁguration and ﬂow parameter associated 
with the coolant holes just mentioned can alter the endwall 
boundary layer uniquely.  On the other hand, the secondary 
and cross ﬂows affect the coolant jets.  The illustrations that are 
going to be presented next do not represent a typical behavior of 
the near wall ﬂow.  The readers will have some understanding 
about the relative importance of the coolant jet conﬁguration 
and secondary ﬂows.    
          Figure 36 shows the measured locations of the coolant 
jets as they travel downstream from their ejection points in a 
linear vane passage66.  The conﬁguration of the coolant holes 
is also shown in the ﬁgure.  The holes are ejecting at 35 degree 
with respect to the endwall surface.  Data are presented near 
Sumanta Acharya
Fig. 36. Coolant jet locations downstream of injection holes in a linear 
vane passage.
Source: See Note 66.

384
the endwall where the quantities are affected the most.  Location P1 is 
located along a pitchwise plane just downstream of the ﬁrst row of holes 
and location P2 is located along a pitch plane just downstream of the 3rd 
and last row of holes.  The coolant concentration is deﬁned as the ratio of 
coolant density to the free-stream density67.  The coolant concentration 
is the highest at the core of jet.  Also, the coolant jets have forced vortex 
motions at the core68.  Thus, the locations of the coolant jets in ﬁgure 
36 can be readily identiﬁed at the locations of high turbulence intensity 
and coolant concentration.  At location P1, ten distinct jets with high 
magnitudes from the ten holes upstream are clearly identiﬁable.  The four 
jets near the suction side are attached to the endwall while the jets nearest 
the pressure side appear to be slightly lifted up from the endwall.  Local 
blowing ratio is high near the suction side because the wall static pressure 
is low there and local blowing ratio is low near the pressure side because 
the wall static pressure is high there.  Thus, the jets have higher momentum 
near the suction side than the jets near the pressure side.  High momentum 
reduces mixing of the jets with the surrounding ﬂow.  Also, the suction 
side main ﬂow has higher kinetic energy than the pressure side main ﬂow. 
The high kinetic energy bends the suction side jets toward the endwall and 
high momentum aids the process.  On the other hand, the low momentum 
jets near the pressure side easily penetrate the low energy main ﬂow and 
lifts up from the endwall.
          At location P2 of ﬁgure 36, turbulence intensity Tu>11% near the 
endwall across the pitch is caused by the combined effects of all coolant 
jets as Tu is maximum 11% at this location without any coolant injection. 
Besides the signatures of three jets (Tu≥19%) from the last row of holes 
near the pressure side, no other jets are distinct at this location.  The 
higher coolant concentration near the pressure side is the result of large 
number of jets near the pressure side compared to the number of jets near 
the suction side.  In addition, some jets in the ﬁrst and second rows are 
directly lifted away from the endwall by the up-wash ﬂows of the pressure 
side leg vortex and suction side leg vortex.  This action mixes the jets 
easily with the main stream and the coolant concentration from these jets 
reduces signiﬁcantly.  Some jets on the pressure side may also have been 
swept toward the middle of the passage by the cross ﬂow and pressure 
side leg vortex.  Thus, the coolant concentration is the highest near y/P=-
0.45 at location P2.  Similar results about the locations of the coolant jets 
are reported in a linear vane passage69.
          The effectiveness of individual coolant jet is largely dependent upon 
its ability to stick persistently to the endwall to provide the maximum 
coverage.  The location chosen for a coolant hole is therefore very 
important in this respect.  Figure 37 provides evidence by how strongly 
the secondary ﬂows deﬂect and block some coolant jets simply because 
of their location70.  The coolant holes shown in ﬁgure 37 are arranged 
in four pitchwise rows at upstream of leading edge, 30% axial chord, 
60% axial chord, and 90% axial chord.  Four individual holes are also 
located at the pressure side of the blade passage.  All the holes have same 
shape and geometry.  The dark traces on the endwall are produced by the 
ejected coolant jets as they travel along the endwall.  The length, level of 
darkness, and lateral spreading of the traces indicate the distance traveled 
by the jets, level of consistency of coolant, and lateral coverage by the 
jets, respectively, before they are mixed with the main ﬂuid.  Ammonia 
gas mixed with the coolant air stream reacts with the Diazo coating on 
the endwall and produces such traces71.  Surface ﬂow visualization as the 
coolant jets ejecting indicates the separation or lift-off lines of the pressure 
side leg/passage vortex and suction side leg vortex in ﬁgure 37.  The 
ﬁve holes from the pressure side at 30% axial chord and the holes at the 
last two rows are located downstream of the lift-off line for the pressure 
side leg vortex.  Friedrichs et al. (1996) shows that this line has moved 
downstream compared to that without coolant injection.  The 4th and 5th 
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics
Fig. 37. Visualization of surface ﬂow and coolant jet 
trajectories along endwall in a linear blade passage at 
Minlet=1.0.
Source: See Note 70.
Fig. 38. Passage vortex and total pressure losses at exit 
ﬂow with (Minlet=2.0) and without coolant injection in a 
linear blade passage. 
Source: See Note 65.

385
coolant jets from the pressure side at 30% axial chord seem to dislocate the lift-off line slightly downstream from their positions.
          The jet traces from the holes located upstream of the passage in ﬁgure 37 shows virtually very little or no traces near the pressure 
side and all jets near the suction side are deﬂected around the lift-off line.  The strong leading edge horse-vortex is either lifting the jets 
or deﬂecting the jets even if they are shooting directly toward the leading edge.  The jets from the middle holes in the upstream row 
have low momentum and are aimed toward the pressure side while the cross ﬂow here is directed in the axial direction have low kinetic 
energy.  Thus, these jets have small trajectories and are easily swept in the main ﬂow as soon as they are ejected.  The traces of the 
jets from the holes inside the passage, except those near the pressure side, are swept toward the suction side by the cross ﬂow.  Similar 
behavior of the jets inside a blade passage is also observed72.  The 3rd to 5th jet from the pressure side at 30% axial chord and 2nd to 4th jet 
from the suction side at 60% axial chord are additionally pulled in by the passage vortex (see the lift-off line) and in cases, are entrained 
into the passage vortex at the hole location itself.  The traces nearest the pressure side are almost parallel to the pressure side as the 
boundary layer is very thin here and ﬂow behaves as inviscid.  A single jet from one of the four holes at the pressure side corner interacts 
with and strengthens the jet downstream and the combined jet trajectory is very long at this location.  The jets at 90% axial chord and 
nearest the suction side in the previous two rows eject with high momentum due to the low wall static pressure.  The main ﬂow kinetic 
energy is also high at these locations because of its high speed.  These keep these jet traces narrow and stick to the endwall for a longer 
distance.  Also note that the last row of jets are covering a large area on the endwall as they are swept toward the suction side by the cross 
ﬂow.  These jets affect the cross ﬂow as seen in the surface ﬂow visualization of ﬁgure 37 (the top image).  The streamlines downstream 
of the holes at 90% axial chord are parallel to the passage rather than being turned toward the suction side as compared to the streamlines 
upstream of these holes.  Thus, these jets have weakened the cross ﬂow near the passage exit.
          The effects of the same cooling holes as in ﬁgure 37 on the passage vortex structure and total pressure losses at the exit ﬂow are 
shown in ﬁgure 3873.  But, the inlet blowing ratio for the data with the endwall coolant injection is now 2.0.  The plots with no coolant 
injection are included in ﬁgure 38 for comparison.  The dashed lines in the ﬁgure indicate the spanwise locations of the passage vortex 
cores.  The passage vortex is identiﬁed in the vector plot at the location of the clockwise rotation and in the total pressure loss contour at 
the location of circular region with high loss magnitudes.  As noted in both the vector and contour plots, the passage vortex with coolant 
ﬂow is located much nearer the endwall than with no coolant ﬂow.  The momentum of the ejected coolant adds energy to the boundary 
layer ﬂuid.  Therefore, when the passage vortex entrains these boundary layer ﬂuids, the total pressure losses near the bottom part of the 
passage vortex are reduced.  Coolant jets can be injected from continuous slots located in the upstream endwall/platform of the blade 
passage inlet.  This type of coolant ﬂow is often termed as the slot-bleed injection.  The readers are referred to note 74 for information 
on the secondary ﬂow ﬁeld behavior with the slot-bleed74. 
4.3-9 Notes
______________________________ 
 
1. B. Lakshminarayana, Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer of Turbomachinery  (New York:John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1996). 
 
2. S. L. Dixon,  Fluid Mechanics, Thermodynamics of Turbomachinery, 3rd ed. (Oxford:  Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd., 1995). 
 
3. H. E. Gallus, J.  Zeschky, and C. Hah,  “Endwall and Unsteady Flow Phenomena in an Axial Turbine Stage,” ASME Tran.   
                   J. Turbomachinery 117 (1995): 562-570; E. Boletis,  “Effects of Tip Endwall Contouring on the Three-Dimensional Flow 
 
    Field in an Annular Turbine Nozzle Guide Vane: Part 1- Experimental Investigation,” ASME Tran. J. Engr for Gas  
 
     
    Turbines and Power 107 (1985): 983-990; C. H. Sieverding, W. Van-Hove, and E. Boletis, “Experimental Study of the  
 
   
    Three-Dimensional Flow Field in an Annular Turbine Nozzle Guidevane,” ASME Tran. J. Engr for Gas Turbines and  
 
    Power 106 (1984): 437-444. 
 
4. A. Duden, I. Raab,  and L. Fottner,  “Controlling the Secondary Flow in a Turbine Cascade by Three-Dimensional Airfoil   
     
    Design and Endwall Contouring,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 121(1999): 191-199; S. P. Harasgama and C. D.  
 
    Burton, “Film Cooling Research on the Endwall of a Turbine Nozzle Guide Vane in a Short Duration Annular Cascade:  
 
 
    Part 1- Experimental Technique and Results,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery, Vol. 114 (1992): 734-740. 
 
5. R. P. Dring and W. H. Heiser,  Turbine Aerodynamics, Chap.4 in Aerothermodynamics of Aircraft Engine Components,  
 
 
    AIAA education series (New York:   AIAA Inc.,  1985). 
 
6. L. Fielding, Turbine Design- The Effect of an Axial Flow Turbine Performance of Parameter Variation, (New York: ASME  
 
    Press, 2000); J.P. Gostelow,  Cascade Aerodynamics, (OxfordPergamon  Press Ltd., Oxford, U.K., 1984). 
Sumanta Acharya

386
 
7. J. L. Kerrebrock, Aircraft Engines and Gas Turbines, 2nd ed. (Massachusetts:  The MIT Press, 1992). 
 
8. H. Cohen, G. F. C. Rogers, G.F.C., and H.I.H.Saravanamuttoo, Gas Turbine Theory, 4th ed. (Essex, U.K.: Longman Group   
 
    Ltd., 1996); also see note 5 above. 
 
9. H. P. Wang, S. J. Olson, R. J. Goldstein, and E.R.G. Eckert,  “Flow Visualization in a Linear Turbine Cascade of High  
 
 
    Performance Turbine Blades,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 119 (1997): 1-8. 
 
10. Ibid. 
 
11. Ibid. 
 
12 R. Niehuis, P. Lücking, and B. Stubert,  “Experimental and Numerical Study on Basic Phenomena of Secondary Flows in   
 
     Turbines,” AGARD Conf. Proc. No. 469, Secondary Flows in Turbomachines (1990): 5.1-5.17.  The original version of  
 
 
     this material was published by the Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development, North Atlantic  
 
     Treaty Organization (AGARD/NATO) in AGARD Conference Proceedings CP-469 ”Secondary Flows in  
 
     Turbomachines” in 1990. 
 
13. L.S. Langston,  “Research on Cascade Secondary and Tip-Leakage Flows- Periodicity and Surface Flow Visualization,”   
                    AGARD Conf. Proc. No. 469, Secondary Flows in Turbomachines (1990): 19.1-19.15; S.H. Moustapha, G.J.Paron,  
 
     and J.H.T. Wade, “Secondary Flows in Cascades of Highly Loaded Turbine Blades,” ASME Tran. J. Engr. Gas Turbines   
 
     and Power 107 (1985): 1031-1038. The original version of this material was published by the Advisory Group for  
 
     Aerospace Research and Development, North Atlantic  
 
     Treaty Organization (AGARD/NATO) in AGARD Conference Proceedings CP-469 ”Secondary Flows in  
 
     Turbomachines” in 1990. 
 
14. H.P. Hodson and R. G. Dominy,  “Three-Dimensional ﬂow in a Low-Pressure Turbine Cascade at Its Design Condition,”   
 
      ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 109 (1987): 177-185. 
 
15. Ibid. 
 
16. D.G. Gregory-Smith, C.P. Graves,  and J.A. Walsh , “Growth of Secondary Losses and Vorticity in an Axial Turbine  
 
 
     Cascade,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 110 (1988): 1-8. 
 
17. E. Detemple-Laake,  “Measurement of the Flow Field in the Blade Passage and Side-wall Region of a Plane Turbine  
 
 
     Cascade,” AGARD Conf. Proc. No. 469, Secondary Flows in Turbomachines (1990): 10.1-10.13.  The original version of   
 
     this material was published by the Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development, North Atlantic  
 
     Treaty Organization (AGARD/NATO) in AGARD Conference Proceedings CP-469 ”Secondary Flows in  
 
     Turbomachines” in 1990. 
 
18. Ibid. 
 
19. Ibid. 
 
20. W.A. Eckerle  and L.S. Langston,  “Horseshoe Vortex Formation Around a Cylinder,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery  
 
 
      109 (1987): 278-285. 
 
21. See notes 13 and 20 above. 
 
22. G.I. Mahmood, R. Gustafson, and S. Acharya,  “Experimental Investigation of Flow Structure and Nusselt Number in a   
   
      Low Speed Linear Blade Passage With and Without Leading Edge Fillets,” ASME Tran. J. Heat Transfer 127 (2005):  
 
      499-512. 
 
23. See note 20 above. 
 
24. See note 9 above. 
 
25. G.I. Mahmood and S. Acharya,  “Experimental Investigation of Secondary Flow Structure in a Blade Passage With and   
                    Without Leading Edge Fillets”, in review, ASME Trans. J. Fluids Engineering (2005);A.K. Saha, G.I. Mahmood, R. 
 
      Gustafson, and S. Acharya,  “Predicted and Measured Flow Field and Heat Transfer in a Linear Blade Cascade   
 
 
      Employing Fillets,” in preparation for the ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery. 
 
26. See note 9 above. 
 
27. See note 9 above. 
 
28. See note 9 above. 
 
29. See note 9 above. 
 
30. See note 9 above. 
 
31. R. J. Goldstein, H.P. Wang,  and M.Y. Jabbari, “The Inﬂuence of Secondary Flows Near the Endwall and Boundary Layer  
 
      Disturbance on Convective Transport From a Turbine Blade,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 117(1995): 657-665. 
 
32. See note 25 above. 
 
33. M.B. Kang and K.A. Thole,  “Flowﬁeld Measurements in the Endwall region of a Stator Vane,” ASME Tran. J.   
 
 
      Turbomachinery 122 (2000): 458-466. 
 
34. See note 14 above. 
 
35. See note 25 above. 
 
36. D. G. Gregory-Smith and J.G.E. Cleak, “Secondary Flow Measurements in a Turbine Cascade With High Inlet   
 
 
      Turbulence,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 114 (1992): 173-183; C. Hah, “A Navier-Stokes Analysis of Three- 
 
      Dimensional Turbulent Flows Inside Turbine Blade Rows at Design and Off-Design Conditions,” ASME Tran. J. Engr.  
 
                    Gas Turbines and Power 106 (1984): 421-429; L.S.  Langston,  “Crossﬂows in a Turbine Cascade Passage,”  
 
      ASME Tran. J. Engr. for Power 102 (1980): 866-874. 
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics

387
 
37. K. Hermanson, S. Kern, G. Picker,  and S. Parneix,  “Predictions of External Heat Transfer For Turbine Vanes and Blades  
 
      With Secondary Flowﬁelds,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, GT-2002-30206, 2002. 
 
38. See note 33 above. 
 
39. A. Yamamoto,  “Production and Development of Secondary Flows and Losses in Two Types of Straight Turbine   
 
                    Cascades: Part 1- A Stator Case,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 109 (1987): 186-193;R.P.  Roy, K.D. Squires, M.  
 
      Gerendas, S. Song, W.J. Howe and A. Ansari,  “Flow and Heat Transfer at the Hub Endwall of Inlet Vane Passages-  
 
 
      Experiments and Simulations,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, 2000-GT-198, 2000. 
 
40. See note 3 above. 
 
41. See note 3 above. 
 
42. See note 3 above. 
 
43. See note 13 above. 
 
44. See note 13 above. 
 
45. R.G. Dominy and S.C. Harding, “An Investigation of Secondary Flows in Nozzle Guide Vanes,” AGARD Conf. Proc. No.  
 
     469, Secondary Flows in Turbomachines (1990): 7.1-7.15. 
 
46. See note 3 above (Gallus). 
 
47. M.V. Hoyningen-Huene, W.  Frank, and A.R. Jung,  “Three-Dimensional Time-Resolved Flow Field in the First and Last   
 
      Turbine Stage of a Heavy Duty Gas Turbine, Part I: Secondary Flow Field,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, 2000-GT-0438,  
 
      2000. 
 
48. J. Zeschky and H.E. Gallus,  “Effects of Stator Wakes and Spanwise Nonuniform Inlet Conditions on the Rotor Flow of   
 
      an Axial Turbine Stage,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 115 (1993): 128-136. 
 
49. H. Sauer, R. Müller, and K. Vogeler,  “Reduction of Secondary Flow Losses in Turbine Cascades by Leading Edge  
 
 
      Modiﬁcations at the Endwall,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 123 (2001): 207-213; G. A.  Zess and K.A. Thole,   
 
      “Computational Design and Experimental Evaluation of Using a Leading Edge Fillet on a Gas Turbine Vane,” ASME  
 
                     Proc. Turbo Expo, GT-2001-0404, 2001; A.T. Lethander, K.A. Thole, G.  Zess, and J. Wagner,  “Ortimizing the Vane- 
 
                     Endwall Junction to Reduce Adiabatic Wall Temperatures in a Turbine Vane Passage,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo,  
 
      GT2003-38939, 2003; S. Becz, M.S.  Majewski,  and L.S. Langston,  “Leading Edge Modiﬁcation Effects on Turbine  
 
 
      Cascade Endwall Loss,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, GT-2003-38898, 2003;S. Becz, M.S.  Majewski,  and L.S. Langston,   
 
      “An Experimental Investigation of Contoured Leading Edges for Secondary Flow Loss Reduction,” ASME Proc. Turbo   
 
      Expo, GT-2004-53964, 2004; also see notes 22 and 25 above. 
 
50. See notes 22 and 25 above. 
 
51. See note 21 above. 
 
52. See note 25 above. 
 
53. See note 49 above. 
 
54. See note 49 above (Zess). 
 
55. S.W. Burd and T.W. Simon,  “Flow Measurements in a Nozzle Guide Vane Passage With a Low Aspect Ratio and  
 
 
      Endwall Contouring,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, 2000-GT-0213, 2000;  T.I-P Shih, Y.-L  Lin,  and T.W. Simon,  “Control  
 
      of Secondary Flows in a Turbine Nozzle Guide Vane by Endwall Contouring,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, 2000-GT-0556,  
 
      2000; V. Dossena, A. Perdichizzi, and M. Savini, “The Inﬂuence of Endwall Contouring on the Performance of a Turbine  
 
      Nozzle Guide Vane,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 121(1999): 200-208; F.C. Kopper, R. Milano, and M. Vanco,  
 
      “Experimental Investigation of Endwall Proﬁling in a Turbine Vane Cascade,” AIAA Journal, AIAA 80-1089R  19, No. 8 (  
 
      August 1981). 
 
56. S. Acharya, “Eendwall Cooling With Endwall Contouring and Leading Edge Fillet,” Smi-annual Report Submiited to  
 
 
      UTSR, South Carolina, Project No. 02-01-SR098, June 2003-December 2003; D.E. Bohn, K. Kusterer, N. Sürken, and F.  
 
      Kreitmeler,  “Inﬂuence of Endwall Contouring in Axial Gaps on the Flow Field in a Four-Stage Turbine,” ASME Proc.  
 
                    Turbo Expo, 2000-GT-472, 2000; L.P. Timko,  “Energy Efﬁcient Engine High Pressure Turbine Component Test 
 
      Performance Report,” Contract Report for NASA, Report No. NASA CR-168289; also see note 55 above (Shih). 
 
57. See note 55 above (Burd). 
 
58. See note 55 above (Dossena). 
 
59. Ibid. 
 
60. See note 3 above (Boletis). 
 
61. See note 55 above (Dossena). 
 
62. R. Gustafson, G.I. Mahmood, and S. Acharya,  “Control of Secondary Flows in a Low Speed Blade Cascade with a Non-  
 
      axisymmetric 3-D Endwall,” in preparation for the ASME Trans J. Turbomachinery. 
 
63. N. W. Harvey, M.G. Rose, M.D. Taylor, S. Shahpar, J. Hartland,  and D.G. Gregory-Smith,  “Nonaxisymmetric Turbine   
                    End Wall Design: Part I- Three-Dimensional Linear Design System,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 122 (2000):  
 
      278-285; J.C. Hartland, D.G. Gregory-Smith, and M.G. Rose, “Non-axisymmetric Endwall Proﬁling in a Turbine Rotor   
 
      Blade,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, 98-GT-525, 1998. 
 
64. G. Ingram, D.G. Gregory-Smith, M.  Rose, N.  Harvey, and G. Brennan,  “The Effect of End-wall Proﬁling on Secondary   
 
      Flow and Loss Development in a Turbine Cascade,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, GT-2002-30339, 2002; J.C. Hartland, D.G. 
 
      Gregory-Smith, N.W. Harvey, and M.G. Rose,  “Nonaxisymmetric Turbine End Wall Design: Part II- Experimental  
 
Sumanta Acharya

388
388
 
      Validation,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 122 (2000): 286-293; J. Yan, D.G.  Gregory-Smith,  and P.J. Walker, 
 
      “Secondary Flow Reduction in a Nozzle Guide Vane Cascade by Non-axisymmetric End-wall Proﬁ ling,” ASME Proc.  
 
 
      Turbo Expo, 99-GT-339, 1999.
 
65. S. Friedrichs, H.P. Hodson, and W.N.  Dawes,  “Aerodynamic Aspects of Endwall Film-Cooling,” ASME Tran. J.  
 
 
      Turbomachinery 119 (1997): 786-793.
66. F. Kost, and F. Nicklas,  “Film-Cooled Turbine Endwall in a Transonic Flow Field: Part I- Aerodynamic Measurements,”   
 
      ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, 2001-GT-0145, 2001.
 
67. Ibid.
68. F. Bario, F.  Leboeuf, A. Onvani, and A. Seddini,  “Aerodynamics of Cooling Jets Introduced in the Secondary Flow of a   
 
      Low-Speed Turbine Cascade,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 112 (1990): 539-546.
 
69. Ibid.
70. S. Friedrichs, H.P. Hodson, and W.N. Dawes,  “Distribution of Film-Cooling Effectiveness on a Turbine Endwall  
 
 
      Measured Using the Ammonia and Diazo Technique,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery 118 (1996): 613-621. 
 
71. M.Y. Jabbari, K.C. Marston, E.R.G.  Eckert,  and R.J. Goldstein,  “Film Cooling of the Gas Turbine Endwall by Discrete-  
 
      Hole Injection,” ASME Tran. J. Turbomachinery .118 (1996):. 278-284; also see note 70 above.
 
72. Ibid.
73. See note 65 above.
 
74. H.D. Pasinato, Z. Liu,  R.P. Roy, W.J. Howe, and K.D. Squires,  “Prediction and Measurement of the Flow and Heat  
 
 
      Transfer Along the Endwall and Within an Inlet vane Passage,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, GT-2002-30189, 2002; 
 
      S.W. Burd and T.W. Simon,  “Effects of Slot Bleed Injection Over a Contoured Endwall on Nozzle Guide Vane Cooling 
 
      Performance: Part I- Flow Field Measurements,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, 2000-GT-0199, 2000; R. Oke, T.W. Simon, 
 
      T. Shih, B. Zhu, Y.L. Lin, and M. Chyu,  “Measurements Over a Film-Cooled, Contoured Endwall with Various Coolant   
 
      Injection Rates,” ASME Proc. Turbo Expo, 2001-GT-0140, 2001.
4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics

4.3 Turbine Blade Aerodynamics
Sumanta Acharya
Louisiana State University
CEBA 1419B, Mechanical 
Engineering Department
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
phone: (225) 578-5809
email: acharya@me.lsu.edu
Sumanta Acharya is currently the L. R. Daniel Professor in Mechanical Engineering, and the 
Director of the Turbine Innovation and Energy Research (TIER) Center at Louisiana State 
University (LSU), Baton Rouge . He received his B.S. in Mechanical Engineering from IIT-
Kharagpur, India, in 1978, his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Minnesota 
in 1982, and has been on the faculty at LSU since 1982. He has worked in several areas pertaining 
to turbine blade cooling and aerodynamics including internal cooling, ﬁlm cooling, blade tip 
leakage ﬂows, and  3D endwall ﬂows (hub). In the gas turbine area he has received funding from 
Pratt & Whitney, General Electric, the University Turbine Systems Research Program (UTSR) of 
the Department of Energy, the U. S Navy, the Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research, the National 
Science Foundation, and the State of Louisiana. He has published 130 journal articles and book 
chapters, and presented over 160 conference papers.
BIOGRAPHY  

Gazi Mahmood 
Louisiana State University
CEBA 1419B, Mechanical 
Engineering Department
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Dr. Gazi Mahmood is currently working as a postdoctoral research associate at the Turbine 
Innovation and Energy Research (TIER) Center of the Louisiana State University.  He received 
his B.Tech. in Mechanical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology in Bombay in 
1995 and his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Utah in 2001.  The research 
interests of Dr. Gazi Mahmood include turbulent channel ﬂ ows, ﬂ uid dynamics and convective 
heat transfer on special surface structures, aerodynamics, gas turbine cooling, pumps, infrared 
imaging techniques, ﬂ ow control on wing-shaped bodies, ﬂ uidic actuators, and miniature contact 
probes for ﬂ ow measurements.  Presently, he has been working in a research project investigating 
the aerodynamic performances and endwall cooling in the gas turbine passages with endwall 
contouring and leading edge ﬁ llets.  His work experiences also include research on dimples, 
pin-ﬁ ns, and vortex passage employed in heat exchangers, wing bodies, bearing cooling, and 
turbine blade cooling.  He was a lecturer at the Mechanical Engineering Department in Columbia 
University (New York) in 2001.  
