411
411
4.4.1-1 Introduction
 
Gas turbine engines, both aircraft and industrial power generation, 
represent one of the most aggressive applications for structural materials.  With 
ever growing demands for increasing performance and efﬁ ciencies, all classes of 
materials are being pushed to higher temperature capabilities.  These materials 
must also satisfy stringent durability and reliability criteria.  As materials are 
developed to meet these demanding requirements, the processing of these 
materials often becomes very complicated and expensive.  As a result, the cost 
of materials and processes has become a much larger consideration in the design 
and application of high performance materials.  Both the aircraft engine and 
power generation industries are highly cost competitive, and market advantage 
today relies on reducing cost as well as increasing performance and efﬁ ciency. 
 
The ﬁ ring temperatures of all gas turbines, both industrial power 
generation and aircraft engines, have increased over the past ~30 years.  More 
recently, the rate of temperature increase has slowed for aircraft engines but not 
for industrial gas turbines (IGT).  As a result, the materials temperature capability 
requirements for these two classes of gas turbines are converging.  For many 
years, the high performance requirements of military and commercial aircraft 
engines fueled the development of advanced materials and processes.  Many of 
these high temperature materials are now being used in industrial gas turbines as 
output, efﬁ ciency, and reliability requirements continue to grow.  Directionally 
solidiﬁ ed and single-crystal nickel-base superalloys have been developed for 
investment casting of hot gas path components and have been scaled up to the 
part sizes required for IGT components but not without signiﬁ cant challenges 
in producibility, defect allowances, and repair.  The application of nickel-
base superalloys in industrial gas turbines has required particular emphasis on 
technology development for the production of buckets and nozzles in large IGT 
sizes.  Processing scale-up from aircraft engine-sized parts to large IGT-sized 
parts has presented unique materials development and processing challenges. 
There has been much synergy in the development of these materials for both 
aircraft engines and industrial power generation turbines, and this synergy is 
likely to continue to grow as we strive to push materials capability to the limit 
while providing robust designs for reliable, long-life service. 
4.4.1-2 Background
 
Higher operating temperatures are historically the primary means of 
improving aircraft engine thrust or industrial power generation gas turbine output. 
Higher operating temperatures require higher temperature capability materials 
and associated technologies such as improved oxidation and environmental 
coatings.  For industrial power generation gas turbines, the ﬁ ring temperature (as 
deﬁ ned by the gas temperature that enters the ﬁ rst rotating stage of buckets or 
blades) has a profound effect on the performance of the turbine.
 
Since the early 1970’s there has been a continuous increase in the 
output and efﬁ ciency of large industrial gas turbines (IGT) for electrical 
power generation.  This increase is due in large part to the introduction of high 
temperature structural materials.  The use of these advanced materials has resulted 
in an increase in gas turbine ﬁ ring temperature from 982ºC (1800ºF) to greater 
than 1427ºC (2600ºF) over the past 30 years.  For every 10ºC (50ºF) increase in 
the ﬁ ring temperature, the gas turbine combined-cycle efﬁ ciency improves by 
approximately 1%.  A 1% improvement in efﬁ ciency means millions of dollars 
in savings to an electrical power producer looking to deliver electricity at the 
lowest cost to its customers.
 
Nickel-base (Ni-base) superalloys are the alloys of choice for high 
temperature, high strength structural applications, and they have become 
the standard for IGT hot gas path components such as buckets, nozzles, and 
shrouds.  Many of these investment cast Ni-base superalloys were derived 
from aircraft engine alloys developed for use in both commercial and military 
aircraft gas turbines.  In addition to investment cast Ni-base superalloys, other 
4.4.1  
Buckets and Nozzles
Stephen J. Balsone
GE Gas Turbines LLC
P.O. Box 648; GTTC 174D
Greenville, SC 29602
Phone: 864 254-5294
Email: stephen.balsone@ps.ge.com

412
high temperature materials are in production or being developed for IGT applications.  High temperature coatings such as metallic 
coatings for oxidation and corrosion resistance and ceramic coatings for thermal protection are becoming standard for hot gas path and 
combustion hardware.  Ceramic-matrix composites are also being developed for high temperature applications such as turbine shrouds, 
combustion liners, and turbine nozzles.
 
In order to reduce the amount of cooling air required to keep materials within their high temperature capability, several options 
have been pursued.  The obvious is the use of higher temperature capability materials.  The second is the use of thermal barrier 
coatings (TBCs).  The third is the incorporation of more efﬁcient cooling schemes.  These approaches are complementary, and system 
approaches have been developed that take advantage of all three.  Advanced industrial gas turbines ﬁring at temperatures of 1425ºC 
(2600ºF) and above require advanced cooling schemes to keep the metal temperatures within design limits.  While aircraft engines have 
used advanced air cooling techniques including extensive use of convection and ﬁlm cooling to maintain part temperatures at required 
levels, they are limited to these techniques because these are the only approaches that are available for turbines that must be ﬂown on 
aircraft.  However, industrial gas turbines do not have these weight limitations and therefore can use other cooling techniques such as 
steam cooling for buckets and nozzles.  The ﬁrst beneﬁt of steam cooling is that it allows higher ﬁring temperatures for a given set of 
parts lives or reliability goals.  The higher thermal transport properties of steam enable designers to maintain metal temperatures within 
acceptable limits in higher gas temperature environments.  Secondly, ﬁlm cooling requires that relatively cool air be mixed with the high 
temperature gas as it passes through the ﬁrst stage nozzles.  This ﬁlm lowers the temperature of the gas thus increasing the difference 
between combustor discharge temperature and the ﬁring temperature for a set combustor discharge temperature. Therefore for a given 
NOx production rate, steam cooling permits higher ﬁring temperatures and hence maximizes output and efﬁciency.  Thus the use of 
steam cooling allows NOx emissions and efﬁciency goals to be met simultaneously.
4.4.1-3 Process Development – Investment Casting of 
 
   DS and SX Alloys
 
The investment cast Ni-base superalloys currently in IGT use have been principally derived from aircraft engine alloys developed 
to meet stringent high performance requirements of both commercial and military aircraft gas turbines.  However, the introduction of 
these aircraft engine alloys in IGT hot gas path components has posed signiﬁcant development challenges1.  Figure 1 shows a General 
Electric F-class gas turbine ﬁrst stage bucket in relation to a typical aircraft engine turbine blade2.  This ﬁrst stage bucket is a directionally 
solidiﬁed (DS) Ni-base superalloy made from GTD-111TM, an alloy derived from Rene’ 80 and developed speciﬁcally to meet property 
requirements for long-life operation in IGT’s.  This ﬁrst stage bucket demonstrates a greater than 10X increase in part size and a greater 
than 20X increase in part weight as compared with the aircraft engine blade.  These DS Ni-base superalloy buckets are up to 76 cm (30 
in) in length and weigh up to 18 kg (40 lbs).  In the most advanced IGT’s, they are designed and manufactured with complex internal 
serpentine cooling passages.  They are manufactured to very tight dimensional tolerances, and inspection and acceptance standards are 
today approaching aircraft engine requirements.
 
The earliest industrial gas turbines used forged turbine buckets 
with cast nozzles.  This changed in the late 60’s when castings began to 
be used in bucket applications.  Many nozzle and bucket castings used 
in industrial gas turbines are made by using the conventional equiaxed 
investment casting process.  Vacuum is used in most cases, except for 
some of the cobalt alloys, to prevent the highly reactive elements in the 
superalloys from reacting with the oxygen and nitrogen in the air.  With 
proper control of metal and mold thermal conditions, the molten metal 
solidiﬁes from the surface toward the center of the mold, creating an 
equiaxed structure.  To prevent shrinkage porosity, care is taken to allow 
proper feeding of molten metal to the casting while it solidiﬁes.
 
Directional solidiﬁcation (DS) was ﬁrst introduced into 
industrial gas turbines in the late 1980’s.  Although it has been in aircraft 
engines for more than 25 years, considerable process development was 
necessary to scale it up to the sizes of buckets used in industrial gas 
turbines.  By exercising careful control over temperature gradients, a 
planar solidiﬁcation front can be developed in these large buckets.  The 
result is a bucket with an oriented grain structure that runs parallel to the 
major axis of the part and contains no transverse grain boundaries.  The 
elimination of these transverse grain boundaries confers additional creep 
and rupture strength on the alloy, and the orientation of the grain structure 
provides a favorable modulus of elasticity in the longitudinal direction to 
enhance fatigue life.   By directionally solidifying the alloy GTD-111TM, 
an increase of approximately 23ºC (40ºF) in creep strength and an increase 
of approximately 10X in fatigue life can be realized3.
Fig. 1.  Size comparison of an IGT ﬁrst 
stage bucket with a typical aircraft en-
gine turbine blade. (Courtesy of General 
Electric Company).
Source: See Note 2.

413
 
Figure 2 shows General Electric’s H SystemTM gas turbine third 
stage and fourth stage buckets made of DS GTD-444TM Ni-base superalloy4. 
The alloy development of DS GTD-444TM serves as a good example of 
the alloy modiﬁcation conducted to adapt an aircraft engine alloy for IGT 
application.  DS GTD-444TM is a directionally solidiﬁed version of the ﬁrst 
generation SX Ni-base superalloy Rene’ N4.  When design requirements 
exceeded the material capability of DS GTD-111TM, the SX Rene’ N4 alloy 
was selected because of the alloy’s very good high temperature strength. 
Grain boundary element modiﬁcations were made to the alloy to produce a 
SX Rene’ N4 derivative as a DS alloy with improved large-part castability 
for IGT application.  The result was a castable, high temperature DS Ni-base 
superalloy with improved creep and fatigue properties as compared with DS 
GTD-111TM.  DS GTD-444TM was ﬁrst introduced in production in 1999.
 
More recently, industrial gas turbine OEM’s have worked with 
suppliers and universities to develop large, single-crystal (SX) castings that 
offer additional creep and fatigue beneﬁts through the elimination of grain 
boundaries.   While directionally solidifying GTD-111TM as a single crystal 
offers some improvements in creep and fatigue, much more signiﬁcant 
improvements can be achieved by adopting alloys developed as single-crystal 
compositions for aircraft engine applications.   The use of one such alloy, 
Rene’ N5, can produce an increase of more than 35ºC (~60ºF) in creep strength 
and 2X to 3X increase in fatigue life compared to DS GTD-111TM.  However, 
to successfully produce large single crystals weighing more than 11 kg. (~25 
lbs) and measuring more than 450mm (~18 inches) in length, modiﬁcations 
had to be made to the alloy.  These modiﬁcations were necessary to reduce 
the reaction between the metal and mold materials to enable reasonable yields 
to be obtained when these buckets and nozzles are solidiﬁed for long times at 
high temperatures5.
 
Figure 3 shows General Electric’s H SystemTM gas turbine ﬁrst stage 
bucket made of SX Rene’ N56.  This Ni-base superalloy was adopted directly 
from aircraft engine application and is currently used in production for ﬁrst 
stage buckets, as well as ﬁrst stage nozzles and shrouds, in General Electric’s 
H SystemTM and FB-class gas turbine product lines.  These applications are 
among the ﬁrst use of SX Ni-base superalloys in IGT’s.  Signiﬁcant material 
and processes development was required for the introduction of SX Ni-base 
superalloys in IGT applications, including SX investment casting equipment 
and technology, ceramic mold and core development, and post-cast joining, 
machining, coating, and inspection technology to fabricate these very 
complex, high performance airfoils.
 
Critical processing technology developments were required to scale 
up the investment casting of Ni-base superalloys for IGT applications.  DS 
and SX investment casting furnaces were scaled up to handle the size and 
weight of IGT buckets.  Advances in mold materials and construction were 
required to hold the large volumes of molten metal during the DS and SX 
casting withdrawal process.  Ceramic cores were improved to increase high 
temperature strength in order to minimize core deformation and hold critical 
dimensional tolerances.  Processing considerations were also important to 
alloy selection and chemistry modiﬁcations, as Ni-base superalloys were 
adapted from aircraft engines to IGT applications.  Alloy chemistries were 
modiﬁed to prevent formation of melt-related defects such as freckles, 
porosity, and hot tearing in the large IGT parts.  In addition, minor alloying 
elements were adjusted to control grain boundary strength.  These alloy 
chemistry changes to improve the castability of alloys in large sizes and to 
increase casting yields had to be balanced with the alloy mechanical property 
and environmental resistance requirements for IGT hardware for robust, 
long-life service.  These materials and processes technology developments 
are often conducted in joint partnership between the gas turbine OEM and 
the investment casting suppliers.
Fig. 3.  First stage IGT bucket made from 
SX Rene’N5. (Courtesy of General Electric 
Company).
Source: See Note 2.
Stephen J. Balsone
 
Fig. 2.  Third and fourth stage IGT buck-
ets made from DS GTD-444TM. (Courte-
sy of General Electric Company).
Source: See Note 2.

414
 
The main drivers for yield in large DS and SX airfoil castings are dimensional and grain defects.  Dimensions and associated 
tolerances result from the aerodynamic, mechanical, and heat transfer design of the part that must meet the gas turbine cycle requirements. 
Grain defects are metallurgical in nature and are controlled by local solidiﬁcation, chemistry, heat treatment, and geometry.  Typical 
grain defects encountered by developers of DS and SX IGT airfoils are shown in ﬁgure 47.  Grain defects are typically dealt with by 
adjusting processing conditions, mold conﬁgurations, local geometry, and alloy chemistry8. 
4.4.1-4 Process Development – High Gradient Casting
 
High gradient is a term used to describe any one of a number of investment casting techniques used to solidify castings under 
well-controlled, large thermal gradients.  This results in cast material have a much-reﬁned microstructure with improved chemical 
homogeneity.  In the conventional DS or SX investment casting process, heat from the mold is removed by conduction to a chill plate 
and by radiation to the surroundings, including heat loss from the open bafﬂe in the bottom of the furnace during the mold withdrawal 
process.  In a high gradient casting process, heat from the mold is removed by immersing the mold into a cooling media directly from 
the mold withdrawal from the furnace.  The high gradient cooling media is often a bath of liquid metal such as aluminum or tin9.
 
High gradient casting technology promises to increase casting yields and throughput by eliminating melt-related defects such 
as freckle formation in complex airfoil geometries.  In addition, high gradient casting produces a signiﬁcant reﬁnement of the cast 
alloy microstructure, as often measured by the primary dendrite arm spacing.  This microstructural reﬁnement is also accompanied by 
a reduction in casting microporosity, a reduction in the volume fraction of eutectic phase, and an improvement in the morphology and 
distribution of carbides.  The chemical homogeneity of the cast alloy is improved, and this allows Ni-base superalloys to be more fully 
solutioned during heat treatment, resulting in a signiﬁcant increase in high temperature creep and fatigue properties10.  This microstructural 
reﬁnement and improved chemical homogeneity achievable by a high gradient casting process can provide both incremental gains and 
big leaps in investment casting technology.  The improved materials capability provided by high gradient casting provides important 
design beneﬁts such as component upgrades without redesign, the ﬂexibility to balance higher component performance with extended 
component life, and the ability to cast more exotic, high performance, hard-to-cast Ni-base superalloys.  In addition, a direct material 
substitution may provide cost reduction by replacing a more costly DS or SX Ni-base superalloy with a less expensive alloy at equivalent 
performance by improving the capability of the less costly alloy via a high gradient casting process.
4.4.1-5 Alloy Development – Buckets
 
Over the past several decades, advanced airfoil alloy development for industrial gas turbines has progressed from poly-crystalline 
Ni-base superalloys such as U500, U700, and Alloy 738, to poly-crystalline and then directionally solidiﬁed superalloys such as (DS) 
GTD-111TM.  GE’s most advanced DS Ni-base superalloy in production use is GTD-444TM, a DS version of the single-crystal (SX) 
Rene’ N4 alloy used in aircraft engine applications.  Figure 5 shows a schematic of IGT airfoil alloy development, plotting application 
temperature as a function of ﬁrst introduction.  Note that ﬁgure 5 shows two paths for advanced IGT airfoil alloy development.  One 
path has been followed for the evolution of cast Ni-base superalloys for latter stage bucket applications that require simple or no internal 
cooling.  The second path shows the introduction of SX Rene’ N5, a second generation (containing rhenium) single-crystal Ni-base 
superalloy developed for aircraft engine applications.  SX Rene’ N5 has been adopted for IGT use in ﬁrst stage buckets having complex 
internal cooling schemes as well as ﬁrst stage nozzle and shroud applications in General Electric’s most advanced IGT’s.  Table I lists 
the alloy compositions of some important IGT investment cast Ni-base superalloys.
Fig. 4.  Typical grain defects in SX and DS airfoil alloys 
that negatively impact casting yields. (Courtesy of Gen-
eral Electric Company).
Source: See Note 7.
Fig. 5.  IGT bucket alloy evolution showing increase in temperature 
capability.
Source: See Note 2.
Early Stages
Complex Cooling
Latter Stages
Simple or No Cooling
Temperature
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
U500
Rene 77
738
GTD-111TMGTD-111TM
(DS)
GTD-444TM
(DS)
GTD-111TM
(DS)
Rene N5
(SX)
Early Stages
Complex Cooling
Latter Stages
Simple or No Cooling
Temperature
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
U500
Rene 77
738
GTD-111TMGTD-111TM
(DS)
GTD-444TM
(DS)
GTD-111TM
(DS)
Rene N5
(SX)
4.4.1 Buckets and Nozzles

415
 
The higher ﬁring temperatures of advanced industrial gas turbines place increased demands on protective coatings for hot gas 
path components.  Coatings are required to protect the components from corrosion, oxidation, and mechanical property degradation. 
As nickel-base superalloys have become more complex, it has been increasingly difﬁcult to obtain both the higher strength levels that 
are required and a satisfactory level of corrosion and oxidation resistance without the use of coatings.  The function of all coatings is 
to provide a surface reservoir of elements that will form very protective and adherent oxide layers, thus protecting the underlying base 
material from oxidation and corrosion attack and degradation.  Since the mid-1980s, an increase in the oxidation resistance of IGT airfoil 
alloys has been required to meet the higher ﬁring temperatures of advanced industrial gas turbines. This demand was met with a series 
of M-CrAlY overlay coatings with increasing oxidation resistance.   In addition to these simple overlay coatings, duplex coatings that 
consisted of an overlay M-CrAlY with a diffusion aluminide were also developed.  The enhanced oxidation protection was achieved by 
an increased aluminum content in the outer region of the coating.  As the internal temperatures of these hot section parts increased, it also 
became necessary to coat the internal surfaces and cooling holes to provide protection against oxidation and embrittlement that would 
otherwise occur.
 
Air plasma sprayed yttria-stabilized zirconia thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) have been successfully used to extend life of 
superalloy components in aircraft engines and industrial gas turbines.  A TBC is a multilayer thermal and environmental protection system 
consisting of an insulating layer of ceramic over a metallic bond coat for substrate oxidation protection and improved metal-ceramic 
interfacial properties.   A typical air plasma sprayed (APS) TBC consists of a low thermal conductivity yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) 
ceramic top coat layer over a metallic bond coat layer.  The top ceramic layer may be from 250 to 1250 microns (0.010 to 0.050 inch) 
thick while the metallic bond coat is typically from 200 to 300 microns (0.008 to 0.012 inch) thick.  The bond coat is usually an M-CrAlY 
chosen to provide oxidation protection to the substrate metal and a rough surface for mechanical adhesion of the ceramic top coat.  In 
conventional APS TBCs, the internal microcracks are “random” or non-directional.  Advanced APS TBCs have been developed that 
mimic the oriented microstructure of vapor phase deposited TBCs.  This advanced APS TBC can accommodate the mismatch in thermal 
strains between the ceramic top layer and the metallic bond coat and substrate.  This allows the superior properties of this coating to be 
achieved by a coating process that can be used to apply TBCs to large industrial gas turbine parts.
4.4.1-6 Alloy Development – Nozzles
 
Nozzles, also called vanes, are the stationary airfoils that direct the hot gas path ﬂow for proper impingement on the rotating 
buckets.  They must be able to withstand high temperatures.  For example, the stage 1 nozzles are subjected to the highest gas path 
temperatures in the turbine but to lower mechanical stresses than rotating buckets.  Much of the stress experience by the nozzles is a result 
of high thermal stresses and to a lesser degree, mechanical stresses such as the aerodynamic loading.  As a result, the nozzles must have 
excellent resistance to thermal fatigue, as well as high temperature oxidation and corrosion resistance.  Good creep resistance is also an 
important design consideration, especially for large, multi-airfoil latter stage nozzles whose size and weight will lead to creep deformation 
at temperature as the nozzles support their own weight (and the attached diaphragm structure) from the turbine case.
 
Since the 1960’s, the cobalt-base alloy, FSX-414, has been the stage 1 nozzle alloy in General Electric’s E-class and F-class 
gas turbines11.  FSX-414 has been the alloy of choice for nozzle applications for many years because of the superior highest temperature 
strength of cobalt alloys as compared with nickel-base alloys.  In addition, cobalt-base alloys exhibit excellent corrosion resistance due to 
the level of Cr in the alloys.  The oxidation resistance of FSX-414 is such that it is currently used without a protective oxidation coating. 
For the larger latter stage nozzles, GTD-222, a nickel-base superalloy, was developed to satisfy the requirement for higher creep resistance 
at relatively lower temperatures12.  GTD-222 offered a creep strength improvement of approximately 60ºC (~150ºF) over FSX-414 at the 
typical operating temperatures for stage 2 and stage 3 nozzle applications.  GTD-222 is often coated by an aluminiding process to enhance 
the oxidation resistance of the alloy.  Both FSX-414 and GTD-222 possess good weldability, an important alloy characteristic for new-
make nozzle salvage to remove casting defects, nozzle hardware fabrication, and nozzle repair after ﬁeld service.
 
As the ﬁring temperature of advanced industrial gas turbines increases, nickel-base superalloys with improved high temperature 
strength and high temperature oxidation resistance are being introduced for nozzle applications.  For example, the bucket alloy GTD-111TM 
has been used for the stage 1 nozzle on General Electric’s FB-class gas turbines.  Also, SX Rene N5 has been used for the stage 1 nozzle 
on General Electric’s H SystemTM gas turbine.  In these applications, both GTD-111TM and SX Rene N5 are coated with a TBC to allow for 
higher hot gas path temperatures.  As hot gas path temperatures increase for more turbine output and cooling ﬂows decrease to improve 
turbine efﬁciencies, alloy development will continue for nozzle applications.  Development of new alloy compositions that possess high 
temperature creep strength, i.e. high gamma prime content and excellent microstructural stability, along with good weldability (difﬁcult 
with high gamma prime alloys) will be critical for long-life nozzle applications.  Excellent oxidation and corrosion resistance are always 
important, especially for fuel ﬂexibility and future syn-gas or other alternative fuel usage.
4.4.1-7 Materials Performance
 
As has been mentioned previously, nickel-base superalloys are the highest temperature class of metallic materials currently 
used in aircraft engines and industrial gas turbines.  Among these, the highest temperature subset are the turbine airfoil alloys.  The 
drive to increase output and efﬁciency in industrial gas turbines results in the need for increased capability materials for both creep and 
fatigue.  It also puts increased demand on thermal and environmental coatings to provide protection for long times in higher temperature 
environments.   Hot section buckets and nozzles must not only have sufﬁcient strength to withstand the mechanical and thermal loading, 
but must also have coatings that protect the substrate material from damaging effects of exposure to the hot gases.  These effects include 
oxidation, hot corrosion, and embrittlement.  Thus these components must be treated as a substrate / coating materials system. 
Stephen J. Balsone

416
 
Industrial gas turbine materials must withstand much longer time at operating temperatures but many fewer loading and unloading 
cycles than aircraft engine materials.   Also, industrial gas turbine materials are not subject to the rapid start-up requirements that aircraft 
engines must tolerate.  However, industrial gas turbines must operate for most of their life at maximum power output at a constant 3,600 
or 3,000 RPM (depending on whether the power frequency is 60 or 50 Hz) as opposed to aircraft engines that see short times at maximum 
“take-off” power levels, drop back to cruise conditions, and have varying RPM shaft speeds.   Industrial gas turbines must be capable 
of burning both clean fuels (e.g. natural gas) and distillate fuels with higher alkali metal levels.  They are also exposed to much more air 
borne contaminates.  
 
Industrial gas turbine customers have come to expect long-term durability for airfoils and 30 year lifetimes for major structures 
(casings, rotors, etc.).  Typically, this translates into hot section turbine overhaul intervals of no less/no earlier than 24,000 hours and 
expected parts lives of greater than 48,000 hours with repair.  Reliability of modern combined-cycle power plants is expected to be >98% 
with an availability of about 90%.  These values can easily be achieved with the proper maintenance plan and operation practices.  New, 
more efﬁcient industrial gas turbines will be expected to meet similar standards, despite higher operating temperatures.  Improved materials 
and coatings have allowed signiﬁcant gains in the durability of critical gas turbine components, even under today’s conditions of higher 
operating temperatures.  The current direction in the industrial gas turbine industry is to provide still greater customer value through the 
availability of improved component repair techniques that permit refurbishment rather than replacement of expensive components such 
as turbine buckets and nozzles.  Given the drive to reduce life-cycle costs of gas turbine operation, increased use of component repair and 
refurbishment will become a key for future activity in the industry.
Creep
 
Turbine airfoil alloys are limited in service temperature primarily by creep strength.  The improvements in creep strength originate 
from changes both in alloy composition and in processing history13.  Increasing the concentration of refractory metals such as W, Nb, Ta, 
and Mo (all of which diffuse slowly because of their high atomic weight) increases the creep strength of nickel-base alloys.  The limits to 
which these additions can be successfully added are determined largely by their solubility and by the tendency of more concentrated alloys 
to form detrimental second phases.  At the service temperatures of turbine airfoils (> two-thirds of the melting temperature), the principal 
creep deformation mode is grain boundary sliding.  Advanced solidiﬁcation processing techniques have been developed to alter the grain 
structure of these alloys during casting.  These processes either create columnar grains with long axes parallel to the turbine blade axis 
(directional solidiﬁcation or DS) or result in castings that have no grain boundaries at all (single crystals or SX).  These structures lead to 
considerable increases in creep strength.  Both of these solidiﬁcation processing technologies have taken a long time to reduce to practice. 
Today, however, DS and SX buckets and nozzles are being used in advanced industrial gas turbines14.
 
The service life requirements for industrial gas turbines are signiﬁcantly longer than for aircraft engines.  This places more 
emphasis on time dependent phenomenon such as creep and creep-fatigue interactions.  Creep-fatigue interactions become more 
pronounced when materials are thermally cycled while operating at higher temperatures for long times.  The effect of creep-fatigue 
interactions can signiﬁcantly reduce the fatigue strength of the material.  This phenomenon places an additional demand for fatigue data 
with hold times to simulate the effect of this interaction.
Fatigue
 
A consequence of the increased ﬁring temperatures of industrial gas turbines is the increased severity in the thermal cyclic 
loading of the hot gas path buckets and nozzles15.  Increased cooling effectiveness achieved with advanced air cooling and steam cooling 
schemes produces higher thermal gradients in these parts.  While the designer can achieve the same or even lower bulk metal temperatures 
compared to lower ﬁring temperature machines, the thermal gradient increases in more advanced gas turbines.  This increases the thermal 
strain associated with these parts.  The increased severity of these thermal cycles is being addressed by moving toward more thermal 
strain-tolerant materials such as DS and SX hot gas path components.  Additionally, thermal barrier coatings are effective in reducing the 
thermal load into the cooled component and thus reducing the thermal gradient and thermal strains.
Environmental
 
Environmental degradation involves oxidation or corrosion of the alloy in the hot gas path.  Oxidation involves the reaction 
between oxygen and the metal alloy to form various oxides.  These chemical reactions remove material or deplete the material of strength. 
At high temperatures, these reactions can occur rapidly and create the potential for failure if an excessive amount of the alloy is consumed. 
The oxidation behavior of an alloy depends on its chemistry, casting segregation, and exposure conditions.  At high temperatures, rapid 
oxidation attack can occur unless there is a barrier to oxygen diffusion and reaction on the exposed alloy surfaces.  Ni-base superalloys 
containing a sufﬁcient amount of Al will form a protective, adherent, and slow growing alumina (Al2O3) scale to prevent extensive 
oxidation damage16.  Alloy chemistries can be furthered modiﬁed to improve oxidation behavior by adding Y or reducing S.
 
Hot corrosion is another environmental damage mode.  It is a rapid form of attack that is generally associated with alkali metal 
contaminants, such as sodium and potassium, which react with sulfur in the fuel to form molten sulfates.  Sodium at levels of only 2ppm 
(parts per million) or less in the fuel or in the air can lead to hot corrosion damage17.   In general, uncoated, cooler areas of a hot gas path 
component are susceptible when fuel is contaminated, synthetic fuel is used, or there is a lot of debris taken into the turbine from the 
environment.  Basically, molten deposits on the component break down the protective oxide scale, and rapid, unpredictable degradation 
proceeds.  The temperature range where this phenomenon occurs is between 650-925oC (~1200-1700oF).  At these temperatures, 
substrate alloys that form faster growing chromia scales show better resistance in corrosion tests.  Generally these systems have over 10% 
Cr.
4.4.1 Buckets and Nozzles

417
 
As Ni-base superalloy development has evolved, the ability to obtain high temperature strength and creep resistance along 
with satisfactory oxidation and corrosion resistance has become increasingly difﬁcult without the introduction of protective coatings. 
Many high strength Ni-base superalloys are not capable of forming a sufﬁciently protective oxide scale because the chemistry of the 
alloy is dictated by other requirements such as high strength, creep resistance, and microstructural stability.  Thus, the alloy chemistry 
can not be optimized for oxidation or corrosion resistance.  In today’s advanced industrial gas turbines, coatings are required to provide 
protection from oxidation, corrosion, and mechanical property degradation with service.  The function of these coatings is to provide 
a surface reservoir of elements such as Al and Cr that will form stable, adherent oxide layers that will protect the substrate alloy from 
environmental attack.
4.4.1-8  Conclusions
 
To increase the output and efﬁciency of IGT’s, the ﬁring temperature continues to increase, placing higher demands on the 
temperature capability of gas turbine materials.  Over the past ten years, ﬁring temperature has increased by approximately 93ºC 
(200ºF), and combined-cycle efﬁciency has increased by approximately 4%.  Materials and processes improvements have enabled 
these performance increases along with improving the durability and reliability of advanced IGT’s.  Continued growth in IGT ﬁring 
temperature and efﬁciency will require continued materials and processes technology development.  Ni-base superalloys have been 
key to past progress and are key to future IGT growth.  Cast Ni-base superalloys for hot gas path applications will require higher 
temperature strength with improved oxidation/corrosion resistance.  Larger component sizes and complex geometries with sophisticated 
internal cooling schemes will require new investment casting technology to produce defect-free, high performance DS and SX Ni-base 
superalloys.  Materials and processes technology development for Ni-base superalloys continues today and into the future to assure that 
when new design requirements demand the world’s best materials, Ni-base superalloys will be ready to meet the most challenging high 
temperature applications.
4.4.1-9  Notes
________________________
 
1. B.B. Seth, “Superalloys - The Utility Gas Turbine Perspective,” Superalloys 2000, ed. T.M. Pollock, R.D. Kissinger, R.R.   
 
    Bowman, K.A. Green, M. McLean, S.L. Olson, and J.J. Schirra,Warrendale, PA: TMS, 2000, 3-16; M.B. Henderson, J.  
 
 
    Hannis, G. Mccolvin, and G. Ogle, “Materials Issues for the Design of Industrial Gas Turbines,” Advanced Materials and   
 
    Processes for Gas Turbines, ed. G. Fuchs, A. James, T. Gabb, M. McLean, and H. Harada,Warrendale, PA: TMS,  
 
    2003, 3-13. 
 
2. S.J. Balsone, “Nickel-Base Superalloy Materials Technology for Advanced IGT Applications,” Niobium for High   
 
 
    Temperature Applications, ed. Y-W. Kim and T. Carneiro,Warrendale PA:  TMS, 2004, 3-9. 
 
3. P.W. Schilke, “Advanced Gas Turbine Materials and Coatings,” GER-3569G, General Electric Company, 2004. 
 
4. See Note 2 above. 
 
5. See Note 1 above. 
 
6. See Note 2 above. 
 
7. J.C. Schaeffer, “Single Crystal Materials Technology for Advanced Gas Turbine Applications,” presentation at Power-Gen   
 
    Europe 2005, Milan, Italy, June 28-30, 2005. 
 
8. M. Konter and M. Thumann, “Materials and Manufacturing of Advanced Industrial Gas Turbine Components,” Journal of   
 
    Materials Processing Technology, 117 (3), 2001, 386-390. 
 
9. R.F. Singer, “Advanced Materials and Processes for Land-Based Gas Turbines,” Materials for Advanced Power   
 
Stephen J. Balsone
Table I.  Nominal Composition of IGT Cast Ni-Base Superalloys
wt %
Ni
Cr
Co
Fe
Mo
W
Al
Ti
Nb
Ta
Mn
V
C
B
other
Buckets
U500
bal
18.50
18.50
4.00
3.00
3.00
0.07
0.006
U700 (Rene 77)
bal
15.00
17.00
5.30
4.25
3.35
0.07
0.020
Alloy 738
bal
16.00
8.30
0.20
1.75
2.60
3.40
3.40
0.90
1.75
0.10
0.001
MAR M247
bal
8.25
10.00
0.80
10.00
5.50
1.00
2.80
0.015
Hf 0.15
GTD-111TM
bal
14.00
9.50
1.50
3.80
3.00
4.90
2.80
0.10
0.010
GTD-444TM
bal
9.80
7.50
1.50
6.00
4.20
3.50
0.50
4.80
0.08
0.009
Hf 0.15
PWA 1483
bal
12.80
9.00
1.90
3.80
3.60
4.00
4.00
Rene N5
bal
7.00
7.50
1.50
5.00
6.20
6.50
0.05
0.004
Re 3.0, Hf 0.15, Y 0.01
CMSX-4®
bal
6.50
9.00
0.60
6.00
5.60
1.00
6.50
Re 3.0, Hf 0.10
PWA 1484
bal
5.00
10.00
2.00
6.00
5.60
9.00
Re 3.0, Hf 0.10
Nozzles
FSX414
10.00
28.00
bal
1.00
7.00
0.25
0.010
GTD-222TM
bal
22.50
19.00
2.30
2.00
0.80
1.20
1.00
 
0.10
0.008
GTD-111TM
bal
14.00
9.50
1.50
3.80
3.00
4.90
2.80
0.10
0.010
Rene N5
bal
7.00
7.50
1.50
5.00
6.20
6.50
0.05
0.004
Re 3.0, Hf 0.15, Y 0.01

418
418
4.4.1 Buckets and Nozzles
 
     Engineering, ed. D. Coutsouradis, J.H. Davidson, J. Ewald, P. Greenﬁ eld, T. Khan, M. Malik, D.B. Meadowcroft, 
 
     V. Regis, R.B. Scarlin, F. Schubert, and D.V. Thornton (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers Group, 
 
     1994, 1707-1729;  A.J. Elliott, S. Tin, W.T. King, S.-C. Huang, M.F.X. Gigliotti, and T.M. Pollock, “Directional 
 
     Solidiﬁ cation of Large Superalloy Castings with Radiation and Liquid-Metal Cooling: A Comparative Assessment,” 
 
     Metall. Trans. A, 35A (10), 2004, 3221-3231.
 
10. S. Balsone, G. Feng, L. Peterson, and J. Schaeffer, “Microstructure and Mechanical Behavior of Liquid Metal Cooled  
 
 
      Directionally Solidiﬁ ed GTD-444TM,” Solidiﬁ cation Processes and Microstructures: A Symposium in Honor of Wilfried 
 
      Kurz, ed. M. Rappaz, C. Beckermann, and R. Trivedi, Warrendale, PA: TMS, 2004, 77-83.
 
11. See Note 3.
 
12. Ibid.
 
13. See Note 7.
 
14. R. Viswanathan and S.T. Scheirer, “Materials Technology for Advanced Land Based Gas Turbines,” Turbomachinery  
 
 
      International, 42 (1), 2001.
 
15. See Note 7.
 
16. See Note 3.
 
17. Ibid.

4.4.1  Buckets and Nozzles
  Mr. Stephen J. Balsone is the Manager for High Temperature Materials Development in the Materials 
& Processes Engineering organization at GE Energy, Greenville SC.  The group is responsible for 
high temperature materials and processes development for industrial power generation gas turbines, 
principally hot gas path and combustor components. Before joining GE Energy in 2000, Mr. Balsone 
was Program Manager for Structural Materials Development & Reliability at GE’s Global Research and 
Development Center, Schenectady NY, responsible for the development of high temperature structural 
metallic materials, principally supporting GE’s aircraft engine and industrial gas turbine businesses. Prior 
to joining GE in 1996, Mr. Balsone worked for 14 years at the Materials & Manufacturing Directorate, Air 
Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton OH.  His work included structural 
materials development for military aircraft engines and hypersonic vehicles. Mr. Balsone received his 
MS degree in Aeronautical Engineering from the Air Force Institute of Technology and his BS degree in 
Metallurgical Engineering & Materials Science from Carnegie Mellon University.  He is currently a PhD 
candidate at the University of Michigan.
Stephen J. Balsone
GE Gas Turbines LLC
P.O. Box 648; GTTC 174D
Greenville, SC 29602
phone: (864) 254-5294
email: stephen.balsone@ps.ge.com
BIOGRAPHY  
