209
209
3.2.1.1
Conventional Type 
Combustion
3.2.1.1-1 Introduction
Brayton Cycle
The role of the combustor in a gas turbine engine is two-fold.  First, the 
combustor transforms the chemical energy resident in the fuel into thermal energy 
for expansion in the turbine.  Second, the combustor tailors the temperature proﬁ le 
of the hot gases at the exit plane in order to not compromise the material constraints 
of the turbine.  To fulﬁ ll this two-fold role, the combustor is designed to mix fuel 
with air at elevated pressure and temperature, to both establish and sustain a stable 
continuous combustion reaction, and to mix the products of combustion to establish 
the desired exhaust temperature proﬁ le.  The combustor processes are, as a result, 
a complex combination of ﬂ uid mixing, chemical kinetics, and heat transfer.  To 
contain and control these processes, the design of the “conventional” combustor has 
evolved over seven decades for the production of propulsive thrust and electrical 
power.  
The thermodynamic path over which the gas turbine engine operates is the 
Brayton Cycle (Figure 1).  The compressor [C] ingests and compresses ambient air 
to elevated pressures that vary in the range of a few to many tens of atmospheres 
depending on the engine design and application.  The “Pressure Ratio” (ratio of 
outlet to inlet pressure of the compressor, P2/P1) is a major factor in establishing the 
overall thermodynamic efﬁ ciency of the engine.  The higher the pressure ratio, the 
higher the overall thermodynamic efﬁ ciency.
Fig. 1. Gas Turbine Brayton Cycle for Electric Power Generation
Fig. 2. Stationary Gas Turbine Electric Power Generator
Scott Samuelsen
Professor of Mechanical, Aerospace, 
and Environmental Engineering
Director
Advanced Power and Energy Program
University of California
Irvine
92697-3550
phone: 949-824-5468
email: gss@uci.edu

210
Combustor Inlet Conditions
The compression of the ambient air from State Point 1 to State Point 2 is accompanied by an increase in the temperature of 
the air.  As a result, the air exits the compressor and enters the combustor at both an elevated pressure and an elevated temperature.
In addition to air, fuel is also injected into the combustor at the inlet.  The fuel (such as natural gas, coal syn gas, or petroleum 
liquids) is the source of energy required to “drive” the cycle. 
 
Goal of the Combustor
The goal of the combustor is to convert the chemical energy bound in the fuel into thermal energy.  The thermal energy can 
then be expanded through a turbine [T] to produce (1) the power required to operate the compressor, and (2) the power required to turn 
a generator and produce electricity.
To accomplish this goal, the combustor serves as the vehicle to:
– 
Combine and mix the air and fuel entering the combustor,
– 
Ignite the mixture of fuel and air,
– 
Contain the mixture during the combustion reaction, and
                   –     Tailor the temperature distribution of the hot gases at the exit plane. 
 
Continuous Combustion
The processes that occur within a gas turbine combustor (e.g., injection of the air and fuel, mixing of the air and fuel, combustion 
reaction) are “continuous” rather than intermittent, and occur at constant pressure.  This is in contrast to the automobile spark ignited 
“Otto Cycle” engine where the combustion is intermittent and accompanied by a signiﬁcant increase in pressure.  The gases exit the gas 
turbine combustor as a steady ﬂow and are then continuously expanded through turbine stages.  After the ﬁnal expansion stage, the spent 
gases are then exhausted into the atmosphere.
3.2.1.1-2 Combustor Features
The design of gas turbine combustors has evolved over many decades with the ﬁnal conﬁguration based on the best of engineering 
judgment and intuitive reasoning.  As demands have developed for efﬁciency and lower environmental impacts, engineering tools such 
as computational ﬂuid dynamics1 and laser diagnostics2 have evolved to facilitate the design process.  This notwithstanding, engineering 
judgment coupled with intuitively based empirical correlations, continues to serve as the anchor to modern design.
Throughout the evolution of combustor technology, the basic requirements for combustor design have remained.  In particular, 
the following ﬁve basic features are integral to the combustor design:  a primary zone, a secondary zone, a dilution zone, various wall 
jets, and the management of heat transfer at the combustor boundary (Figure 3).
Fig. 3. Combustor Features

211
3.2.1.1-3 Primary Zone
The air exiting the compressor enters the combustor through four major injection points, each of which has a particular role. 
Each injection point convects approximately one-quarter of the total air ﬂow into the combustor.  Two of these injection points (swirler, 
primary air wall jets) control both the structure of, and the mixing within, the primary zone.
Swirler.  The ﬁrst entry point for the compressor air is through swirler vanes that are positioned at the front face of the combustor 
and typically surround the fuel injection port.  The swirl vanes impact a circumferential velocity component to the air and thereby thrust 
the air radially outward as the air enters the combustor.  This creates a pressure void at the center line and induces a backﬂow to ﬁll 
the centerline pressure deﬁcit.  This effectively creates, as a result, a recirculation ﬂow that extends approximately one duct diameter 
downstream and deﬁnes the “Primary Zone” of the combustor.  The strength of the swirl is deﬁned by the swirl number, SN:
 
  
       (1)
where:
Gm = Axial Flux of Angular Momentum
Gt   = Axial Thrust
Dsw = Diameter of Swirler
The swirl number must exceed 0.6 in order to induce a recirculation zone.
“Aerodynamic Spark Plug.”  The fuel is injected at an angle to mix with the swirler air that is exiting the swirler.  Mixing of the 
fuel and air is facilitated by the turbulence that is created by the passage of the air through the swirler.  The resultant fuel/air mixture is 
then recirculated and mixed with energetic “hot products” of combustion that are pulled and entrained into the recirculation zone from 
downstream.  These energetic species provide the ignition source for the fresh mixture of fuel and air.  In effect, the recirculation zone 
combines as a combined aerodynamic “blender” and “spark plug.”
Primary Air Jets.  Wall jets affect the mixing, stoichiometry, and structure of the ﬂows in gas turbine combustors. 
Due to this dominating role, a substantial literature has evolved to guide the design and estimate the behavior of jets 
injected into a crossﬂow.3 In a typical combustor design, two sets of air wall jets (primary and dilution) are prescribed 
(Figure 3).  The primary air jets are located approximately one duct diameter downstream from the combustor inlet and serve two major 
functions.  First, the jets bring closure to the recirculation zone by providing a strong force against which the primary zone cannot easily 
penetrate.  Without the set of primary air jets, the dynamics of the recirculation zone would create aerodynamic ﬂuctuations and result 
in pressure oscillations, undesirable noise, and elevated pollutant emission.
Secondly, the primary jets bifurcate with a substantial percentage of the ﬂow directed upstream to mix with the recirculating 
fuel/air mixture, and the remainder mixing downstream into the secondary zone (Figure 4).  The primary jet ﬂowing upstream augments 
the swirler air to establish the overall stochiometry of the primary zone.
Fig. 4. Bifurcation of Primary Jets
The stochiometry describes the actual fuel-to-air ratio compared to the chemically correct or “stoichiometric” ratio.  A number 
of indices (e.g., theoretical air, excess air) can be used.  For gas turbine combustion, the equivalence ratio (φ) is the index that is typically 
adopted:
(
)
(
)
tric
stoichiome
actual
Fuel/Air
Fuel/Air
=
φ
 
 
 
        (2)
 
 
Scott Samuelsen

212
The primary zone is typically fuel rich (φ>1.0) in order to promote reaction stability (e.g., preclude blow-out).  
Mixing.  Combustion is a complex coupling of ﬂuid mechanics and chemical kinetics (Figure 1).  A large scale, macro ﬂuid 
mechanical structure (“recirculation zone”) mix the fuel and air within the primary zone and entrain hot, energetic species to ignite 
the fresh reactant mix.  Chemical kinetics determine the paths and rate at which the reaction proceeds.  The ﬂuid mixing and chemical 
kinetics occur in parallel throughout the primary zone and over a range of scales.  In particular, the zone of recirculation is at the macro 
scale and, within this zone, a range of turbulent eddy scales exists and persists.
The size of the macroscale mixing associated with recirculation is on the order of the combustor diameter (Figure 3).  Within 
the macroscale recirculation zone, mixing of the fuel, air, and recirculated energetic products occurs on the “microscale.”  Whereas 
the macroscale recirculation zone is a “blender” on the scale of the duct diameter, the microscale mixing occurs within “mini-blender” 
packets that vary in (1) the concentrations of fuel and air (Figure 5), and (2) size.
The microscale mini-blenders are turbulent eddies generated (1) at the physical boundaries of the inlet plane, and (2) within 
the shear that exists between the various ﬂows in the primary zone.  The most important shear layer (layer separating two streams 
of differing velocities) exists between the entering fuel and air streams, and within the steep velocity gradient associated with the 
macroscale recirculation zone.
Each turbulent eddy will experience a ﬁnite lifetime (~tens of milliseconds) within the reaction zone before breaking up, mixing 
with adjacent eddies, and forming a new eddy.  Some eddies containing unreacted fuel and air will ignite.  Others will not, waiting to mix 
with other eddies to acquire sufﬁcient energetic species of the necessary mixture ratio that is required for ignition.  
In traditional combustors, the fuel and air are injected separately (i.e., “non-premixed”).  The reaction is often referred to as 
a “diffusion ﬂame” and the combustor as a “diffusion combustor.”  This is a misnomer.  In a diffusion ﬂame, the fuel is not premixed 
with the air prior to reaction, and the reaction occurs at the interface between the fuel and the air.  Within the primary zone of a gas 
turbine combustor, the injection of reactants, the mixing of the reactants, the entrainment and mixing of energetic species, and reaction 
are occurring simultaneously throughout the volume of the recirculation zone.  A variety of fuel/air packets are formed with a myriad of 
mixture ratios.  As a result, mixing of the fuel and air indeed occurs before reaction of the individual packets.  The extent to which, in 
the aggregate, the fuel and air mix prior to reaction depends upon the fuel properties, the fuel and air injection hardware, and the time for 
mixing prior to reaction.  While not premixed (the fuel and air are injected separately), the reaction is not a diffusion ﬂame.  Instead, the 
reaction is a “partially-mixed” “distributed reaction.”  To approached a premixed reaction, the fuel and air must be either (1) intensely 
mixed after injection in a zone that precedes reaction but precludes auto-ignition (“rapidly mixed, non-premixed”), (2) introduced over 
a spatially large area through a large number of discrete injection points (“spatially injected, non-premixed”), or (3) premixed prior 
to injection (“premixed”).  Due to safety, non-premixed operation has been the preferred option.  The need to reduce the emission of 
pollutant species, however, has sought a reaction in the primary zone that behaves closer to a premixed reaction.  For stationary gas 
turbines, all three options listed above are being developed and deployed.  For aero-propulsion applications, only the ﬁrst two options 
are being developed and deployed.
Gaseous fuels (e.g., natural gas, syn-gas) will mix more rapidly with the air than liquid fuels.  Liquid fuels are injected as small 
droplets and must ﬁrst evaporate into a vapor before mixing with the air can occur.  (Some droplets may not completely evaporate and 
will react as a small diffusion ﬂame.)
Heat Release.  The transformation of the chemical energy bound in the fuel to thermal energy is a two-step process.  The ﬁrst 
step is associated with the primary zone.  Here, the hydrogen and carbon bonds in the fuel are converted relatively fast through a series 
of reactions to carbon monoxide (CO) and water (H2O) (Figure 6).  Approximately two-thirds of the chemical energy bound in the fuel 
is released to thermal energy in this ﬁrst phase.  The radiative ﬂux emanating from CO is light blue (Figure 7).  In actual engines, this 
cannot be observed.  In a laboratory model combustor with appropriate optical assess, the light blue emission is discernable at the edges 
surrounding the “white-light” associated with the long-duration exposure of the ﬁlm (Figure 8).
Fig. 5. Microscale Eddies
3.2.1.1 Conventional Type Combustion

213
The CO produced retains one-third of the chemical energy.  The release of the residual energy bound in the CO does not occur 
readily in the primary zone due to (1) the relatively slow kinetic rate for the oxidation of CO to carbon dioxide (CO2), (2) the relatively 
short residence time in the recirculation zone, and (3) the rich stochiometry of the primary zone.  Herein is the role of the secondary 
zone.
 
 
    
  Fig. 6. Heat Release Chemistry (Example for Methane, CH4, as the Fuel)
 
 
 
  Source: 4. Samuelsen, G. S., The Combustion Aspects of Air Pollution,
 
 
 
  Advances in Environmental Science  and Technology, Vol. 5, pp. 219-322, John Wiley & Sons ,1975.
3.2.1.1-4 Secondary Zone
The role of the secondary zone is to oxidize the CO to CO2.  The principal elementary kinetic reaction that governs the 
oxidation is:
CO + OH => CO2 + H 
  
         (3)
 
Fig. 7. Radiative Properties of the Primary Zone
Scott Samuelsen

214
                 Fig. 8. Model Combustor Operating on JP-4 
  
Source: Cameron, C.D., Brouwer, J., and Samuelsen, G.S., A Model Gas Turbine Combustor with   
 
 
Wall Jets and Optical Access for Turbulent Mixing, Fuel Effects, and Spray Studies, Twenty-Second  
 
 
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, pp. 465-474, 1988.
 
The strategy is to increase the sluggish forward reaction rate by (1) establishing an overall lean mixture ratio (e.g., φ~0.8) 
through the primary jet bifurcation, (2) retaining the temperature at an elevated level, and (3) providing the residence time needed to 
promote the oxidation.  The emission from CO2 is purple (Figure 9).  The effectiveness of the secondary zone is evident in Figure 8 
where a purplish light emission, characteristic of the CO2 molecule, is observed between the primary and dilution jets.      
 
 
 
 
      
   
 
 
            
 
 
             Fig. 9. Radiative Properties of the Primary and Secondary Zones
3.2.1.1-5 Dilution Zone
The role of the dilution zone is to reduce the temperature of the combustion products and mix the resultant gases in order to 
establish a temperature that will uphold the integrity of the turbine blades.  This is accomplished by second major set of air jets.  The 
dilution jet ﬂow, approximately one-quarter of the total air ﬂow exiting the compressor, is sufﬁcient to reduce the overall equivalence 
ratio of the gases exiting the combustor to a very lean condition (e.g., φ~0.3) with a corresponding concentration of oxygen of 15% by 
volume.
To protect the integrity of the turbine section, it is not sufﬁcient to reduce the mean temperature.  The radial and circumferential 
variation in local temperature from the mean can create hot spots and degrade, damage, and possibly destroy a turbine component 
(e.g., blade, stator, seal).  As a result, the temperature proﬁle at the exit plane must meet design criteria.  The temperature proﬁle is 
characterized by various indices including the “Pattern Factor,” the “Proﬁle Factor,” and the “Turbine Proﬁle Factor.”
3.2.1.1 Conventional Type Combustion

215
A combustor designer will work with the turbine design team to establish the exit plane temperature “design proﬁle” 
(Figure 10).  The temperature is reduced at the root (0% Blade Span) to protect the blade attachment to the shaft, and reduced at the 100 
percent span point to manage the clearance at the wall.  The peak temperature occurs closer to the 100 percent span point due to the larger 
circumferential area of the turbine that can manage the elevated heat ﬂux.
The actual temperature proﬁle may deviate from the design proﬁle.  The Pattern Factor reﬂects the extent to which the maximum 
temperature deviates from the average temperature rise across the combustor {T3- T2}:
Pattern Factor
{
}
{
}
2
3
3
T
T
T
Tmax
−
−
=
 
  
        (4)
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10. Exit Plane Temperature Proﬁles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Lefebvre, Arthur H., Gas Turbine Combustion, Second Edition, Taylor and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Francis, p. 120, 1998.
The Proﬁle Factor characterizes the extent to which the maximum circumferential mean temperature, Tmr, deviates from the average 
temperature rise across the combustor:
Proﬁle Factor
 
  
         (5)
The Turbine Proﬁle Factor addresses the maximum temperature difference by comparing the average temperature at any given radius 
around the circumference (T3r) and the design temperature for that same radius (T3des):
Turbine Proﬁle Factor
{
}
{
}
2
3
3
3
T
T
T
T
max
des
r
−
−
=
 
  
         (6)
 
 
The goal is for the actual proﬁle to match the design proﬁle.  The dilution jet penetration is the major force that directly determines the 
extent to which this match is achieved.  In general, the combination of the number of dilution jets and the oriﬁce size for each jet is 
selected such that the centerline of the dilution jets penetrates from the wall a distance that corresponds to 1/3 of the duct diameter.
Scott Samuelsen

216
216
3.2.1.1-6 Heat Transfer
A substantial design consideration in the management of the air ﬂ ow exiting the compressor is to address the heat transfer 
demands of the combustor liner.  The reaction within the combustor produces a substantial radiative ﬂ ux of heat to the liner wall. 
Unless this heat is dissipated from the wall, the wall will be compromised and fail.  To preclude this, approximately one-quarter of the 
compressor air ﬂ ow is allocated to liner cooling.  Designs for accommodating this cooling ﬂ ow are small holes in the liner with louvers 
on the inside wall to direct the ﬂ ow along the internal boundary (Figure 3).  New designs incorporate liner materials with hundreds of 
closely spaced holes that promote a diffusive ﬂ ux of air at all points along the liner.
3.2.1.1-7 Combustor Conﬁ gurations
Gas turbine combustors ﬁ rst evolved in a “can” conﬁ guration.  Over time, a length-to-diameter ratio of ~3.0 has emerged as 
necessary to (1) physically accommodate the three zones (primary, secondary, and dilution), and (2) achieve the combustion efﬁ ciency, 
combustion stability, and pollutant emission required of viable, commercial systems.  Due to the simplicity of this conﬁ guration, many 
modern stationary gas turbine engines today retain a can geometry.
To accommodate the evolution of larger engines and the annular ﬂ ow of air exiting compressors, a can-annular conﬁ guration 
evolved as the second-generation strategy for propulsion engines.  The Pratt & Whitney JT8D was the epitome of this design, constituted 
for many years the major population of aero-propulsion engines, and powered the Boeing 727 and early series of Boeing 737s.
The third-generation conﬁ guration is the “full-annular” geometry which provides an exact match in the open annular area to 
both the compressor exit and the turbine entrance.  Modern aero-propulsion engines adopt this geometry universally in order to embrace 
many advantages including a reduced combustor length (and hence a higher thrust to weight ratio), and the ability to accommodate a 
wider range turndown (e.g, from idle to taxi, to cruse, to full power) with a low environmental signature.  With the exception of some 
aero-derivative engines, stationary gas turbine designs have retained the can geometry for (1) ease of maintenance, and (2) ability to 
incorporate advanced low-emission combustor strategies (e.g., premixed injection, catalytic surfaces).
Conﬁ guration options also include whether or not the combustor system will be “in-line” with the compressor and turbine. 
Due to the requirement of aero-propulsion engines to be efﬁ ciently packaged with a minimum length and overall weight, the in-
line conﬁ guration is standard.  Stationary gas turbine engines are free from these constraints.  As a result, engines designed from 
scratch for stationary applications are outﬁ tted with can combustors that are often not in-line in order to support (1) ease of access, 
and (2) ease of maintenance.  Aero-propulsion engines that are applied as well for stationary power generation will be often retroﬁ tted 
with out-of-line can combustors as a substitute to the relatively elegant in-line annular conﬁ guration for the aero application.
3.2.1.1-8 Notes
_______________________
1. Mongia, H. C., Reynolds, R. S., and Srinivasan, R., “Multidimensional Gas Turbine Combustion Modeling: Applications        
    and Limitations,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 24, No. 6, pp. 890-904, 1986.
 
2. McDonell, V.G. and Samuelsen, G.S., ”Measurement of Fuel Mixing and Transport Processes in Gas Turbine  
 
 
    Combustion,” Measurement, Science, and Technology, Topical Issue on Measuring Techniques for Turbomachinery, 
    Vol. 11, pp. 870-886, 2000.  
 
3. Holdeman, J.D., “Mixing of Multiple Jets with a Conﬁ ned Subsonic Crossﬂ ow,” Progress in Energy and Combustion  
 
    Science, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 31-70, 1993.  
3.2.1.1 Conventional Type Combustion

Professor Scott Samuelsen is Director of the Advanced Power and Energy Program (APEP) at the 
University of California Irvine and Professor of Mechanical, Aerospace, and Environmental Engineering. 
He directs as well the National Fuel Cell Research Center (NFCRC) and the UCI Combustion 
Laboratory (UCICL).  His research is directed to advanced power systems including gas turbines, fuel 
cells, and fuels.   He directs anchor research on advanced coal and natural gas power plants for the co-
production of electricity and hydrogen for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), distributed generation 
and information technology research for the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) in support of energy-
efﬁ cient and environmentally-responsible power generation, advanced energy systems research for 
the California Energy Commission, and coal-gas and hydrogen-fueled gas turbine combustion studies. 
His energy expertise is based on forty years of combustion research working with strategic alliances 
involving industry with applications to gas turbine propulsion, gas turbine electronic power generation, 
and combustion distributed generation resources.  He holds the Ph.D. degree from the University of 
California Berkeley.
Scott Samuelsen
Professor of Mechanical, Aerospace, and 
Environmental Engineering Director
Advanced Power and Energy Program
University of California
Irvine
92697-3550
phone: 949-824-5468
email: gss@uci.edu
3.2.1.1 Conventional Type Combustion
3.2.1.3 Rich Burn, Quick-Mix, Lean Burn (RQL) Combustor
BIOGRAPHY  
