121
121
1.3.3-1 Introduction
 
There are two main features that distinguish a Partial Oxidatation Gas 
Turbine from a conventional gas turbine. These are associated with the design 
arrangement and the thermodynamic processes used in operation.  A primary design 
differentiating feature of the POGT when compared to a conventional gas turbine 
is that POGT utilizes a non-catalytic partial oxidation reactor (POR) in place of 
a normal combustor. An important secondary distinction is that a much smaller 
compressor is required, one that typically supplies less than half of the air ﬂ ow 
required in a conventional gas turbine.  From an operational and thermodynamic 
point of view the key distinguishing feature is that the working ﬂ uid provided by 
the POR (a secondary fuel gas) has a much higher speciﬁ c heat than lean complete 
combustion products and more energy per unit mass of ﬂ uid can be extracted by 
the POGT expander than is the conventional case. (This is why the POGT uses a 
smaller compressor than a conventional gas turbine.)
 
A POR operates at fuel rich conditions typically at equivalence ratios on 
the order of 2.5, and virtually any hydrocarbon fuel can be combusted.  Because 
of these fuel rich conditions, incomplete combustion products are used as the 
hot section working ﬂ uid.  A POGT thus produces two products: power and a 
secondary fuel that usually is a hydrogen rich gas.  This speciﬁ c feature creates a 
great opportunity to provide high efﬁ ciencies and ultra-low emissions (single digit 
NOx and CO levels) when the secondary fuel is burned in a bottoming cycle.  When 
compared to the equivalent standard gas turbine bottoming cycle combination, the 
POGT provides an increase of about 10 percent points in system efﬁ ciency. 
 
The overall efﬁ ciency of a POGT two-staged power system is typically 
high and can approach 70% depending on the POGT operating conditions and 
the chosen bottoming cycle. In ﬁ gure 1 a generic arrangement of a two-stage or 
air-staged reheat power system with a POGT as a topping cycle is shown.  The 
bottoming cycle can be either a low pressure (or vacuum) combustion turbine, or 
an internal combustion engine, or a solid oxide fuel cell, or any combination of 
them.  In addition, the POGT can be used as the driver for cogeneration systems. 
In such cogeneration systems the bottoming cycle can be a fuel-ﬁ red boiler, an 
absorption chiller, or an industrial furnace.  The POGT is ideally suited for the co-
production of power and either hydrogen, or synthesis gas (syngas), or chemicals. 
Some of the important applications are described below.
1.3.3-2 Background
 
Research and development (R&D) into the application of POGT concepts 
for power generation was ﬁ rst performed by the Institute of High Temperature 
(IVTAN) in the former Soviet Union in the late 1950s1. The result of this R&D was 
the demonstration of a working POGT.  In one published application by IVTAN2,
residual fuel oil is partially combusted to produce high-pressure steam and fuel 
gas, which is then cooled and cleaned to remove ash and sulfur compounds.  The 
steam and puriﬁ ed fuel gas are then used for power generation.  A 1970 patent 
for a POGT by Jacques Ribesse of the JARIX company in Brussels, Belgium, 
1.3.3 
Partial Oxidation Gas 
Turbine (POGT) Cycles
Fig. 1. Generic Schematic of POGT System
Joseph K. Rabovitser, Ph.D.
 Serguei Nester, Ph.D.,
Gar Technology Institute, Energy 
Utilization center
1700 S. Mount Prospect Road
Des Plaines, IL 60018
Phone: 847-768-0548
 
847-768-0541
joseph.rabovitser@gastechnology.org,
serguei.nester@gastechnology.org
TRITEK Consulting
3633 Millikin Avenue
San Diego, CA 92122-2413
Phone: 858-453-8653
Email: tritek@san.rr.com
David James White

122
was followed by a technical paper in 19713, and a second paper describing further improvements in 19914, which described the gas 
turbine, air compressor, catalytic partial oxidation reactor (POR), and expansion turbine.  Partial or total combustion of the combustible 
gas (leaving the POR) and passing through the expansion turbine was accomplished by injecting air into the turbine vanes.  This 
simultaneously accomplished both the needed cooling and, through local combustion, an isothermal expansion5. 
 
In 1992, IVTAN published a paper describing an innovative combined cycle utilizing a POGT for the repowering of existing 
natural-gas-ﬁred steam turbine power plants.  The retroﬁt modiﬁcations were estimated to improve fuel efﬁciencies to between 70-80% 
and reduce NOx emissions by a factor of 10 or more6. Efﬁciencies are increased mainly because of (1) complete use of the thermal energy 
of the hot pressurized gasiﬁer product gas supplied by the POGT; (2) reduced air ﬂow requirements typically about 65% of that used for 
a conventional expansion turbine, (3) larger volumetric gas ﬂow in the turbine (15-20%), taking into account the lower speciﬁc mass 
of the partial oxidation products, (4) higher speciﬁc heat of the turbine working ﬂuid, and (5) close to isothermal expansion, allowing a 
better utilization potential of the heat7.  
 
Hodrien and Fairbairn in 1993 evaluated the POGT in a report prepared for British Gas as a highly promising cycle with a 
potential efﬁciency above 60%8. Further study at the University of Leige (Belgium) in collaboration with other European partners, which 
included preliminary analysis and testing, concluded POGT has good potential for power generation applications and Combined Heat 
and Power (CHP) applications as well9.  
 
The Gas Technology Institute (GTI) has been actively working on the POGT concept since 1995.  With support from the U.S. 
Department of Energy (DOE) and Gas Research Institute (GRI), GTI (formerly IGT) teamed up with SWPC (formerly Westinghouse) 
to perform a system study of POGT applications10.  The cycles studied included (1) a conventional natural-gas-ﬁred gas turbine with a 
POGT utilized as a topping cycle, (2) a combined cycle plant joining a POGT with a steam turbine, and (3) a repowering system for coal-
ﬁred power plants using a POGT as a topping cycle.  In a continuation of this work Westinghouse performed technical feasibility studies 
and cost analyses of the PO power cycle11 and concluded that there was potential for signiﬁcant plant heat rate and cost-of-electricity 
improvements.  
 
In a recent development effort to demonstrate a POGT for on-site CHP generation, GTI with support from the California Energy 
Commission (CEC) and GRI, has teamed with Solar Turbines Incorporated (Solar), Tritek Consulting, Alturdyne Incorporated , and the 
Belcan Corporation to develop, build, and install at GTI a 10-MWth (34 MMBtu/hr) pressurized research non-catalytic POR, intended to 
replace the  combustor of the  Solar Spartan T-350 conventional gas turbine modiﬁed to operate in a POGT mode.  
1.3.3-3 Overview
 
The POGT has great potential as a driver for a wide 
range of bottoming cycles for power generation.  A POGT can 
effectively co-produce both power and syngas from which 
hydrogen can be extracted.  It can also be used in a cogeneration 
mode where the bottoming cycle systems are industrial furnaces, 
boilers, or absorption chillers.
 
Depending on the fuel type and if normal ambient air is 
used (rather than oxygen enriched air) the exit fuel gases from the 
POGT are essentially low to medium heating value secondary 
fuels with variable but high hydrogen contents.  In general the 
lower the hydrogen content of the fuel molecule the lower the 
exhaust gas hydrogen concentrations will be.  An increase in 
hydrogen content can be obtained by adding steam to the POR 
which through reforming reactions will increase the hydrogen 
content of the POR exhaust.  Typically the POR will operate at 
temperatures on the order of 2000 to 2400°F thus keeping the 
maximum turbine inlet temperature to this level and allowing 
usage of existing and proven ﬂeet of turbine expanders for 
POGT application.  The simultaneous endothermic reforming 
and exothermic oxidation reactions that occur within the POR 
tend to thermally balance each other at a particular temperature 
(depending on the equivalence ratio) thus eliminating any 
destructive run-away reactions.  The POR exhaust gases, which 
have very high speciﬁc heats, provide a signiﬁcant improvement 
over air as the working ﬂuid.  Expansion of the POR gases over 
a turbine provides a much greater power extraction per unit mass of working ﬂuid than is possible for the products of lean conventional 
combustion systems. This working ﬂuid improvement results in the speciﬁc power of the POGT proper, being almost twice that of 
conventional gas turbines.  Generally improved speciﬁc power provides in turn improved proﬁtability for the manufacturer and lower 
unit costs for the customer. Higher efﬁciencies typically improve the customer’s proﬁtability.  The POGT exhibits both improved speciﬁc 
power and increased efﬁciencies when compared to conventional gas turbines.  This is clearly shown in ﬁgure 2 in which a comparison 
of the POGT with a number of gas turbine cycles is provided.
Fig. 2. POGT Cycle Comparisons

123
1.3.3-4 POGT Applications
 
This section covers the key applications that are perfectly suited to a POGT.  These applications have been divided into power 
generation, co-production of power and synthesis gas /hydrogen, and cogeneration applications.  Each application is covered in details 
in the following sections.
POGT for Power Generation
 
The beneﬁts of POGT in power generation systems 
when compared to those based on a conventional gas turbine 
are that it provides fundamentally higher energy conversion 
efﬁciencies and inherently lower nitrogen oxide (NOx) 
emissions without any catalytic combustion or post combustion 
catalytic treatment.  Typically in the POGT power generation 
approaches more of the oxygen in the air is consumed in the 
staged combustion arrangement than in conventional gas 
turbine power systems; O2 in the stack is about 3% for POGT 
systems vs. 14-16% for conventional systems.  This leads 
to the generally higher conversion efﬁciencies.  The overall 
combustion system can be regarded as being similar to a rich-
lean combustor with an expansion turbine located between 
the rich and lean sections.  The expansion process cools the 
gases that enter the lean combustion section creating easier 
premixing and lower ﬂame temperatures than are encountered 
in a standard rich-lean combustor.  It is this critical difference 
that allows the POGT system to provide NOx emission levels 
less than 3 parts-per-million, by volume (ppmv), dry (corrected 
to 15% oxygen).  The POGT does require a more advanced 
control system than a conventional gas turbine primarily for 
starting and shut-down.  In particular if the exhaust fuel gas 
composition is to be varied then additional control features 
have to be added to the basic system.
 
The integration of the POGT with bottoming systems 
such as a steam based combined cycle is straightforward as 
is the integration with a fuel cell.  Using a gas turbine as 
a bottoming cycle is more difﬁcult and usually results in 
either a sub-atmospheric pressure system being employed 
or forward integration of the gas turbine with the POGT. 
A steam bottoming cycle involving the return of all of the 
steam generated (in a fuel ﬁred boiler) to the POGT is shown 
in ﬁgure 3. This is considered to be a steam injected simple 
cycle.  This general approach is similar to steam injected gas 
turbines and produces a signiﬁcant increase in power over 
the non-steam injected case.  A combined cycle version 
of this steam injected POGT is shown in ﬁgure 4.  In this 
arrangement the steam produced in the bottoming cycle is 
split into two streams.  One of the streams is injected into the 
POGT proper and the other is used to drive a steam turbine. 
This particular approach using steam injection not only 
increases the power output of the POGT but also increases 
the hydrogen content of the exhaust secondary fuel gases as 
mentioned above.  The higher hydrogen content provides 
improved stability for the lean combustion systems that are 
used to ﬁre the boilers.  This improved stability allows the 
boiler combustion systems to operate at very lean (low NOx 
emission) conditions.  The injected steam not only enters into 
the POR reforming reactions but is also be used for cooling 
of the POR and hot-section structures where needed. 
Fig. 3. Steam Injected Simple Cycle POGT
Fig. 4. Steam Injected Combined Cycle POGT
Joseph K. Rabovitser, Ph.D., Serguei Nester, Ph.D.,

124
 
The use of a gas turbine as the bottoming 
cycle typically involves a much closer integration 
than say with a fuel cell or boiler.  This forward 
integration results in a conﬁguration that has been 
termed an Air Staged Reheat (ASR) system.  Perhaps 
the simplest version of an ASR in an all electric power 
generating system is shown as a schematic in ﬁgure 5. 
In gas turbine terminology this could be a two shaft, 
single-spool arrangement with a reheat combustor. 
The POGT turbine provides power to both the low 
pressure and high pressure compressors while a ﬁred 
(power) turbine produces the power for export.  This 
conﬁguration has high overall efﬁciencies because 
of the higher levels of oxygen consumed in the two 
stage combustion process when compared to a single 
combustor arrangement.
 
The fuel cell integrated as a bottoming cycle 
with a POGT is shown in ﬁgure 6.  In this particular 
version the fuel cell air is provided by an auxiliary fan 
while the fuel is supplied as the POGT exhaust.  This 
approach of using the POGT exhaust which is a high 
hydrogen content fuel gas for the fuel cell lends itself 
well to both the solid oxide and molten carbonate 
fuel cells.  Figure 6 shows an application involving 
a solid oxide fuel cell.  In general the POGT is a 
better candidate topping cycle to the fuel cell than a 
conventional gas turbine.  The POGT eliminates the 
need for a reformer and the integration problems that 
reformers create for fuel cell thermal management, as 
well as improves start-up and shut-down operation.
POGT for Co-Production of Hydrogen and Power 
 
One of the more promising applications 
of the POGT is the co-production of hydrogen and 
electrical power.  In ﬁgure 7 a POGT system intended 
for the production of both synthesis gas or hydrogen 
(from natural gas) together with electrical power 
is shown.  It shares many features with the steam 
injected systems shown in ﬁgures 3 and 4.  Instead 
of reinjecting all of the steam generated into the POR 
part of the steam produced is reacted with part of 
the POGT exhaust in a shift reactor to increase the 
hydrogen content.  Part of the exhaust is burned in a 
boiler to produce the required steam.  This particular 
POGT arrangement is a very effective approach to 
producing synthesis gas or hydrogen and can be 
viewed as a “self-powered” reformer when this kind 
of application is needed.
POGT for Cogeneration with Industrial Furnaces, 
Boilers or Chillers
 
The use of POGT systems as the drivers for 
cogeneration is likely to be very effective primarily 
because of the use of the POGT exhaust as a fuel.  Not 
only is the exhaust thermal energy made available as 
in a conventional gas turbine cogeneration system 
but the fuel when combusted boosts the application 
Fig. 6. Hybrid Fuel Cell POGT System
Fig. 7. POGT Co-Production of Power and Hydrogen
1.3.3 Partial Oxidation Gas Turbine (POGT) Cycles
Fig. 5 Integrated Air Staged Reheat POGT

125
temperatures to higher levels.  These higher temperatures 
increase the efﬁciency of the bottoming cycle.  The 
exhaust which is a low to medium energy gas typically 
has low ﬂame temperature and thus produces minimal 
levels of NOx.  An arrangement of the POGT with a 
high temperature furnace (HTF) or an industrial boiler 
(IB) is shown in ﬁgure 8.  High temperature steam 
suitable for process uses or even power generation is 
typically produced.  Furnaces such as those used in 
steel annealing and reheat, glass melting, or aluminum 
reclamation are candidates for this approach because 
the associated processes typically require both electrical 
power and high temperatures.
1.3.3-5 Conclusions
 
POGT is a highly ﬂexible device that when 
integrated with a bottoming cycle can provide signiﬁcant 
improvements over conventional gas turbines in both 
efﬁciency and gaseous emissions particularly in small 
megawatt-size power generation systems.  The core 
POGT because of its very high speciﬁc power (kW/
(lb/s)) should have a lower speciﬁc cost ($/kW) than a 
conventional gas turbine.
 
Thus the POGT represents a promising type 
of gas turbine which could be widely used for power 
generation, cogeneration, and co-production of power 
and hydrogen, syngas  or  chemicals.  POGT systems 
efﬁciency is in the lower ﬁfties for simple cycle systems 
and the upper sixties for combined cycles.  Typically the 
NOx emission levels are below 3-ppmv without post 
combustion catalytic treatment.  A conventional gas 
turbine could be converted to a POGT by replacement 
of the conventional combustor with a POR, and by 
downsizing the compressor.  Modiﬁcations to the 
turbine and the hot section cooling systems could also 
be needed.
1.3.3-6 Acronyms and Abbreviations
AC 
 
Air Compressor
FFB 
 
Fuel Fired Boiler
HPAC 
 
High-Pressure Air Compressor
HTF 
 
High Temperature Furnace
IB 
 
Industrial Boiler
LPAC 
 
Low -Pressure Air Compressor
LPT 
 
Low-Pressure Turbine
LRC 
 
Lean Reheat Combustor 
POR 
 
Partial Oxidation Reactor
POGT 
 
Partial Oxidation Gas Turbine
Fig. 8. High Temperature Furnace or Industrial Boiler Cogeneration 
Joseph K. Rabovitser, Ph.D., Serguei Nester, Ph.D.,

126
126
1.3.3-7 Notes
_________________________
 
1. J.K. Rabovitser, M. J. Khinkis, R. L. Bannister, and F. Q. Miao, “Evaluation of Thermochemical Recuperation and Partial   
                  Oxidation Concepts for Natural Gas-Fired Advanced Turbine Systems,” presented at International Gas Turbine and 
 
    Aeroengine Congress & Exhibition, Birmingham UK, June 1996.
 
2. S.A. Christianovich, V. M. Maslennikov, and V. L. Sterenberg, “Steam-Gas Power Stations with Multi-Stage Residual Oil   
 
    Combustion,” Applied Energy, Great Britain, 2 (1995):175-187.
 
3. J. Ribesse, “Gas Turbine with Catalytic Reactor for the Partial Oxidation of Natural Gas and Its Application in Power  
 
 
    Stations,” Gas Wärme International,July-August, 1971.
 
4. J.J. Ribesse, “Isothermal Gas Turbine Using Catalytic Partial Oxidation,” International Patent WO 91/05946, May 2, 1991.
 
5. J.J. Ribesse, “The Isotherm Partial Oxidation Gas Turbine,” Eur. J. Mech. Eng. 36 no. 1 (1991): 27-32.
 
6. V.M. Maslennikov and V. J. Sterenberg, “Steam-Gas Units for the Modiﬁ cation of Existing Steam Power Plants,” IVTAN,   
 
    Moscow, 1992.
 
7. See note 1 above.
 
8. R.C. Hodrien and G.W. Fairbairn, “Power Into the 21st Century,” Gas Engineering &  Management (March, 1994).
 
9. B. Kalitventzeff, M. N. Dumont, and F. Marechal, “Process Integration Techniques in the Development of New Energy  
 
 
    Technologies:  Application to the Isothermal Gas Turbine,” Univ. Liege, Belgium;  M.A. Korobitsyn, P.W. Kers, and 
 
    G.G. Hirs, “Analysis of a Gas Turbine Cycle with Partial Oxidation,” American Society of Mechanical Engineers (Paper), 
 
    98-GT-33 (1998): 7;G. Heyen and B. Kalitventzeff, “A  Comparison of Advanced Thermal Cycles Suitable for Upgrading 
 
    Existing Power Plants,” Applied Thermal Engineering 19 (1998): 227-237; F. Desmaré and G. Heyen, “High-Temperature 
 
    Heat and Power Generation using a partial Oxidation Gas Turbine : Application to an annealing Furnace,” IcheaP-5 
 
    Symposium, Florence, May 20-23, 2001; M. Korobitsyn, “Enhancing Direct-Fired Power Plants Performance by Use of 
 
    Gas Turbine Technology,” Journal of Propulsion and Power 16 no. 4 (2000): 568-571; B. Kalitventzeff, M.N. 
 
    Dumont, and F. Maréchal, “Process Integration Techniques in the  Development of New Energy Technologies : 
 
    Application to the Isothermal Gas Turbine, proceedings of Chisa 1998, August 24-28, Prague; B. Albrecht, “Reactor 
 
    Modeling and Process Analysis for Partial Oxidation of Natural Gas,” (PhD diss. University of Twente, Oct. 14, 2004).
 
10. See note 1 above.
 
11. Newby et. al, “An Evaluation of a Partial Oxidation Concept for Combustion Turbine Power Systems,” ASME paper 97-  
 
      AA-24, 1997
1.3.3 Partial Oxidation Gas Turbine (POGT) Cycles

1.3.3 Partial Oxidation Gas Turbine (POGT) Cycles
Joseph K. Rabovitser, Ph.D. 
Gar Technology Institute, Energy Utilization center
1700 S. Mount Prospect Road
Des Plaines, IL 60018
phone: 847-768-0548
email:   joseph.rabovitser@gastechnology.org
Dr. Joseph Rabovitser is a director of power generation, at the Gas Technology Institute. Since 1994, 
he has been involved in the development of the partial oxidation gas turbine (POGT) technology, 
and currently he is the project manager / principal investigator of the ongoing project “Development 
of a POGT for Combined Electricity and Hydrogen Enriched Fuel Gas Generation,” and he directs 
several other research programs including development and deployment of high efﬁ ciency and 
ultra-low NOx boilers, burners for gaseous and solid fuels, and novel partial oxidation gas turbine 
for CHP and multi-stream cogeneration system. Dr. Rabovitser has over 30 years of extensive 
experience in R&D, engineering, and computer modeling of various power plants equipment.  He 
has over 145 publications, including three books (with co-authors), 44 articles in technical journals 
and proceeding, and 32 patents.
BIOGRAPHY  

Serguei Nester, Ph.D.
Gas Technology Institute, Energy Utilization center
1700 S. Mount Prospect Rd.
Des Plaines, IL 60018
phone: 847-768-0541
email: serguei.nester@gastechnology.org
Dr. Serguei Nester is a senior engineer at Gas Technology Institute, Des Plaines, Illinois.  He 
conducts combustion research and development for industrial applications. His responsibilities 
include CFD modeling, design, development, and testing of novel combustion equipment. 
Currently Dr. Nester is involved in the development of the Partial Oxidation Gas Turbine (POGT) 
technology, including Partial Oxidation Reactors, and small and midsize partial oxidation gas 
turbines,  POGT cycle analysis, combinations of POGT with boilers, furnaces and fuel cells, 
gas turbine/fuel cell hybrids, fundamental studies of partial oxidation of natural gas. Also, he is 
involved in the development of downstream supplemental ﬁring combustion equipment. 

David James White
TRITEK Consulting
3633 Millikin Avenue
San Diego, CA 92122-2413
phone: 858-453-8653
email: tritek@san.rr.com
Mr. David J. White is the president of TRITEK Consulting whose specialty is future gas turbine 
technologies.  Mr. David J. White is a chemical engineer and combustion specialist with degrees 
from Manchester University (BSc.) and Royal College of Aeronautics (MSc.).  He has worked 
in a research capacity for a number of companies including Rolls-Royce, Garrett AiResearch, 
and Solar Turbines Incorporated.  He retired early from Solar Turbines Incorporated and started 
TRITEK Consulting.  Mr. David J. White has provided valuable contributions to a number of 
programs including:
• 
Variable power afterburners for the Rolls-Royce Spey-Engined Phantom.  
• 
Hypersonic Ramjet Engine (HRE) for the X-15 (Garrett AiResearch)
• 
Advanced Turbine Systems (Solar Turbines Incorporated)
• 
Low NOx Combustion Systems (Several Companies)
• 
Partial Oxidation Gas Turbine Design (GRI)
