43766
437
6.0.3-1 Introduction
 
The University Turbine Systems research (UTSR) Program began 
in 1992, as part of the U.S. Department of Energy’s major development 
program in gas turbines1.  Between 1992 and 2001 the program was funded 
with about $400 million of DOE money and a similar amount of contractor 
money.  Part of the program was a university research effort.  Major emphasis 
areas were university research projects, internships, and technology transfer. 
The university program was coordinated by the South Carolina Institute for 
Energy Studies (SCIES), a part of Clemson University, under the overall 
direction of DOE’s National Energy Technology Laboratory.
 
Total cost of the university research program from 1992 until 2001 
was $35.5 million, of which $34.2 million came from DOE and $1.2 million 
came from industry.  The UTSR activity, which began in 2002, is budgeted 
for $15 million in DOE funds and $750,000 from industry over 5 years. 
More details on the UTSR Program can be found in note 12.
 
The DOE Program has continued since 2002 and is now called the 
Turbine Program.  The university activity is continuing as the University 
Turbine Systems Research (UTSR) Program.  In 2003, the UTSR program 
shifted from an emphasis on natural gas fuel to research that supports a 
future power industry needing turbines fueled by syngas and hydrogen 
(SGH).
 
Under the university research program 108 universities in 40 states 
did/do research in the ﬁ elds of aerodynamics and heat transfer, combustion, 
and materials.  Besides the universities, the UTSR consortium includes 
leading gas turbine original equipment manufacturers (OEM’s) and users, 
and gas turbine component manufacturers.  These companies comprise 
the Industry Review Board (IRB), who recommend and track research 
projects that are funded, and are the host sites for graduating seniors and 
graduate students from UTSR universities placed for summer assignments 
(Fellows). 
 
Current IRB Member Companies are BP, Capstone Turbine 
Corporation, Cinergy Energy Services, Clean Energy Systems, EPRI, 
ExxonMobil, General Electric Company, Ingersoll Rand Energy Systems, 
Parker Hanniﬁ n, Pratt & Whitney/UTRC, Precision Combustion Inc., 
RAMGEN, Rolls-Royce, Siemens Westinghouse Power Corporation, Solar 
Turbines, Inc., Southern Company Services and Woodward FST.  Voting 
member companies are gas turbine manufacturers: GE, Pratt & Whitney, 
Rolls-Royce, Siemens Westinghouse and Solar Turbines.  The others are 
Associate Member companies.
1. 
The overall program in 1992-2001 was called the Advanced 
Turbine Systems (ATS) Program, and the university research 
portion of ATS was called the Advanced Gas Turbine Systems 
Research (AGTSR) Program.
 
An Academic Advisory Board (AAB) was formed in 2004 to 
provide a mechanism for obtaining input from the academic community to 
the UTSR program and to develop short courses on gas turbine technologies. 
Their ﬁ rst product was a short course in August 2004 on the impact of 
synfuels on gas turbines.  Current AAB members represent Virginia Tech, 
Georgia Tech, U. of California Irvine, U. of Central Florida, Penn State, U. 
of Connecticut, Brigham Young and U. of Wisconsin.
 
The program is geographically broad – based, see ﬁ gure 1.66
6.0.3 
University Turbine 
Systems 
Research Program 

438
Fig. 1. The UTSR Process
 
The point of the research program is to address the goals of the DOE Turbine Program while producing results that are useful to 
the gas turbine industry.  In order to achieve that outcome the program is designed with signiﬁcant input from industry, through the IRB. 
The IRB and DOE decide which research topics are most relevant to their needs, in the areas of a) combustion, b) materials – focusing 
on thermal barrier coatings (TBC’s) – and c) aerodynamics / heat transfer – focused on the turbine section of the gas turbine. These topics 
deﬁne the requested research in the Request for Proposals released yearly to the UTSR universities. 
 
Then, after the proposals come in from the universities, the IRB ranks them within each of the three subject areas and 
recommends a short list to DOE for funding  in the annual IRB meeting. The short list is created in rank order starting with the most 
important proposal and ending where the expected funding runs out, plus typically two backup proposals in case there is extra funding 
or enough cost savings can be achieved on the selected ones to fund more projects.
 
The typical project lasts for three years, averaging about $150K per year.  So each year, the available funding needs to cover 
projects that were started one and two years ago in addition to the ﬁrst year costs of new projects.  
 
There is considerable communication between industry, the universities, DOE and SCIES, designed to keep the program 
relevant to the needs of industry, DOE’s priorities, and the capabilities and ideas from the universities. The overall process of the UTSR 
Program is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.  
Fig. 2. Research Program

439
 
Since its inception in 1992, the UTSR research program has launched 103 projects, including 77 completed, 21 underway 
and 5 announced but not yet started.   By visiting the website mentioned in note 1 the reader can select descriptions of each project 
and search by Principal Investigator or University3.
 
Considerable results of use to industry have been achieved from these projects.  A sampling of some of the most signiﬁcant 
are listed below in the three technical areas of concentration.
MATERIALS (THERMAL BARRIER COATINGS): 
 
• Laser ﬂuorescence (LF) was determined to be the most promising technique for non-destructive evaluation (NDE) of TBCs   
and a UTSR projected started the commercial development of a new low cost and portable NDE instrument. 
 
• Processing approaches have been identiﬁed that can increase TBC lifetimes by a factor of four and more. 
 
• A new Small Particle Plasma Spray (SPPS) process was shown to produce a factor of two lower internal oxidation rate of the 
bond coat and TBC coatings that experience lower fatigue damage. 
 
• Two superior alloys and one coating were identiﬁed for operation at surface temperatures above 700 C (1290 F which did not 
experience signiﬁcant degradation associated with water vapor effects, signiﬁcant to operation with syngas fuel. 
 
 
COMBUSTION: 
 
 
 
AERODYNAMICS / HEAT TRANSFER: 
 
              
William H. Day, Richard A. Wenglarz and Lawrence P. Golan
• Experiments showing a scientiﬁc foundation for use of a ﬁne water mist in steam for cooling high temperature turbine 
components.  The addition of 1% water mist can enhance cooling by 50 to 100%, and in best cases, as much as 700%. 
 
• Internal surface features within channels improve turbine blade cooling. Dimples on the interior of cooling channels can 
improve cooling effectiveness by as much as a factor of two, signiﬁcant for operation with syngas fuels. 
 
• LES (Large Eddy Simulation) computational approaches improve predictions of heat transfer and design of turbine blade 
cooling. This enables less coolant air to improve turbine performance.
Illustrations of a few of the completed projects are shown in ﬁgures 3 – 5.
                                     
• Active control approach to overcome instabilities in low emission turbine combustors. A factor of four reduction in 
combustor pressure oscillations was demonstrated, and several gas turbine companies have started projects to evaluate 
application of the approach to their combustors. 
 
• Method to determine the stability margin of combustors before experiencing problems in the ﬁeld. 
 
• Computer code for NOx and CO emissions prediction design of low emission turbine combustors. The code has shown a 
factor of forty reduction in computation times. 
 
• Devices using infrared light for measuring fuel-air mixedness in combustors. Less than one-third of the cost of laser 
devices for measuring mixedness and are more compact and rugged.

440
 Fig. 3. Improvement in Life of Thermal Barrier Coatings
Fig. 4. Reduction in Combustor Pressure Oscillations
Fig. 5. Improved Turbine Cooling Design
6.0.3 University Turbine Systems Research Program

441
6.0.3-2 The Challenge of Synfuels
The use of coal-derived synfuels poses particular issues to the designers of the hot parts of the gas turbine. Table 1 summarizes the 
major turbine research challenges and suggested means to overcome them.
Table 1
Issue Syn-H2 Gas Introduces
Description
Challenge/Resolution
Heating Value Variability
Syngas to natural gas variability is as 
much as 20:1. 
Current combustors cannot manage this 
variability and research is needed to aid design of 
combustors that will.
Gas Constituent Variability
Constituent proportions vary 
signiﬁcantly; for example H2 can vary 
8.6% to 44%. Amount of H2O in the 
combustion process will be signiﬁcantly 
greater than for conventional fuels.
Flash back is an issue for H2 bearing fuels and 
research on ﬂashback will also aid design of 
natural gas turbines.
Increased mass ﬂow has required down rating of 
current designs. 
Design to prevent combustion instabilities is 
complicated by fuel variability
Blade coatings
Mixed gases (H2O, salt, etc.) attack 
current airfoil base materials.
Research for more robust barrier blade coatings 
is justiﬁed in order to increase operating 
temperature and life.
Heat Transfer 
Increased heat transfer to components 
results for syngas-hydrogen fuels.
Research to gain improved understanding of heat 
transfer mechanisms for syngas is justiﬁed. 
Deposits
Syngas deposits will cause special 
problems not now fully understood.
Research needed to gain improved 
understandings of consequences such as blade 
wakes, reduced ﬂow passageways, and clogging 
of ﬁlm cooling holes.
Erosion-Corrosion
Erosion-corrosion issues not fully 
understood.
Research is needed to understand rates and 
consequence of blade passage wear, especially 
in blade tip region. TBC degradation and 
spalling need to be understand in order to allow 
operation at higher more optimal temperatures. 
Contribution of syngas contaminants need 
improved understanding.
Combustion
Flashback is an issue and increased 
residence time is needed for CO burn-
up. 
Flashback due to H2 in the fuel, leanness limits 
to support low NOx and residence time needs for 
CO burnout, must be researched separately and in 
an integrated sense.
Prediction of Problems
Syngas-hydrogen fuels are likely to 
challenge predictive understanding of 
turbine robustness.
Research is very important to aid prediction of 
slow failures that would result in environmental 
issues, accelerated blade degradation, hindrance 
of engine cycling.
William H. Day, Richard A. Wenglarz and Lawrence P. Golan

442
6.0.3 Gas Turbine Industrial Fellowship
 
As part of the UTSR Program, the Gas Turbine Industrial Fellowship Program offers students valuable work experience and 
the opportunity to practice the “art” of engineering in an industrial setting.  Discipline areas, as applied to land-based gas turbine power 
generation systems, include mechanical design and manufacturing, heat transfer, aerodynamics, combustion, thermodynamic analyses, 
materials and coatings, and testing and evaluation.
   
Emphasis is placed on gas turbine component design and manufacturing techniques, using state-of-the-art experimental and 
computational facilities.  UTSR professors and industry engineering staff serve as mentors and advisors for the fellows.  Students 
are exposed to gas turbine design techniques, analysis and system optimization methods, design limitations and practical problems 
encountered in the industry. 
 
Fellows participate in a 10-12 week work experience at turbine industry sites (manufacturers and end users).  In order to 
participate in the program, students must be in good standing in an appropriate degree program at an accredited U.S. college or university 
that is a UTSR Performing Member.  The program targets B.S. (graduating seniors), M.S. and Ph.D. graduate students.  Applicants 
must be U.S. citizens or permanent resident aliens.  The applicant’s selection is based on academic record, aptitude and gas turbine 
engineering interest, as well as the recommendation of the applicant’s advisor and engineering instructors.  
 
Fellows are paid a stipend of $700, $800, or $900 per week, depending on academic status of BS, MS or Ph.D. respectively, 
plus a one-time payment of $1200 to help cover travel and relocation expenses.  Further details and background can be found in note 
44.
Process of the Fellowship Program
 
Selection of Fellows: Annually, an announcement of the program is released, and applications are received and reviewed by 
industry. The applicants rank the companies they most want to work for, and the IRB companies rank the applicants they are most 
interested in, typically their top 4 or 5 since they get only 1 or 2 Fellows; one per Associate Member and two per Voting Member.  The 
applicants respond, accepting or rejecting the offers.  Typically the student acceptance rate is about 90%.  For those cases where the 
applicant rejects the offer, SCIES, after conferring with the IRB company where that student was offered placement, makes offers to 
backup candidates as needed until all the available slots are ﬁlled.
Reports and Presentations:  At the conclusion of their projects, the Fellows are required to make a report on their projects, including 
objectives, procedure and results.  Also they develop a PowerPoint description of the projects.  One Fellow from each IRB company 
participates in a poster session at the annual Peer Review Workshop.  The PowerPoint presentations are posted on the UTSR website. 
The presentations are cleared with the IRB companies for placement in the public domain.
 
                                       Fig. 6 Sample project description from the 2004 Fellowship Assignments
6.0.3 University Turbine Systems Research Program

443
Title:  CFD Modeling of Rotor-Stator Cavity Purge Flow
Author:  Jonathan McGlumphy Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University
Industrial Mentor: Dr. Philip Andrew, Mgr., Turbine Aero Engineering 
Industrial Site: General Electric Power Systems, Greenville, SC facility
Objective:  Apply GE in-house CFD solver to simple rotor-stator cavity geometries to lay foundation for future work
Achievements:
 Reviewed literature to ﬁnd simple cavity geometry with available experimental data
 Performed initial computations using GE in-house code
 Developed technique to allow density-based code to solve incompressible ﬂow ﬁeld
 Results compared favorably with published data and accompanying computations
 Conﬁrmed that code can capture fundamental physics without modiﬁcation to the code
Future Work
 Code will be used to model ﬂow ﬁelds of more complex geometries.
 Method could be used in the future to guide experimental set-ups
2005 Fellows
The placement of the Fellows for 2005 is shown in Figure 4; a total of 20 applicants from 12 universities were placed in 13 companies.
  
Fellow
University
Company Placement 
Benjamin Asefa 
University of Michigan 
Parker Hanniﬁn 
Christopher Bolszo 
University of California, Irvine 
General Electric Company 
Nicholas Cardwell 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
Pratt & Whitney/UTRC 
Jeffrey Carullo 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
Solar Turbines, Inc 
Jared Crosby 
Brigham Young University 
Pratt & Whitney/UTRC 
Jason Habeger 
Michigan State University 
Siemens Westinghouse 
Michael Hind 
University of Wyoming 
Ingersoll Rand Energy Systems 
Jerrod Isaak 
University of Wyoming 
Clean Energy Systems 
Richard Klop 
Michigan State University 
Rolls-Royce Corporation 
Jonathan McGlumphy 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
Rolls-Royce Corporation 
Adam Norberg 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
Ramgen 
Clark Paterson 
Colorado State University 
Woodward FST 
Travis Patterson 
University of Central Florida 
Siemens Westinghouse 
Emmanuel Perez 
University of Central Florida 
General Electric Company 
Stanton Peterson 
University of Wyoming 
BP 
Patrick Sheppard 
Vanderbilt University 
Solar Turbines, Inc 
Andrew Skoglund 
University of Minnesota 
Siemens Westinghouse 
Ruwan Somawardhana 
University of Texas, Austin 
Precision Combustion 
Paul Teini 
University of Wyoming 
Pratt & Whitney/UTRC 
Scott Thawley 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
Capstone Turbine Corporation 
In 2004 we contacted former Fellows concerning their permanent positions and heard back from 63 of them: 
To the gas turbine industry : 
 
 
29
To industry, non-gas turbine: 
 
 
8
To academia: 
 
 
 
 
3
Subtotal who have started full-time employment: 40
Still in graduate school at last report: 
 
23
So, of those who have started full-time employment, 73% went to the gas turbine industry, and an additional 7% went to academia.  If 
we include those in academia, 80% of them are beneﬁting the gas turbine industry. 
William H. Day, Richard A. Wenglarz and Lawrence P. Golan

444
444
6.0.3-4 Notes
___________________________
 
1. SCIES website: http://www.clemson.edu/scies/; click on “University Turbine Systems Research” for information on the  
 
 
    UTSR Program.
 
2. Ibid.
 
3. Ibid.
 
4. SCIES website: http://www.clemson.edu/scies/  then click on “Gas Turbine Fellowship”; W. Day,  “University Turbine  
 
                  Systems Research Program: An Innovative Approach to Graduate Education”  ASME Paper number MECE2005-82534 (to  
 
    be presented at the ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress & Exposition, Orlando, FL, November 2005).6.0.3
 6.0.3 University Turbine Systems Research Program

6.0.3 University Turbine Systems Research Program
Dr. Day is a graduate of Cornell University BME 1960, Polytechnic University MSME 1966, and Polytechnic 
University Ph.D. ME 1970.  Dr. Day started as an engineer with General Electric in 1960.  During his career with GE’s 
Gas Turbine Division he was responsible for establishing and managing the High Temperature Turbine Technology 
Program, and managed the business with EPRI and the US Department of Energy.  In 1979 Dr. Day joined the United 
Technologies Corporation, where he managed a joint gas turbine design study between Pratt & Whitney and Siemens. 
He was also responsible for negotiating the contract with the People’s Republic of China that launched the FT8 gas 
turbine and for directing the development of the FT8. He was responsible for negotiating the contract with Siemens 
that led to development of the V84.3A gas turbine and was in charge of that development effort at UTC.  From 1995 
until his retirement from United Technologies in 2002, Dr. Day was Manager of Advanced Engine Programs for Pratt 
& Whitney’s industrial gas turbine business.  In 1995, Dr. Day led the founding of the Gas Turbine Association, the 
trade association for the gas turbine industry.  He served as Chairman of the Board of GTA from its founding in 1995 
until his retirement from United Technologies in 2002.  In 2001 Dr. Day was named a Fellow of Pratt & Whitney in 
recognition for his expertise in industrial gas turbines.  In 2002, Dr. Day joined the South Carolina Institute for Energy 
Studies (SCIES) as Outreach Manager.  SCIES coordinates the university research programs for the U.S. Department 
of Energy’s University Turbine Systems Research (UTSR) Program.  Responsibilities and accomplishments include a 
substantial expansion of the Gas Turbine Industrial Fellowship Program and of the Industry Review Board, publication 
of numerous articles in gas turbine trade journals and ASME papers on the UTSR Program, while working closely with 
the Department of Energy.  Dr. Day has four patents and has published over 60 technical papers.
William H. Day
Outreach Manager
South Carolina Institute for Energy Studies (SCIES)
Clemson University
phone: (860) 404-0759
email: billday3@comcast.net
www.clemson.edu/scies
BIOGRAPHY  

Richard A. Wenglarz
South Carolina Institute for Energy Studies (SCIES)
Clemson University
phone: (864) 656-0142
email: rwnglrz@clemson.edu
www.clemson.edu/scies
          
Richard Wenglarz received B.S. and M.S degrees from the University of Illinois, and Ph.D. degree 
from Stanford University, all in Engineering Mechanics. He has held positions at the University of 
Newcastle Upon Tyne, Bellcomm, Bell Laboratories, Westinghouse R&D Center, Rolls Royce/Allison 
Division of General Motors, and South Carolina Institute for Energy Studies (SCIES) at Clemson 
University. 
His early experience involved dynamics and control for gyroscopic systems and manned space stations. 
Later experience concerned developing and applying analytical and experimental methods to evaluate 
deposition, erosion, and corrosion (DEC) in advanced energy systems (e.g., gas turbines and fuel cells) 
operating with alternate fuels. Currently, Dr. Wenglarz is Manager of Research at SCIES for the DOE 
sponsored University Turbine Systems Research (UTSR) program supporting university gas turbine 
research nationwide. 
 
Dr. Wenglarz has over 80 publications and presentations including invited presentations at the Von 
Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics, Yale University, UK Central Electricity Research Laboratories, 
Cambridge University, and the Kentucky Energy Cabinet Laboratories. 

Lawrence P. Golan is presently Special Assistant to the Vice President for Research at Clemson University (2003 – present).  In addition, 
Dr. Golan is Director of the South Carolina Institute of Energy Studies - SCIES. (1986-2003)  He established the Energy Systems 
Laboratory, a unit blending energy facilities, academics and research.  Dr. Golan maintains a working relationship with the Gas Turbine 
Association, the Alliance to Save Energy and the Southeast Energy Efﬁ ciency Alliance.  He received his Ph.D. from Lehigh University 
and his B.S. and M.S. from West Virginia University.
Dr. Golan’s professional activities include:  Chairman 1996 National Heat Transfer Conference hosted by AIChE, ASME, AIAA and 
ANS; 1990, 1994 and 1999 Chair of the AIChE Heat Transfer Division; 1992 National Heat Transfer Conference Best Paper co-Chair; 
1992, 1994 and 1996 Chair Kern and Jakob Award Committee; member National Heat Transfer Conference Coordination Committee; 
AICHE Chair 2004 Summer Heat Transfer and Fluids Engineering Conference, advisor to the State of Illinois Coal Combustion 
Program; and member of the Academic Advisory Committee West Virginia University Mechanical Engineering Department.  Dr. 
Golan has authored 34 articles, offered 13 short courses and organized numerous energy conferences and workshops. Prior to 
his present position at Clemson University, Dr. Golan was employed by Exxon Research and Engineering Company (presently 
ExxonMobil) for nineteen years.  Since 1992 Dr. Golan has directed a nationwide activity of 110 universities and 10 
U.S. corporations for the U.S. DOE that is providing technology necessary for developing the next generation 
of advanced land-based power generation systems.  
Lawrence P. Golan
South Carolina Institute for Energy Studies (SCIES)
Clemson University
phone: (864) 656-2267
email: glawren@clemson.edu
www.clemson.edu/scies
