203
203
3.2-1 Introduction
 
The technical challenges surrounding syngas and hydrogen fuel 
combustion have been outlined in section 3.1.  Given the issues presented 
there, various options can be considered for combustor design and operation. 
First, it is critical to deﬁ ne the type of combustion system that will be used. 
There are two broad categories:  diffusion ﬂ ame combustors, and premixed 
combustors.  These are described below, but before discussing the combustion 
strategies, it is useful to review how NOx pollutants are formed.  
3.2-2 NOx Formation
There are several routes to form NOx pollutants and these may be 
broadly catalogued as thermally-generated, ﬂ ame-generated, or fuel-bound 
NOx.  Different authors use different names to catalogue these mechanisms and 
there is still continuing research to understand the most prominent mechanisms 
at ultra-low NOx conditions.  For example, in hydrogen fueled systems, the 
prominence of H radicals may contribute to NOx in a manner that is different 
than in systems fueled by natural gas.1
Thermal NOx is formed by oxidation of nitrogen in air and requires 
sufﬁ cient temperature and time to produce NOx.  A rule of thumb is that below 
approximately 1700K, the residence time in typical gas turbine combustors 
is not long enough to produce signiﬁ cant thermal NOx.  Where temperatures 
higher than 1700K cannot be avoided, it is necessary to limit residence time to 
control NOx formation, which favors very short combustor designs.  Thermal 
NOx production also increases with the square root of operating pressure, 
making it more difﬁ cult to reduce in higher-pressure aeroderivative gas 
turbines.
As the name implies, ﬂ ame-generated NOx occurs in the ﬂ ame front, 
created on the short time scale associated with primary combustion reactions. 
There are a variety of chemical mechanisms involved, all linked to intermediate 
combustion species that exist only in the reaction zone of the ﬂ ame.  It is 
important to understand that in practical combustors, the reaction zone is just 
a small portion of the total combustor volume –most of the combustor volume 
is sized to complete the relatively slow approach to equilibrium products 
(notably CO to CO2 oxidation).  Thus, residence time in the whole combustor 
does not affect the ﬂ ame-generated NOx produced – a signiﬁ cantly different 
behavior compared to thermal NOx.   A convincing demonstration of this 
point was presented by  Leonard and Stegmaier2 who studied multiple ﬂ ame 
holders, operating conditions, and residence times from 2 to 100 milliseconds, 
demonstrating that the ﬂ ame temperature alone (not residence time) determined 
the NOx production for emissions under 10 ppmv.   Fig. 1, is useful to estimate 
the ﬂ ame NOx produced at a given  ﬂ ame temperature, accounting for ideal, 
and “poor” premixing (not carefully deﬁ ned in note 2).  Note that the effect of 
poor premixing raises the NOx levels by as much as a factor of three.  These 
data were recorded in turbulent ﬂ ames, where combustion products are mixed 
with the fresh reactants right at the ﬂ ame.  It has been suggested that other 
combustion conﬁ gurations, without signiﬁ cant stirring between the ﬂ ame front 
and products, may reduce the ﬂ ame generated NOx.3  This may be the basis for 
NOx reductions reported in the Low-Swirl Combustion section.
Finally, fuel-bound NOx is produced by nitrogen species in the fuel 
reacting with air during combustion.  For coal syngas, the most prominent 
fuel nitrogen species is ammonia, generated during gasiﬁ cation from nitrogen 
compounds in coal.  The ammonia should ideally be removed from the 
fuel before entering the combustor, or it will be converted to NOx by most 
combustion strategies.  Where this is not possible, rich-lean strategies have 
the most potential to reduce NOx pollutants.  In this approach, combustion 
is ﬁ rst carried out under fuel-rich conditions, followed by completing 
combustion under fuel lean conditions.  In fuel rich conditions, with sufﬁ cient 
residence times, the ammonia can be reduced to nitrogen and water, rather than 
3.2
Combustion Strategies for 
Syngas and High-Hydrogen 
Fuel 
Pete Strakey
Energy Systems Dynamics Division
National Energy Technology Laboratory
3610 Collins Ferry Rd.
P.O. Box 880
Morgantown, WV 26507-0880
phone: (304) 285-4476
email: peter.strakey@netl.doe.gov
George Richards
National Energy Technology Laboratory
3610 Collins Ferry Rd.
P.O. Box 880
email: george.richards@netl.doe.gov 
phone: (304) 285-4458
Nate Weiland
National Energy Technology Laboratory
P. O. Box 10940
Pittsburgh, PA  15236
email: nathan.weiland@netl.doe.gov
phone:  (412)386-4649

204
atmospheric oxygen.  A number of studies have been conducted to evaluate rich-lean combustion as an approach to reducing fuel bound 
NOx.  These studies have shown as much as 95% of the fuel ammonia can be reduced to nitrogen and water using rich-lean combustion, 
with the remaining 5% converting to NOx.4  Untreated syngas ammonia concentrations can exceed 1000ppm, where even 5% conversion 
would lead to 50ppm NOx, which is well above desired emissions levels.  Thus, it is desirable to remove fuel ammonia during gas 
cleanup, rather than rely on combustion techniques to reduce it to water and nitrogen.
 
 
       
1
10
1650
1700
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
Flame Temperature (K)
NOx (ppmvd) @15% O2
2
4
6
Ideal Premixing
Poor Premixing
 
 
          Fig. 1.  NOx emissions, adopted  from Leonard and Stegmaier.
 
 
            Source: See note 2. 
3.2-3 Diffusion Flame Combustion
 
In this style of combustion, fuel and air are introduced in separate passages, and the ﬂame is stabilized where the fuel and 
air streams mix.    Combustion reactions are typically so fast that fuel and oxidant consumption is limited by transport to the reaction 
zone (i.e., diffusion), and the reaction proceeds locally at nearly stoichiometric conditions. The Lewis number (Le) describes the ratio 
of thermal transport to species transport from this reaction zone.  Where Le = 1, the temperature in the reaction zone will equal the 
adiabatic ﬂame temperature because thermal energy diffuses away as fast as the reactants are supplied.   The fuel species in hydrocarbon 
combustion typically have fuel Lewis numbers (
fuel
ij
mix
D
/
α
) in the range of 0.9 to 1.2, meaning that diffusion ﬂame combustors will 
have ﬂame temperatures near the adiabatic ﬂame temperature.  These temperatures are high enough to oxidize nitrogen in air, producing 
appreciable NOx pollutants.  Hydrogen itself has a fuel Lewis number as low as 0.4, making it even more difﬁcult to reduce NOx 
because the peak laminar ﬂame temperatures are higher than adiabatic due to differential diffusion effects.  The effect of fuel Lewis 
number on ﬂame temperature has been observed experimentally as well as with direct numerical simulations (DNS).5
Because of their high ﬂame temperatures, diffusion ﬂame combustors require some method to achieve low-NOx performance. 
An obvious technique is to dilute the fuel, lowering the adiabatic ﬂame temperature.  A common diluent is steam, which can both 
lower the ﬂame temperature, and reduce the production of non-thermal NOx.  The hydroxyl radical OH is increased by the presence 
of additional water, and these radicals favorably scavenge HCN fragments which might otherwise produce NOx.  Steam dilution is 
already used on IGCC applications, but it is not completely desirable.  The extra energy that is needed to make steam from water is not 
recovered in the turbine expansion, penalizing cycle efﬁciency, (but raising power output from the added mass ﬂow).  The additional 
steam in the exhaust produces a modest increase in the turbine nozzle heat transfer, raising metal temperatures.   The protective thermal 
oxide layers in turbine material sets can be affected by increased moisture levels.  Finally, steam consumption by stationary turbines 
should be minimized to conserve water resources.  For these reasons, any further development of diffusion ﬂame combustors for IGCC 
applications would ideally use nitrogen from the air separation plant, rather than steam.  The amount of nitrogen available for ﬂame 
dilution is established by the engine cycle and the ASU, and it can be shown that for example, hydrogen could be diluted up to about 
50% with nitrogen in a typical IGCC conﬁguration.  Unfortunately, this level of dilution produces an adiabatic ﬂame temperature around 
2025 K, which is still too high for ultra-low NOx performance.
Given the dilution limit on adiabatic ﬂame temperature, it is important to consider other methods to reduce the diffusion ﬂame 
temperature.  As noted above, the diffusion ﬂame temperature is set by the ratio of thermal diffusion away from the reaction zone to 
heat generated by reactants.   If the reaction zone is “strained” by ﬂuid shear, it is possible to change the balance between diffusion 
and reaction in the reaction zone, changing the ﬂame temperature.  Strongly sheared ﬂows can locally extinguish the  ﬂame, providing 
opportunity for fuel air mixing before combustion is initiated elsewhere.  This raises the possibility that strong shearing could be used 
to make a diffusion ﬂame combustor behave more like a premixed combustor.  The required levels of shearing (known as “stretch” or 
“strain”) have not been fully characterized. These concepts are discussed in the Highly-Strained Diffusion Flame Combustion section.

205
3.2-4 Lean Direct Injection
Lean Direct Injection (LDI) combustion was developed as a low NOx alternative to Lean Prevaporized Premixed (LPP) 
combustion for aircraft gas turbines, where the inherent ﬂashback and dynamic instability concerns of LPP combustion are considered 
too great of a risk for ﬂight application.  In LDI combustors, liquid fuel is directly injected into the combustion chamber, where it is 
mixed with air in the shortest possible distance.  The intent is to provide an essentially lean premixed fuel/air mixture that burns in a 
low-NOx ﬂame, similar to LPP combustors, which are discussed in the Premixed Combustion section below.6
Low-NOx performance is compromised in an LDI combustor if the fuel and air are not perfectly mixed before combustion 
occurs, creating regions with higher fuel content that burn hotter and generate more NOx.  Similarly, the mixture may burn upstream of 
the premixed zone in a diffusion ﬂame, with combustion occurring at stoichiometric conditions that result in higher temperatures and 
NOx production. Nevertheless, ﬂashback and auto-ignition concerns are nearly eliminated in LDI combustors, and they can operate over 
a wide turndown range with a high degree of static and dynamic stability using a wide range of fuels.  
The desire to burn high-hydrogen fuels in gas turbines used for power applications raises similar concerns of ﬂashback and 
instability when operating in the Lean Premixed mode of combustion, so LDI combustors seem to be a natural ﬁt for burning these fuels 
in a low NOx gas turbine system.  To demonstrate the potential of LDI combustors, researchers at NASA Glenn have recently studied 
various low NOx LDI concepts for pure hydrogen combustion in aircraft gas turbine combustors.7   Five separate injector concepts 
from different manufacturers were tested at aircraft gas turbine conditions (4.8 – 13.6 atm, Tin = 600 – 1000 °F).  At low combustor exit 
temperatures, it was possible to achieve very small NOx levels (~1 ppmv, wet, uncorrected).  NOx emissions were primarily controlled 
by lowering equivalence ratios to limit combustion temperatures, and no hydrogen dilution cases were considered. 
One of the tested injectors at NASA Glenn was similar to those used in current IGCC gas turbines that burn syngas, where fuel 
is injected axially into a swirling airﬂow.  Although this injector was very robust, it produced substantially higher NOx than the other 
tested injectors.  Some of the other tested injectors were similar to those studied recently at GE Energy, where multiple fuel jets were 
injected at an angle into a central air jet.8  Their results show that more fuel injection ports per air jet reduce NOx emissions due to higher 
fuel jet momentum and mixing. Increasing the number and decreasing the size of the air jets is shown to reduce NOx by reducing the 
length of the combustion zone, although this comes at the expense of increased combustor pressure drop.  Similar injector conﬁgurations 
studied at NASA Glenn had better NOx emissions, due in part to the shortened combustion zone. However, in some cases, this also led 
to overheating problems and injector failure, since the combustion zone was located much closer to the fuel and air injectors.  
Pressure drops in the NASA Glenn injectors were sometimes very large (4-25%).  Redesign and optimization for power 
gas turbines could reduce these pressure drops.  In addition, large pressure drops may have been required to reduce the ﬂashback or 
ﬂameholding potential in those injector designs that operated more in a premixed combustion mode than a diffusion combustion mode. 
As the injectors were tested on pure hydrogen, dilution with nitrogen will reduce ﬂame speeds and may decrease the necessity for large 
injector pressure drops and high air velocities to avoid these issues.
3.2-5 Highly-Strained Diffusion Flame Combustion 
 
Though not discussed explicitly in the above studies, successful LDI diffusion ﬂame combustors use jets of fuel and air that 
introduce high strain rates in the combustion zone.  In a pure diffusion ﬂame, strain rate can be quantiﬁed by measuring or calculating the 
velocity gradients in the mixing ﬂow ﬁeld.  In regions of high strain and ﬂuid shear, mixing rates and bulk transport rates are faster than 
chemical reaction rates, thus local reactions are not allowed to go to completion before the ﬂow carries the combustion radicals away 
from the reaction zone.  The net result of this process is a reduction in peak ﬂame temperature of a highly strained ﬂame, which in turn 
reduces thermal NOx production.  It should be pointed out, however, that thermal NOx is not only a function of temperature, but also of 
ﬂame residence time and O-atom concentration in the reaction zone.  Increasing the ﬂame strain also tends to reduce the residence time 
in the ﬂame, but it also can increase the O-atom concentration in the ﬂame by an order of magnitude.  This effect is shown in Figure 2, 
where intermediate strain rates tend to increase the production rate of NO due to the increased O-atom concentration, while at high strain 
rates, the reduction in ﬂame temperature overcomes the inﬂuence of the O-atom concentration, and NO production rates are reduced. 
This points to increased strain rates as a possible path to reducing or effectively eliminating thermal NOx in a diluted diffusion ﬂame, 
where dilution of the fuel alone does not reduce ﬂame temperatures enough to satisfy ultra-low NOx emission goals.  
Increased strain rates are typically attained by increasing the fuel and/or air jet velocities to increase ﬂuid shear, though at the 
expense of increased combustor pressure drop.  In addition, the static stability of the ﬂame is a strong function of these jet velocities, 
where too high of a jet velocity could cause the ﬂame to blowout.  Thus, ﬂame stability concerns place limits on allowable levels of 
ﬂame strain, particularly for diluted high-hydrogen content fuels, since ﬂameholding ability is closely linked to the ﬂame speed of the 
fuel/air mixture, which decreases as more diluent is added to the fuel stream.  From this perspective, impinging fuel and air jet injector 
conﬁgurations9 hold an advantage over co-axial jet conﬁgurations, as forced mixing of the fuel and air should improve the ﬂameholding 
abilities of these diffusion ﬂames.  
Much more study could be done in this area to determine injector conﬁgurations that maximize ﬂame strain while minimizing 
stability and combustor pressure drop concerns.  In addition, the effect of strain rate on NOx emission from diffusion ﬂames has only 
been partially quantiﬁed for simple diffusion ﬂames, and there are no such studies in practical LDI-type diffusion ﬂame combustors using 
hydrogen, syngas, and/or fuel diluents.  Other areas requiring further study include the effects of increased ﬂame strain on combustion 
efﬁciency and on in-ﬂame NOx production mechanisms.
Pete Strakey, Nate Weiland, Geo Richards

206
 
 
 
 
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
1
10
100
1000
10000
Strain Rate (1/s)
Tmax (K)
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
w NO (kg/m
3 s) and X O
Tmax
wNO
10 XO
 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Strain rate effects, adapted from Sanders et. al.  wNO = NO formation rate, 
 
 
 
XO = O-atom mole fraction, Tmax = peak temperature
 
 
 
Source: Sanders, J. P. H., Chen, J.-Y., and Gokalp, I., “Flamelet-Based Modeling of NO Formation in  
 
 
 
 
Turbulent Hydrogen Jet Diffusion Flames,” Combustion And Flame, Vol. 111, pp. 1-15, 1997. 
3.2-6 Premixed Combustion
 As the name implies, premixed combustion is accomplished by mixing the fuel and air upstream of the ﬂame.  The fuel-air 
ratio normalized by the stoichiometric value is known as the equivalence ratio φ, and in many practical premixed turbine combustors, 
has a value of slightly more than 0.5.  Thus, there is approximately ½ the fuel needed to burn all the air, or conversely twice as much 
air as needed to burn all the fuel.  The excess air serves to dilute the combustion and keep the ﬂame temperatures low enough to avoid 
thermal NOx formation.  While the concept of premixed combustion is simple and effective at reducing NOx, it also has drawbacks. 
The combustor must operate in a very narrow range of equivalence ratio to avoid blowout at (typically) φ < 0.5 , and increasing NOx 
formation for φ somewhat greater than 0.6. The combustor controls must include some form of staging, since the range of desired exit 
temperatures usually cannot be achieved with such a small range of φ .  For example, if four fuel injectors are used in a combustor, it 
is possible to reduce the heat input 50% keeping two injectors operating, but turning two off.  The difﬁculty with this approach is that 
the air ﬂow from inactive injectors can quench the boundary of the ﬂame from operating injectors, raising CO emissions, but this can 
be addressed with good aerodynamic design.  Staging in this manner is used on commercial engines.10  Beyond simply de-activating 
injectors, staging is also accomplished by operating some injectors at slightly richer equivalence ratios, to improve ﬂame stability.  This 
can also be accomplished using “pilots” on individual injectors.  The pilot ﬂame is typically supplied with some air for partial premixing, 
and the pilot fuel circuit is controlled to achieve stable combustion at the lowest possible NOx emissions, as described in the following 
section.
 
3.2-7 Tuning and Combustor Control
 
Balancing the fuel delivery among various fuel circuits to meet operating requirements is known as “tuning” and has become a 
critical part of both commissioning and operating low-emission gas turbines.  Various strategies have been used, or are being developed 
so that the emissions targets can be met with stable combustion.  Because combustion stability is affected by inlet temperature and fuel 
composition, tuning may need to be adjusted to accommodate ambient environment temperatures and even fuel composition.  In addition 
to controlling the fuel split, for some turbines, tuning may include adjustment of compressor inlet guide vanes or bleeding compressor 
ﬂow11.  This allows an adjustment of the combustor air ﬂow at ﬁxed compressor speed, providing another tuning option even on single-
speed (synchronous) gas turbines. 
 
It is important to understand that turbines must be able to contend with requirements for load rejection while low-emission 
combustors operate near the blowout condition.  Without careful development, cutting the fuel during load rejection can lead to ﬂame 
blowout, requiring (sometimes) unacceptable time to re-light and establish power, or making the engine unable to meet grid requirements. 
An interesting account of the development of combustor and control system required to meet stringent rejection requirements is given 
in the references.12
 
On some engines, fast acting valves are used to enhance lean-blowout performance13 and allow operation right near the limits 
of stable combustion.   A more advanced concept is to modulate the fuel to counteract combustion oscillations, usually called active 
combustion control.  Active control has been studied in many research projects14, but has only been deployed on one test engine15 and on 
one commercial engine installation16 to date. 
 
An important aspect of combustion tuning and control is diagnosing conditions in the combustor so that the control system can 
respond to maintain stable, low-emission operation. For example, it is possible to improve engine operation by monitoring combustion 
performance from available engine sensors.17  A number of recent papers have shown the potential of using ﬂame optical signals, 
acoustic signals, or ﬂame ionization to monitor and control the combustion process.18
3.2 Combustion Strategies for Syngas and High-Hydrogen Fuel 

207
3.2-8 Oxy-Fuel Combustion
 
As noted in section 1.3.1, advanced engine cycles using oxy-fuel combustion have been proposed as a means of capturing 
CO2 from engine operation.  These oxy-fuel cycles require a different approach to combustor design because the combustion is ideally 
operated at stoichiometric conditions – having just enough oxygen to completely oxidize the fuel.  Oxygen is produced from air separation, 
such that any excess oxygen is produced with an accompanying penalty to the overall cycle efﬁciency.  In addition, after the water is 
condensed from the exhaust, any excess oxygen should be eliminated from the compressed CO2 to avoid corrosion in handling the CO2 
gas.  For these reasons, the combustor design must achieve very high combustion efﬁciency at conditions with little excess oxygen. 
This requirement places a premium on achieving high levels of mixing uniformity in the combustor, because even modestly unmixed 
fuel stream will be starved for oxygen.  It should be noted that boiler designs also ideally operate near stoichiometric, but typically use 
1-3% excess oxygen, and have relatively long residence times to complete fuel oxidation.  For the oxy-fuel turbine, the excess oxygen 
would ideally be lower, with much shorter residence times (~30ms) to avoid excessively large pressurized combustion chambers.  Oxy-
fuel combustion for power cycles has been studied in a number of papers.19  The easiest combustion strategy is to employ a diffusion 
ﬂame combustor.  The stability and simple operation of diffusion ﬂame systems make them appealing for oxy-fuel systems.  There 
is no need to control NOx, since the products are sequestered,  and there is otherwise little nitrogen in the combustor.  Even without 
sequestration, the peak ﬂame temperature in diffusion ﬂames can be controlled by the level of diluent added, thereby avoiding NOx 
formation. Nevertheless, a potential advantage of premixed combustion is that premixing the fuel and oxidant can reduce the unmixed 
streams of fuel and oxygen that are created in diffusion ﬂame systems where relatively small fuel jets must penetrate and mix in the 
large combustion volume.  There is relatively little fundamental data on premixed oxy-fuel ﬂames diluted by water or CO2
20 such that 
proposed designs must include some margin with respect to fundamental issues like ﬂame speed.
3.2-9 Notes
__________________________
 
1. Konnov, A.A., Colson, G., De Ruyck, J. (2000). The new Route to Forming NO via NNH, Combustion and Flame, Vol.  
 
 
    121, pp. 548-550. 
 
2. Leonard, G., Stegmaier, J. (1994).  Development of an Aeroderivative Gas Turbine Dry Low Emissions Combustion  
 
 
    System, ASME J. Eng. For Gas Turbines and Power, Vol. 116, pp. 542 – 546.  
 
3. Sattelmayer, T., Polifke, W., Winkler, D., Dobbeling, K., (1998).  NOx-Abatement Potential of Lean-Premixed Gas Turbine 
 
    Combustors, ASME Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, Vol. 120, pp. 48- 59. 
 
4. Fietelberg, A. S.,  Lacey, M. A., (1997). The GE Rich-Quench-Lean Gas Turbine Combustor ASME 97-GT-127;   
 
 
    Hasegawa,T.,  Sato, M., Ninomiya, T. (1997). “Effect of Pressure On Emission Characteristics In LBG-Fueled 1500C- 
 
    Class Gas Turbine, ASME 97-GT-277; Constant, D. R., Bevan, D. M, Cannon, M. F., Kelsall, G. J. (1997). Development  
 
    of an LCV Fuel Gas Combustor for an Industrial Gas Turbine ASME 97-GT-38; Folsom, B.A., C.W. Courtney, Heap, M.   
                   P. (1980). “The Effects of LBG Composition and Combustor Characteristics on Fuel NOx Formation,” ASME J. Eng.  
 
    Power, V102, pp459-467; Domeracki, W.F., Dowdy, T. E., Bachovchin, D. M. (1997).  Topping Combustor Status for  
 
 
    Second-Generation Pressurized Fluidized Bed Cycle Applications, ASME J. Eng. Gas Turbines and Power, Vol. 119,  
 
    pp. 27 – 33. 
 
5. Takagi, T., Xu, Z. and Komiyama, M., Preferential Dissusion Effects on the Temperature in Usual and Inverse Diffusion  
 
 
    Flames, Comb. and Flame 106: 252-260 (1996); Gabriel, R. Navedo, J. E. and Chen R.,, Effects of Fuel Lewis Number on   
 
    Nitric Oxide Emission of Diluted H2 Turbulent Jet Diffusion Flames, Comb. and Flame 121:525-534 (2000). 
 
6. Tacina, R., Wey, C., Liang, P., and Mansour, A., “A Low NOx Lean-Direct Injection, Multipoint Integrated Module  
 
 
    Combustor Concept for Advanced Aircraft Gas Turbines,” Clean Air Conference, Porto, Portugal, NASA/TM-2002- 
 
    2111347; Tacina, R. R., Wey, C., Choi, K. J., “Flame Tube NOx Emissions Using a Lean-Direct-Wall-Injection  
 
 
 
    Combustor Concept,” 37th Joint Propulsion Conference and Exhibit, Salt Lake City, Utah, July 8-11, 2001,  
 
    AIAA-2001-3271. 
 
7. Marek, C. J., Smith, T. D., and Kundu, K., “Low Emission Hydrogen Combustors for Gas Turbines Using Lean  
 
    Direct Injection,” 41st Joint Propulsion Conference and Exhibit, Tuscon, Arizona, AIAA-2005-3776, July 10-13, 2005;  
 
 
    GE Energy, “Premixer Design for High Hydrogen Fuels – Final Report,” DOE Cooperative Agreement No. DE-FC26- 
 
 
    03NT41893, November, 2005. 
 
8. Ibid. 
 
9. Ibid.  
 
10. Joshi, N. D., Mongia, H. C., Leonard, G., Stegmaier, J. W., Vickers, E. C. (1998).  Dry Low Emissions Combustor  
 
 
      Development, ASME 98-GT-310; Lefebvre, A.H. (1998).  Gas Turbine Combustion,  2nd ed, pp. 349, Taylor and Francis.  
 
11. Sewell, J. B., Sobieski, P. A., (2005).  Monitoring of Combustion Instabilities: Calpine’s Experience, in Combustion  
 
 
      Instabilities in Gas Turbine Engines, Lieuwen, T. C. , Yang, V. [eds.],  American Institute of Astronautics and  
 
      Aeronautics, pp. 147 – 162.
Pete Strakey, Nate Weiland, Geo Richards

208
208
 
12. Myers, G., Tegel, D., Feigl, M., Setzer, F., Bechtel, W., Fitts, D., Couture, B., Tuthill, R. (2003). Dry, Low-Emissions 
 
      For the ‘H’ Heavy Duty Industrial Gas Turbines: Full-Scale Combustion System Rig Test Results, ASME GT2003-38193; 
 
      Feigl, M., Setzer, F., Feigl-Varela, R., Myers, G., Sweet, B. (2005).  Field Test Validation of the DLN2.5H Combustion  
 
 
      System on the 9H Gas Turbine at the Baglan Bay Power Station, ASME GT2005-68843.
 
13. Mongia, H.C., Held, T. J., Hsiao, G. C., Pandalai, R.P. (2003).  Challenges and Progress in Controlling Dynamics in Gas   
 
      Turbine Combustors.  AIAA Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 19, No. 5, pp. 822-829.
 
14. Cohen, J. H.,  Rey, N.M., Jacobson, C. A., Anderson, T.J. (1999).  Active Control of Combustion Instabilities in a Liquid-  
 
      Fueled Low-NOx Combustor.  ASME Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, Vol. 121, No. 2, pp. 
 
      281 - 284; Sattinger, S.S, Neumeier, Y., Nabi, A., Zinn, B. T., Amos, D. J., Darling, D. D. (1998).  Subscale  
 
 
 
      Demonstration of the Active Feedback Control of Gas Turbine Combustion Instabilities, ASME Paper 98-GT- 258; 
 
      Jones, C. M., Lee, J. G., Santavicca, D. A. (1999). “Closed-loop Active Control of Combustion Instabilities Using 
 
      Subharmonic Secondary Fuel Injection, Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 1-7.
 
15. Richards, G. A., Thornton, J. D., Robey, E. H., Arellano, L (2004). Open-Loop Active Control Of Combustion Dynamics   
 
      On A Gas Turbine Engine, ASME IMECE2004-59702
 
16. Seume, J. R., Vortmeyer, N., Krause, W., Hermann, J., Hantschk, C.-C., Zangl, P., Gleis, S., Vortmeyer, D., and 
 
      Orthmann, A., (1998). Application of Active Combustion Instability Control to a Heavy Duty Gas Turbine. ASME 
 
      Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, Vol. 120,  No. 4,  pp. 721 -726.
 
17. Angello, L. C., Castaldini, C. (2004).Combustion Instability Tuning Guidelines: Understanding and Mitigating Dynamic   
 
      Instabilities in Modern Gas Turbine Combustors, ASME GT2004-54081.
 
18. Muruganandam, T., Seitzman, J.M. (2003).  Optical Sensing of Lean Blowout  Precursors in a Premixed Swirl Stabilized   
  
      Dump Combustor. ASME GT 2003-38104; Lieuwen, T. (2004).  Online Combustor Stability Assessement using 
 
      Dynamic Pressure Data, ASME GT2004-53149; Benson, K., Thornton, J. D., Straub, D. L., Huckaby, E. D., Richards, G.   
 
      A. (2005).  Flame Ionization Sensor Integrated Into a Gas Turbine Fuel Nozzle, ASME Journal of Engineering For Gas 
 
      Turbines and Power, Vol. 127 pp. 42 - 48
 
19. Chorpening, B. Richards, G. A., Casleton, K. H., Woike, M., Willis, B., Hoffman, L., (2005).  Demonstration of a Reheat   
 
      Combustor for Power Production with CO2 Sequestration.  ASME Journal of Engineering For Gas Turbines and Power, 
 
      Vol 127, pp. 740 – 747; Richards, G. A., Casleton, K. H., Chorpening, B. T., (2005).  –CO2 and H2O Diluted Oxy-Fuel   
        
      Combustion for Zero-Emission Power, Proc. IMecheE, Vol 219, Part A, J. Power and Energy, pp. 121 – 126.
 
20. Lewis, B., von Elbe, G., (1987).  Combustion, Flames, and Explosions of Gases, 3rd ed. , ppAcademic Press; Koroll,  
 
 
      G. W., Mulpuru, S. R., (1986).  The Effect of Dilution with Steam and the Burning Velocity and Structure of  
 
 
       
      Premixed Hydorgen Flames, The Twenty First Symposium (international) On Combustion, The Combustion Institute,        
 
      pp. 1811-1819.
3.2 Combustion Strategies for Syngas and High-Hydrogen Fuel 

BIOGRAPHY  
3.2 Combustion Strategies for Syngas and High-Hydrogen Fuel
Geo Richards received his Ph.D. in mechanical engineering from Purdue University on the subject 
of gas turbine combustion.  Since coming to the National Energy Technology Laboratory in 1988, he 
has conducted research on various topics in thermal science and energy production, with a particular 
emphasis on combustion dynamics.  He currently leads the Energy System Dynamics Focus Area, 
providing  technical direction for research groups investigating turbine combustion, carbon dioxide 
capture, high-temperature fuel cells, fuel processing, and stationary reciprocating engines.  In addition 
to conducting his own research, Dr. Richards’ responsibilities include developing and executing 
cooperative research agreements with private industry and academia, and evaluating proposed concepts 
related to energy conversion. He also serves as a research advisor for both graduate and post-graduate 
investigators visiting NETL from academic institutions.
George Richards
National Energy Technology Laboratory 
3610 Collins Ferry Rd. 
P.O. Box 880
email: george.richards@netl.doe.gov 
phone: (304) 285-4458

Nate Weiland graduated with a Bachelor’s Degree in Mechanical Engineering from Purdue University 
in 1997, received his Master’s Degree in Mechanical Engineering from Georgia Tech in 2000, and 
completed his PhD in thermoacoustics at Georgia Tech in 2004.  He is currently an ORISE Post-doctoral 
Research Fellow at the National Energy Technology Laboratory, where he is investigating various gas 
turbine combustor concepts burning dilite diffusion hydrogen ﬂames.  His reserach interests include 
experimental, computational and theoretical studies of the interactions between acoustic, thermal, and 
chemical processes, and the development of novel devices utilizing these interactions.  
Nate Weiland
National Energy Technology Laboratory
P. O. Box 10940
Pittsburgh, PA  15236
email: nathan.weiland@netl.doe.gov
phone: (412) 386-4649

Pete Strakey
Energy Systems Dynamics Division
National Energy Technology Laboratory
3610 Collins Ferry Rd.
P.O. Box 880
Morgantown, WV 26507-0880
phone: (304) 285-4476
email: peter.strakey@netl.doe.gov
Pete Strakey received his Ph.D. in 1995 from the Pennsylvania State Univeristy in the ﬁ eld of 
Mechanical Engineering.  The emphasis of his research is ﬂ uid dynamics, combustion and laser 
diagnostics.  He spent 9 years at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Edwards AFB, CA working 
in the ﬁ eld of rocket propulsion, speciﬁ cally high-pressure liquid rocket injector atomization 
and mixing.  Since coming to NETL, he has been primarily involved in research on gas turbine 
combustion and the application of laser diagnostic techniques to combustion systems.  He has also 
been involved in computational ﬂ uid dynamics (CFD) modeling of combustion systems as well as 
model validation.  He has authored numerous technical papers on liquid atomization, combustion 
and laser diagnostics.
 
