197
3.1.1-1 Introduction
 
The objective of this article is to provide the reader 
with some background on blowoff and combustion instability, 
often referred to as a combustor’s “static stability” and “dynamic 
stability”.  In particular, this chapter will focus upon this 
phenomenon in lean, premixed combustion systems operating 
with any of a variety of fuels, such as natural gas or synthetic-
gas.
 
Blowoff refers to the ﬂ ame physically leaving the 
combustor and “blowing out” of the combustor.  This issue is 
often referred to as “static stability”.  Blowoff occurs when 
the ﬂ ame cannot be anchored in the combustor.  Combustion 
instability, or “dynamic instabilities” refer to damaging 
oscillations driven by ﬂ uctuations in the combustion heat release 
rate.  These oscillations cause wear and damage to combustor 
components and, in extreme cases, can cause liberation of pieces 
into the hot gas path and resulting damaging to downstream 
turbine components.
   
3.1.1-2 Static Stability
 
As the propagation speed of essentially all ﬂ ames is 
substantially lower than ﬂ ow velocities in realistic systems, 
special ﬂ ame stabilization systems are necessary to anchor the 
ﬂ ame.  These include rapid expansions or bluff bodies in the ﬂ ow, 
so that there is a re-circulating ﬂ ow ﬁ eld that recirculates hot 
products back to the incoming reactants.  Swirling combustors 
introduce this recirculation with purely aerodynamic means - the 
ﬂ ow actually reverses direction and forms a recirculation bubble 
when the ﬂ uid has a sufﬁ cient swirl number, a phenomenon 
referred to as “vortex breakdown”.
 
Whatever the stabilization method, a ﬂ ame can only be 
stabilized in a combustor over a certain range of conditions, even 
if those conditions lie within its ﬂ ammability limits.  For example, 
at a ﬁ xed stoichiometry, as the ﬂ ow velocity is increased, at some 
point the ﬂ ame will not be able to remain anchored but will blow 
off.  Alternatively, at a ﬁ xed ﬂ ow velocity, as the equivalence 
ratio is decreased, at some point the ﬂ ame blows off.
 
Predicting blowout behavior is complicated by a lack 
of understanding of the ﬂ ame characteristics at the stabilization 
point.  Nonetheless, empirically anchored phenomenological 
methods for correlating blowout behavior have been reasonably 
successful.  Most approaches consider the ratio of two time 
scales: a chemical kinetic time and residence time, τchem/τres. 
The chemical time characterizes how much time is required 
for the reaction while the residence time characterizes the time 
which the reactants reside in the reaction zone1. This ratio is 
often referred to as a combustor loading parameter.  Simply 
put, if this residence time is shorter than the chemical time, the 
ﬂ ame will blow off.  It must be emphasized that the detailed 
ﬂ ow and chemical processes are much more complex than this 
simple picture might suggest; nonetheless, more sophisticated 
approaches generally reduce to a correlation of this form. 
 
When applied to blowoff limits of premixed ﬂ ames, 
this chemical time can be estimated as:
197
Timothy C. Lieuwen
Associate Professor
School of Aerospace Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0150
email: tim.lieuwen@aerospacegatech.edu
3.1.1
Static and Dynamic 
Combustion stability

198
2
L
chem
S
α
τ
=
    
 
 
 
                          (1)
where SL and α denote the laminar ﬂame speed and thermal diffusivity, 
respectively2.  The residence time is generally scaled as d/Uref, where d and 
Uref denote a characteristic length scale (e.g., a recirculation zone length) 
and velocity scale, respectively.  Putting this together, blowoff limits 
should scale with the Damköhler number:
2
res
L
chem
ref
S d
Da
U
τ
τ
α
=
=
.  
 
 
 
          (2)
 
 
Determining the correct length and velocity scale is not 
straightforward.  Note that Uref need not directly scale with approach ﬂow 
velocity, Uu, due to the acceleration of the burned gas3.  Since the burned 
gas velocity scale is given by Ub=(Tb/Tu)Uu, then Uref =f(Uu, Tb/Tu).  Similar 
considerations apply for the recirculation zone scale, d.  For this reason, 
prior workers have often had to measure the recirculation zone length in 
order to use Eq. (2) (e.g., see Ref 6.).  Furthermore, the chemical time 
calculation is complicated by thermal-diffusive effects (i.e., H2  diffuses 
much more rapidly than air or other fuels), as the local fuel/air ratio of the 
mixture may differ from the global average.
 
While clearly there are important issues such as appropriate choice 
of length and velocity scale, Damköhler number scalings do a reasonable 
job in scaling blowout data across a wide range of fuel compositions, as 
shown in several prior publications.  As such, the manner in which the 
blowoff trends of a system are affected by variations in fuel composition 
can be inferred from the chemical kinetic times of the mixtures.  To 
illustrate, ﬁgure 1, plots the dependence of the chemical time, upon fuel 
composition of H2/CO/CH4 mixtures at a ﬁxed ﬂame temperature of 
1900°K.  Note the order of magnitude variation in chemical time from the 
fast H2 mixtures to slow CO mixtures.  One clear implication of this result 
is that higher hydrogen mixtures will blowoff at leaner equivalence ratios, 
as can be seen by ﬁgure 2, which plots the equivalence ratio of the mixture 
at blowoff. 
 
It should be emphasized that ﬂuid mechanics, and not just 
chemical kinetics, must be accounted for in understanding how blowoff 
limits will vary with composition.  Because the ﬂow ﬁeld and the ﬂame are 
coupled, variations of the chemistry do impact the ﬂow.  
3.1.1-3 Dynamic Stability 
Overview
Combustion instabilities refer to large amplitude oscillations of pressure, 
heat release, velocity, and other variables inside the combustion chamber. 
They often occur at discrete frequencies associated with the natural acoustic 
modes of the combustor. Such instabilities have been encountered during 
the development and operation of most high performance propulsion and 
power generating devices.  They are spontaneously excited by feedback 
between unsteady heat release and, generally, one of the natural acoustic 
modes of the combustor. Their occurrence is usually problematic because 
they produce large amplitude pressure and velocity oscillations that 
result in enhanced heat transfer and thermal stresses to combustor walls, 
oscillatory mechanical loads that result in low or high cycle fatigue of 
system components, and ﬂame blowoff or ﬂashback. 
Fig. 1. Dependence of chemical time (ms) 
upon fuel composition at ﬁxed adiabatic ﬂame 
temperature of 1900°K [pressure is 4.4 atm with 
460K reactants temperature] (reproduced with 
permission from authors). 
Source:  Q. Zhang, D. Noble, and T. Lieuwen, 
“Blowout Measurements in a Syngas-Fired Gas 
Turbine Combustor,”  Annual Pittsburgh Coal 
Conference (2005).  
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
% H2
φ at LBO
Flame
No Flame
Fig. 2. Dependence of LBO equivalence ratio 
upon H2 mole fraction at approach  ﬂow velocities 
of 6 m/s and 4.4 atm combustor pressures, 460 
K inlet temperature (reproduced with permisson 
from authors). 
Source:  See ﬁg. 1.

199
A generic feedback loop is shown in ﬁgure 3, illustrating the sequence 
of events responsible for self-excited oscillations in the combustion 
chamber: (1) Fluctuations in the velocity, pressure, fuel/air ratio, etc. excite 
a ﬂuctuation in the heat release rate, (2) The heat release ﬂuctuation excites 
acoustic oscillations, (3) The acoustic oscillations generate the disturbance 
in Step (1) above, closing the feedback loop.  Depending upon the phase 
between the pressure and heat release (discussed below), the ﬂame may add 
or remove energy from the acoustic ﬁeld during each cycle, represented by 
one complete loop in this diagram.  If the energy supplied to the acoustic 
ﬁeld by the combustion process exceeds the energy losses of the mode, the 
acoustic amplitude will grow in time until it saturates, at some limit, cycle 
amplitude.  
Generally, combustion instabilities occur at frequencies associated with 
natural acoustic modes of the combustor. These include, e.g., bulk (i.e., 
Helmholtz type oscillations), axial, and transverse (i.e., tangential and/or 
radial) modes (see ﬁgure 4).  On occasion, however, the oscillations are 
not associated with a purely acoustic mode and are excited by a coupled 
“convective-acoustic mode, which occurs at frequencies lower than those 
of purely acoustic modes.  Such oscillations occur when a hot gas packet 
(due to, e.g., partial ﬂame extinction) or vortex convects through the nozzle, 
where it excites an acoustic wave that propagates back to the ﬂame4, exciting 
another convected wave, thus repeating the process. These types of modes 
are often encountered in systems that are operating at conditions close to 
ﬂame blowoff. 
Why do Instabilities Occur?
In order to understand why instabilities occur, we must understand why 
the ﬂame adds energy to the acoustic ﬁeld.  Rayleigh’s Criterion describes 
these conditions. Essentially, it states that heat release disturbances add energy 
to the acoustic ﬁeld if the heat is added/removed to or from the gas when its 
pressure is above/below its mean value. This statement is mathematically 
described by the integral in Eq. (2).  This equation shows that the heat 
addition process locally adds energy to the acoustic ﬁeld when the magnitude 
of the phase between the pressure and heat release oscillations, θpq, is less 
than ninety degrees (i.e., 0<| θpq|<90). Conversely, when these oscillations 
are out of phase (i.e., 90<| θpq|<180), the heat addition oscillations damp the 
acoustic ﬁeld.  
Rayleigh’s criterion describes the conditions under which unsteady 
heat release adds energy to the acoustic ﬁeld.  However, even if energy is 
transferred from the combustion process to the acoustic ﬁeld, this does not 
necessarily imply that the combustor is unstable – this can only happen 
if the rate of energy supplied by the periodic combustion process to the 
acoustic ﬁeld is larger than the rate at which acoustic energy is dissipated 
within the combustor and/or transmitted through its boundaries.  
Having established the conditions under which energy is added 
to the acoustic ﬁeld by the ﬂame, we need to consider the mechanisms 
through which these heat release disturbances are generated.  A number 
of mechanisms can produce heat release ﬂuctuations in gas turbines, as 
indicated in ﬁgure 5.  These include:
1. Fuel Feed Line-Acoustic Coupling.  Pressure oscillations in the 
combustor modulate the pressure drop across unchoked fuel nozzles. 
This, in turn, modulates the fuel injection rate into the system, causing an 
oscillatory heat release process that drives the acoustic oscillations.
2. Equivalence Ratio Oscillations6. Combustor pressure oscillations 
propagate into the premixer section where they modulate mixing processes 
and fuel and/or air supply rates, thus producing a reactive mixture whose 
equivalence ratio varies periodically in time. The resulting mixture is 
convected into the ﬂame where it produces heat release oscillations that 
drive the instability. 
Heat Release
Oscillations
Acoustic
Oscillations 
Flow and 
Mixture 
Perturbations
Fig. 3. Illustration of feedback loop responsible for 
combustion instability.
Longitudinal
Transverse Radial Mode
Transverse Azimuthal Mode
Fig. 4. Longitudinal and transverse acoustic modes in 
cylindrical combustors.
Unsteady mixing, 
vaporization, 
atomization
Fuel flow rate 
oscillations
Vortex/flame 
interactions 
Fuel/air ratio 
oscillations
Flame area and 
reaction rate 
oscillations
Combustion 
Products
Flow rate 
oscillations
Fig. 5. Potential mechanisms of combustion instability.
Timothy C. Lieuwen

200
4. Oscillatory Flame Area Variation7. Interactions of acoustic 
velocity oscillations with the ﬂame cause periodic variation of the ﬂame 
area and, thus, a periodic heat addition process that drives the acoustic 
ﬁeld. 
5. Vortex Shedding8. Large scale, coherent vortical structures due 
to ﬂow separation from ﬂameholders and rapid expansions, as well as 
vortex breakdown in swirling ﬂows, are often present in gas turbine 
combustors, as shown in ﬁgure 6.  The vortical structures distort the 
ﬂame and cause its surface area to oscillate, thus producing heat release 
oscillations.
 
Although the details are excluded here, one can show that 
in order for any one of these mechanisms to be self-exciting, the 
characteristic times related to the physical processes responsible for the 
heat release disturbance must be of similar magnitude as the acoustic 
period.  For example, if the mechanism is equivalence ratio oscillations 
or vortex shedding, a combustion instability may occur when the 
following relationship holds: 
 
convect
chem
kT
τ
τ
+
=
 
 
 
                     (3)
 
where τconvect refers to the time required for either the equivalence ratio oscillation or vortex to convect from its point of 
formation to the “center of mass” of the ﬂame, τchem refers to the chemical delay time, T refers to the acoustic period, and k is a series of 
constants whose value depend upon the combustion chamber acoustics9.  
 
Fuel composition variations impact this relationship, Eq. (3), by affecting both characteristic times on the left of the equation. 
Their impact on the chemical time is clear.  Their impact on the convective time delay can be better understood from the following 
equation:
 
(
/
) /
convect
Fl
st
L
n
L
u
τ
=
+
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (4)
where u refers to the mean ﬂow velocity, Lst refers to the ﬂame “standoff distance” from wherever the disturbance originates, LFl is the 
ﬂame length, and n is a constant that determines the location of the ﬂame “center of mass”.  For example, an n value of ½ refers to a 
ﬂame that is effectively concentrated at its midpoint.  
 
Variations in fuel composition impact both the ﬂame standoff location, ﬂame length and the constant n (by altering the ﬂame 
shape).  For situations where the ﬂame temperature remains constant, fuel composition impacts upon the ﬂame standoff location can be 
approximately inferred from the turbulent ﬂame speed.  Increases in turbulent ﬂame speed cause the ﬂame to anchor farther upstream 
and vice-versa.  If the ﬂame temperature varies as well, the situation is much more complex, as the recirculating ﬂow structure can be 
altered as well in a complex manner.  
 
Similar considerations apply for the ﬂame length, which also scales with the turbulent ﬂame speed.  One point worth emphasizing 
is that no fuel is intrinsically more “stable” or “unstable” than another.  In other words, stability is determined by whether the equality 
in Eq. (4) is satisﬁed – depending upon ﬂow velocity, ﬂame location, and a variety of other factors, any particular fuel can be either 
stable or unstable.  This point is emphasized because it is sometimes stated, incorrectly, that the addition of hydrogen has a stabilizing 
inﬂuence upon dynamic stability.  While hydrogen certainly does have a stabilizing inﬂuence on static stability, due to its high ﬂame 
speed, hydrogen fueled combustors can  (and do!) become quite dynamically unstable.  One instance where hydrogen addition can 
promote dynamic stability in general is under near blowout conditions where low frequency dynamic instabilities occur.  By promoting 
a more statically stable ﬂame, hydrogen addition could potentially make these types of dynamic instabilities less problematic.  
Growth and Saturation of Instabilities
The amplitude of the instability grows if the rate of energy addition to the oscillations exceeds the rate of energy dissipation by 
damping processes. As the amplitude of the oscillations increases, the energy addition and dissipation processes become amplitude 
dependent and the amplitude of the oscillations attains its maximum value when the time average of the energy addition and removal 
equal one another. The resulting oscillations are referred to as a limit cycle. The objective of this section is to consider the growth and 
saturation of the instability amplitude. 
The mechanisms that initiate combustion instabilities are typically grouped into linear and nonlinear categories. A linearly unstable 
system is one that is unstable with respect to inﬁnitesimally small disturbances; e.g., a ball perfectly balanced at the crest of a hill.  
To further illustrate the dependence of the stability and limit cycle of a system upon the amplitude of the oscillations, A, consider 
the hypothetical, amplitude dependent, driving, H(A), and damping, D(A) processes, which are described in ﬁgure 8.  As shown, the 
3.1.1 Static and Dynamic Combustion stability
Fig. 6.  Computed image of swirling ﬂame distorted by 
vortical structures (reproduced with permission of Y. 
Huang and V. Yang).
Source:  Y Huang and V. Yang, “Effect of Swirl on 
Combustion Dynamics in a Lean-Premixed Swirl-
Stabilized Combustor,” Proceedings of the Combustion 
Institute 30 (2004):  1771-1778.

201
“driving” and “damping” curves intersect at the origin, indicating that a 
zero amplitude oscillation is a potential equilibrium point. This equilibrium 
point is, however, unstable, as any small disturbance that moves the system 
away from the origin produces a condition in which H(A) is larger than 
D(A), resulting in further growth of the disturbance. Because these two 
curves diverge near the origin, their difference increases with amplitude, 
implying that the amplitude growth rate increases with amplitude. 
Nonlinear combustor processes control the dynamics of the 
oscillations as the driving and damping processes become amplitude 
dependent.  Figure 8 describes a situation where H(A) saturates and D(A) 
increases linearly with the amplitude A, thus resulting in an intersection 
of the two curves at the limit cycle amplitude, ALC. 
A nonlinearly unstable system differs from a linearly stable one 
in that it is stable with respect to small amplitude disturbances but is 
unstable when subjected to disturbances whose magnitude exceeds a 
certain threshold value, AT. A simple example of a nonlinearly unstable 
system is a ball in a depression on the top of a hill. When pushed, this ball 
returns to its equilibrium point as long as it is subjected to disturbances 
with amplitude that does not get it over the side walls of the depression. 
However, for sufﬁciently large disturbance amplitude, the ball rolls out of 
the depression and down the hill. 
Similar behavior may be observed in combustors. Although 
nominally stable, if disturbed hard enough, the combustor may become 
unstable.  A typical manifestation of combustors with this type of behavior 
is hysteresis, where the parameter values where instability occurs differ 
depending upon whether the parameter is increasing or decreasing. Figure 
9 provides an example of the amplitude dependences of H(A) and D(A) 
that produces the above discussed behavior. In this case, the system has 
three equilibrium points where the driving and damping curves intersect. 
Speciﬁcally, the damping exceeds the driving when A<AT, indicating that 
A=0 is a stable ﬁxed point, as all disturbances in the range 0< A < AT decay 
to A=0. The next equilibrium amplitude where the driving and damping 
curves intersect is at the triggering amplitude, A =A T. This is an unstable 
equilibrium point because any disturbance that shifts the system from this 
point continues to increase in time. The third equilibrium point, A=ALC, is a 
stable limit cycle. Thus, in such a system all disturbances with amplitudes 
A<AT return to the stable solution A=0 and disturbances with amplitudes 
A>AT grow until their amplitude attains the value A=ALC. Consequently, 
two stable solutions exist at this operating condition. The one observed at 
any point in time will depend upon the history of the system.  
Two other phenomena are often observed in unstable combustors 
under limit cycle conditions.  First, is the generation of harmonics.  In 
other words, an instability at 251 Hz generates harmonic oscillations at 
502 Hz, and possibly 753 Hz and higher harmonics as well.  Second, the 
presence of oscillations also changes the mean ﬂame position and ﬂow 
ﬁeld.  For example, the ﬂame may become either shorter or longer. 
Unfortunately, the factors that inﬂuence the limit cycle instability 
amplitude are very poorly understood.  As such, it is not possible to comment 
on the inﬂuence of fuel composition upon instability amplitudes.
A
Driving/Damping
D(A )
H(A )
A LC
A T
Fig. 8. Hypothetical dependence of the acoustic 
driving, H(A) and damping, D(A), processes 
upon amplitude, A, that produce triggering of 
instabilities.
A
Driving/Damping
D(A )
H(A )
A LC
Fig. 7. Hypothetical dependence of the acoustic 
driving, H(A) and damping, D(A), processes 
upon the instability amplitude, A.
Timothy C. Lieuwen

202
202
3.1.1-4 Notes
_________________________
1. E.E. Zukoski, “Afterburners,” in Aerothermodynamics of Gas Turbine and Rocket Propulsion, G. Oates, Ed., 1997; D. 
          Spaulding, “Some Fundamentals of Combustion,” Ch. 5, Butterworth Press:  London, 1955; J. Longwell, E. Frost, and M. 
          Weiss, “Flame Stability in Bluff-Body Recirculation Zones,” Ind. Eng. Chem. 45 no. 8 :  1629-1633; S. Hoffmann, 
          P. Habisreuther, and B. Lenze, “Development and Assessment of Correlations for Predicting Stability Limits of Swirling 
          Flames,” Chemical Engineering and Processing 33 (1994):  393-400.
2. S.L. Plee, and A.M. Mellor, “Characteristic Time Correlation for Lean Blowoff of Bluff Body Stabilized Flames,”  
         Comb. Flame 35 (1979):  61-80; K. Radhakrishnan, J. Heywood, and R. Tabaczynski, “Premixed Turbulent Flame Blowoff 
         Velocity Correlation Based on Coherent Structures in Turbulent Flows,” Comb. Flame 42 (1981):  19-33.
3. See note 2 (Plee & Mellor).
4. K. Yu, A. Trouve, and J. Daily, “Low-frequency Pressure Oscillations in a Model Ramjet Combustor,” J. Fluid Mech. 232 
         (1991):  47-72; F. Marble and S. Candel, “Acoustic Disturbance from Gas Non-uniformity Convected Through a Nozzle,”  
         J. Sound Vib. 55 (1977):  225-243.
5. Donald W. Kendrick, Torger J. Anderson, and William A. Sowa, “Acoustic Sensitivities of Lean-Premixed Fuel Injectors in a       
         Single Nozzle Rig,” ASME Paper #98-GT-382.
6. T. Lieuwen, H. Torres, C. Johnson, and B.T. Zinn, “A Mechanism for Combustion Instabilities in Premixed Gas Turbine  
 
         Combustors,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 123 no. 1 (2001):  182-190.
7. S. Candel, “Combustion Dynamics and Control:  Progress and Challenges,”  Proc. Comb. Inst. 29 (2002): 
8. U.G. Hegde, D. Reuter, B.R. Daniel and B.T. Zinn, “Flame Driving of Longitudinal Instabilities in Dump Type Ramjet 
          Combustors,” Comb. Sci. and Tech. 55 (1987):  125-138; K. Schadow and E. Gutmark, “Combustion Instability Related 
          to Vortex Shedding in Dump Combustors and Their Passive Control,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 18 (1992):  117-132.
9. See note 6 above.
3.1.1 Static and Dynamic Combustion stability

Timothy C. Lieuwen
Associate Professor
School of Aerospace Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0150
email: tim.lieuwen@aerospacegatech.edu
3.1.1 Static and Dynamic Combustion stability
Dr. Tim. Lieuwen is an Associate Professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology.  He is an 
active researcher in the areas of unsteady combustion phenomenon and acoustics. Dr. Lieuwen 
is the author of 2 book chapters, and over 100 conference publications and journal articles.  He 
is an Associate Editor of the Journal of Propulsion and Power.  Dr. Lieuwen has held various 
leadership roles in the Air Breathing Propulsion technical committee of the American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) and the Combustion and Fuels committee of the American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME).  Dr. Lieuwen has served on the organizing committees 
of several major international conferences sponsored by both AIAA and ASME.  Dr. Lieuwen’s 
awards include the NSF CAREER Award, the AIAA Lawrence Sperry Award, and the ASME/
IGTI Turbo Expo Best Paper Award.  
BIOGRAPHY  
