I.
Overview

Chapter 1
Combustion Instabilities: Basic Concepts
Ben T. Zinn∗and Timothy C. Lieuwen†
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia
I.
Introduction
C
OMBUSTION instabilities are characterized by large-amplitude oscillations
of one or more natural acoustic modes of the combustor. Such instabili-
ties have been encountered during the development and operation of propulsion
(e.g., rockets, ramjets, and afterburners), power generation (e.g., land-based gas
turbines), boiler and heating systems, and industrial furnaces. These instabilities
are spontaneously excited by a feedback loop between an oscillatory combustion
process and, in general, one of the natural acoustic modes of the combustor. In
general, the occurrence of instabilities is problematic because they produce large-
amplitude pressure and velocity oscillations that result in thrust oscillations, severe
vibrations that interfere with control-system operation, enhanced heat transfer and
thermal stresses to combustor walls, oscillatory mechanical loads that result in
low- or high-cycle fatigue of system components, and ﬂame blowoff or ﬂashback.
These phenomena may result in premature component wear that could lead to
costly shutdown or catastrophic component and/or mission failure. Consequently,
considerable research and development efforts have been invested during the past
half-century to elucidate the processes responsible for the excitation of these in-
stabilities and the development of approaches for their prevention. The objective
of this chapter is to provide an overview of the causes, characteristics, and control
of these instabilities.
Figure 1.1 summarizes the conditions under which combustion instability spon-
taneously occurs. The cartoon on the top shows an unstable combustor with re-
actants entering on the left and combustion products leaving through the nozzle
on the right. Interaction between one of the combustor’s acoustic modes and heat-
release oscillations transfers or removes energy from the acoustic mode. It can
Copyright c⃝2005 by the authors. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
nautics, Inc., with permission.
∗David S. Lewis Jr. Chair and Regents’ Professor, School of Aerospace Engineering.
†Associate Professor, School of Aerospace Engineering.
3

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
4
What Causes Combustion Instabilities?
Flame
Acoustic
Oscillations
Feedback
Reactants
Combustion 
products
Oscillations damped by viscosity, heat transfer, 
sound radiation...
Driving of
Oscillations
p'
q'
System
Driving
Damping
Condition for 
Instability :
Flame adds energy to acoustic field when 
Rayleigh’s Criterion is satisfied: 
Damping of
Oscillations
>
phase between heat 
addition and pressure
oscillations θpq< 90°
t
p′(t)q′(t)dt > 0
∫
Fig. 1.1
Summary of conditions required for a combustion instability to occur.
be shown that the combustion process adds (removes) energy from the acoustic
oscillations locally if the integral in Fig. 1.1, which is often referred to as Rayleigh’s
integral,1 is positive (negative). The sign of this integral depends on the phase dif-
ference between the heat-release and pressure oscillations and is positive (negative)
when this phase difference is smaller (larger) than 90 deg. As shown in Fig. 1.1,
combustion instability spontaneously occurs only if the energy supplied to the
acoustic mode by the combustion process exceeds the energy losses of the mode
caused by, for example, radiation and convection of acoustic energy out of the
combustor (e.g., through the nozzle), viscous dissipation, and heat transfer. Thus,
as long as the magnitude of the driving exceeds the magnitude of the damping
process, the energy of the mode will increase with time. In such a case, the ampli-
tude of oscillations initially increases exponentially with time until it saturates at
some limit-cycle amplitude. When this occurs, the time averages of the driving and
damping processes are equal and no net energy is added to the oscillating mode.
In general, combustion instabilities occur at frequencies associated with natural
acousticmodesofthecombustor.Theseinclude,forexample,bulk(i.e.,Helmholtz-
type oscillations), axial, and transverse (i.e., tangential and/or radial) modes (see
Fig. 1.2). On occasion, however, the oscillations are not associated with a purely
acoustic mode and are excited by a coupled convective-acoustic mode similar to
cavity tones,2 which often occur at frequencies lower than those of purely acoustic
modes. Such oscillations occur when an entropy wave (i.e., a hot-gas packet) or
a vortex generated in the ﬂame region is convected toward (and impinges on) the
nozzle, at which it excites an acoustic wave that propagates back to the ﬂame,3,4
exciting another convected wave and thus repeating the process. These types of
modes are often encountered in systems that are operating at conditions close to
ﬂame blowoff.

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
5
Longitudinal
Transverse Radial Mode
Transverse Azimuthal Mode
Fig. 1.2
Examples of longitudinal and transverse acoustic modes that are excited in
cylindrical combustors.
Because the initial amplitudes of most instabilities are generally quite small,
their characteristics are described by the linear-wave equation.5 The frequencies
and mode shapes of these oscillations and the conditions under which they sponta-
neously occur are determined by the solutions of these equations. Linear analyses
cannot, however, predict the magnitude of the limit-cycle amplitude attained by the
instability because it is controlled by nonlinear processes. Furthermore, nonlinear
processes may allow a large-amplitude disturbance whose amplitude exceeds a
certain threshold value, AT , to trigger instability in a system that is linearly stable;
that is, one in which low-amplitude oscillations are not spontaneously self-excited.
Consequently, both the characteristics of the limit-cycle oscillations and conditions
under which ﬁnite amplitude disturbances trigger instabilities can only be deter-
mined by solving the nonlinear equations that describe the system’s dynamics.6,7
To prevent the onset of detrimental combustion instabilities, the processes re-
sponsible for their driving and damping must be understood. This chapter presents
an overview of the current understanding of these processes with the objective of
providing the reader with the background needed for the more detailed discussions
of these and related subjects in the remaining chapters of this volume. To attain this
goal, the following topics are discussed in this chapter: the history of this problem,
driving and damping of combustion instabilities, common instability mechanisms
in gas turbines, the initial growth and saturation of the oscillations, and some basic
characteristics of limit-cycle oscillations.
II.
Historical Overview
Thissectionprovidesabriefoverviewofpriorexperiencewithcombustioninsta-
bilities. Although instabilities have been observed in a variety of combustion sys-
tems, related phenomena have also been excited in other systems by heat-transfer
processes.8 For example, glass blowers have reported observations of spontaneous
excitation of acoustic oscillations during the heating of the closed end of a blown-
glass tube. Also, acoustic oscillations can be spontaneously excited inside tubes
with sharp-temperature gradients, as has been observed in cryogenic systems.9
Because in all these cases the acoustic oscillations are excited by thermal sources,
the resulting phenomena are often referred to as thermoacoustic instabilities.

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
6
Fuel+Air
u' – velocity
oscillation
p' – pressure 
oscillation
Fig. 1.3
An example of a ﬂame-driven instability in a tube open at both ends.
With a focus on combustion-driven oscillations for the remainder of the chapter,
the ﬁrst observation of ﬂame-driven oscillations (referred to as singing ﬂames)
dates back to 1777.10 This and subsequent studies found that spontaneous acoustic
oscillations of considerable amplitude might be generated when a gas ﬂame is
placed inside a larger-diameter tube, as illustrated in Fig. 1.3. The sensitivity of
ﬂames to music at a musical party was noted by Le Conte11 in 1858 and described
in the following quotation: “Soon after the music commenced, I observed that
the ﬂame exhibited pulsations exactly synchronous with the audible beats. This
phenomenon was very striking to everyone in the room, and especially so when
the strong notes of the violoncello came in. . . . A deaf man might have seen the
harmony. . . .”
Combustion oscillations moved beyond an academic curiosity with the advent of
high-intensity combustion systems. Detrimental, combustion-driven oscillations
have been observed in boilers, blast furnaces, and a variety of other oil, coal,
and gas-ﬁred heating units.12 The occurrence of these instabilities was generally
unexpected as demonstrated, for example, by recent experience with one of the
nation’s largest landﬁll sites in Los Angeles County (Fig. 1.4). The site has two
45-ft-high, 12-ft-diam ﬂares, each designed to ﬂare excess landﬁll gas at rates of up
to ∼50 MW. However, at loads greater than about 50% of full capacity, instability
of the quarter-wave mode of the ﬂare, oscillating at about 10 Hz, is excited in the
system.13
Instabilities have also signiﬁcantly hindered the development of various liquid-
fueled rockets. Notable were the instabilities encountered during the development
of the F-1 engine that powered the Saturn rockets, which were used in the ﬁrst
manned mission to the moon. The F-1 encountered instabilities with amplitudes up
to 100% of the mean combustor pressure (i.e., more than 2000 psi) with frequen-
cies in the 200- to 500-Hz range. These instabilities caused signiﬁcant damage to
the combustor, and their elimination required a costly trial and error, development
program that included ∼2000 full-scale tests (of a total of 3200). One of the so-
lutions developed involved welding a system of bafﬂes to the injector face. These
bafﬂes prevented the excitation of the transverse acoustic oscillations that could
be driven by the combustion process near the injector face (Fig. 1.5).

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
7
Fig. 1.4
Landﬁll gas ﬂares that experienced low-frequency, combustion-driven
oscillations.13
Fig. 1.5
Photograph of rocket injector with welded bafﬂe plates that was tested to
prevent transverse mode instabilities during F-1 engine development.26

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
8
Combustion instabilities have also been encountered in numerous solid-
propellant rockets, including the Space Shuttle solid-propellant rocket boosters,
the Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile, and the Mars Pathﬁnder descent
motor.14 The Minuteman missile provides a good example of the enormous dif-
ﬁculties that instabilities generated in solid-propellant rocket development and
testing programs. In 1968, the U.S. Air Force experienced ﬁve ﬂight failures of
the Minuteman Wing I missiles during routine tests. This rate of failure raised
concerns about the condition of the systems that were already ﬁelded in missile
silos and resulted in costly removal and modiﬁcations of many of the systems.
Combustion instabilities in ramjet-powered missiles have also been problem-
atic because they cause thrust oscillations and shock-system oscillations in the
inlet diffuser, which lead to a reduced stability margin of the inlet ﬂow.15 Sim-
ilar problems have also been encountered in afterburners, in which instabilities
of transverse acoustic modes, generally referred to as “screech,” and axial modes
damage ﬂame holders, liner sections, and other engine components.15
III.
Causes of Instabilities
A.
Combustion Process: Acoustic Modes Energy Transfer
This section discusses the mechanisms through which the combustion process
can drive acoustic modes of the system. Lord Rayleigh1 was the ﬁrst to state
the so-called Rayleigh criterion, which describes the conditions under which a
periodic heat-addition process adds energy to acoustic oscillations. Paraphrased,
the criterion states that a periodic heat-transfer process adds energy to the acoustic
ﬁeld if the heat is added to or removed from the gas when its pressure is above or
below its mean value. This statement is described mathematically by the integral
in Fig. 1.1. It basically says that the heat-addition process locally adds energy
to the acoustic ﬁeld when the magnitude of the phase between the pressure and
heat-release oscillations, θpq, is less than 90 deg (i.e., 0<|θpq|<90). Conversely,
when these oscillations are out of phase (i.e., 90<|θpq|<180), the heat-addition
oscillations damp the acoustic ﬁeld.
The physical reason for this energy exchange follows from determining the
conditions under which the unsteady heat release performs work on the gas. Heat
release at constant pressure results in gas expansion, analogous to blowing up a
balloon. The Rayleigh criterion states that the unsteady heat release performs work
on the gas when this expansion occurs in phase with the pressure. This statement is
analogous to problems in mechanics in which an unsteady force (i.e., the pressure)
must be in phase with the velocity (i.e., the gas-dilatation rate) if net work is to be
performed.
One may also gain physical insight into the Rayleigh criterion by considering
its similarities to the manner in which the combustion-process energy is converted
into work in a Brayton cycle, the thermodynamic cycle used in gas turbines. In
this cycle, thermal energy is added to the working ﬂuid at high pressure after
it has been compressed in the diffuser and compressor. Work is subsequently
extracted from the working ﬂuid at low pressure as it is expanded through the
turbine and nozzle. The similarity between the Brayton cycle and the Rayleigh
criterion becomes apparent if one recalls that according to the Rayleigh criterion
one can drive acoustic pressure oscillations in a system by heating the gas with

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
9
an instantaneous “heat-addition pulse” when its pressure is maximum and cooling
it with an instantaneous “cooling pulse” when its pressure is minimum. Such a
process essentially describes the manner in which heat is added and removed in a
Brayton cycle to do work.
The Rayleigh criterion describes the conditions under which unsteady heat re-
lease adds energy to the acoustic ﬁeld. However, even if energy is transferred from
the combustion process to the acoustic ﬁeld, this does not necessarily imply that
the combustor is unstable. As described in Fig. 1.1, acoustic oscillations are spon-
taneously excited in a combustor only when the rate of energy supplied by the
periodic combustion process to the acoustic ﬁeld is larger than the rate at which
acoustic energy is dissipated within the combustor and/or transmitted through its
boundaries. This statement is summarized by the following expression:

V

T
p′(x, t) q′(x, t) dt dV ≥

V

T

i
Li(x, t) dt dV
(1.1)
where p′(x, t), q′(x, t), V, T , and Li are the combustor pressure oscillations, heat-
addition oscillations, combustor volume, period of the oscillations, and the ith
acoustic energy loss process (e.g., viscous dissipation, radiation of acoustic en-
ergy out of the combustor through its boundaries), respectively. The equal sign in
Eq. (1.1) describes conditions when limit-cycle oscillations are attained and the
time average of the energies added and removed from the oscillations are equal.
The integral on the left side of Eq. (1.1) is referred to as the Rayleigh integral and
is often used in experimental or numerical studies to quantify the energy transfer
from the combustion process to the acoustic ﬁeld. Note that the inner integral on
the left side of Eq. (1.1) is the integral shown in Fig. 1.1, which describes the
local driving/damping of the acoustic oscillations by the heat-addition process
q′(x, t).
B.
Instability-Driving Mechanisms
As discussed earlier, combustion instabilities are excited by feedback between
the combustion process and acoustic oscillations that depends on the system char-
acteristics and operating conditions. This section provides a brief overview of
common instability mechanisms and the conditions under which they are self-
exciting.
Figure 1.6 describes the generic feedback loop responsible for combustion in-
stabilities. It consists of the following sequence of events: 1) Fluctuations in the
velocity and/or thermodynamic-state variables induces a ﬂuctuation in the heat-
release rate, 2) the heat-release ﬂuctuation excites acoustic oscillations, and 3) the
acoustic oscillations generate the velocity and thermodynamic-state variable ﬂuc-
tuations that are described in step 1, thus closing the feedback loop. Depending
on the relative magnitudes of the energy added and removed from the acoustic
oscillations, the amplitude of oscillations may decrease, remain constant, or grow
during each cycle of this loop.
Several mechanisms capable of driving combustion instabilities in gas turbines
have been identiﬁed, as indicated in Fig. 1.7. Because most of these mechanisms

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
10
Heat Release
Oscillations
Acoustic
Oscillations 
Flow and 
Mixture
Perturbations
Fig. 1.6
Illustration of the feedback processes responsible for combustion instability.
are discussed in more detail in Chapter 9, the remainder of this section only pro-
vides a brief description of each.
1) Fuel Feed Line–Acoustic Coupling.5,16 Pressure oscillations in the combustor
modulate the pressure drop across unchoked fuel nozzles. The pressure drop, in
turn, modulates the fuel-injection rate into the system, causing an oscillatory heat-
release process that drives the acoustic oscillations.
2) Equivalence-Ratio Oscillations.17 Combustor pressure oscillations propagate
into the premixer section in which they modulate mixing processes and fuel and/or
air supply rates, thus producing a reactive mixture whose equivalence ratio varies
periodically in time. The resulting mixture is convected into the ﬂame in which it
produces heat-release oscillations that drive the instability.
3) Oscillatory Atomization, Vaporization, and Mixing.5,16 Interactions of the
acoustic ﬁeld with the fuel spray produce periodic variations of the fuel-spray
shape, droplet sizes, evaporation rates, and mixing rates of the fuel vapor with
surrounding gases. These variations, in turn, could result in periodic supply rates
of fuel to the ﬂame and/or periodic variations of the equivalence ratio that produce
heat-release oscillations that drive the acoustic ﬁeld.
Unsteady mixing,
vaporization, 
atomization
Fuel flow rate 
oscillations
Vortex/flame
interactions 
Fuel/air ratio 
oscillations
Flame area and
reaction rate
oscillations
Combustion
Products
Flow rate 
oscillations
Fig. 1.7
Flow and ﬂame processes that can cause combustion instabilities in
gas turbines.

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
11
Fig. 1.8
Computed image of swirling ﬂame distorted by vortical structures. Courtesy
of Y. Huang and V. Yang.40
4) Oscillatory Flame-Area Variation.18 Interactions of acoustic velocity oscilla-
tions with the ﬂame cause periodic variation of the ﬂame area and, thus, a periodic
heat-addition process that drives the acoustic ﬁeld.
5) Vortex Shedding.19,20 Large-scale, coherent vortical structures caused by ﬂow
separation from ﬂame holders and rapid expansions, as well as vortex break-
down in swirling ﬂows, are often present in gas-turbine combustors, as shown in
Fig. 1.8. In the initial stage of their formation, these vortices generally consist of
combustible gases. As they form, these vortices entrain hot products and ignite.
This ignition is followed by rapid combustion of the reactants within the vortex and
sudden breakdown of the coherent vortical structure into small-scale turbulence.
Alternatively, the vortical structures may distort the ﬂame and cause its surface
area to oscillate, thus producing an oscillatory heat-release rate process that can
also drive the acoustic ﬁeld if the heat addition and pressure oscillations are in
phase. These dynamics are also discussed in Chapters 10 and 11 of this volume.
Heat-release oscillations add energy to an acoustic ﬁeld if the magnitude of
the characteristic timescales of the heat-addition process are of the order of some
integer multiple of the acoustic period. This point is illustrated in Fig. 1.9, which
shows the hypothetical response of 1) the fuel-injection rate, 2) the rate of change
of droplet-size distribution, 3) the rate of heat transfer to the fuel, and 4) the rate
of fuel–air mixing to a pressure pulse with period T . The ﬂuctuations in each of
the rates of the preceding four processes causes a ﬂuctuation in the heat-release
rate after a time delay τ, which depends on the characteristics of the analyzed
process, the combustor-operating conditions, and design (Fig. 1.9). For example,
the magnitude of the time delay τ1 depends on various geometric and operating
parameters of the fuel-delivery system; for example, the fuel-line length and fuel
gas temperature.

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
12
time
T
T
a. Pressure
at flame 
b. Process 1
c. Process 2
d. Process 3
e. Process 4
τ1
τ2
τ3
τ4
Heat Release 
Perturbation
due too:
Fig. 1.9
Hypothetical responses of various combustor processes to a periodic pressure
disturbance.
According to the Rayleigh criterion, the heat-release oscillations shown in
Fig. 1.9 add energy to the acoustic ﬁeld if the time average of the product of
the pressure and heat-release oscillations is greater than zero. Figure 1.9 shows
that the heat release attributable to process 1 satisﬁes this criterion and that the heat
release by processes 2–4 does not. The heat release of process 1 and the pressure
pulses are positively correlated because the characteristic time of the process τ1
is of the order of the period of the acoustic waves, T . Combustion instability will
thus occur if the rate of energy addition to the disturbance by process 1 exceeds
its rate of damping.
Keep in mind that any of a number of the natural acoustic modes of the combus-
tion system can be excited. To illustrate the relationships between different acoustic
modes and various driving mechanisms, assume that the pressure disturbance of
period T in Fig. 1.9 is caused by oscillations of the ﬁrst longitudinal acoustic
mode of the combustor. If we now repeat the preceding analysis to determine the
driving of the second longitudinal acoustic mode of the combustor with a period of
T/2, then τ1 = 2T and τ2 = T . Consequently, in the example shown in Fig. 1.9,
energy is added to this mode by both processes 1 and 2. This example shows that
an instability could be excited if the characteristic time of the combustion process
equals T , 2T , or any other integer multiple of T .
The preceding examples illustrate several important points. First, they show that
different mechanisms may play different roles in the stability of different modes of
the combustor. For example, the mechanism(s) responsible for exciting a 100-Hz
longitudinal mode of a combustor will signiﬁcantly differ from those that excite a
5000-Hz transverse-mode instability. Second, these examples show that the role of
various mechanisms may change with operating conditions. For example, suppose
changes in combustor-operating conditions change the timescales of processes 1
and 2. Such a change in timescales could affect the coupling between the pressure
and heat-addition disturbances and, thus, the role of each process in driving various
combustor modes. Finally, the preceding examples demonstrate that the charac-
teristic times associated with processes that are responsible for the excitation of

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
13
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
15
20
25
30
35
40
Premixer Velocity (m/s)
p'  (arbitrary units)
430 Hz 
630 Hz 
Fig. 1.10
Measured25 dependence of the instability amplitude on the premixer
velocity.
combustion instability must have magnitudes that are of the order of some integer
multiple of the acoustic period of the modes.
Note also that combustor pressure oscillations generally vary harmonically with
time and do not exhibit the pulselike behavior used in the examples in Fig. 1.9.
Consequently, the time delays and acoustic periods of the various modes need
not be exactly equal for the process to add energy to the acoustic ﬁeld; instead,
these characteristic times must satisfy a relationship of the form T −T/4 < nτ <
T + T/4, where n is an integer; that is, n = 1, 2, . . .17
Some of these points are illustrated by the results in Fig. 1.10,17 which describe
the dependence of the amplitudes of a 430- and 630-Hz combustor mode on the
mean velocity of the reactants in the combustor premixer. The instabilities in this
combustor were driven by a mechanism that depends on the time required to trans-
port the reactants from the fuel-injection point to the combustor,17 a time delay that
is inversely proportional to the mean velocity of the gases in the premixer. Con-
sequently, this time delay decreases as the gas velocity in the premixer increases.
Figure 1.10 shows that, as the velocity in the combustor premixer increased and
the convective time delay decreased, the amplitude of the lower-frequency mode
(i.e., 430 Hz with the longer period T ) decreased and the amplitude of the higher-
frequency mode (i.e., 630 Hz with the shorter period T ) increased. This ﬁnding
indicates that when the premixer velocity was low the driving process coupled
with the 430-Hz mode and this coupling “switched” to the 630-Hz mode as the
premixer velocity increased.
C.
Damping Processes
As noted earlier, acoustic damping processes play an important role in the
determination of the conditions under which combustion instability occurs. This
section summarizes important damping mechanisms in combustors and the key
parameters that inﬂuence their magnitude.
Energy can be dissipated/removed from an unstable mode via the following three
processes: 1) transfer of acoustic energy to vortical or entropy disturbances through
viscous and heat-transfer processes, respectively; 2) convection and/or radiation
of acoustic energy out of the system; and 3) transfer of energy between acoustic

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
14
modes. Note that in all these cases, the “dissipation process” refers to the transfer
of acoustic energy out of the combustor, frequency regions, or modes of oscillation
in a manner that reduces the acoustic energy of the unstable mode.For example,
in the second mechanism, the acoustic energy is simply radiated or convected out
of the combustor through its boundaries and represents part of the noise heard
outside the system. The rest of this section describes each of these mechanisms in
further detail.
1.
Viscous and Heat-Transfer Damping Mechanisms
This mechanism can be further subdivided into two submechanisms: boundary-
layer losses and ﬂow-separation losses. Boundary-layer losses occur when acoustic
motions are present in the vicinity of surfaces on which viscosity and thermal-
dissipation effects dominate (see Ref. 21). Suppose that an acoustic wave that
perturbs the ﬂow velocity and temperature impinges obliquely on a rigid wall.
Because of the no-slip boundary condition at the wall, the energy in the acoustic
mode is partially transferred into vortical velocity ﬂuctuations. In an analogous
manner, the temperature-boundary condition at the wall (e.g., zero-amplitude tem-
perature oscillations) causes some acoustic energy to be converted into entropy
ﬂuctuations. Consequently, the energy of the acoustic wave reﬂecting from the
wall is smaller than that of the incident wave, because some of its energy is con-
verted into vorticity and/or entropy ﬂuctuations. These processes are analogous to
those occurring in a steady pipe ﬂow in which heat transfer and viscosity result in
stagnation-pressure losses. The magnitudes of these dissipation mechanisms in-
crease with frequency as ( f τv)1/2, where τv is the viscous or thermal transport
timescale.
Flow separation at sharp edges or during rapid ﬂow expansions also damp acous-
tic waves by converting acoustic energy into vorticity. This damping mechanism is
analogous to the stagnation-pressure losses in steady, separated ﬂow downstream
of sharp corners or edges, tabulated in many engineering handbooks and ﬂuid me-
chanics texts.22 This dissipation mechanism has nonlinear-amplitude dependence
and is discussed further in Sec. IV.C.
2.
Convection and/or Radiation of Acoustic Energy
Acoustic energy inside a duct can leave the system by propagation and/or con-
vection by the mean ﬂuid motion out of the system. For example, the tone heard
from an organ pipe is caused by some of the sound energy in the standing wave
insidethepipepropagatingoutthroughitsopenend.Ingeneral,thisdampingmech-
anism scales with frequency as ( fD/c)2, where f , D, and c are the frequency, pipe
diameter, and sound speed, respectively. Sound energy is also convected out of the
system by ﬂuid motion with a magnitude that roughly scales with the mean ﬂow
Mach number. Because the magnitude of acoustic damping in a typical system is
quite small, in general, the presence of low-velocity mean ﬂow can have a signif-
icant impact on the system’s damping level. To illustrate this point, consider the
dependence of the magnitude of a reﬂected acoustic wave incident on the open
end of a pipe upon the ﬂow Mach number in Fig. 1.11. It shows that the reﬂection
coefﬁcient equals 0.95 in the no-ﬂow case, implying that the wave amplitude is re-
duced by 5% because of acoustic radiation. This reﬂection coefﬁcient is reduced to

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Mach Number
Reflection Coefficient
Fig. 1.11
Dependence of the reﬂection coefﬁcient from an open-ended pipe on the
ﬂow Mach number. Taken from Ingard and Singhal.41
0.85 at M = 0.05, implying that the presence of a very-low-velocity ﬂow increases
the acoustic damping by a factor of 3.
3.
Transfer of Energy Out of Natural Acoustic Frequencies
to Other Frequencies
Oscillations in an unstable combustor, in general, are composed of one or more
nearly pure tones at speciﬁc frequencies. This composition occurs because com-
bustors are generally lightly damped acoustic resonators that respond to external
disturbances over very-narrow-frequency ranges. Consequently, mechanisms that
do not directly dissipate acoustic energy but transfer energy from the excited
modes to other modes that oscillate at frequencies that are either not ampliﬁed
in the combustor or at which the energy is more readily dissipated, effectively
constitute “dissipation” mechanisms for a given natural acoustic mode. The energy
transfer can be to either narrowband, coherent, ﬂuctuations at other frequencies or
to incoherent, broadband ﬂuctuations. Nonlinear combustor processes are a key
mechanism for enabling the former; that is, they transfer energy from a certain fre-
quency fo, to higher harmonics (2 fo, 3 fo, . . .) or subharmonics ( fo/2, fo/3, . . .).
Theenergyatthesehigherfrequenciesisusuallydissipatedmorerapidlybythepre-
viously discussed viscous and radiation mechanisms whose magnitudes increase
with frequency. Nonlinear combustor processes are discussed further in Sec. IV.
Acoustic energy is transferred from narrowband, coherent oscillations to spec-
trally distributed, incoherent oscillations by random modulation processes. For
example, such spectral broadening occurs during reﬂection and scattering of a
sound wave from turbulent eddies23 or a randomly ﬂapping ﬂame front.24 The
energy-transfer mechanism in this case can be purely linear and is essentially
caused by a random Doppler shift of the reﬂected and transmitted waves. For ex-
ample, when a pure tone with a temporal dependence given by sin(ωt) impinges on
a randomly moving ﬂame front or a medium with a random velocity ﬁeld, reﬂected
and transmitted waves with a random phase shift are generated. The temporal de-
pendence of the reﬂected/transmitted waves is given by sin[ωt + φ(t)], where φ(t)
is a random phase shift. This mechanism is discussed further in Chapter 12.

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
16
IV.
Growth and Saturation of Instabilities
As indicated by Eq. (1.1), the amplitude of the instability grows if the rate
of energy addition to the oscillations exceeds the rate of energy dissipation by
damping processes. As the amplitude of the oscillations increases, the energy
addition and dissipation processes become amplitude dependent and the amplitude
of the oscillations attains its maximum value when the time average of the energy
addition and removal equal one another. The resulting oscillations are referred
to as a limit cycle. The objective of this section is to consider in more detail the
growth and saturation of the instability amplitude.
A.
Linear and Nonlinear Stability
As discussed in the introduction, the mechanisms that initiate combustion in-
stabilities are typically grouped into linear and nonlinear categories. A linearly
unstable system is one that is unstable with respect to inﬁnitesimally small dis-
turbances. Thus, because linearly unstable systems can not exist, they are never
observed in nature. An example of a linearly unstable situation is a ball perfectly
balanced at the crest of a hill, where any small disturbance will cause it to roll
away from this unstable equilibrium point.
To further illustrate the dependence of the limit cycle on the amplitude of the
oscillations A consider the hypothetical, amplitude-dependent, driving, H(A), and
damping, D(A) processes, which are described in Fig. 1.12 and the following
expressions:
H(A) = εHA + Hn(A)
(1.2)
D(A) = εDA + Dn(A)
where subscript n denotes the nonlinear part of the transfer function.
As shown in Fig. 1.12, the driving and damping curves intersect at the origin,
indicating that a zero-amplitude oscillation is a potential equilibrium point. This
equilibrium point is unstable, however, because any small disturbance that moves
the system away from the origin produces a condition in which H(A) is larger than
A
Driving/Damping
D(A)
H(A)
εD
1
εH
1
ALC
Fig. 1.12
Hypothetical dependence of the acoustic driving, H(A), and damping, D(A),
processes on the instability amplitude A.

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
17
D(A), resulting in further growth of the disturbance. Because these two curves
diverge near the origin, their difference increases with amplitude, implying that
the amplitude growth rate increases with amplitude. When the amplitudes of the
oscillations are small, the driving and damping processes can be approximated
by linearized expressions; that is, H(A) = εHA and D(A) = εDA. Thus, linear
combustor processes (i.e., processes whose magnitude is directly proportional to
amplitude A), in general, control the balance between driving and damping pro-
cesses when the amplitude of oscillations is small and thus determine the frequency
and growth rate A ∼eαt of inherent combustor disturbances. It can be shown that
the initial growth rate of the instability α is proportional to the difference between
the driving and damping processes in the linear regime; that is, α ∼εH −εD.
For this reason, linear combustor stability models (such as those described in
Chap. 13) are routinely used to determine whether a given operating point is stable
or unstable.
Nonlinear combustor processes control the dynamics of the oscillations as the
driving and damping processes become amplitude dependent. Figure 1.12 de-
scribes a situation in which H(A) saturates and D(A) increases linearly with the
amplitude A, thus resulting in an intersection of the two curves at the limit-cycle
amplitude ALC. Note that this limit-cycle amplitude is stable; that is, a perturbation
of the amplitude to the left (right) of this intersection point causes H(A) to become
larger (smaller) than D(A), thus causing the amplitude to increase (decrease) and
return to its limit-cycle value ALC.
Next, consider a situation in which some combustor parameter is systematically
varied in such a way that εh increases while εd remains constant (see Fig. 1.12).
For εh < εd, A = 0 is the stable solution; that is, the system is linearly stable be-
cause all perturbations imposed on the system will decay. However, when εh > εd,
the solution A = 0 becomes unstable, causing the amplitude of the disturbance to
increase toward a new stable, limit-cycle equilibrium. The εh = εd condition sep-
arates two regions of fundamentally different dynamics and is referred to as a
supercritical bifurcation point. These ideas are illustrated in the bifurcation dia-
gram in Fig. 1.13, which shows the dependence of the amplitude ALC on εh −εd.
Figure 1.13 shows that as εh −εd becomes positive, the system becomes linearly
εh- εd
Amplitude
Stable 
Unstable
Fig. 1.13
An example of a supercritical bifurcation.

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
18
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
18
21
24
27
30
Mean Inlet Velocity (m/s)
Normalized Pressure  (p'/p)
Fig. 1.14
Measured data describing the occurrence of supercritical bifurcation at
combustion inlet velocity of 23.5 m/s.25
unstable. Although εh −εd describes variation along the x-axis in Fig. 1.13, it
could be replaced in practice by any parameter that affects the system’s stability,
for example, the air velocity or temperature as demonstrated by the measured data
in Fig. 1.14.25 It shows a smooth, monotonic dependence of the amplitude on the
premixer velocity, which is indicative of the presence of the previously discussed
supercritical bifurcation in this combustor.
A nonlinearly unstable system differs from a linearly stable one in that it is sta-
ble with respect to small-amplitude disturbances but is unstable when subjected to
disturbances whose magnitude exceeds a certain threshold value AT . This type of
instability is sometimes referred to as subcritical. A simple example of a nonlin-
early unstable system is shown in Fig. 1.15, which shows a ball in a depression on
the top of a hill. When pushed, this ball returns to its equilibrium point as long as it
is subjected to disturbances with amplitude that does not get it over the sidewalls
of the depression. However, for a sufﬁciently large disturbance amplitude, the ball
will roll out of the depression and down the hill. As discussed earlier, such behav-
ior is often referred to as “triggering” in the context of combustion instabilities in
rockets. A simple example of a nonlinearly unstable combustion system is one in
which the response of the heat-release process to ﬂow perturbations depends non-
linearly on the amplitude of the disturbance. For example, a small perturbation in
pressure may cause the rate of heat release to ﬂuctuate slightly. However, pressure
perturbations of sufﬁciently large amplitudes may cause the combustion process
to temporally extinguish. The large-amplitude heat-release oscillations induced by
Fig. 1.15
A simple example of a nonlinearly unstable state.

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
19
A
Driving/Damping
D(A)
H(A)
εD
1
εH
ALC
AT
1
Fig. 1.16
Hypothetical dependence of the acoustic driving, H(A), and damping, D(A),
processes on amplitude A, that produce the triggering of instabilities.
these transient extinguishment and reignition processes may cause instability in
the combustor. Rockets are prone to nonlinear triggering for reasons that are not
fully understood.
Although large-amplitude disturbances are generally required to initiate unsta-
ble oscillations in nonlinearly unstable systems,26 a system may be nonlinearly
unstable at low-amplitude disturbances that are of the order of the background-
noise level. This scenario is somewhat analogous to the hydrodynamic stability
of a laminar Poiseuille ﬂow,27 which is linearly stable but becomes increasingly
susceptible to destabilization by nonlinear mechanisms with increasing Reynolds
numbers. It is important to recognize this point because it indicates that it is difﬁcult
to determine from measured data whether the combustor is linearly or nonlinearly
unstable.
Figure 1.16 provides an example of the amplitude dependences of H(A) and
D(A) that produce the behavior discussed earlier. In this case, the system has three
equilibrium points at which the driving and damping curves intersect. Speciﬁcally,
the damping exceeds the driving when A < AT , indicating that A = 0 is a stable
ﬁxed point, because all disturbances in the range 0 < A < AT decay to A = 0.
The next equilibrium amplitude at which the driving and damping curves intersect
is at the triggering amplitude A = AT . This amplitude is an unstable equilibrium
point because any disturbance that shifts the system from this point continues to
increase in time. The third equilibrium point, A = ALC, is a stable limit cycle.
Thus, in such a system all disturbances with amplitudes A < AT return to the
stable solution A = 0 and disturbances with amplitudes A > AT grow until their
amplitude attains the value A = ALC. Consequently, two stable solutions exist
for this operating condition. The one observed at any point in time will depend
on the history of the system. This triggering behavior is probably not limited to
rockets. As discussed in Chapter 12, nonlinearities in the response of premixed
ﬂames to acoustic oscillations result in H(A) curves resembling those shown in
both Fig. 1.12 and Fig. 1.16; thus, both subcritical and supercritical bifurcations
should be expected in gas turbines as well.
A typical bifurcation diagram for this type of system is shown in Fig. 1.17.
It shows that for εh < εd, the A = 0 and A = ALC are stable solutions, as noted

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
20
εh-εd
Amplitude
Stable
Unstable
AT
Fig. 1.17
An example of a subcritical bifurcation.
before. For εh > εd, the A = 0 solution becomes unstable (as indicated by the solid
line becoming dashed), and only a single stable solution is present. In this case, if
a system parameter is monotonically increased to change the sign of εh −εd from
a negative to a positive value, the system’s amplitude will jump discontinuously
from A = 0 to A = ALC at εh −εd = 0. Hysteresis is also present in the system,
because if the system parameter is subsequently decreased, the system’s amplitude
decreases as it follows the stable branch on top, even for a range of εh < εd
values, before it discontinuously “jumps” to the A = 0 solution. Experimental
data exhibiting such behavior are presented in Fig. 1.18.25
B.
Other Characteristics of Limit-Cycle Oscillations
The preceding discussion has shown that both linear and nonlinear combustion
and acoustic processes control the dynamics of unstable combustors. In general,
linear processes control the balance between driving and damping processes for
small-amplitude disturbances and, thus, determine the conditions under which
spontaneous self-excited instabilities occur. On the other hand, nonlinear combus-
tor processes control the dynamics of ﬁnite amplitude oscillations.
0
0.0025
0.005
0.0075
0.01
0.0125
0.015
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
15.5
Mean Inlet Velocity (m/s)
Normalized Pressure (p'/p) 
Fig. 1.18
Experimental data showing evidence of a subcritical bifurcation. Taken
from Lieuwen.25

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
21
Nonlinear processes are also responsible for two other phenomena observed in
unstable combustors: generation of harmonics and changes in the mean value of
certain system properties. These phenomena can be understood by considering
the response of a nonlinear system to harmonic forcing. Consider, for example,
the gas-dynamic nonlinearity generated by the isentropic relationship between
pressure and density; that is,
p(t)
¯p
=
ρ(t)
¯ρ
γ
(1.3)
Assume that the density oscillates harmonically with an amplitude A and angular
frequency ω, that is,
ρ′(t)
¯ρ
= A sin ωt
(1.4)
Substitute this expression into Eq. (1.3) and expand the resulting expression in
a Taylor series about A = 0 to obtain the following expression for the pressure
oscillations:
p′(t)
γ ¯p = (γ −1)
4
A2 +

A + (γ −1)(γ −2)
8
A3

sin ωt −(γ −1)
4
A2 cos 2ωt
−(γ −1)(γ −2)
24
A3 sin 3ωt + · · ·
(1.5)
Equation (1.5) shows that the expansion for the pressure consists of a linear term
that is proportional to A (the second term on the right), and a collection of nonlinear
terms that are proportional to higher powers of the amplitude A. The latter includes
a time-independent term (ﬁrst term on the right) that is proportional to A2 and
represents the change in the mean pressure caused by the purely oscillatory density
disturbance. Furthermore, the expansion includes harmonics that are proportional
to A2, oscillating at twice the disturbance frequency, and terms proportional to
A3, oscillating with frequencies of 3ω and ω. Such harmonics of the unstable
combustor mode are routinely observed.
Changes in mean pressure of up to several hundred pounds per square inch have
been observed during very-large-amplitude instabilities in solid rockets. On the
other hand, instabilities in gas turbines generally have much smaller magnitudes,
and no reports have been published of signiﬁcant shifts in mean pressure because
of these instabilities. However, changes in mean ﬂame location and length are
routinely observed.28,29 These changes, in turn, can have an impact on the static
pressure distribution in the combustor because it depends on the distribution of the
combustion-process heat release.
C.
Causes of Nonlinearities
Numerous processes that drive and damp oscillations in unstable combustors de-
pend nonlinearly on the instability amplitude. These nonlinearities may be caused

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
22
by ﬂow and combustion processes that occur either within the combustor volume
or at its boundaries.
Gas-dynamic nonlinearities within the combustor volume are introduced by
processes described by nonlinear terms in the Navier–Stokes and energy equations,
for example, convective terms such as ρ⃗u · ∇⃗u in the Navier–Stokes equation
or the previously discussed nonlinear pressure–density relationship. Such terms,
in general, become signiﬁcant when the amplitudes of the ﬂuctuating pressure,
density, or velocity become on the order of the mean pressure, density, or speed of
sound, respectively. Consequently, these terms are generally not important when
the relative amplitudes of the acoustic disturbances are low (e.g., p′/ ¯p < 10%).
On the other hand, when very-large-amplitude oscillations are encountered, these
nonlinear processes strongly affect the characteristics of the instabilities in these
systems. Examples of the treatments of these nonlinear processes can be found in,
for example, the works of Zinn and coworkers,30 Culick and coworkers,31,32 and
Yang.33
Combustion-process nonlinearities are introduced by the nonlinear dependence
of the heat-release oscillations on the disturbance amplitude. Additionally, ﬂow
oscillations may control the response of the combustion process, resulting (in
these cases) in nonlinearities that become important when the ratio u′/¯u ∼O(1).25
Consequently, in these cases, the relevant velocity scale that determines when
nonlinearities are important is the mean velocity and not the sound speed (as in
the gas-dynamic nonlinearities). In fact, it has been shown that such combustion-
process nonlinearities play a key role in the stability of lean premixed combus-
tion systems.34 Further discussion of these nonlinearities can be found in Chap-
ters 12 and 13.
The nonlinearities in processes that occur at or near the combustor bound-
aries also affect the combustor dynamics as they are introduced into the anal-
ysis of the problem through nonlinear boundary conditions. Such nonlinearities
are caused by, for example, ﬂow separation at sharp edges or rapid expansions,
which, as discussed earlier, cause stagnation-pressure losses and a corresponding
transfer of acoustic energy into vorticity. The resulting nonlinear damping is pro-
portional to ρ|⃗u|2, resulting in an unsteady damping process that is proportional
to ¯ρ(|⃗u′|2 + 2|⃗u′| · |¯⃗u|) + ρ′(|¯⃗u|2 + |⃗u′|2 + 2|⃗u′| · |¯⃗u|).35 This expression indicates
that the presence of mean ﬂow introduces linear and nonlinear damping terms and
that the damping is proportional to the square of the magnitude of the velocity am-
plitude |⃗u′|2 in the absence of mean ﬂow (i.e., |¯⃗u| = 0). Such nonlinear damping
has been well characterized in experiments (see Ref. 35, for example).
Also, wave reﬂection and transmission processes through choked and unchoked
nozzles become amplitude dependent at large amplitudes. The effect of these
processes on the instabilities is described by a nonlinear boundary condition.36
V.
Conclusion
This chapter concludes with a summary of the state of the art of current model-
ing capabilities of combustion instabilities. From a practical point of view, three
basic instability characteristics must be predicted and understood: 1) frequency of
oscillations, 2) conditions under which the oscillations occur, and 3) their ﬁnal,
limit-cycle amplitude, which are listed in increasing order of predictive difﬁculty.

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
23
Speciﬁcally, the frequency and mode shape are easier to predict because they gen-
erally only require an understanding of the system’s linear dynamics, whereas
determination of the limit-cycle amplitude requires an understanding of nonlinear
system characteristics.
Consider ﬁrst the prediction of instability frequencies. Although some fun-
damental problems remain, such as analytical descriptions of the combustor’s
acoustic boundary conditions, prediction of instability frequencies is a relatively
mature area. In fact, capabilities for modeling the acoustics of combustors are rea-
sonably well developed, as described in Chapter 13, in this volume and also, for
example, in recent proceedings of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Turbo Expo conferences or in Munjal’s book.37 These descriptions indicate that
the frequencies and mode shapes of the excited instabilities can often be predicted
with good accuracy. In general, accurate predictions of these properties simply
require knowledge of the geometric characteristics of the system and average tem-
perature distributions. Although unsteady heat-release effects, which are much
harder to predict, have some impact on instability frequencies, this impact is often
small.
Predicting the conditions under which instabilities occur (the second issue) is
considerably more difﬁcult than predicting acoustic mode shapes and frequencies,
because it requires knowledge and modeling of the interactions of ﬂow and mixture
disturbances with ﬂames and damping processes. In recent years, the focus of
much of the research in this area has been on developing these understanding
and modeling capabilities. Examples of the ﬁndings of some of these studies that
investigated, for example, acoustic wave–ﬂame interactions and other mechanisms
that can drive these instabilities are discussed Chapters 9 and 12. Much progress
has been made in these areas to date and many gas-turbine manufacturers have
reported success in predicting instability frequencies and mode shapes, and the
conditions under which they occur, as discussed in the subsequent case-study
chapters in this book. Furthermore, even in cases in which predictive capabilities
do not exist, reasonable understanding of qualitative combustor stability trends
can often be obtained through analysis of combustor data after they have been
obtained; for example, rational correlations of the data can be developed.
Note that direct experimental veriﬁcation of linear combustor dynamics models
and mechanisms of instability is difﬁcult, because instabilities, in general, are
experimentally studied under limit-cycle conditions (with the notable exception
of Ref. 38). For example, consider the role of vortex shedding, which is thought
to be an important instability mechanism in gas turbines. The mere observation
of vortex shedding at the instability frequency under limit-cycle conditions does
not necessarily imply that it is also responsible for initiating the instability. Vortex
shedding can be forced at the frequency of an external excitation when the forcing
occurs at sufﬁciently large amplitude, even if this frequency does not coincide with
the natural shedding frequency.39 Consequently, ﬂow oscillations may be excited
by some other instability mechanism, which subsequently forces the shedding of
vortices at the instability frequency.
In contrast to the prediction of the instability characteristics and the condi-
tions under which it spontaneously occurs, which can be determined with linear
combustor models, the prediction of the limit-cycle amplitude of the instability
and the conditions under which large-amplitude disturbances destabilize a linearly

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
24
stable system (triggering) requires solution of nonlinear models of the combustor
processes. Amplitude-prediction capabilities are critical because it would tell en-
gineers whether an instability can be tolerated in the system under consideration
if its amplitude is not too large, or whether they need to take steps to decrease its
magnitude to prevent damage to the combustor. Such capabilities require under-
standing of the ﬂame and gas-dynamic response to large-amplitude disturbances
and the ability to model these nonlinear phenomena. Progress in this area has
largely been limited to simple, laminar ﬂames and little is known, even in a qual-
itative sense, about the key parameters controlling nonlinear ﬂame dynamics. As
such,instability-amplitudepredictioncapabilitiesremainakeychallengeforfuture
work.
References
1Rayleigh, J. S. W., The Theory of Sound, Vol. 2, Dover, New York, 1945.
2Crighton, D., “Airframe Noise,” Aeroacoustics of Flight Vehicles, edited by H. H.
Hubbard, Acoustical Society of America, New York, 1995.
3Yu, K., Trouve, A., and Daily, J., “Low-Frequency Pressure Oscillations in a Model
Ramjet Combustor,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 232, 1991, pp. 47–72.
4Marble, F., and Candel, S., “Acoustic Disturbance from Gas Non-uniformity Convected
Through a Nozzle,” Journal of Sound Vibrations, Vol. 55, 1977, pp. 225–243.
5Crocco, L., and Cheng, S., Theory of Combustion Instability in Liquid Propellant Rocket
Motors, Butterworths Scientiﬁc Publications, London, 1956.
6Yang, V., Kim, S. I., and Culick, F. E. C., “Triggering of Longitudinal Pressure Os-
cillations in Combustion Chambers: I: Nonlinear Gasdynamics,” Combustion Science and
Technology, Vol. 72, 1990, pp. 183–214.
7Wicker, J. M., Greene, W. D., Kim, S. I., and Yang, V., “Triggering of Longitudinal
Combustion Instabilities in Rocket Motors: Nonlinear Combustion Response,” Journal of
Propulsion and Power, Vol. 12, 1996, pp. 1148–1158.
8Swift, G., Thermoacoustics, Acoustical Society of America, New York, 2002.
9Rott, N., “Damped and Thermally Driven Acoustic Oscillations,” Zeitschrift fuer Ange-
waxdte Mathematik und Physik, Vol. 20, 1969, p. 230.
10Jones, A. T., “Singing Flames,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Vol. 16,
No. 4, 1945, pp. 254–266.
11Le Conte, J., Philosophical Magazine HP, 235.
12Putnam, A.,CombustionDrivenOscillationsinIndustry,American Elsevier Publishers,
New York, 1971.
13Pun, W. Ph.D. Thesis, California Inst. of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 1991.
14Blomshield, F. S., “Historical Perspective of Combustion Instability in Motors: Case
Studies,” AIAA Paper 2001-3875, 2001.
15Culick, F., “Combustion Instabilities in Liquid-Fueled Propulsion Systems-An
Overview,” AGARD, 1977.
16Kendrick, D. W., Anderson, T. J., and Sowa, W. A., “Acoustic Sensitivities of Lean-
Premixed Fuel Injectors in a Single Nozzle Rig,” American Society of Mechanical Engi-
neers, Paper 98-GT-382, 1998.
17Lieuwen, T., Torres, H., Johnson, C., and Zinn, B. T., “A Mechanism for Combustion
InstabilitiesinPremixedGasTurbineCombustors,”JournalofEngineeringforGasTurbines
and Power, Vol. 123, No. 1, 2001, pp. 182–190.

COMBUSTION INSTABILITIES: BASIC CONCEPTS
25
18Candel, S., “Combustion Dynamics and Control: Progress and Challenges,” Proceed-
ings of the Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, Vol. 29, 2002.
19Hegde, U. G., Reuter, D., Daniel, B. R., and Zinn, B. T., “Flame Driving of Longitudinal
Instabilities in Dump Type Ramjet Combustors,” Combustion Science and Technology,
Vol. 55, 1987, pp. 125–138.
20Schadow, K., and Gutmark, E., “Combustion Instability Related to Vortex Shedding
in Dump Combustors and Their Passive Control,” Progress in Energy and Combustion
Science, Vol. 18, pp. 117–132, 1992.
21Temkin, S., Elements of Acoustics, Wiley, New York, 1981.
22Roberson, J., and Crowe, C., Engineering Fluid Mechanics, Houghton Mifﬂin, New
York, 1993.
23Kim, J. S., “Effects of Turbulence on Linear Acoustic Instability: Spatial Inhomogene-
ity,” Liquid Rocket Engine Combustion Instability, edited by V. Yang and W. Anderson,
AIAA, Washington, DC, 1994, Chap. 16.
24Lieuwen, T., Neumeier, Y., and Rajaram, R., “Measurements of Incoherent Acoustic
Wave Scattering from Turbulent Premixed Flames,” Proceedings of the Combustion Insti-
tute, Pittsburgh, PA, Vol. 29, 2002.
25Lieuwen, T., “Experimental Investigation of Limit Cycle Oscillations in an Unsta-
ble Gas Turbine Combustor,” Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2002,
pp. 61–67.
26Oefelein,J.C.,andYang,V.,“ComprehensiveReviewofLiquid-PropellantCombustion
Instabilities in F-1Engines,” Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 9, 1993, pp. 657–
677.
27Drazin, P. G., and Reid, W. H., Hydrodynamic Stability, Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, England, U.K., 1981.
28Polifke, W., Fischer, A., and Sattelmayer, T., “Instability of a Premix Burner with Non-
Monotonic Pressure Drop Characteristics,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and
Power, Vol. 125, No. 1, 2003, pp. 20–27.
29Broda, J. C., Seo, S., Santoro, R. J., Shirhattikar, G., and Yang, V., “An Experimental
Investigation of Combustion Dynamics of a Lean, Premixed Swirl Injector,” Proceedings
of the Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, Vol. 27, 1998, pp. 1849–1856.
30Zinn, B. T., and Powell, E. A., “Nonlinear Combustion Instability in Liquid- Propellant
Rocket Engines,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, Vol. 13, 1970.
31Culick, F. E. C., Burnley, V., and Swenson, G., “Pulsed Instabilities in Solid-Propellant
Rockets,” Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 11, No. 4, 1995, pp. 657–665.
32Culick, F. E. C., “Nonlinear Growth and Limiting Amplitude of Acoustic Oscillations
in Combustion Chambers,” Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 3, No. 1, 1971.
33Wicker, J. M., Greene, W. D., Kim, S.-I., and Yang, V., “Triggering of Longitudinal
Combustion Instabilities in Rocket Motors: Nonlinear Combustion Response,” Journal of
Propulsion and Power, Vol. 12, No. 6, 1996.
34Peracchio, A. A., and Proscia, W. M., “Nonlinear Heat Release/Acoustic Model for
Thermo-Acoustic Instability in Lean Premixed Combustors,” Journal of Engineering for
Gas Turbines and Power, Vol. 121, 1999.
35Zinn, B. T., “A Theoretical Study of Nonlinear Damping by Helmholtz Resonators,”
Journal of Sound Vibrations, Vol. 13, No. 3, pp. 347–356.
36Zinn, B. T., and Crocco, L, “Periodic Finite Amplitude Oscillations in Slowly Con-
verging Nozzles,” Astronautica Acta, Vol. 13, Nos. 5 and 6, Aug. 1968, pp. 481–488.
37Munjal, M., Acoustics of Ducts and Mufﬂers, Wiley, New York, 1987.

B. T. ZINN AND T. C. LIEUWEN
26
38Poinsot, T., Veynante, D., Bourienne, F., Candel, S., Esposito, E., and Surget, J., “Ini-
tiation and Suppression of Combustion Instabilities by Active Control,” Proceedings of the
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, Vol. 22, pp. 1363–1370, 1988.
39Blevins, “The Effect of Sound on Vortex Shedding from Cylinders,” Journal of Fluid
Mechanics, Vol. 161, 1985, pp. 217–237.
40Huang, Y., and Yang, V., “Effect of Swirl on Combustion Dynamics in a Lean-Premixed
Swirl-Stabilized Combustor,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA,
Vol. 30, 2004, pp. 1771–1778.
41Ingard and Singhal, “Effect of Flow on the Acoustic Resonances of an Open Ended
Duct,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Vol. 58, No. 4, 1975, pp. 788–793.
