445
445
5.0-1 Introduction
 
With the varied and fast changing global power market, the complexity of 
turbine system economics has increased dramatically.  In the past, power plants were 
primarily government regulated and base loaded.  Dispatch and electricity pricing 
was relatively predictable.  In today’s market, with IPPs, there are endless variations 
in the way power is produced, provided, regulated, and purchased.  OEMs and power 
producers need to understand methods to quantify and compare parameters, and to 
understand the drivers and uncertainties to properly evaluate decisions and their 
potential for proﬁ tability in this constantly changing marketplace.
5.0-2 The Power Market Drivers
 
To understand the power market, one must keep in mind the key differences 
between this market and others:  
Electric power can not be economically stored.
 
Unlike other commodities, electric power cannot be easily or economically 
stored.  For the most part, it must be produced on demand.   While there are some 
efforts to retain energy generated during off peak hours using technologies such as 
pumped storage, ﬂ ywheels, and/or superconductors, the cost is high and the efﬁ ciency 
and reliability of these methods is low.
The demand for electric power is constantly ﬂ uctuating. 
 
The ﬂ uctuating demand for electric power is clear.  Demand varies during 
the day, with a morning and evening peak and varies over the year with a winter 
and summer peak.  Some of this ﬂ uctuation can be predicted based on historical 
information, such as the typical change in consumption over a day, and the typical 
seasonal variations, but the ﬂ uctuations can shift signiﬁ cantly from the norm due to 
uncontrollable events like periods of severe weather. 
Utilities have a high capital investment cost.
 
The initial required investment for a power plant varies based on the type of 
power plant.  Typically, utilities have very high ﬁ xed costs, spending almost ﬁ ve times 
the initial investment per dollar than other manufacturing endeavors1.  These ﬁ xed 
costs, which are typically between $475/kW and $1430/kW2, include equipment for 
generation, transmission, distribution, and permitting.
Power plants have a relatively long life cycle. 
 
Power plants do require signiﬁ cant initial investment, but they compensate 
with very long life.  Power plants operate for decades, with units operating 30 years 
or more.
Fuel prices are subject to negotiation and electricity prices are constantly varying.
 
These factors impact the ability to compete effectively in the deregulated 
market.
There is an unﬂ inching expectation that required electric power is always and 
immediately available.
 
Electricity has become a critical and integral part of the economy and there 
is no tolerance for an inadequate supply no matter what the circumstances.  This is 
reﬂ ected in the fact that electric consumption is generally accepted as one of the lead 
economic indicators.  
5.0
Turbine System Economics 
and Reliability, Availability 
& Maintainability (RAM)
Bonnie Marini, Ph.D.
Manager, Gas Turbine Design
Gas Turbine Engineering
Siemens Power Generation
Orlando, FL
phone: 407 736-6428
email: bonnie.marini@siemens.com

446
 
These unique features of the power market create a complex situation to evaluate and choose effective strategies for power 
generation.
Power Market Solutions
 
The nature of this constantly ﬂuctuating demand for a commodity that must be essentially produced on demand drives a varied 
supplier base, which can be broken into three basic types of operating modes – base loaded plants, intermediate loaded plants, and 
peakers.  
 
Base load plants operate continuously for long periods of time.  They are typically large plants (> 200MW), which are economical 
and reliable to operate.  These plants often do not have the ability to change load quickly and take advantage of spot market peak pricing. 
These units operate year round and all day with an overall economy, which allows them to compete and operate proﬁtably, even at low 
demand times.  Base load plants provide the core of the power grid, and act to regulate and maintain the grid frequency.
 
Intermediate load supplier includes plants that operate to meet normal ﬂuctuating demands in the morning and evening hours 
and typically operate for 10 to 14 hours per day.  
 
Peak load suppliers include plants which can start up quickly and supply power to meet high demands during periods of high or 
low temperature when the combined base and intermediate load capacity is not adequate.  These plants are typically more expensive to 
operate, but offer operational ﬂexibility. Electricity supplied during a peak demand is sold at a premium, making this the most proﬁtable 
time to generate.  
5.0-3 The Economics of Making Electricity
 
The US market is currently a hybrid market consisting of regulated market regions and deregulated market regions, with 
each having different economic drivers.  The regulated markets have contracts that are cost based.  Rates are negotiated, ﬁxed, and 
renegotiated allowing for a set return on investment for the power producer.  The deregulated market is an auction market, with suppliers 
bidding into the market, offering power to the grid.  A controller ranks the bids and purchases power as needed from the lowest cost 
supplier on up in price until the demand is met.
 
The traditional power market is regulated to meet local demand for power.  In this scenario, the cost of electricity is typically 
locked in by regulation and varies little.  A network of base load units and expensive peakers is put in place to enable the supply to meet 
the ﬂuctuating demand for power.  Proﬁts are based on a cost plus regulated model.  For a power producer, when choosing an OEM 
(Original Equipment Manufacturer) or AE (Architect Engineer), the primary economic variables to consider are ﬁrst time plant cost, 
service costs, fuel costs, and plant availability and reliability.   Fuel costs far outweigh the other factors and the driver in this case for the 
OEM industry is efﬁciency.  
 
The power market has changed signiﬁcantly with deregulation and different variables must be considered to appropriately 
assess the potential from a customer and supplier point of view.  In the deregulated market power prices ﬂuctuate drastically over time. 
In different areas and different countries, the rules vary, but it is common to have power generators bidding to supply to the grid and in 
some cases, there are penalties for promising power and then not being able to deliver.  This market, which seems as harried and volatile 
as the stock exchange ﬂoor, bids the operation of units which vary in their ability to come up to full power, to sustain partial load and to 
assure delivery of power at a precise time.  
RAM and Economics
 
When a power plant is off line for maintenance, there is no income stream.  When power is offered on the spot market and 
the plant does not start, there may be penalties.  These scenarios drive a need to consider RAM.  RAM is an acronym for Reliability, 
Availability, and Maintainability.  
 
Reliability is used to express and quantify the unplanned maintenance needs of a power plant.  Reliability is a measure of how 
often a plant is available in comparison to the total number of hours the plant would be available with no unexpected maintenance.  An 
ideal power plant has a reliability is 100%.
  
 
 
Availability is a measure of how often a unit is capable of providing service.  The availability can be quantiﬁed as the ratio of 
the total number of hours the unit is actually available in comparison to the total number of hours.  Availability considers both scheduled 
and unscheduled maintenance and compares that to an ideal situation with no maintenance outages at all.  An ideal power plant has an 
availability that is less than 100%.  Units with less frequent and shorter maintenance intervals have higher availabilities.  

447
 
Maintainability is used to express the cost of maintenance.  This includes the cost for parts, and the cost of the servicing. 
Maintainability can be used to compare plants that require frequent, lower cost servicing, with plants that require less frequent, higher 
cost servicing.
 
Combining these considerations, RAM looks at how often you can use the equipment and how much it costs to keep it in 
operating condition.  The concept of RAM is used to consider the trade off between higher technology immature technologies, and less 
advanced, but more reliable operation.
Modern Power Plant Economics
 
Throughout the US market exists a hybrid market in which the trend has been to move towards deregulation.  The change 
from regulation to deregulation changed the motivation and strategy of power producers.  The old descriptions of the power industry as 
stable and constant were traded in for adjectives like competitive, ﬂexible, dynamic – even risky.  This volatile market favors plants that 
are highly fuel efﬁcient for base load and plants with quick, “push button” starting capability to meet daily peak demands.  As a power 
producer, the ideal situation is to be efﬁcient enough to compete in the base loaded market or ﬂexible enough to change load quickly 
to compete in the peak market.  For an OEM to have access to the largest market share, this means providing engines that can do both. 
This need to “have it all” has driven the technology of power plants.  Equipment manufacturers are competing to deliver plants with the 
highest efﬁciency and the most ﬂexibility.  This demand for more performance results in pushing the technology envelope.  
 
There have been positive and negative consequences to this change in the industry.  The driver for the change was to increase 
competition in the marketplace, and consequently to reduce utility bills.  A discussion of the result in that regard is out of the scope of this 
paper, but signiﬁcant secondary consequences occurred which are relevant.  The technology of gas turbines has advanced very quickly 
in this market.  Efﬁciencies have increased and emissions have reduced.  The introduction of new technologies has increased in volume 
and scope, resulting in issues in reliability and availability for less mature engines.  A power producer must decide between buying the 
most advanced technology with the highest efﬁciency, or buying a model that is more mature, and more reliable, but not as efﬁcient.
 
Utilities are businesses.  Regulated utilities are mainly concerned with maintaining the lowest life cycle costs for their units. 
For deregulated enterprises proﬁtability is what is important.  Prior to deregulation, sound economic decisions were important, and with 
regulation, these calculations were fairly simple and reliable.  Subsequent to deregulation, sound economic decisions became absolutely 
critical to survival, while becoming far more complex.  Utilities must understand how to make appropriate purchasing decisions, and 
OEMs must understand how these choices are made to compete effectively.  The economics and the technology are intimately tied 
together.  While it may be clear which technical decision advances technology the fastest, it is not always as clear which technical 
decision makes the best business case.  Power plant economics explores the cost of a decision over time.  
Basic Power Plant Economics
 
Economic evaluation of a power plant can be explored in a number of ways.  All methods account for the cost of a decision over 
time.  There are several accepted methods to examine cost over time.  A common approach is to evaluate net present value (NPV).
 
The net present value method looks at the value of the project over time by converting all income and expenditures into 
equivalent values at the current time and subtracting the initial investment.  To do this, the future interest rate and the rate of inﬂation 
must be estimated and expressed as a discount rate, r.  While these estimates are somewhat inaccurate, the sensitivity to the assumption 
can be explored to understand the implication of one choice over another.
Where;
In:   initial investment
r: discount rate or weighted average capitol cost for a given company
t: time
CashFlow: Income – expenses
Bonnie Marini

448
 
The basic rule of thumb is that the NPV should be greater than zero for an investment, though most investors will strive to get 
a hurdle rate that is higher.
 
To calculate the NPV of a power plant, the following parameters are needed:
1) capital investments,
2) projected price of electricity,
3) size of the plant,
4) capacity factors (how many hours the plant will operate in a given year),
5) dispatch payments
6) projected fuel costs,
7) operating and maintenance costs, 
8) start up time and costs,
9) regulating costs, and
10) the discount rate (the cost of money).
 
For a power producer, the initial investment is the cost of the plant and initial costs for support equipment and hiring staff.   
 
The income is calculated per annum, and is income from the electricity sold to the grid.  This is the price of electricity ($/MWh) 
multiplied by number of hours the facility is producing power (MWh) in a typical year.  In a deregulated market, the price of electricity 
is determined by the market and for calculation, should be evaluated based on historical data and forecasted fuel and electricity prices. 
In some markets, dispatch payments are another source of income.  Dispatch payments are fees paid to producers that are capable of 
providing power to the grid with a very short lead time, typically in the range of 10 minutes from demand to supply (spinning and non-
spinning reserve).  These payments are for the assurance of capability and are paid regardless of whether the capability is leveraged. 
This provides incentive to suppliers to develop and maintain a fast start supply, so the grid can adequately respond to unplanned peak 
needs.
 
Expenses are determined on a per annum basis and include the cost of fuel, and operating and maintenance costs.  The fuel cost 
is a variable cost and must be estimated.  For the calculation, fuel cost must be converted to annual cost in dollars by multiplying the 
fuel price times cumulative fuel consumed per annum.  The operating and maintenance costs include personnel costs, and the costs for 
scheduled and unscheduled maintenance.  Operating and maintenance costs are impacted directly by the mode of operation of a plant. 
The frequency of maintenance is inﬂuenced by both operating hours and number of starts.  A single start for a combined cycle facility 
can result in a signiﬁcant incremental increase in maintenance costs, with one producer estimating $20,000 in incremental costs for one 
combined cycle start3. 
 
Expenses may also include regulating costs.  Regulating costs are government instituted economic consequence to encourage 
industry to make decisions that have been determined to be for the good of the people.  These costs include taxes and the cost of 
complying with government regulations.  Taxes may be implemented to inﬂuence companies to choose preferred technologies or to 
impact the local job market.  Technologies may be politically preferable due to environmental or safety issues as viewed by the regulating 
government.  Certain fuel sources may be preferred to enhance energy independence or to promote local industry and employment. 
Regulating costs also include costs for adhering to regulations that are put in place to assure the safety of a facility, such as OSHA 
requirements.  Regulations and taxes are dependent on the current political climate and are subject to frequent changes, often resulting in 
the changing position of a certain facility in the market place.  An example of this kind of inﬂuence is environmental regulations where 
emissions credits are traded.  Over time a facility built to meet a certain regulation may become covered by a regulation with a more 
aggressive limit. This may mean that additional operating costs are incurrent to purchase additional emissions credits, thus inﬂuencing 
the economics of the power producer.
 
The calculation complexity increases further when looking over the life of the power plant.  Power plants have a long life 
and many changes occur over the life of the plant.  Some of these risks can be hedged by investing in futures to ﬁx the future price of 
commodities such as fuels, or to insure against adverse business conditions, such as long periods of mild weather.
 
Some gas turbines have the capability to operate on alternate fuels. Some units are purchased with the ﬂexibility to switch 
between gas and oil, and various qualities of oil can be considered. As the price for oils and gases ﬂuctuate, a plant with this capability 
can be more competitive, but at a price. This option requires more capital investment, both in the unit and in the supporting auxiliaries, 
and potentially in licensing and permitting fees.
 
Units desire to remain competitive over time by being highly efﬁcient and as a result of this are also driven to increase capital 
investment over time.  New technology is regularly introduced and can be purchased as upgrades to improve efﬁciency.  To develop a 
symbiotic relationship with customers, some OEMs offer access to upgrades to customers who purchase long term service agreements, 
thereby integrating the need for consistent high quality service with the need for continually competitive technology.  
 
To understand the drivers for proﬁtability, and the importance of RAM, the sensitivity of the calculation can be explored to 
further understand the uncertainty of the calculation.  The variables can be examined in terms of controllable variable and uncontrollable 
variables.  
5.0-4 Operating Strategies and Options
 
For a base loaded plant, low margins are compensated by long operating times.  Long, uninterrupted operating times are 
supported by reliability and maintainability.  Gas turbine technology has been in service for many decades, and most units have 
5.0  Turbine System Economics and Reliability, Availability & Maintainability (RAM) 

449
reliabilities of greater than 95%.  However, the base line efﬁciency of a competitive unit is constantly increasing.  The old robust engine 
with learned out technology is simply not efﬁcient enough.
 
At the other end of the operating spectrum are peakers that are looking to leverage the high costs of electricity during peak 
needs.  In June 25 of 1998, the price per megawatt-hour of electricity in parts of the Midwest soared brieﬂy from $40 to $70004.  Though 
the higher end of this scale is the exception and not the norm, the implication is clear that the investment costs and fuel costs pale in the 
face of this return and the only signiﬁcant factor is how much the plant can generate.  In this market the goal is to be ready to run when 
the prices increase.  Here again RAM is the driver since for the most part, a window of high potential for peak need can be identiﬁed, 
and so owners can schedule planned maintenance outside these windows.  However, availability and reliability are extremely important 
because if an owner pushes the start button and does not get power, a competitor will quickly jump in and take over that share of the 
market.  If a plant is inoperable due to unplanned maintenance (low reliability) then the opportunity to compete during this need will not 
even be possible.  
 
Operators in the intermediate load business are balancing all of these needs.  They want to be chosen for operation, so efﬁciency 
is important, and they need to ready to operate.  Reliability, availability, and maintainability are all equally important.
Gas Turbines in the Power Market
 
Gas turbines operate in all three operating regimes.  Simple cycle gas turbines are installed to meet peak demands.  They are 
extremely ﬂexible, relatively low in initial investment cost, and quick to install.  While internal machine efﬁciencies are quite high, gas 
turbine simple cycles exhaust at roughly 1000◦F, wasting a signiﬁcant amount of energy and resulting in a rather low cycle efﬁciency, 
and limiting the application to peak markets.
 
For intermediate and base load applications, gas turbines are used in combined cycles.   In this arrangement, the gas turbine 
waste heat is used in a heat recovery steam generator to power a bottoming steam cycle.  The combined efﬁciency of such power plants 
are quite competitive (> 55%), easily ﬁtting into the intermediate load market, and capable of competing as a base loaded units.  
 
In both scenarios there are economic complexities.  The base loaded plants must maintain very low costs.  The business cases 
are based on low margins and high volume.  Large plants with high availability and low maintenance needs have the advantage in this 
market.  The business cases for load following plants are based on a low volume high proﬁt model, which requires them to be available 
when the need is present.  The economics improve when an unexpected peak in demand occurs.  Those who can meet these peaks 
quickly and reliably can reap the beneﬁt of selling when the market is at its highest.  For these reason, RAM – reliability, availability and 
maintainability become signiﬁcant driving factors in the power market.  
Controlling RAM While Increasing Technology Level 
 
To maintain competitiveness, OEMs are aware that new technology must be introduced at a lower risk level. Steps are taken 
to control risk during design, prior to implementation, and during operation.  During design, risk analysis and management methods are 
used which allow a quantiﬁed assessment of the probability of a particular failure and the consequences.  Results of these analyses are 
used to mitigate risks by either changing the design, or altering the consequential impact.  Prior to implementation, new technologies 
are being tested more thoroughly.  In the past, most of the testing was done with similar technologies in small engines, or aircraft engine 
test beds.  These approaches are similar, but not the same as the IGT (Industrial Gas Turbine) application.  To further reduce risk, some 
OEMs such as Siemens, have built IGT test beds, so fully scaled new technology can be fully instrumented and tested in a controlled 
environment.  For further reaching changes, an entire test site is constructed through cooperation between an OEM and a power producer 
to validate a new design.  In some cases, new technologies are introduced to a single customer site with an agreement to test out the 
technology prior to release to a larger ﬂeet.  Subsequent to implementation, engines can be ﬁtted with improved monitors and sensors, 
condition monitoring, and better controls.  OEMs are now offering producers the option to purchase a monitoring contract, where the 
OEM constantly monitors plant operation.  Monitoring a ﬂeet of engines allows the OEM to develop probabilistic indicators of potential 
failures.  When symptoms occurs, the owner is informed, and corrective actions can be taken in a controlled manner, at a convenient 
time, greatly reducing the likelihood of unexpected failure during a peak need.  All of these features combine to reduce the risk of 
increased RAM costs.
5.0-5 Conclusion
 
Since deregulation the focus on efﬁciency so over shadowed other needs that the technical envelope was pushed very hard, 
very fast.  The result was an improvement in the efﬁciency of gas turbines, but there was a partnering risk when leveraging immature 
technologies.  Using RAM in business models allows appropriate evaluation of the beneﬁt and risk of immature technologies and allows 
user to apply these technologies intelligently.  Today, OEMs and operators are both cognizant of the need to make sound economic 
evaluations of technology options and to consider technology maturity and the resultant RAM into their calculations.  Additional actions 
(further testing) are taken and additional products (such as online monitoring) are being offered to reduce and control RAM.  With these 
considerations, good choices can be made by power producers that will provide for proﬁt for the company and reliable power for the 
communities served.
Bonnie Marini

450
450
5.0-6 Notes
–––––––––––––––––––––––
 
1. Bonbright, Danielson and Kamerschen, Principles of Public Utility Rates, Arlington, Virginia, Public Utility Reports, Inc.,   
 
    1988.
 
2. “Cost Comparison IGCC and Advanced Coal,” by Stu Dalton, Director Fossil, Emission Control and Distributed Energy   
                   Resources,   EPRI.  Presented at EPRI Roundtable on Deploying Advanced Coal July 29, 2004.
 
3. Panel of Combined Cycle Users Group & Gas Turbine Users Group, Electric Power Conference, Chicago, April 5-7, 2005. 
 
4. “Exploiting Uncertainty, The “real options revolution in decision-making,” by Peter Coy, Published in Business Week,  
 
                   June 7, 1999.
5.0  Turbine System Economics and Reliability, Availability & Maintainability (RAM)

Bonnie Marini, Ph.D.
Manager, Gas Turbine Design
Gas Turbine Engineering
Siemens Power Generation
Orlando, FL
phone: (407) 736-6428
email: bonnie.marini@siemens.com
5.0  Turbine System Economics and Reliability, Availability & Maintainability (RAM)
Dr. Marini has been working in the power industry since 1980 and has a PhD in experimental ﬂ uids 
mechanics.  She is currently the Manager of Turbine Technology and Processes for Siemens Power 
Generation.  In this position she is responsible for technical approaches and processes for turbine 
hot gas path design and for advanced turbine development projects.  Prior to this, she led the team 
developing upgrade products for the Siemens gas turbine service ﬂ eet.  Other experience includes 
combined cycle analysis, steam turbine gas path design, and systems design for nuclear power 
plants while working for various AE ﬁ rms, OEMs, and utilities
BIOGRAPHY  
