59
1.2-1 Introduction
 
Integrated Coal Gasiﬁ cation Combined Cycle (IGCC) refers to the 
technology of converting coal to a fuel gas by contacting it with a mixture 
of oxygen (or air) and steam, burning the fuel gas in a combustion turbine/
generator, using the waste heat from the turbine to raise steam, and sending 
the steam to a steam turbine for additional power generation.  IGCC has a 
number of technical advantages, but until recently, higher capital costs plus 
the availability of cheap natural gas have limited its application. However, 
as pollution limits become more stringent and natural gas prices increase, the 
superior performance of IGCC will make it increasingly attractive, particularly 
as technical advances reduce costs.
 
Gasiﬁ cation is a well-proven technology that had its beginnings in 
the late 1700s.  In the 19th century, gasiﬁ cation was used extensively for the 
production of “town gas” for urban areas.  Although this application has all 
but vanished in the 20th century with the widespread availability of natural 
gas, gasiﬁ cation has found new applications in the production of fuels and 
chemical feed stocks and in large-scale power generation.  Today, gasiﬁ cation 
technology is being widely used throughout the world.  A study conducted 
in 2004 indicated that there were 156 gasiﬁ cation projects worldwide.  Total 
capacity of the projects in operation was 45,000 MW (thermal) with another 
25,000 MW (thermal) in various stages of development. 
1.2-2 The Gasiﬁ cation Process1
 
The major difference between combustion and gasiﬁ cation from the 
point of view of the chemistry involved is that combustion takes place under 
oxidizing conditions, while gasiﬁ cation occurs under reducing conditions. In 
the gasiﬁ cation process, a carbon-based feedstock in the presence of steam and 
oxygen at high temperature and moderate pressure is converted in a reaction 
vessel called a gasiﬁ er to synthesis gas, a mixture of carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen, generally referred to as syngas. The chemistry of gasiﬁ cation is quite 
complex and involves many chemical reactions, some of the more important 
of which are:  
C + O2  CO2 
 
 
ΔHr = -393.4 MJ/kmol 
 
(1)
C + ½ O2  CO  
 
ΔHr = -111.4 MJ/kmol 
 
(2)
C + H2O  H2 + CO 
 
ΔHr = 130.5 MJ/kmol 
 
(3)
C + CO2 ↔ 2CO  
 
ΔHr = 170.7 MJ/kmol 
 
(4)
CO + H2O ↔ H2 + CO2 
 
ΔHr = -40.2 MJ/kmol 
 
(5)
C + 2H2  CH4  
 
ΔHr = -74.7 MJ/kmol 
 
(6)
 
Reactions (1) and (2) are exothermic oxidation reactions and provide 
most of the energy required by the endothermic gasiﬁ cation Reactions (3) 
and (4).  The oxidation reactions occur very rapidly, completely consuming 
all of the oxygen present in the gasiﬁ er, so that most of the gasiﬁ er operates 
under reducing conditions.  Reaction (5) is the water-gas shift reaction, which 
in essence converts CO into H2.  The water-gas shift reaction alters the H2/
CO ratio in the ﬁ nal mixture but does not greatly impact the heating value of 
the synthesis gas, because the heats of combustion of H2 and CO on a molar 
basis are almost identical.  Methane formation, Reaction (6), is favored by 
high pressures and low temperatures and is, thus, mainly important in lower-
temperature gasiﬁ cation systems.  Methane formation is an exothermic 
reaction that does not consume oxygen and, therefore, increases the efﬁ ciency 
59
1.2
Integrated Coal 
Gasiﬁ cation Combined 
Cycle (IGCC)
SAIC
P.O. Box 10940
Pittsburgh, PA 15236
Massood Ramezan
phone: (412) 386-6451
email: massood.ramezan@sa.netl.
doe.gov
Howard G. McIlvried
phone: (412) 386-4825
email: howard.mcilvried@sa.netl.doe.
gov
Gary J. Stiegel
NETL
626 Cochrans Mill Road, 
P.O. Box 10940
Pittsburgh, PA 15236
email: gary.stiegel@netl.doe.gov

60
of gasiﬁcation and the ﬁnal heating value of the synthesis gas.  Overall, about 70% of the fuel’s heating value is associated with the CO 
and H2 in the gas, but this can be higher depending upon the gasiﬁer type.
 
Depending on the gasiﬁer technology employed and the operating conditions, signiﬁcant quantities of H2O, CO2, and CH4 can 
be present in the synthesis gas, as well as a number of minor and trace components. Under the reducing conditions in the gasiﬁer, most 
of the fuel’s sulfur converts to hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S), but 3-10% converts to carbonyl sulﬁde (COS).  Fuel-bound nitrogen generally 
converts to gaseous nitrogen (N2), but some ammonia (NH3) and a small amount of hydrogen cyanide (HCN) are also formed.  Most of 
the chlorine in the fuel is converted to HCl with some chlorine present in the particulate phase.  Trace elements, such as mercury and 
arsenic, are released during gasiﬁcation and partition among the different phases, such as ﬂy ash, bottom ash, slag, and product gas.  Table 
1 shows typical gas compositions for some of the more commonly used gasiﬁers.
Table 1.  Composition of Raw Syngas from Coal Fed Gasiﬁers
Gasiﬁer Technology
Sasol/Lurgi1
Texaco/GE Energy2a
BGL2b
E-Gas/Conoco Phillips
Shell/Uhde2c
Type of Bed
moving
entrained
moving
entrained
entrained
Coal Feed Form
dry
slurry
dry
slurry
dry
Coal Type
Illinois No. 6
Illinois No. 6
Illinois No. 6
Illinois No. 6
Illinois No. 5
Oxidant
oxygen
oxygen
oxygen
oxygen
oxygen
Pressure, MPa (psia)
0.101 (14.7)
4.22 (612)
2.82 (409)
2.86 (415)
2.46 (357)
Ash Form
slag
slag
slag
slag
slag
Composition, vol%
  H2
52.2
30.3
26.4
33.5
26.7
  CO
29.5
39.6
45.8
44.9
63.1
  CO2 
5.6
10.8
2.9
16.0
1.5
  CH4
4.4
0.1
3.8
1.8
0.03
  Other HC
0.3
-
0.2
-
-
  H2S
0.9
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.3
  COS
0.04
0.02
0.1
0.1
0.1
  N2 + Ar
1.5
1.6
3.3
2.5
5.2
  H2O
5.1
16.5
16.3
-
2.0
  NH3 + HCN
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.02
  HCl
-
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.03
H2S/COS Ratio
20/1
42/1
11/1
10/1
9/1
Sources:
1 Rath, “Status of Gasiﬁcation Demonstration Plants,” Proc. 2nd Annu. Fuel Cells Contract Review Mtg., DOE/METC-9090/6112, p. 91.
2 Coal Gasiﬁcation Guidebook: Status, Applications, and Technologies, Electric Power Research Institute, EPRI TR-102034, 1993.  2a: p. 5-28; 2b p. 5-58; 2c: p. 
5-48.
 
Many other reactions, besides those listed, occur. In the initial stages of gasiﬁcation, the rising temperature of the feedstock 
initiates devolatilization of the feedstock and the breaking of weaker chemical bonds to yield tars, oils, phenols, and hydrocarbon gases. 
These products generally react further to form H2, CO, and CO2.  The ﬁxed carbon that remains after devolatilization reacts with oxygen, 
steam, CO2, and H2.  
Gasiﬁer Types:
 
All gasiﬁer technologies generally fall into one of three generic types of reactor: moving-bed (also call ﬁxed-bed), ﬂuidized-
bed, and entrained ﬂow.  In a moving-bed gasiﬁer, large particles of coal move slowly down through the bed while reacting with gases 
moving countercurrenly. Reaction “zones” are often used to describe the reactions occurring along the length of the gasiﬁer.  In the 
drying zone at the top of the gasiﬁer, the entering coal is heated and dried by the countercurrent ﬂow of syngas, while simultaneously 
cooling the syngas before it leaves the gasiﬁer.  The moisture content of the coal mainly controls the temperature of the discharge gas 
from the gasiﬁer.  Because of the countercurrent operation of this gasiﬁer, hydrocarbon liquids can be found in the product gas which 
has been problematic for downstream operations; however, techniques have been devised to capture the hydrocarbons and recycle them 
to the lower part of the gasiﬁer.  As the coal continues down the bed, it enters the carbonization zone where the coal is further heated 
and devolatilized by higher temperature gas.  In the gasiﬁcation zone, the devolatilized coal in converted to syngas by reactions with 
steam and CO2.  In the combustion zone near the bottom of the reactor, oxygen reacts with the remaining char to consume the remaining 
carbon and to generate the necessary heat for the gasiﬁcation zone.  Depending upon the operation of the combustion zone, the moving 
bed gasiﬁer can be made to operate in one of two distinct modes, i.e., dry ash or slagging.  In the dry-ash version, the temperature is 
maintained below the ash slagging temperature by the endothermic reaction of the char with steam in the presence of excess steam.  In 
addition, the ash below the combustion zone is cooled by the entering steam and oxidant. In the slagging version, much less steam is 
used so that the temperature of the ash in the combustion zone exceeds the ash fusion temperature of the coal and molten slag is formed. 
Moving-bed gasiﬁers have the following characteristics:

61
• 
Low oxidant requirements;
• 
Production of hydrocarbon liquids, such as tars and oils;
• 
High “cold-gas” thermal efﬁciency, when the heating value of the hydrocarbon liquids is included; and,
• 
Limited ability to handle ﬁnes.
 
Fluidized-bed gasiﬁers operate in a highly back-mixed mode, thoroughly mixing the coal feed particles with those particles 
already undergoing gasiﬁcation.  Coal enters at the side of the reactor, while steam and oxidant enter near the bottom, thereby suspending 
or ﬂuidizing the reacting bed.  Char particles entrained in the raw gas leaving the top of the gasiﬁer are recovered by a cyclone and 
recycled back to the gasiﬁer.  Ash particles removed below the bed give up heat to the incoming steam and oxidant.  Because of the 
highly back-mixed operation, the gasiﬁer operates under isothermal conditions at a temperature below the ash fusion temperature of 
the coal, thus avoiding clinker formation and possible collapse of the bed.  The low temperature operation of this gasiﬁer means that 
ﬂuidized-bed gasiﬁers are best suited to relatively reactive feeds, such as low-rank coals and biomass, or to lower quality feedstocks, 
such as high ash coals.  Fluidized-bed gasiﬁers have the following characteristics:
• 
Accept a wide range of solid feedstocks, including solid waste, wood, and high ash coals;
• 
Uniform, moderate temperature;
• 
Moderate oxygen and steam requirements; and,
• 
Extensive char recycling.
 
In entrained-ﬂow gasiﬁers, ﬁne coal particles react with steam and oxidant, generally pure oxygen, at temperatures well above 
the fusion temperature of the ash.  The residence time of the coal in these gasiﬁers is very short, and high temperatures are required 
to achieve high carbon conversion.  Because of the high reaction temperatures required compared to the other gasiﬁer types, oxygen 
consumption is higher because of the need to combust more of the feedstock to generate the required heat.  To minimize oxygen 
consumption, and hence cost, these gasiﬁers are usually supplied with higher quality feed stocks.  Entrained-ﬂow gasiﬁers can operate 
either in a down-ﬂow or up-ﬂow mode.  Entrained-ﬂow gasiﬁers have the following characteristics:
• 
Ability to gasify all coals, regardless of rank, caking characteristics, or amount of ﬁnes, although feedstocks with 
lower ash content are favored;
• 
Uniform temperature;
• 
Very short feed residence time in the gasiﬁer;
• 
Solid fuel must be very ﬁnely divided and homogeneous;
• 
Relatively large oxidant requirement;
• 
Large amount of sensible heat in the raw gas;
• 
High-temperature slagging operation; and,
• 
Entrainment of some ash/slag in the raw gas.
Syngas Cleanup
 
Before syngas can be burned as a fuel or converted to chemicals, liquid fuels, or hydrogen, impurities in the gas, as shown 
in Table 1, must be reduced to levels that depend upon the requirements of the downstream process.  To clean the syngas, chemical 
solvents, such as monoethanolamine (MEA), diethanolamine (DEA), and methyl diethanolamine (MDEA), and physical solvents, such 
as methanol (Rectisol) and mixtures of dimethyl ethers of polyethylene glycol (Selexol), operating at ambient or lower temperatures 
are employed.  The selection of the technology for gas cleanup is dependent on the purity requirements of downstream operations and 
whether of not capture of carbon dioxide is required.  
 
With all of these technologies, the syngas is contacted with the scrubbing liquid in a packed column.  In the amine-based systems 
(MEA, DEA, MDEA), weak chemical compounds are formed between H2S and the amine.  Compounds such as COS are unaffected by 
the amine and must ﬁrst be hydrolyzed to H2S if deeper sulfur removal is required.  The rich amine is then pumped to a second packed 
column, operating at a higher temperature, where the H2S is stripped from the solvent and sent to sulfur recovery, typically a Claus unit. 
The lean amine is cooled and returned to the absorber.  The Rectisol process uses chilled methanol, at a temperature of about -40oF to 
-80oF, as the solvent.  In this case, the H2S and other sulfur-containing compounds, such as COS, dissolve in the methanol but do not react 
with it.  The methanol is regenerated by ﬂashing, and the lean solvent is then returned to the absorber.  Like the Rectisol process, H2S 
and other sulfur-containing compound are quite soluble in the Selexol solvent, which operates at about 0oF to 100oF. The rich solution 
is sent to a regeneration column, where a combination of reduced pressure and stripping at an increased temperature is used to remove 
the absorbed acid gases.  The regenerated solvent is returned to the absorber.  In current IGCC systems, absorption processes are used 
to remove H2S, with a minimum of CO2 removal, since CO2 in the fuel gas improves turbine performance.  However, should it become 
necessary to also recover CO2, these processes can be conﬁgured to remove both H2S and CO2.
Gary J. Stiegel, Massood Ramezan, Howard G. McIlvried

62
 
Once the synthesis gas is sufﬁciently cleaned, various options exist for its utilization, such as the production of electricity via 
IGCC or the production of chemicals, hydrogen, and liquid fuels by water-gas shift and Fischer-Tropsch (F-T) technology.  In IGCC, the 
clean synthesis gas is sent to a combustion turbine, where the gas is burned to produce electricity.  The energy contained in the exhaust 
gas from the gas turbine is recovered in a heat recovery steam generator (HRSG). Steam from the HRSG goes to a steam turbine for the 
production of additional electricity.  Approximately, two-thirds of the total electricity generated in the IGCC plant is produced by the gas 
turbine and one third is produced by the steam turbine. Because of the sulfur removal process discussed above, SO2 emissions are very 
low.  Likewise, eliminating ammonia from the syngas in the gas cleaning system and adding a diluent (nitrogen or moisture) to the fuel 
gas prior to combustion to lower combustion temperature in the turbine results in very low levels of NOx emissions, even in the absence 
of selective catalytic reduction (SCR).
 
There is growing concern that the increased concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels is 
contributing to global warming with undetermined consequences.  This concern had resulted in the development of the Kyoto Protocol, 
which sets limits on CO2 emissions for the signatory countries.  An obvious target for CO2 reductions is large stationary point sources, 
such as coal-ﬁred power plants.  Studies to date have indicated that recovery of the CO2 from the ﬂue gas from these plants is very 
expensive and inefﬁcient.  Because the ﬂue gas is at about atmospheric pressure and the CO2 concentration is typically less than 15%, 
large volumes of gas have to be treated and the driving force for CO2 absorption is low.
 
With coal gasiﬁcation, the situation is different.  The CO2 partial pressure in the product gas from the gasiﬁer is much higher 
due to the higher pressure of the syngas (typically 500-700 psi). The higher pressure and the absence of nitrogen dilution result in a much 
lower gas volume to be treated (on the order of only 0.5% to 1% the volume of ﬂue gas).  Furthermore, by using a water-gas shift unit, 
CO in the fuel gas can be converted to H2 and CO2 before CO2 capture.  With this approach, nearly all the carbon in the gasiﬁer feed can 
be captured as CO2 for use or sequestration.  Major potential uses for the captured CO2 include enhance oil recovery (EOR) and enhanced 
coal bed methane recovery (ECBM).  Smaller uses include feedstock for chemicals manufacture and as a fertilizer in greenhouses, but 
these uses are much too small to have an impact on CO2 emissions.  If it becomes mandatory to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 
it is likely that CO2 will be sequestered by injection into deep saline aquifers, abandoned oil and gas ﬁelds, and unminable coal seams.  
1.2-3 IGCC Systems
 
Gasifier 
Particulate 
Scrubber 
Process 
Water 
Treatment 
Gas 
Cooling 
Sulfur 
Recovery 
Unit 
Heat 
Recovery 
Steam 
Generator 
Acid 
Gas 
Removal 
Gas 
Turbine/ 
Generator 
Raw 
Syngas 
Raw 
Syngas 
Sour 
Syngas 
Sweet 
Syngas 
Sour 
Gas 
Coal    
Water 
Turbine 
Exhaust 
Steam 
Turbine/ 
Generator 
Recycle Water 
Stack Gas 
Oxygen from 
ASU or Air 
Electricity 
Scrubber 
Water 
Electricity 
Recycle Ash  
Acid 
Gas 
Sour 
Condensate 
Scrubber 
Blowdown 
Slag or Ash        
(including non-volatile 
trace elements) 
Water 
Treatment 
Residuals 
Treated 
Waste Water  
Byproduct 
Sulfur or 
H2SO4 
Tail Gas 
Recycled to 
Gasifier 
Air 
Gas 
Turbine/ 
Generator 
Fig. 1.  Schematic of Generic IGCC Power Plant
1.2 Integrated Coal Gasiﬁcation Combined Cycle (IGCC) 

63
 
IGCC involves the integration of a number of technologies, as shown by the schematic diagram in ﬁgure 1.  The technologies 
involved include air separation, gasiﬁcation, syngas cleanup (including sulfur recovery), and power generation. Figure 2 presents some 
of the options for the various technology blocks in the gasiﬁcation based systems.  Improvements in any of these technologies will result 
in an improvement in IGCC.  In a typical IGCC unit, coal, oxygen and steam are fed to the gasiﬁer, where they are converted to raw 
syngas. The syngas is then cooled and cleaned of particulate matter, ammonia, and sulfur compounds.  The cleaned gas is sent to the gas 
turbine where it is mixed with air and burned.  Nitrogen from the air separation unit or steam may be added to the syngas to lower the 
combustion temperature and reduce NOx formation.  The hot exhaust from the combustion turbine goes to a HRSG to raise steam for a 
steam turbine.  The combination of a combustion turbine plus a steam turbine bottoming cycle increases the efﬁciency of IGCC.
 
If it is desired to produce hydrogen, either as a product or to permit CO2 recovery, then a water-gas shift reactor is included along 
with an acid gas removal system.  The hydrogen can be used as a fuel for fuel cells, for petroleum reﬁning, as a chemical intermediate, or 
burned in the combustion turbine.  In this case, the only combustion product is water, and the only pollutant is a small amount of NOx.
Air/Oxygen 
Coal 
Biomass 
Petroleum Coke 
Heavy Oil 
Refinery Wastes 
MSW 
Orimulsion 
Other Wastes 
OXYGEN-BLOWN 
Entrained Flow  
  ChevronTexaco, E-Gas, 
  Shell,   Prenflo, Noell 
Fluidized Bed 
  HT Winkler 
Moving Bed 
  British Gas Lurgi (BGL) 
  Lurgi (Dry Ash) 
Transport Reactor 
  Kellogg 
------------------------------------ 
AIR-BLOWN 
Fluidized Bed 
  HT Winkler, IGT “Ugas” 
  KRW 
Spouting Bed 
  British Coal,  
  Foster Wheeler 
Entrained Flow 
  Mitsubishi 
Transport Reactor 
  Kellogg 
RESOURCES 
GASIFIERS 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
CONTROL 
Particulate Removal and 
Recycle 
  Filtration, 
  Water Scrubbing 
Chloride and Alkali 
Removal 
  Water Scrubbing 
Acid Gas Removal 
  Amine Processes 
  Rectisol, Selexol 
COS Hydrolysis 
Sulfur Recovery 
  Claus Process 
  Scott Process 
  Sulfuric Acid Plant 
Water Treatment 
  Process Water, BFW 
Tail Gas Treating 
Turbine NOx Control 
  Nitrogen/Steam Dilution 
Syngas Mercury Capture 
Syngas CO2 Capture 
ENERGY 
CONVERSION 
Gas Turbine 
Heat Recovery Steam 
Generator (HRSG) 
Steam Turbine 
Boiler 
Syngas Conversion to 
Fuels & Chemicals 
Catalytic Conversion 
Shift Conversion 
Fischer-Tropsch 
Fuel Cell 
H2 Turbine 
PRODUCTS 
Steam 
Electric Power 
Liquid Fuels 
Chemicals 
Methanol 
Hydrogen 
Ammonia/ 
Fertilizers 
Slag 
Sulfur/Sulfuric 
Acid 
 
Fig. 2. Gasiﬁcation-Based Energy Conversion System Options
1.2-4 Gasiﬁer Improvements
 
Reliability and performance of the gasiﬁer are key factors impacting the commercial deployment of IGCC technology.  Today, 
single train IGCC plants, such as the Wabash River and Tampa Electric plants, have typically not achieved availabilities in excess of 
80% for any sustained period of time.  However, for gasiﬁcation to be accepted for utility applications, availabilities in excess of 90% 
are required.  For other applications, such as in reﬁneries and chemical plants, the availability of the gasiﬁer must be over 97%.  Today, 
these high availabilities can be accomplished, but only through the addition of a spare gasiﬁer at an increase in capital cost.   To achieve 
gasiﬁer high availability, several areas of gasiﬁer operation need to be improved.  
 
Feed injectors are considered to be the weakest link in achieving a high on-stream factor, particularly with slurry-fed systems. 
A typical injector is reported to last from two to six months; however, a minimum life of 12 months is desired.  Computational ﬂuid 
dynamic (CFD) modeling around the injector may help to elucidate the factors that lead to failure.  New materials and/or coatings 
for existing materials are needed to provide protection from sulﬁdation and corrosion at high reactor temperatures. New injectors are 
currently being developed based on rocket engine technology to achieve the target life and improve carbon conversion in the gasiﬁer.
Gary J. Stiegel, Massood Ramezan, Howard G. McIlvried

64
 
Injector life also appears to be dependent on whether a dry or wet feed system is used. In a dry feed system, injector life is 
usually better, possibly due to the absence of a large amount of evaporating water.  Although improved life has been reported, operations 
with dry feed systems at high pressures are problematic because of the use of lock hoppers.  To eliminate lock hoppers, a high pressure 
dry feed pump is under development which could result in a signiﬁcant cost reduction for dry feed systems.  
 
For those gasiﬁers employing refractories to protect the pressure vessel, such as Texaco (now owned by GE Energy) and E-Gas 
(now owned by Conoco Phillips), new materials that have a useful life in excess of three years must be developed and demonstrated. 
Depending upon the severity of the gasiﬁer operation and the feedstock being used, refractory liners typically last from six to 18 months. 
Rebricking a gasiﬁer typically requires three weeks of downtime and costs $1-2 million.  If a gasiﬁer must be rebricked once a year, 
availability is automatically reduced by 5-6%.  New refractory materials under development have shown considerable resistance to slag 
attack under simulated gasiﬁer conditions and are currently being evaluated in commercial coal gasiﬁers. 
 
Actively cooled gasiﬁers, such as the Shell gasiﬁer, which has steam tubes imbedded in the refractory liner, mitigate the 
refractory problem, but this route is usually more expensive.  A new actively cooled liner that is potentially less expensive than other 
approaches is under development.
 
Thermocouples used to measure the temperature inside the gasiﬁcation zone are reported to last about 30-45 days. Failure of the 
thermocouples is due to corrosion resulting from slag penetration into the refractory and stresses caused by temperature cycles.  When 
thermocouples are lost, the gasiﬁer is typically controlled based on a prior correlation of gasiﬁer temperature versus the methane content 
of the exit gas.  New instrumentation capable of operating in the gasiﬁcation environment with an expected lifetime of more than a year 
is required.  Several new temperature measuring devices are being developed and tested with a promise of improved performance. 
Gas Cleanup Improvements
 
Current synthesis gas cleaning technologies employ chemical or physical solvents and operate at ambient or lower temperature. 
In an IGCC plant, these technologies typically account for 12-15% of the total capital cost of the plant.  Amine-based systems are 
suitable for meeting today’s emission requirements, but they are not capable of achieving the limits of future potential regulations nor 
are they applicable for cleaning syngas for chemicals production.  For the latter case, more expensive and energy intensive technologies, 
such as Rectisol, must be employed.  What is needed are technologies capable of achieving the performance of a Rectisol unit but at 
equal or lower cost than an amine system. Considerable effort is currently underway to develop improved sorbents technologies that 
operate at moderate process temperatures while reducing acid gas concentrations to desired levels at a reduced cost and improved 
thermal efﬁciency. Integrated operation in a coal gasiﬁer will be necessary to demonstrate the impact of trace contaminants in coal-
derived syngas on the performance, longevity, and regenerability of any new sorbent.
 
Selective catalytic oxidation has the potential for achieving sulfur levels well below 1 ppm while operating at moderate process 
temperatures.  In this approach, a small quantity of oxygen is injected into the synthesis gas stream and reacts with H2S over a catalyst 
to form elemental sulfur.  To achieve the desired performance, either the COS in the raw gas stream must be hydrolyzed to H2S or a new 
catalyst must be developed to directly convert COS to elemental sulfur. 
 
For these approaches to be commercially attractive at a moderate process temperature, technologies are needed that can remove 
other trace contaminants at similar process conditions.  Technologies for NH3, chlorides, and Hg removal are being developed and tested. 
Although not currently regulated, effort is also being focused on the removal of arsenic (As), selenium (Se), and cadmium (Cd) with 
emphasis on multi-contaminant removal technologies to achieve near-zero emissions of all contaminants. 
1.2-5 Gas Separation Improvements
 
Cost effective and efﬁcient gas separation technologies are vital in the production of hydrogen from coal. Gas separation 
operations occur in two major areas: the separation of oxygen from air for use in the gasiﬁer and the separation of the shifted synthesis 
gas into pure H2 and CO2 streams. Cryogenic technologies are currently employed for the production of oxygen; however, these plants 
are very capital and energy intensive.  The cryogenic air separation unit in an IGCC plant typically accounts for 12-15% of the total plant 
capital cost and can consume upwards of 10% of the gross power output of the plant.  
 
Advanced dense ceramic membranes possessing both ionic and electronic conductance are being developed as a high temperature 
approach for air separation.  A preliminary engineering analysis comparing these advanced membranes with conventional cryogenic 
technologies has been performed, and the results indicate that the advanced membranes have the potential for signiﬁcantly reducing the 
capital cost of an IGCC plant with a corresponding 1-2 percentage point gain in thermal efﬁciency.  Although many challenges remain 
in material composition and processing to produce defect-free, chemically and thermally stable membranes with commercially relevant 
ﬂuxes, signiﬁcant progress has been made.  
1.2 Integrated Coal Gasiﬁcation Combined Cycle (IGCC) 

65
 
Separation of hydrogen from shifted synthesis gas, either derived from coal or natural gas, is a key unit operation of any 
fossil-energy-based hydrogen production system.  Membrane technologies have been, and continue to be, explored quite extensively 
by many investigators.  Engineering studies comparing conventional coal gasiﬁcation processes for producing hydrogen with advanced 
membranes and other technologies indicate that there is substantial incentive to develop advanced H2/CO2 separation technologies. 
 
Membranes can generally be divided into either organic or inorganic.  Organic membranes appear to have limited applications 
for coal-based hydrogen production routes because of their extreme sensitivity to process conditions and trace contaminants.  Instead, 
the bulk of the work for hydrogen separation is focused on inorganic membranes. Inorganic membranes can be classiﬁed as either 
porous or dense, and the latter can be further subdivided into metallic or solid electrolytes (ceramic).  One promising membrane uses a 
manufacturing process that precisely controls the pore size distribution to allow primarily hydrogen to diffuse through the pores, thereby 
achieving very high separation factors.  
 
Considerable effort has also been devoted to metallic membranes, most of which are based on palladium (Pd).  Although 
initially thought to be promising, these membranes have been found to be susceptible to degradation from the presence of both sulfur 
and CO.  There have been reports of metal alloys that show very high hydrogen ﬂuxes at temperatures around 750oF, but the stability of 
these membranes in the presence of trace contaminants from coal gasiﬁcation must be determined.
1.2-6 Conclusions
 
Markets and drivers are changing rapidly. Environmental performance is becoming a greater factor as emission standards 
tighten and market growth occurs in areas where total allowable emissions are capped.  Also, reduction of CO2 emissions is one of the 
challenges in response to global climate change.  There is a need for more environmentally sound processes, more efﬁcient and reliable 
systems, and higher proﬁtability.  Industries need technologies that can match these requirements—a way to remain ﬂexible, reduce risk, 
decrease emissions, increase stockholder return on investment, and consume fewer resources. Gasiﬁcation is a technology that can meet 
these requirements. So far, the majority of existing applications have been geared toward the production of a single product or a constant 
ratio of two or more products per facility.  The potential of gasiﬁcation in expanding markets is in its ability to use low-cost and blended 
feedstocks and its multi-product ﬂexibility. With deregulation, rapidly changing market demands, ﬂuctuation in natural-gas prices, and 
increased environmental concerns, gasiﬁcation has the potential to become a cornerstone technology in many industries.
In particular, IGCC could become a dominant technology in the power industry because of the following advantages:
• 
Ability to handle almost any carbonaceous feedstock;
• 
Ability to efﬁciently clean up product gas to achieve near-zero emissions of criteria pollutants, particulates, and mercury at 
substantially lower costs and higher efﬁciencies;
• 
Flexibility to divert some syngas to uses other than turbine fuel for load following applications;
• 
High efﬁciency because of the use of both gas turbine and steam turbine cycles;
• 
Ability to cost effectively recover CO2 for sequestration, if required;
• 
Ability to produce pure H2, if desired;
• 
Greater than 50% reduction in the production of solid by-products; and,
• 
Substantial reduction in water usage and consumption.
Gary J. Stiegel, Massood Ramezan, Howard G. McIlvried

66
1.2-7 Notes
_____________________
1.  For a more complete discussion of gasiﬁ cation, refer to the following reports:
 
     “Gasiﬁ cation,” by C. Higman and M. van der Burgt, (Elsevier: Gulf Professional Publishing, 2003); “Major Environmental  
 
            Aspects of Gasiﬁ cation-Based Power Generation Technologies,” by J. Rataﬁ a-Brown, L. Manfredo, J. Hoffmann, and 
 
     M. Ramezan, U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁ ce of Fossil Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory, December 2002.
1.2 Integrated Coal Gasiﬁ cation Combined Cycle (IGCC) 

1.2 Integrated Coal Gasiﬁ cation Combined Cycle (IGCC)
Mr. Gary J. Stiegel has been with the Department of Energy’s National Energy Technology 
Laboratory over twenty-nine years and is currently Technology Manager for Gasiﬁ cation.  In this 
capacity, he is responsible for strategic planning, budget formulation, program development and 
oversight, and outreach activities for DOE’s Ofﬁ ce of Fossil Energy’s gasiﬁ cation program. 
Prior to his present assignment, Mr. Stiegel served as the Program Coordinator for the Department’s 
Indirect Liquefaction and Gas-to-Liquids programs and spent ten years in R&D focusing on coal 
hydrogenation and the reﬁ ning of coal-derived liquids. 
Mr. Stiegel has a Bachelors and Masters degree in chemical engineering and a Masters in Business 
Administration from the University of Pittsburgh.
Prior to joining the Department of Energy, Mr. Stiegel was a process engineer for Union Carbide 
Corporation.  During his career, Mr. Stiegel has published over ﬁ fty technical articles on various 
aspects of coal conversion and reactor engineering and is a registered Professional Engineer in 
Pennsylvania.
Gary J. Stiegel
Technology Manager - Gasiﬁ cation 
NETL
626 Cochrans Mill Road, 
P.O. Box 10940
Pittsburgh, PA 15236
phone: (412) 386-4499
email: gary.stiegel@netl.doe.gov
BIOGRAPHY  

Dr. Ramezan has over twenty ﬁve years of diverse experience in engineering, research & 
development, program management, marketing, energy technology assessment, process evaluation, 
personnel management, and technical services support in the areas of advanced energy systems 
and environmental control technologies.  Speciﬁc project examples include: an environmental 
assessment of IGCC power systems, analysis of gasiﬁcation-based multi-product systems with 
CO2 recovery, and life cycle assessment of advanced power systems. Dr. Ramezan received his 
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in Mechanical Engineering from West Virginia University.  He is a 
registered professional engineer and a member of ASME.  He has authored more than 80 technical 
papers and has received numerous awards.  Dr. Ramezan previously taught courses and conducted 
research in the areas of thermal-ﬂuid sciences.
Massood Ramezan
SAIC
P.O. Box 10940
Pittsburgh, PA 15236
phone: (412) 386-6451
email: massood.ramezan@sa.netl.doe.gov

Howard G. McIlvried
SAIC
P.O. Box 10940
Pittsburgh, PA 15236
phone: (412) 386-4825
email: howard.mcilvried@sa.netl.doe.gov
Over 40 years experience in the areas of petroleum reﬁ ning, petrochemicals, synthetic fuels, and 
energy conversion.  Actively engaged in the preparation of many topical reports and post project 
assessments for the DOE’s Clean Coal Technology program.  Speciﬁ c project examples include 
the Tampa Electric Company and the Wabash IGCC projects.  Received his BS, MS, and Ph.D. 
degrees in Chemical Engineering from Carnegie-Mellon University.  He is a member of ACS, and 
has coauthored numerous technical papers and reports related to energy technology.
