265
3.2.2.1-1 Introduction
 
Currently, gas turbines operating on natural gas offer the lowest 
achievable NOx emissions without exhaust-gas aftertreatment, as compared 
to other fuels.  Commercially, this has been achieved through the use of lean-
premixed combustion systems, allowing NOx emissions below 9 ppm (at 15% 
O2) to be guaranteed for natural gas operation, and emissions near 5 ppm to be 
demonstrated1.  Lower emissions are needed, however, and are possible through 
the use of catalytic combustion2.
 
Because natural gas has historically offered the greatest potential for 
low emissions, catalytic combustor development has until recently focused 
largely on methane and natural gas operation.  As a result, the unique properties 
of methane have led to a number of development issues and design strategies, 
generally related to the behavior of Pd-based catalysts used for methane 
oxidation.
 
In particular, for methane oxidation under fuel-lean conditions, only 
Pd-based catalysts among the PGM group are currently practical, because 
only they offer acceptable activity, lightoff temperature, and resistance to 
volatilization3.  Unfortunately Pd-PdO catalyst morphology and its reactions 
with methane are complex, and lead to complex behaviors such as deactivation 
at high temperature (above about 750°C / 1380°F), hysteresis in reaction rate 
over heating and cooling cycles4, and oscillations in activity and temperature5. 
In addition, lightoff and extinction temperatures are well above 300°C (570°F) 
for fuel-lean reaction on Pd-based catalysts, thus requiring the use of a preburner 
in many engine applications6.
 
Fuel-rich operation of the catalyst circumvents many of these issues 
and provides signiﬁ cant catalyst advantages, including a wider choice of 
catalyst type (non-Pd catalysts are active to methane under fuel-rich conditions), 
improved catalyst durability (non-oxidizing catalyst environment), and low 
catalyst lightoff and extinction temperatures.  Catalyst extinction temperature is 
particularly low, and is generally less than 200°C (400°F) for the precious-metal 
catalysts used in the work reported here (that is, once the catalyst has been lit 
off, the catalyst remains lit at inlet air temperatures less than 200°C / 400°F), and 
a preburner is generally not required.  A more complete discussion of fuel-rich 
versus fuel-lean catalyst behavior for methane oxidation is given by Lyubovsky 
et al.7.
 
In addition to catalyst material challenges, commercial acceptance of 
catalytic combustion by gas turbine manufacturers and by power generators has 
been slowed by the need for durable substrate materials.  Of particular concern 
is the need for catalyst substrates which are resistant to thermal gradients and 
thermal shock8.  Metal substrates best ﬁ ll this need, but their temperature must 
be limited to less than 950°C (1750°F) to assure sufﬁ cient material strength and 
long life.  Downstream of the catalyst, combustion temperatures greater than 
about 1100°C (2000°F) are required for gas-phase reactions to complete the 
burnout of fuel and CO in a reasonable residence time (on the order of 10 ms). 
Thus, only a portion of the fuel can be reacted on the catalyst.
 
A major challenge, then, is to limit the extent of reaction within the 
catalyst bed such that excessive heat does not damage the catalyst or substrate, 
yet release sufﬁ cient heat that downstream gas-phase combustion is stabilized 
under ultra-low emission conditions.  For systems which lean-premix fuel and 
air upstream of the catalyst, the degree of reaction can be limited by chemical 
reaction rate upon the catalyst, or by channeling within the reactor such that only 
a limited fraction of the fuel contacts the catalyst.  In all cases, however, it is 
imperative that uncontrolled gas-phase reactions do not occur within the catalyst-
bed, since this implies a loss of reaction limitation and ultimate over-temperature 
and failure of the catalyst bed.  Preventing such gas-phase reactions is especially 
challenging in applications to advanced, high-ﬁ ring temperature turbines, where 
fuel/air ratios in the catalyst-bed can be well within the ﬂ ammability limits.
265
Fuel-Rich Catalytic 
Combustion
3.2.2.1
Gas Turbine Group, Precision 
Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, CT 
06473
phone: (203) 287-3700 x217
email: setemad@precision-
combustion.com
Dr. Lance Smith
Dr. Hasan Karim
Dr. Shahrokh Etemad
Dr. William C. Pfefferle

266
3.2.2.1-2 Fuel-Rich Catalyst Systems
 
Another approach to limiting the extent of reaction is to operate the catalyst fuel-rich.  In this case, there is insufﬁcient oxygen 
to fully oxidize all fuel in the catalyst bed, and the extent of reaction is therefore limited even if gas-phase reactions occur.  To use a fuel-
rich catalyst bed in a catalytic combustion system, additional air is introduced downstream of the catalyst so that combustion completion 
can occur fuel-lean.  Based on this concept, fuel-rich catalytic reactors were tested by NASA and contractors for liquid fuel applications, 
and showed good soot-free performance9.  An examination of fuel-rich catalysis on a variety of liquid fuels was also conducted at Yale 
University under support from NASA10.  Like the NASA results, this work showed soot-free catalyst performance on a range of fuel 
types, including a surrogate jet fuel.  United Technologies Research Center11 also investigated fuel-rich catalytic reaction of liquid fuels, 
to reduce downstream thermal NOx generation by removing some heat of reaction prior to gas-phase combustion.
 
For these liquid hydrocarbon fuel applications, ultra-low NOx emissions (< 3 ppm) have not been considered feasible because 
of these fuels’ propensity for autoignition during mixing with additional combustion air downstream of the catalyst.  Even for natural 
gas fuel, previous systems have not permitted mixing of raw catalyst efﬂuent with additional combustion air.  For example, Acurex 
tested a two-stage natural gas combustion system having a fuel-rich catalyst stage followed by inter-stage heat extraction12.  Additional 
combustion air was introduced only after heat extraction, and prior to a ﬁnal fuel-lean catalytic combustion stage.
 
Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI), however, demonstrated that it is possible to directly mix catalyst efﬂuent with additional 
combustion air without incurring autoignition13.  This is possible because signiﬁcant improvement in combustion stability is imparted to 
the downstream fuel-lean combustion process even at catalyst efﬂuent temperatures well below the instantaneous autoignition temperature 
of the efﬂuent.  Thus, low-temperature low-emissions combustion requires only moderate catalyst temperatures, and autoignition can be 
avoided.
 
This improvement in combustion stability with only moderate heat release on the catalyst can be quantiﬁed most simply by 
modeling the gas-phase combustion process as a zero-dimensional stirred reactor, as shown in ﬁgure 1.  A simple Perfectly-Stirred-
Reactor (PSR) combustion model demonstrates that combustion stability is signiﬁcantly improved when catalytic pre-reaction heats the 
combustor inlet gases from 400°C to 700°C, well below the instantaneous autoignition temperature.  Details of the model are described 
by Smith et al. and model results for methane/air combustion are plotted here in ﬁgure 1 as ﬂame temperature at incipient blowout 
(y-axis) versus combustor inlet temperature (x-axis)14.  In this model, combustor inlet temperature is 400°C when there is no catalytic 
reaction.  For the 400°C no-catalyst case lean blowout occurs at a ﬂame temperature near 1305°C .  With catalytic pre-reaction providing 
a 700°C inlet temperature to the combustor, however, the ﬂame temperature at lean blowout drops by 55°C (100°F) to near 1250°C, a 
signiﬁcant improvement.
 
This improvement is achieved without risk of autoignition.  For a catalyst efﬂuent temperature (combustor inlet temperature) 
of 700°C, the estimated autoignition delay time is about 25 ms.  This autoignition delay time was calculated using the correlation of 
Spadaccini and Colket for a representative natural gas composition (94.9% CH4, 3.1% C2H6, 0.65% C3H8, 0.3% C4H10, 0.1% C5H12, 0.1% 
C6H14, 0.05% C7 and higher-order hydrocarbons, and 0.8% diluent)15.  For this calculation, pressure was 15 atm, equivalence ratio was 
0.5 and the effect of vitiation from catalytic pre-reaction was neglected. 
 
Note that this 25 ms autoignition delay time at 700°C catalyst efﬂuent temperature is far greater than the 2 to 5 ms residence 
time required to mix catalyst efﬂuent with ﬁnal combustion air, and is also greater than the typical 10-20 ms residence time of gas 
turbine combustors.  Thus, complete mixing without autoignition is in fact possible downstream of the catalyst, yet combustion stability 
is markedly improved as a result of catalytic pre-reactions.  The result is stable, low-temperature, ultra-low-NOx combustion. 
 
 
           
          
1200
1210
1220
1230
1240
1250
1260
1270
1280
1290
1300
1310
1320
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
PSR inlet temperature (post-catalyst), 
oC
PSR exit temperature
at imminent blowout, 
oC
2192
2212
2232
2252
2272
2292
2312
2332
2352
2372
2392
PSR exit temperature
at imminent blowout, 
oF
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Gas temperature (“ﬂame” temperature) within PSR reactor at imminent 
 
 
 
           blowout, as a function of PSR inlet temperature (catalyst exit temperature).

267
3.2.2.1-3 Rich-Catalytic Lean-burn (RCL) Combustion
 
Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI) has developed a Rich-Catalytic Lean-burn combustion system (trademarked by PCI as 
RCL) based on this concept of stabilizing combustion of catalyst efﬂuent having a temperature below the instantaneous autoignition 
temperature.  The system catalytically reacts a portion of the fuel upstream of the combustor, thus preheating (and vitiating) the fuel/air 
mixture entering the combustor, and thereby improving combustion stability especially at low ﬂame temperatures.  NOx emissions are 
improved by operating at lower allowable (stable) ﬂame temperatures, and turndown to low engine power can be improved by operating 
at still lower ﬂame temperatures without excessive emissions of CO or unburned hydrocarbons.
 
A schematic of PCI’s rich-catalytic combustion system is shown in ﬁgure 2.  As shown, the combustion air stream is split 
into two parts upstream of the catalyst.  One part is mixed with all of the fuel and contacts the catalyst, while the second part is used to 
backside cool the catalyst.  At the exit of the catalytic reactor, the catalyzed fuel/air stream and the cooling air stream mix and then burn 
to completion to provide the ﬁnal burner outlet temperature.  As shown, combustion (fuel oxidation) occurs in two stages: a fuel-rich 
catalyst stage and an overall fuel-lean gas-phase combustion stage.  Note that the catalyst is cooled only by primary combustion air, so 
that no heat is extracted from the system.
 
With this approach, the fuel-rich mixture contacting the catalyst has insufﬁcient oxygen to completely oxidize all of the fuel, 
thus limiting the extent of catalyst-stage reaction and enabling limitation of the catalyst-stage operating temperature to a safe value.
Combustion
Fuel
Premixer Catalytic
Reactor
Post-Catalyst
Mixing
Catalyst
Cooling
Air
Burned Gas
 
         Fig. 2. Schematic of Rich-Catalytic Lean-burn system, showing two-stage (rich-lean) combustion process.
3.2.2.1-4 Performance and Operating Characteristics of RCL Combustion
 
PCI has tested the RCL catalytic reactor at pressures from 1 to more than 15 atm, in both sub-scale and full-scale tests and for 
multiple fuel types, providing design data over a wide range of operating conditions.  Key performance parameters for RCL combustion 
are listed below, and measured values for these parameters are given in this section.
                           From full-scale full-pressure rig tests using natural gas fuel:
• 
Combustor emissions and turndown
• 
Combustor noise levels
• 
Combustion system pressure drop
• 
Catalyst operating temperatures
From sub-scale full-pressure rig tests to date:
• 
Catalyst lightoff and extinction temperatures
• 
Alternate (non-methane) hydrocarbon fuel capability
• 
Non-hydrocarbon fuel capability, e.g. syngas (discussed in later section)
 
In addition to these performance criteria, engine operational issues are also of interest, including method for engine start and 
catalyst lightoff, fuel staging needs, complexity of required controls, and transient capability such as load shifting and load rejection.  
To address these operational concerns, PCI and Solar Turbines have operated a modiﬁed Saturn engine using RCL combustion; these 
results are also presented here.
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle 

268
3.2.2.1-5 Full-Scale Full-Pressure Test at Solar Turbines
 
Under DOE support and in cooperation with Solar Turbines, Inc., a full-scale fuel-rich catalytic reactor was fabricated and 
combustion tested to provide well-characterized experimental conﬁrmation of the capabilities of Rich-Catalytic Lean-burn combustion 
for ultra-low-NOx power generation.  The tests were performed in Solar Turbines’ full-pressure single-injector combustion rig using 
natural gas fuel, and are described in detail by Smith et al.,and summarized here16. 
 
A schematic of the catalytic combustor assembly, including premixer, catalytic reactor, and downstream combustor liner as 
tested in the rig is shown in ﬁgure 3.  The catalytic reactor design is described generally in Smith et al. and includes backside cooling 
of the catalyst17.  An annular reverse-ﬂow premixer was ﬁtted around the catalytic reactor, to provide a premixed fuel-rich mixture to 
the catalyst.  Note that all fuel entered via this premixer, and all fuel contacted the catalyst.  Catalyst cooling air bypassed the premixer, 
and entered from the left-hand side in ﬁgure 3.  Downstream of the catalyst, but upstream of the combustor, the fuel-rich mixture and 
the catalyst cooling air were combined in a post-catalyst mixing duct (“post-mix” duct) to create a partially-reacted fuel-lean fuel/air 
mixture.  The premixer, catalytic reactor, and post-mix duct together constitute what we call the “RCL-injector.”  Conceptually, the 
RCL-injector replaces a conventional Dry Low-NOx (DLN) premixer/swirler arrangement, such as Solar’s SoLoNOx injector.  For the 
tests reported here, a single Solar Turbines Taurus 70 SoLoNOx injector was replaced by an RCL-injector having a 3.0-inch diameter 
catalyst.  An actual Taurus 70 engine would have 12 such injectors installed in its annular combustor.
 
In Solar’s single-injector rig, the combustor liner was cylindrical, 8.0 inches in diameter, and backside-cooled.  Four 0.5-inch 
diameter holes were located at the combustor’s downstream end, to allow dilution air to enter the combustor after cooling it.  Some 
leakage air also entered the combustor at the injector insertion seal (grommet seal), where the RCL-injector was inserted into the 
combustor’s head end, or dome.  A small amount of cooling air was also used to cool the combustor dome, and entered the combustor 
along the liner walls.
 
A ﬂameholding cone was installed at the exit of the post-mix duct, as shown in ﬁgure 3.  Recirculation of hot combustion gases 
in the cone’s wake provided a ﬂame anchor zone in the central part of the combustor.  The expansion (dump) of the combustor liner’s 
dome also served to anchor combustion.  In general, the RCL-injector catalyst is intended to improve combustion stability and turndown 
at the ﬂame anchor point, but is not necessarily intended to provide gas-phase ignition.  Solar’s torch igniter was used to ignite gas-phase 
combustion during rig testing. 
 
                
                                    
Combustor Emissions and Turndown
 
Emissions performance and turndown were measured for the RCL combustion system depicted in ﬁgure 3, at nominal Taurus 
70 operating conditions (16-17 atm pressure and 4 pps total airﬂow to the single-injector combustor).  Measured NOx and CO emissions 
are plotted in ﬁgure 4 as a function of adiabatic ﬂame temperature at the emissions rake.  For the tests reported here, the emissions rake 
was located just upstream of the combustor dilution air holes, corresponding to about 30 ms combustor residence time.  NOx and CO 
emissions are reported after correction to 15% O2 on a dry basis.  UHC emissions are reported on a wet basis, corrected to 15% O2.
 
It is also worth noting that, as discussed earlier, some leakage and cooling air entered the combustor between the RCL-injector 
and the emissions rake.  For this reason, fuel/air ratio as measured at the emissions rake gave an adiabatic ﬂame temperature that was 
about 130°C (230°F) lower than that based on fuel/air ratio measured at the RCL-injector exit.  Imperfect mixing of this leakage air with 
the injector’s fuel/air mixture can increase NOx emissions to values slightly higher than expected for perfectly premixed combustion at 
the adiabatic ﬂame temperatures measured at the emissions rake.  In fact, the NOx emissions shown in ﬁgure 4 are about 1 ppm higher 
than expected at 1450°C (2650°F) based on perfectly premixed combustion.
 
As shown in ﬁgure 4, the RCL combustion system achieved ultra-low emissions over a wide operating window of approximately 
110°C (200°F) variation in ﬂame temperature, with CO below 10 ppm and NOx below 3 ppm (and as low as 1 ppm).  Unburned 
hydrocarbons (UHC) remained less than 2 ppm at all conditions shown in ﬁgure 4.
3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion
Fig. 3. Assembly of 3-inch diameter fuel-rich catalytic reactor with 8-inch diameter 
combustor liner in Solar Turbines’ single-injector combustion test facility.  Bulk ﬂow is from 
left-to-right.

269
 
These high-pressure ultra-low-emissions results provide experimental conﬁrmation of the ultra-low-NOx capability of the 
RCL combustion concept.  In particular, they demonstrate that it is possible to mix fuel-rich catalyst efﬂuent with ﬁnal combustion 
air, without inducing autoignition, yet imparting signiﬁcant combustion stability to the downstream combustion process to allow low-
temperature low-emissions combustion with wide turndown.
 
 
 
Fig. 4.  NOx and CO emissions, as a function of adiabatic ﬂame temperature at 
 
 
 
            emissions rake.  Data obtained at 16 atm pressure.
Combustor Noise Levels
 
Combustion-driven pressure oscillations (noise) were also monitored during full-scale combustion tests at Solar, and remained 
less than 2.4 kPa (0.35 psi) peak-to-peak (less than 0.15% peak-to-peak of mean combustor pressure) at all conditions tested, indicating 
quiet operation.  Low levels of combustion noise are expected, since gas-phase energy release in the combustor (the driving force for 
combustion noise) is reduced when a portion of the fuel is catalytically reacted prior to gas-phase combustion.
Combustion System Pressure Drop
 
Pressure drop through the fuel-rich catalytic reactor is a primary determiner of RCL-injector size for any given application. 
For the 3-inch diameter reactor tested at Solar, pressure drop through the entire combustion system at simulated Taurus 70 full load 
conditions varied from about 3.5% to 5% of combustor inlet pressure, depending on hardware modiﬁcations made to redirect airﬂow 
during rig testing.  This pressure drop includes both the losses through the fuel-rich catalytic reactor and losses in the downstream 
combustor (pressure drop across ﬂameholder, dump loss at combustor inlet, fundamental combustion loss, etc.).  We estimate that losses 
in the downstream combustor account for about 0.5% pressure drop, with the remaining best-case 3% attributable to the catalytic reactor 
in Solar’s rig.  Additional pressure loss data has been obtained for other full-scale RCL-injectors not tested in Solar’s rig, but designed 
for reduced pressure drop.  Data from other rigs indicate that at Solar rig conditions pressure drop would be about 2%.
Catalyst Operating Temperatures
 
Figure 5 shows steady-state catalyst surface temperatures plotted against adiabatic ﬂame temperature at the full-scale RCL-
injector exit, as tested at Solar.  As shown in ﬁgure 5, catalyst surface temperature increases only slightly as fuel ﬂow is reduced, and 
all catalyst surface temperature measurements remain below 780°C (1430°F) over the complete range of operating conditions tested 
(1440-1700°C / 2620-3090°F range in adiabatic ﬂame temperature).
 
RCL catalyst temperatures do not vary signiﬁcantly with fuel/air ratio because reaction rate (heat release) upon the catalyst 
surface is controlled by oxygen ﬂow (air ﬂow) under fuel-rich conditions, and because heat removal (heat transfer) from the catalyst is 
also determined primarily by air ﬂow.  Fuel ﬂow has little effect on reaction rate and little effect on heat removal rate.  This insensitivity 
of catalyst temperature to fuel/air ratio is advantageous in allowing combustor and turbine operation over a wide range of ﬂame 
temperatures (including ﬂame temperatures well above the low-NOx-emissions range), making the RCL system suitable even for 
advanced high-ﬁring-temperature machines.
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
2400
2450
2500
2550
2600
2650
2700
Adiabatic Flame Temperature at Emissions Rake (F) 
NOx (ppm, 15% O2 dry)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
CO (ppm, 15% O2 dry)
NOx
CO
NOx
CO
2550
2600
2650
2700
2750
2800
2850
Calculated Primary Zone Temperature (F)

270
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
1400
1450
1500
1550
1600
1650
1700
1750
Adiabatic Flame Temperature at RCL Injector Exit (C)
Catalyst Temperature (C)
P = 15 - 16 atm
Tinlet air =  440 C
Fig. 5.  Catalyst surface temperature as a function of adiabatic ﬂame temperature at RCL-injector exit.
3.2.2.1-6 Sub-Scale Test Data for Hydrocarbon Fuels
 
Catalyst testing under controlled conditions is best conducted at sub-scale, where smaller-size equipment allows for accurate 
metering and control of ﬂow and temperature.  Thus, accurate values for catalyst lightoff and extinction temperature are obtainable. 
Sub-scale testing is also useful for evaluating new concepts, such as use of alternative fuels.
Catalyst Lightoff and Extinction Temperatures
 
Catalyst lightoff and extinction tests 
have been performed under well-controlled 
experimental conditions at sub-scale for pressures 
from 9 to 15 atm.  For natural gas fuel having one 
or two percent ethane, PCI’s fuel-rich catalysts 
typically light off in the vicinity of 300°C.  For 
natural gas fuel with greater than two percent 
ethane (or higher-order hydrocarbons) lightoff 
can occur at inlet temperatures below 280°C. 
This is shown in ﬁgure 6 below, which indicates 
a lightoff temperature between about 260 and 
280°C for natural gas fuel, at 15 atm pressure.  In 
ﬁgure 6, inlet gas temperature, catalyst surface 
temperature, and gas temperature exiting the 
module (following mixing of the catalytically 
reacted stream with the catalyst cooling air 
stream, but prior to gas-phase combustion) are 
plotted as a function of time in minutes.  Lightoff 
occurs when the heat of reaction results in an 
increase in catalyst operating temperature and 
catalyst exit temperature as compared to the gas 
inlet temperature, as described in Section 3.2.2. 
of this Handbook
15 atm pressure
1470 F
1110 F
750 F
Fig. 6.  Catalyst lightoff in a sub-scale high-pressure (15 atm) fuel-rich reactor 
operating on natural gas fuel.  Inlet gas temperature (“T gas in”), catalyst 
surface temperature (“T catalyst”), and gas temperature exiting the module (“T 
gas out”) are plotted as a function of time in minutes.
3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion

271
                                              
15 atm pressure
1470 F
1110 F
750 F
390 F
 
Following catalyst lightoff, the inlet air temperature can be reduced well below the initial lightoff temperature without 
extinguishing the catalyst.  Thus, once lit (active), the catalyst remains lit (active) down to inlet temperatures approaching ambient. 
Following the catalyst lightoff event depicted in ﬁgure 6, the inlet air temperature was reduced to less than 200°C, but catalyst activity 
was not diminished.  This is shown below in ﬁgure 7, which plots the same parameters as ﬁgure 6, now after several hours of testing 
following the initial lightoff.  Here, still at 15 atm pressure and with the same ﬂow of natural gas fuel, catalyst activity was maintained 
until the fuel was shut off at an inlet air temperature less than 200°C.
Alternate Hydrocarbon Fuel Capability
 
Sub-scale fuel-rich catalyst tests have also been performed using alternative (non-natural-gas) hydrocarbon fuels.  In particular, 
liquid fuels have been tested (gasoline and Diesel No. 2 fuel) with performance similar to that obtained using methane or natural gas, 
and a simulated landﬁll gas fuel has also been tested.
BACK PRESSURE
VALVE
WATER COOLED
SAMPLE LINES
CATALYTIC 
REACTOR
COMBUSTOR BURNOUT SECTION
 
Sub-scale tests with alternative fuels were performed in a 10 atm combustion test rig at PCI equipped for obtaining combustion 
emissions measurements, as shown in ﬁgure 8.  The gas-phase combustion section of this rig is nominally 2 inches in diameter and 
18 inches in length, and is fabricated from high-temperature ceramic and housed in a steel pressure vessel as shown in the photograph 
of ﬁgure 8.  Reactants enter the ceramic-lined combustor through an air-cooled fuel-rich catalytic reactor of nominally 3/4-inch 
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle
Fig. 7.  Catalyst extinction does not occur until the fuel is shut off at an inlet air temperature 
less than 200 C.  Data were obtained for the same sub-scale high-pressure (15 atm) 
fuel-rich reactor for which data were shown in Figure 6.  Again, inlet gas temperature 
(“T gas in”), catalyst surface temperature (“T catalyst”), and gas temperature exiting the 
module (“T gas out”) are plotted as a function of time in minutes.
Fig. 8.  Photograph of PCI’s 10 atm sub-scale combustion rig, for testing fuel-
rich catalytic reactors with downstream combustion.  Bulk ﬂow is from right to 
left in this photograph.

272
diameter.  Combustion emissions reported for the alternative-fuel tests were obtained from a water-cooled gas sampling probe location 
corresponding to 30 ms residence time in the ceramic-lined combustor downstream of the catalyst.
 
A single sub-scale fuel-rich catalytic reactor was tested in PCI’s high-pressure combustion rig with three different fuels: methane, 
simulated landﬁll gas, and Diesel No. 2 (the ﬁrst three listed in Table 3).  No changes were made to the reactor or combustor for operation 
on these different fuels.  For diesel fuel, however, a prevaporizer was added upstream of the reactor.  Two different prevaporizers were 
used: initially we used a simple preheater to directly heat diesel fuel after adding less than 10% N2 (by weight) to assist in atomization; 
later we improved prevaporization by mixing steam with the diesel fuel.  The latter was considered ideal for co-generation applications. 
Note that liquid fuel tests were generally performed at 6-8 atm pressure, based on limitations of the fuel prevaporizers.
 
Prior to testing of the ﬁrst three fuels listed in Table 3, a separate fuel-rich catalytic reactor of similar design was tested with 
gasoline and natural gas.  For these initial liquid fuel tests gasoline was chosen for its high volatility, simplifying prevaporizer design.
 
For all fuels, the most relevant measures of performance for PCI’s two-stage catalytic combustion system are catalyst 
temperatures in the ﬁrst stage (catalyst-stage) and combustor emissions from the second stage (gas-phase combustion stage).  We 
especially wish to compare these measures of performance for operation on various types of fuels.
           
 
In ﬁgure 9, catalyst temperatures for 7 atm operation on gasoline are compared to those for natural gas. As shown, catalyst 
operating temperature (“Tsurfaces”) and catalyst lightoff temperature are both very similar for the two dissimilar fuels.  Note that for 
both fuels the overall equivalence ratio was 0.4 downstream of the catalyst, after mixing of catalyst cooling air with fuel-rich catalyst 
efﬂuent.
 
Catalyst lightoff and extinction temperatures for diesel fuel were tested using the ﬁrst-generation prevaporizer  at 6 atm pressure 
and 0.33 equivalence ratio, as shown in ﬁgure 10.  For this test, temperature of the prevaporized fuel was between 350 and 380°C before 
mixing with air.  For catalyst lightoff, inlet air temperature was ramped up from about 345°C until deﬁnitive lightoff occurred at about 
360°C inlet air temperature, as indicated by a rapid increase in catalyst temperature.  Prior to this event, some reaction occurred along 
the length of the reactor, as evidenced by catalyst temperatures nearly 75°C higher than the inlet temperature (e.g. 420°C versus 350°C). 
After lightoff, inlet air temperature was ramped down until sudden loss of activity (catalyst extinction) occurred at about 200°C inlet 
air temperature.  Note that for all fuel types tested under fuel-rich conditions, catalyst extinction temperature was well below catalyst 
lightoff temperature.  Also note the similar catalyst operating temperatures for diesel fuel as compared to gasoline and natural gas 
operating temperatures, as a result of fuel-rich operation of the catalyst.
 
Although successful operation on diesel fuel was obtained using the non-steam prevaporizer, it could only provide enough 
prevaporized fuel to establish an overall equivalence ratio of 0.33 downstream of the catalyst.  A steam prevaporizer was therefore 
designed and used, allowing catalyst temperatures and combustion emissions to be measured over a wider range of equivalence ratios 
(ﬂame temperatures), as shown in ﬁgures 11 and 12.
 
For diesel fuel operation using the second-generation prevaporizer, steady-state catalyst temperature data (“T surface”) are 
shown as a function of the reactor’s overall equivalence ratio in ﬁgure 11.  Diesel fuel operating data were obtained at the prevaporizer’s 
maximum operating pressure of 6 atm, and at 430°C inlet temperature.  Average gas temperature exiting the reactor (“T gas out”) is also 
shown.  Note that “T gas out” and overall equivalence ratio are both deﬁned after mixing of catalyst efﬂuent with catalyst cooling air.
 
Fig. 9 (left panel).  Combined graph showing catalyst operation for 
both natural gas and liquid fuel (gasoline) at 7 atm pressure and 
0.4 equivalence ratio (Φ), as a function of time.  For both fuels, the 
inlet gas temperature (“Tgas in”) was initially held steady at about 
350 C, and then ramped down to about 200 C without catalyst 
extinction.
Fig. 10 (right panel).  Catalyst surface temperatures, and 
lightoff and extinction temperatures, for diesel fuel operation. 
Tests were performed with non-steam prevaporizer, at 6 atm 
pressure and 0.33 overall equivalence ratio (Φ).  "Tinlet" 
represents air temperature entering the reactor, and "Tcatalyst" 
represents catalyst surface temperature.
3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion

273
 
 
Fig. 11.  Catalyst performance with diesel fuel versus methane, for second-generation prevaporizer 
 
 
              (~5:1 steam:fuel ratio by weight) operating at 6 atm pressure and 430°C inlet air temperature.  
 
 
              Compare to methane tests at 9 atm and 440°C inlet temperature.  
 
As shown in ﬁgure 11, catalyst operating temperatures are insensitive to operating condition (overall equivalence ratio) for both 
methane and diesel fuels, and in general very similar catalyst performance was obtained for both fuels.
 
As stated earlier, catalyst temperatures do not vary signiﬁcantly with fuel/air ratio because reaction rate (heat release) upon the 
catalyst surface is controlled by oxygen ﬂow (air ﬂow) under fuel-rich conditions.  Thus, the oxygen available for reaction (the limiting 
reactant under fuel-rich conditions) is the same at all test conditions, with the result that heat release and temperatures in the catalyst bed 
are insensitive to equivalence ratio, and are very similar for both methane and diesel fuels despite a wide difference in reactivity between 
these two fuels.
 
NOx emissions from the fuel-lean combustion zone downstream of the fuel-rich catalyst were also measured for both liquid 
fuels and gaseous fuels, as shown in ﬁgure 12.  Note that NOx emissions from the diesel fuel are primarily due to fuel-bound nitrogen, 
except at the highest ﬂame temperature tested (near 2900°F).  The Diesel fuel tested was red-dyed Diesel No. 2 fuel, and its nitrogen 
content was measured at 188 ppm by weight by an independent laboratory.  At this concentration, nearly complete conversion of fuel-
bound N to NOx is expected [4].  Thus, based on fuel-bound nitrogen content, the diesel fuel would emit at least 8.1 ppmv NOx (at 15% 
O2) when burned.  Fuel-bound nitrogen for all other fuels was zero.
 
NOx emissions are shown in ﬁgure 12 for three fuel types: methane, simulated bio-mass landﬁll gas (essentially diluted 
methane), and Diesel No. 2 fuel.  Here, NOx emissions are measured on a dry basis and are corrected to 15% excess O2.  NOx emissions 
are shown as a function of maximum measured ﬂame temperature (via type S thermocouple) for each data point.  For all data points 
obtained, CO and unburned hydrocarbon (UHC) emissions were less than 2 ppmv.
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle

274
              
 
Fig. 12.  NOx emissions for three fuel types (methane, biomass landﬁll gas, and Diesel No. 2 fuel).  For all data points, 
 
              CO/UHC emissions were less than 2 ppmv.  For the Diesel No. 2 fuel, fuel analysis indicated that 8.1 ppmv 
 
              NOx would be emitted as a result of fuel-bound nitrogen alone.
 
For methane and bio-mass landﬁll gas fuels, NOx emissions were below 3 ppm for measured ﬂame temperatures below 2600°F. 
For diesel fuel, NOx emissions were about 10 ppm for measured ﬂame temperatures below 2600°F, compared to the 8.1 ppm expected 
based on fuel-bound nitrogen alone.  Thus, about 2 ppm NOx is likely formed by prompt (non-thermal) mechanisms at low ﬂame 
temperatures (below 2600°F).  At higher ﬂame temperatures, NOx increases due to thermal formation mechanisms for all three fuels, as 
shown.  The low NOx levels at low ﬂame temperature indicates that well-mixed fuel-lean combustion was achieved downstream of the 
catalyst for all three fuels: methane, bio-mass landﬁll gas, and diesel.
3.2.2.1-7 Engine Test Results
 
Based on the successful full-scale single-injector rig tests at Solar Turbines, a “cluster” of four RCL-injectors was installed in 
a modiﬁed (single can combustor) Solar Turbines Saturn engine, to assess controls compatibility and transient operation in an engine 
environment, including engine start, acceleration, and load variation.  In addition, steady-state operating data were obtained, including 
NOx and CO emissions at the engine exhaust.  The engine test also provided a basis for evaluating fuel-rich reactor robustness in an 
engine environment, over a range of operating conditions and demands (including start, acceleration, and load).
Test Engine Speciﬁcations and Conﬁguration
Combustor Housing
Compressor Discharge Air Pipe
Combustor Primary Zone Air Pipe
Dilution Air Pipe
Burner Outlet Pipe (to turbine)
3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1900
2000
2100
2200
2300
2400
2500
2600
2700
2800
2900
Flame Temperature (°F)
NOx (15% O2) ppmv
Methane - measured NOx (32 ms, 9 atm)
Biofuel - measured NOx (32 ms, 9 atm)
Diesel (prevap, steam) - measured NOx (32 ms, 6 atm), measured flame temp
Diesel (prevap, steam) - measured NOx (32 ms, 6 atm), measured flame temp
Calculated NOx emissions from fuel-bound nitrogen in Diesel
Prediction 10 atm, 30 ms
, calculated adiabatic flame temperature
, calculated adiabatic flame temperature
NOTE:  For methane data measured and calculated flame temperatures generally agree within 50 degrees Fahrenheit.

275
 
The test engine was a modiﬁed version of a two-shaft recuperated Saturn T1200 engine, nominally rated at 750 kW (1000 hp) 
after modiﬁcation.  This engine was selected as a test bed because its external combustor conﬁguration was amenable to modiﬁcation. 
For catalytic combustor testing, the recuperator was removed, but the compressor discharge scroll and turbine inlet scroll were retained, 
allowing a single side-mounted combustor can to be installed.
 
The overall combustor conﬁguration is shown in ﬁgure 13.  Note that variable airﬂow butterﬂy valves were ﬁtted in the 
combustor primary zone air pipe and the dilution air pipe, to allow combustor air to be varied for best emissions at any given fuel ﬂow 
(engine load).  Also note that a preburner was located in the combustor primary zone air pipe below the butterﬂy valve, to temporarily 
increase catalyst inlet air temperature to about 350°C (660°F) to ensure catalyst lightoff.  The preburner was turned off after catalyst 
lightoff, and before engine emissions were measured.
 
All fuel and air entered the combustor through the four RCL-injectors (neglecting leakage air).  The combustor liner was 
backside cooled with dilution air, before the dilution air entered the hot gas path 24 inches downstream of the combustor’s upstream 
end (the round plate through which the post-mix ducts are inserted, visible in ﬁgure 14, forms the combustor’s upstream end).  The 
combustor liner itself was cylindrical and 15 inches in diameter.  At full Saturn engine load, and assuming 1.3 pps airﬂow through each 
RCL-injector for ultra-low-emissions operation, combustor residence time was about 35 ms.
Engine Operating Procedure
 
Engine start-up data are shown in ﬁgure 15, with annotations, giving a graphical depiction of the start-up procedure.  Note that 
there are three fuel circuits:  a preburner fuel stage, which received about 25 kg/hr (55 pph) fuel during catalyst lightoff, and two RCL-
injector fuel stages, which together received up to about 275 kg/hr (600 pph) fuel at load.  RCL-injector fuel stage A supplied fuel to the 
top two injectors, while RCL-injector fuel stage B supplied fuel to the bottom two injectors.
 
At cold crank conditions (29% gas producer shaft speed, Ngp) the preburner was ignited and adjusted to 260°C (500°F) 
outlet temperature, below the catalyst lightoff temperature.  As seen in ﬁgure 15, the small preburner fuel ﬂow provided little motive 
power to the engine and negligible increase in engine speed.  Next, while still at 29% Ngp, fuel was introduced to the RCL-injectors 
and combustion was ignited by a torch igniter in the main combustor.  With the starter motor still engaged, fuel ﬂow was ramped up 
as the engine accelerated to 65% Ngp.  At 65% Ngp the starter motor was disengaged and the engine controller added fuel to maintain 
a constant idle speed of 65% Ngp (no load).  Preburner outlet temperature remained at 260°C (500°F), and the catalysts remained 
inactive.
Fig. 13.  Side-mounted combustor conﬁguration in modiﬁed 
Saturn engine, showing variable airﬂow control valves in 
primary zone air pipe and dilution air pipe.
Fig. 14.  Photograph of four-RCL-injector assembly, prior to 
installation in Saturn engine.
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle

276
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
12:36:00
12:43:12
12:50:24
12:57:36
13:04:48
13:12:00
Time
Fuel mass flow (Wf, kg/hr)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Gas producer shaft speed (Ngp, %)
Preburner Fuel (Wf_pbn)
RCL Stage A fuel (Wf_A)
RCL Stage B Fuel (Wf_B)
Shaft Speed (Ngp)
cold crank
idle
Ngp
Wf_A
Wf_B
preburner fuel
on @ 29% Ngp
increase preburner fuel
(RCL inlet temp) to
light-off catalysts
turn preburner fuel off @ 80% Ngp --
catalysts remain active (lit off)
Wf_pbn
fuel RCL injectors,
ignite combustion,
accel to 65% Ngp
Adjust combustor air
valves for best emissions
Fig. 15.  Saturn engine start-up data, showing engine acceleration, catalyst activation by preburner (followed by preburner shutoff with 
continued catalyst activity), and operation at engine load by fuel supplied through four RCL-injectors.
 
Preburner temperature was then increased to about 350°C (660°F) to ensure catalyst lightoff.  Engine speed was increased to 
80% Ngp, the preburner was turned off, and the catalysts remained active.  Engine speed was then increased to 90% and the variable 
airﬂow valves were adjusted to obtain optimum emissions.  The valves served to vary the airﬂow to the RCL-injectors thus allowing 
control of NOx and CO emissions.  Emissions data were taken as engine speed was reduced in increments of about 1% Ngp.  The airﬂow 
valves were adjusted for best emissions at each speed.
 
Engine controls were based on a Saturn T1202R design and used a state of the art Allen-Bradley microprocessor console to 
run the logic.  For the RCL combustor engine tests, catalyst temperatures were not used in the fuel control algorithm.  Instead, fuel 
control was performed according to standard DLN methods (primarily monitoring engine speed versus set point), with the addition of a 
preburner fuel control during initial start and catalyst lightoff.  This was possible because catalyst temperature is insensitive to fuel/air 
ratio under fuel-rich conditions, as shown in ﬁgure 2.1.2 for the single-injector rig tests.  In addition, the RCL catalyst is air-cooled by 
a large fraction of the total combustion air, and reactions on the catalyst are limited by available oxygen (fuel-rich); thus, the catalyst is 
resistant to ﬂashback, autoignition, and overheating damage, and can operate safely without active temperature control.
Engine Performance with RCL Combustor
 
With RCL combustion, Saturn engine NOx emissions averaged 2.1 ppm with less than 10 ppm CO over an achievable engine 
operating range (82% to 89% Ngp), as shown in ﬁgure 16.  Over this engine operating range, UHC emissions remained below 3 ppm, 
and combustion-driven pressure oscillations (CDPO) remained less than 0.7 kPa (0.1 psi) peak-to-peak (less than 0.15% peak-to-peak 
of mean combustor pressure).
 
At 89% Ngp, combustor inlet air (compressor discharge air) was at 5.0 atm and 223°C (434°F).  At 82% Ngp, combustor inlet 
air was at 3.9 atm and 191°C (376°F).  For all data points shown in Figure 2.1.16 the preburner was turned off, the catalyst remained 
active at the available compressor discharge temperatures (as low as 191°C / 376°F), and NOx emissions remained below 3 ppm.
 
Measured power output ranged from 237 kW (318 hp) to 453 kW (607 hp) over the 82% to 89% Ngp operating range, or about 
32% to 61% load based on a 750 kW (1000 hp) nominal power rating for this modiﬁed engine.  Engine load was delivered to a water 
dynamometer.
 
Engine operation was limited to the 82% to 89% speed range.  At less than 82% Ngp the compressor was at its surge condition, 
and the compressor bleed valve was opened to prevent surge.  This reduced the airﬂow to the RCL-injectors thus increasing NOx 
emissions.  At speeds greater than 89% Ngp operation was limited by locally hot temperatures within the scroll ducting downstream of 
the combustor.  This limitation was not attributable to the RCL combustion technology but to inadequate mixing of combustor dilution 
air.  Improving the test rig dilution mixing was deemed unnecessary to document the controllability of the RCL system.
 
Table 1 summarizes the Saturn engine operating data at the low-end and high-end of the achievable operating range.  In general, 
the results show good combustor performance (low emissions and low combustion-induced pressure oscillations, or CDPO) even at very 
low inlet temperatures.  In addition, the Saturn engine operation shows the feasibility of engine start-up, acceleration, and operation at 
load using RCL combustion with simple engine controls.  The engine was successfully started, accelerated, and powered at load by fuel 
injected through the four catalytic reactors, using conventional engine instrumentation and controls without instrumentation input from 
the catalyst.
3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion

277
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
Ngp (gas producer shaft speed, % of max)
NOx / CO (ppm, @ 15% O2 dry)
NOx
CO
 
 
 
Fig. 16.  RCL combustor emissions during Saturn engine operation, showing 
 
 
 
              ultra-low NOx and CO emissions over an achievable engine operating 
 
 
 
              range of 82% to 89% speed.
 
      Table 1  Saturn engine operating data at low-end and high-end of achievable operating range.  Note catalyst 
 
 
      activity and ultra-low-emissions achieved at inlet temperatures as low as 191 C (376 F).
Engine Speed
82% Ngp
89% Ngp
NOx Emissions
2.2 ppm
2.2 ppm
CO Emissions
9.5 ppm
5.7 ppm
CDPO (noise)
< 0.7 kPa pk-pk
< 0.7 kPa pk-pk
Power Output
237 kW / 318 hp
453 kW / 607 hp
Nominal Load
32%
61%
Comb. Inlet Pressure
3.9 atm
5.0 atm
Comb. Inlet Temp.
191 C / 376 F
223 C / 434 F
3.2.2.1-8 Ultra-Low NOx Combustion of Coal-Derived Syngas and High-Hydrogen  
 
      Fuels
 
While early development of PCI’s Rich-Catalytic Lean-burn (RCL) combustion system was focused on the use of natural gas 
fuel, fuel-rich operation of the catalyst is also advantageous for alternative fuels, including high-hydrogen fuels and coal-derived syngas. 
As with natural gas, combustion stability is improved (especially at low ﬂame temperatures) by catalytically reacting a portion of the 
fuel upstream of the combustor, thus preheating (and vitiating) the fuel/air mixture entering the combustor.  And, as with natural gas, this 
allows improved NOx emissions by operating the combustor at lower allowable (stable) ﬂame temperatures.
 
For low-Btu fuels such as blast furnace gas, ﬂame stability improvement by catalytic pre-reaction of a portion of the fuel is 
especially important since combustion may be otherwise unsustainable even at the highest possible ﬂame temperatures.  With catalytic 
pre-reaction and concomitant pre-heating, however, fuels having heating values as low as 82 Btu/ft3 have been successfully combusted 
at PCI, with near-zero emissions of unburned fuel, CO, and NOx.
 
For fuels with more moderate dilution levels, such as the syngas delivered from a coal gasiﬁer, combustion of the raw fuel can 
occur without a catalyst, but low-emissions combustion is difﬁcult as a result of the high levels of hydrogen.  In particular, lean-premixed 
combustion for syngas fuels has not generally been considered feasible, because the high concentration of hydrogen leads to increased 
risk for ﬂashback and ﬂameholding in regions upstream of the combustor.  Thus, syngas fuels are generally burned in a non-premixed 
mode, with NOx control accomplished by dilution of the fuel stream with water and/or nitrogen.  This introduces combustion stability 
issues, however, such that low-single-digit NOx emissions have not yet been achieved in gas turbines burning coal-derived syngas.
 
One solution to this combustion stability problem is to catalytically react some portion of the syngas fuel prior to gas-phase 
combustion, effectively providing a higher inlet temperature to the combustor.  This is exactly the role of a catalyst in a lean-premixed 
combustion system, and it can also be applied to combustion of syngas fuel, allowing greater dilution of the fuel and reduced NOx 
emissions.
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle

278
 
For any fuel type, whether syngas, low-Btu gas, or hydrocarbon, fuel-rich catalytic reactor performance is insensitive to the 
fuel’s reactivity, because reaction rate (heat release) upon the catalyst surface is controlled primarily by oxygen ﬂow (air ﬂow) under 
fuel-rich conditions, and not by fuel ﬂow or reactivity.  Performance on different type fuels will therefore be similar when heat release 
per atom of oxygen reacted is similar, and when the fuel’s mass and thermal capacity is negligible in the fuel/air mixture.  This is 
generally the case for hydrocarbon fuels, and the primary remaining issue for operation on heavy liquid fuels is prevaporization.
 
For coal-derived syngas fuel, heat release per atom of oxygen reacted is similar to hydrocarbon fuels, and additionally 
prevaporization is not an issue.  However, unlike fuels consisting only of hydrocarbons, the large volume (low Btu value) of syngas fuels 
is not negligible, particularly when the syngas is highly diluted with steam or nitrogen for NOx control.  Thus, while fuel-rich catalytic 
reactor performance for syngas fuels can be made similar to that obtained on hydrocarbon fuels (on the basis of heat release per atom of 
oxygen reacted), the reactor design must consider the large volume ﬂow of fuel that it must pass, as well as the oxygen ﬂow required for 
the desired level of pre-reaction or pre-heat.
3.2.2.1-9 Sub-Scale Test Data for Syngas Fuel
 
A sub-scale fuel-rich catalytic reactor was fabricated at PCI for testing with syngas fuel in PCI’s high-pressure sub-scale 
combustion rig (pictured in ﬁgure 8).  For the syngas tests, two independently controllable air supplies are provided, both heated and 
at high pressure.  The larger air supply (entering from the right in ﬁgure 8) provides catalyst cooling air, which becomes primary zone 
combustion air in the gas-phase combustor, and the smaller air supply (entering from the vertical pipe at the top-right of ﬁgure 8) 
provides air to the fuel-rich fuel/air mixture.  For operation with syngas fuel, two heaters are also provided (but not shown in Figure 8); 
one heater heats N2 diluent just before it is mixed with fuel, and the second heater heats all other fuel components and CO2.
 
Dry, oil-free, high-pressure air is supplied to the rig from compressors, at pressures up to about 145 psia entering the rig.  At this 
ﬂow rate, the rig inlet air can be heated to about 500°C.  Fuel and diluent are supplied from bottles or Dewar ﬂasks at high pressure, and 
are pressure regulated to the proper delivery pressure to the rig.  All ﬂows (air, fuel, and diluent) are metered with electronic mass ﬂow 
controllers.  Each fuel component is separately metered and then mixed with the other components to simulate the desired coal-derived 
syngas composition.  Up to ﬁve fuel components can be introduced:  H2, CO, CH4, CO2, and N2.
 
For syngas operation, combustion rig startup was accomplished by bringing the reactor to fuel-rich conditions using unheated 
methane fuel, with some diluent addition to ensure proper mixing.  When necessary, a small amount of H2 was temporarily added to the 
unheated methane to light off the reactor.  Once the catalyst and combustor were lit and the rig was thermally stable, syngas fuel ﬂow 
was ramped up while methane fuel ﬂow was ramped down, holding catalyst equivalence ratio approximately constant.  This startup 
procedure was economical and safe: it minimized the use of high-volume (costly) laboratory syngas fuel blend, and also avoided use 
of H2 during transient and ignition events, where there was a concern that unburned H2 might enter the exhaust stack and create an 
explosion hazard.  This procedure is similar to syngas combustor startup in actual engine applications.
Catalyst Lightoff
 
Prior to high-pressure testing with syngas, atmospheric-pressure tests were performed to provide some initial experience in 
syngas fuel operation, and in catalyst and combustor behavior using syngas fuels.  The results were used to help guide reactor design and 
test planning for the subsequent high-pressure tests.  Catalyst lightoff tests were an important part of these early atmospheric pressure 
tests, and a lightoff temperature of 180°C was measured for fuel-rich reaction of syngas.  This value was most carefully measured for a 
syngas mixture composed of 25% H2 and 35% CO (remainder diluent), but it was found that lightoff temperature is relatively insensitive 
to syngas composition unless CO levels drop to very low values, leaving essentially a high-hydrogen fuel having signiﬁcantly lower 
lightoff temperature.  In all cases, the 180°C or lower lightoff temperature is well below compressor discharge temperatures of industrial 
and large-frame turbines, and the need for a preburner is thereby avoided in expected syngas applications.
High-Pressure Test Conditions
 
For the high-pressure sub-scale syngas tests, “baseline” operating conditions were scaled from those published for the IGCC 
plant at Tampa Electric’s Polk Power Station.  The Tampa Polk plant operates a GE 107FA combined cycle system on syngas generated 
from a Texaco oxygen-blown coal gasiﬁer.  Nitrogen injection reduces the effective heating value of the fuel, for NOx control.
 
Data from references by the U.S. DOE, GE Power Systems, and Brdar and Jones were used to establish a baseline syngas 
fuel composition representative of the Tampa Polk IGCC power plant fuel after dilution with nitrogen for NOx control, as well as a 
baseline full-load ﬁring temperature18.  This baseline syngas composition was used for most sub-scale high-pressure testing at PCI, and 
is tabulated in the ﬁrst row of Table 2 as noted.  The baseline full-load ﬂame temperature was determined to be about 2550°F (1400°C), 
and represents a maximum in NOx emissions for an expected syngas application of fuel-rich catalytic combustion.
 
Additional tests were performed for a highly-diluted low-Btu syngas, to demonstrate the ﬂame stability augmentation provided 
by the catalyst.  The second row of Table 1 lists the composition of this low-Btu syngas mixture.  Note that for all sub-scale tests at PCI, 
the nitrogen diluent was added to the syngas fuel prior to mixing with air, and well upstream of the catalyst.
3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion

279
 
 
Table 2  Syngas fuel compositions used for high-pressure sub-scale tests.
Syngas Composition
H2 
(%)
CO
(%)
CO2
(%)
N2
(%)
LHV
(Btu/ft3)
Baseline
20
20
10
50
117
Low-Btu
15
15
10
60
88
 
Emissions measurements reported here were obtained from a water-cooled gas sample probe located 15 inches downstream of 
the catalyst, corresponding to about 50 ms residence time in the 2-inch inside-diameter ceramic-lined combustor.  This represents the 
maximum residence time expected in a low-emissions gas turbine combustor, and therefore also represents the maximum expected NOx 
emissions for a given operating condition.  Note that all emissions reported in ppm are parts per million by volume, and are corrected to 
15% O2 dry.
 
All measurements were made with a combustor inlet air temperature of 750°F (400°C) and a syngas fuel temperature of 570° 
F (300°C).  Adiabatic ﬂame temperatures were calculated based on fuel/air ratio as measured by the emissions analyzers (i.e. from gas 
samples extracted at the 15-inch gas sample probe location).
Combustor Emissions and Turndown
 
Figure 17 plots measured NOx and CO emissions as a function of adiabatic ﬂame temperature at 10 atm pressure for the baseline 
syngas composition listed in row 1 of Table 2, having a Lower Heating Value (LHV) of 117 Btu/ft3.  With this fuel composition, NOx 
emissions were 2.0 ppm (0.011 lbs/MMBtu) at the 2550°F (1400°C) ﬂame temperature data point corresponding to baseline operation 
in the Tampa Polk IGCC plant at 100% load.
 
As the fuel/air ratio was decreased, CO emissions remained near zero for ﬂame temperatures greater than about 2250°F (1230° 
C), permitting a 300°F (150°C) turndown in ﬂame temperature from the 2550°F (1400°C) baseline point, allowing ultra low emissions 
operation over a wide range of loads.  These results − CO near zero, and NOx equal to or less than 2 ppm (0.011 lbs/MMBtu) for full 
load and below − easily met PCI’s emissions goals for these tests.
0.000 
0.005 
0.010 
0.015 
0.020 
0.025 
0.030 
2100 2200 2300 2400 2500 2600 2700 2800 
Adiabatic Flame Temperature @ emissions probe (F) 
NOx ((lbs NOx)/MMBtu) 
0.0 
0.9 
1.8 
2.7 
3.6 
4.5 
5.4 
NOx / CO (ppm @ 15% O2) 
Baseline Combustor  
Temp (2550 F) 
NOx 
CO 
Combustor rig data, P = 10 atm 
Syngas: 20% H 2 , 20% CO, 10% CO 2 , 50% N 2 
(LHV = 117Btu/ft3) 
 
 
 
Fig. 17.  Measured NOx and CO emissions for 10 atm baseline syngas tests, 
 
 
 
 
as a function of adiabatic ﬂame temperature at the emissions probe. 
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle

280
 
0.000 
0.005 
0.010 
0.015 
0.020 
0.025 
0.030 
0.035 
0.040 
2100 
2200 
2300 
2400 
2500 
2600 
2700 
2800 
Adiabatic Flame Temperature @ emissions Probe (F) 
NOx ((lbs NOx)/MMBtu) 
0.0 
0.9 
1.8 
2.7 
3.6 
4.5 
5.4 
6.3 
7.2 
NOx (ppm, 15% O2) - Baseline Syngas Only 
LHV = 88 Btu/ft  
3 
 Except as noted: 
 P = 10 atm;  τ res  = 50 ms 
 air @ 400 C (750 F), syngas @ 300 C (570 F) 
 baseline syngas composition, LHV = 117Btu/ft 
3 
 (20% H 2 , 20% CO, 10% CO 2 , 50% N 2 ) 
LHV = 117 Btu/ft  
3 
 
 
 
Fig. 18.  Measured NOx emissions  for two different syngas compositions having 
 
 
 
              LHVs of 88 and 117 Btu/ft3.
 
Subsequent to the baseline tests, the heating value of the diluted syngas fuel was reduced to determine operability and emissions 
for highly-diluted low-Btu syngas fuels.  NOx emissions are shown in ﬁgure 18 for the low-Btu syngas composition listed in row 2 of 
table 2, as well as for the baseline syngas composition.  It is important to note that the right-hand vertical axis in ﬁgure 18 (NOx values 
in ppm) is only applicable to the baseline syngas composition, as marked.  For the fuel composition with the lower heating value (88 
Btu/ft3), NOx emissions in ppm are slightly lower than shown (for the low-Btu fuel, 0.011 lbs/MMBtu is equivalent to 1.6 ppm).
 
It is worth noting that, as shown in ﬁgure 18, catalytic combustion allows stable operation with low emissions for the low Btu 
syngas case (88 Btu/ft3) even at ﬂame temperatures as low as 2300°F (1260°C).  CO emissions were less than 5 ppm in all cases, and 
were near zero for ﬂame temperatures greater than 2200°F (1200°C).
3.2.2.1-10 Sub-Scale Test Data for High-Hydrogen and Low-Btu Fuels
 
In addition to syngas, other fuels containing non-hydrocarbon heating values are also of interest for power generation with low 
emissions.  Industrial process and waste gases are particularly of interest, and PCI has therefore tested its fuel-rich catalytic combustion 
system with two such fuels: a low-Btu Blast Furnace Gas (BFG) and a high-hydrogen reﬁnery fuel gas.  Both gases were simulated in the 
laboratory by blending gases obtained from bottles or Dewars, using the same equipment that was used for the syngas fuel tests.  Again, 
tests were performed in PCI’s high-pressure sub-scale combustion test rig, pictured in ﬁgure 8.
Blast Furnace Gas
 
RCL combustion of an 82 Btu/ft3 blast furnace gas was tested using a catalytic reactor that had previously been used for syngas 
testing.  Results for the blast furnace gas show that combustion of this gas is extremely stable following fuel-rich catalytic reaction, even 
at adiabatic ﬂame temperatures as low as 2250°F (1230°C).  For these tests the simulated blast furnace gas comprised 23% CO, 22% 
CO2, 1.4% H2, 0.6% CH4, and 53% N2, and entered the reactor after being heated to about 450°F (230°C).  Air entered the reactor and 
combustor at about 660°F (350°C).
 
Note that the high diluent fraction (low Btu value) of the blast furnace gas means that high fuel-lean equivalence ratios are 
needed in the combustor burnout zone to achieve the desired ﬂame temperature.  Therefore, tests were performed over a low range of 
adiabatic ﬂame temperatures in the combustor burnout section, from about 2250°F(1230°C) to 2500°F (1370°C), representing maximum 
fuel ﬂow capability of the rig for this blast furnace gas composition.  For comparison, the stoichiometric ﬂame temperature for this blast 
furnace gas is only about 2700°F (1480°C) for the inlet temperatures tested.
 
Because the catalyst was able to stabilize complete combustion at such low ﬂame temperatures,  NOx and CO emissions 
were ultra-low for all conditions tested.  NOx emissions for blast furnace gas operation are plotted in ﬁgure 19, as measured by sample 
extraction from the cooled probe located 15 inches downstream of the catalyst exit.  For all conditions tested, NOx emissions were 
measured below 2.5 ppm on a raw basis (uncorrected) and below 1 ppm corrected to 15% O2 dry.  CO emissions were near zero (< 1 
ppm) for all conditions shown.
 
Because measured oxygen concentrations after fuel-lean burnout were very low, varying between about 2.5% and 5.5% for 
the conditions shown, the standard emissions reporting correction to 15% O2 may be misleading.  In fact, because of the high level of 
3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion

281
diluent in the blast furnace gas, oxygen levels would never approach 15% in an actual engine application.  Therefore, the raw NOx data 
are probably as relevant as the corrected NOx data, or perhaps more so, and both are therefore plotted in ﬁgure 19.  In either case, NOx 
emissions were ultra-low as a result of the low blast furnace gas ﬂame temperatures.
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
3 
2200 
2250 
2300 
2350 
2400 
2450 
2500 
Adiabatic Flame Temperature (F) 
NOx @ 15% O2 dry 
raw 
(uncorrected) 
corrected 
(15% O2) 
 
 
 
        Fig. 19.  NOx emissions, uncorrected and corrected to 15% O2, as a 
 
 
 
 
        function of adiabatic ﬂame temperature in the downstream 
 
 
 
 
        combustion zone of the RCL combustor burning blast furnace 
 
 
 
 
        gas (23% CO, 1.4% H2, 0.6% CH4, 22% O2, and 53% N2).
Reﬁnery Fuel Gas
 
Testing of RCL combustion of reﬁnery fuel gas was also conducted using the same hardware conﬁguration as previous tests 
for syngas and blast furnace gas.  Results showed NOx emissions below 3 ppm for ﬂame temperatures below 2800°F (1538°C).
 
For the reﬁnery fuel gas tests, the simulated reﬁnery fuel gas comprised 30% H2 and 70% CH4, and entered the reactor without 
passing through a fuel heater.  However, some fuel heat was obtained from hot combustor rig components so that the fuel plenum gas 
temperature measured about 347°F (175°C).  Combustion air entered the reactor at about 734°F (390°C).
 
Tests were performed over a range of adiabatic ﬂame temperatures, from about 2400 to 3000°F  (1315 to 1650°C) in the 
combustor burnout section, and at a pressure of about 10 atm.  NOx and CO emissions were measured at each condition, as well as O2 
and CO2.
 
NOx emissions for the RCL combustion of reﬁnery fuel gas are plotted in ﬁgure 20, as measured by sample extraction from the 
cooled probe located 15 inches downstream of the catalyst exit, corresponding to about 50 ms residence time.  As shown, NOx emissions 
were measured below 3 ppm for ﬂame temperatures less than about 2800°F (1540°C).  CO emissions were less than about 1 ppm for all 
conditions shown.
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2400 
2500 
2600
2700 
2800 
2900 
3000 
Adiabatic Flame Temp (F)  
NOx @ 15% O2 dry
 
 
 
Fig. 20. NOx emissions, corrected to 15% O2, as a function of adiabatic ﬂame 
 
 
 
             temperature in the downstream combustion zone burning reﬁnery fuel 
 
 
 
             gas (30% H2 and 70% CH4).
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle

282
3.2.2.1-11 Technology Status and Outlook
 
For natural gas fuel, RCL combustion system has been demonstrated in engine testing of a modiﬁed Solar Turbines Saturn 
engine, and in full-scale full-pressure rig tests at Taurus 70 conditions and beyond, including F-engine type ﬂame temperatures.  The 
technology has been demonstrated viable in-engine, and the next step in technology maturity will be ﬁeld demonstration for an extended 
period.  Thus, the major challenges that lie ahead for natural gas applications will be durability demonstration and design integration for 
speciﬁc engine applications.
 
RCL combustion system has also been tested at sub-scale with multiple alternative fuels, as listed in table 3.  For all fuels 
tested, catalyst temperatures were well controlled and combustor emissions were held to single-digit values over a wide turndown range, 
conﬁrming the beneﬁt of catalytic reactions in achieving low emissions for multiple types of fuels.  The results also conﬁrm that fuel-rich 
operation of the catalyst allows similar catalyst and reactor performance with widely varying fuel types.
 
For liquid fuel applications, the major outstanding development issue is prevaporization of the fuel prior to fuel-rich catalytic 
reaction.  The primary concern here is autoignition and overheating of the premixer hardware.  Likewise, the propensity for high-
hydrogen fuels to autoignite is also problematic, as in syngas fuels.  In both cases, the air-cooled catalyst structure is able to tolerate 
autoignition and gas-phase reactions, but conventional premixing devices located upstream of the catalyst may not.  Therefore, advanced 
premixing concepts are to be developed for both liquid fuel and high-hydrogen fuel (e.g. syngas) applications.
  Table 3  Composition of seven different fuel types tested.
Fuel Tested
Chemical Formula
C/H Ratio
by Wt (%)
Fuel-Bound
N by Wt (%)
Methane
CH4
75 / 25
0
Landﬁll Gas
0.65 CH4 + 0.35 CO2
46.5 / 10.1
0
Diesel No. 2
Multi component
87.6 / 13.0
0.0188
Gasoline
not analyzed
not analyzed
~0
Reﬁnery Fuel Gas
0.70 CH4 + 0.30 H2
71.2 / 28.8
0
Syngas
20% H2 + 20% CO + 10% CO2 + 50% N2
14.75 / 1.64
0
Blast Furnace Gas
23%CO+22%CO2+1.4%H2+0.6%CH4+53%N2
17.6 / 0.17
0
 
In addition, for IGCC applications with coal-derived syngas fuels, consideration must be given to the high volume ﬂow of fuel 
that must pass through the catalytic reactor, to prevent excessive size or pressure drop penalties.  Depending upon the application, this 
may require system level re-design and development of the catalyst and combustor.
 
Finally, it is also recognized that syngas fuels carry trace levels of catalyst contaminants that may affect long-term catalyst 
durability.  This needs to be examined and remediated if problematic.  Long-term durability tests are required, preferably in an actual 
syngas slipstream at an operating IGCC plant, where real contaminants will be present.
3.2.2.1-12 Conclusions
 
For natural gas operation, the Rich-Catalytic Lean-burn (RCL) combustion concept has been tested at gas turbine conditions, 
ﬁrst in a full-scale full-pressure single-injector rig, and second in a modiﬁed industrial gas turbine.  These constitute two signiﬁcant 
experimental milestones:
1. 
Experimental conﬁrmation of the ultra-low-NOx capability of the RCL combustion concept.  In particular, we conﬁrm the ability 
to mix fuel-rich catalyst efﬂuent with primary combustion air, without inducing autoignition, yet imparting signiﬁcant stability to 
the downstream combustion process.
2. 
Demonstration of RCL combustion feasibility for gas turbine engine operation.  In particular, we demonstrate engine start-up, 
acceleration, and robust operation at load by fuel injected only through RCL-injectors (effectively a single fuel stage, with all fuel 
contacting the catalyst), and with simple engine controls that do not monitor catalyst temperature.
 
In summary, the data presented show that fuel-rich catalytic reactions can stabilize fuel-lean premixed combustion to provide 
stable, quiet combustor operation with ultra-low NOx and CO emissions.   In addition, the air-cooled fuel-rich catalyst system can 
operate safely without active temperature control because its temperature is insensitive to fuel/air ratio.
 
The RCL system also provides signiﬁcant operational advantages as compared to earlier catalytic combustion systems.  Most 
notably, the RCL reactor requires no preburner, is immune to issues of auto-ignition and ﬂashback (and can therefore operate safely 
in high-ﬁring-temperature machines such as F-class), and provides long catalyst life (as a result of the non-oxidizing fuel-rich catalyst 
environment).
3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion

283
 
Finally, fuel-rich operation of the catalyst allows operation on multiple types of fuels, as successfully demonstrated at sub-scale 
for gaseous and liquid hydrocarbon fuels, for low-Btu fuels and high-hydrogen fuels, and for simulated coal-derived syngas.  For all of 
these fuels catalyst temperatures were well controlled, and ultra-low emissions were achieved.
3.2.2.1-13 Notes
________________________
1. C.L. Vandervort, “9 ppm NOx / CO Combustion System for ‘F’ Class Industrial Gas Turbines,”  ASME Paper 
    No. 2000-GT-0086, ASME Turbo Expo May 8-11, 2000, Munich, Germany.
2. D.K. Yee, K. Lundberg, and C.K. Weakley, “Field Demonstration of a 1.5 MW Gas Turbine with a Low Emissions Catalytic 
    Combustion System,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 123 (2001): 550-556; L.L. Smith, H. Karim, M.J. 
    Castaldi, S. Etemad, W.C. Pfefferle, V.K. Khanna, and K.O. Smith,  “Rich-Catalytic Lean-Burn Combustion for Low-Single-
    Digit NOx Gas Turbines,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 127 (2005): 27-35. 
3. J.H. Lee and D.L. Trim, “Catalytic Combustion of Methane,” Fuel Processing Technology  42 (1995): 339-359; R.A. Dalla 
    Betta,  “Catalytic Combustion Gas Turbine Systems:  the Preferred Technology for Low Emissions  Electric Power Production 
    and Co-generation,” Catalysis Today 35 (1997): 129-135; P. Forzatti and G. Groppi, “Catalytic Combustion for the Production 
    of Energy,” Catalysis Today  54 (1999): 165-180.
4. R.J. Farrauto, M.C. Hobson, T. Kennelly, and E.M. Waterman, “Catalytic Chemistry of Supported Palladium for Combustion 
   of Methane,” Applied Catalysis A: General  81 (1992): 227-237; R.J. Farrauto, J.K. Lampert, M.C. Hobson, and E.M. 
   Waterman, “Thermal Decomposition and Reformation of PdO Catalysts; Support Effects,” Applied Catalysis B: Environmental  
    6 (1995): 263-270; J.G. McCarty “Kinetics of PdO Combustion Catalysis,” Catalysis Today  26 (1995): 283-293; N.M. 
    Rodriguez, S.G. Oh, R.A. Dalla-Betta, and R.T.K. Baker, “In Situ Electron Microscopy Studies of Palladium Supported on 
    Al2O3, SiO2, and ZrO2 in Oxygen,” J. Catalysis  157 (1995): pp. 676-686.
5. R.A. Dalla Betta, T. Shoji, K., Tsurumi, and N. Ezawa (1994). “Partial Combustion Process and a Catalyst Structure for Use 
    in the Process,” U.S. Patent No. 5,326,253; T. Furuya, K. Sasaki, Y. Hanakata, T. Ohhashi, M. Yamada, T. Tsuchiya, and Y. 
    Furuse (1995). “Development of a Hybrid Catalytic Combustor for a 1300°C Class Gas Turbine," Catalysis Today  26 (1995): 
    345-350; Y. Ozawa, Y. Tochihara, N. Mori, I. Yuri, T. Kanazawa, and K. Sagimori,  “High Pressure Test Results of a 
    Catalytically Assisted Ceramic Combustor for a Gas Turbine,” ASME Paper No. 98-GT-381, Stockholm, Sweden, 2-5 June 
    1998; R. Carroni, V. Schmidt, and T. Grifﬁn, “Catalytic Combustion for Power Generation,” Catalysis Today  75 (2002):  287-
    295.
6. S.T. Kolaczkowski, “Catalytic Stationary Gas Turbine Combustors: A Review of the Challenges Faced to Clear the Next Set of 
    Hurdles,” Trans. I. Chem. E. 73 Part A (1995): 168-190; D.B. Fant, G.S. Jackson, H. Karim, D.M. Newburry, P. Dutta, K.O. 
    Smith, and R.W. Dibble,  “Status of Catalytic Combustion R&D for the Department of Energy Advanced Turbine Systems 
    Program,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 122 (2000): 293-300.
7. M. Lyubovsky, L.L. Smith, M. Castaldi, H. Karim, B. Nentwick, S. Etemad, R. LaPierre, and W.C. Pfefferle, “Catalytic          
           Combustion over Platinum Group Catalysts: Fuel-Lean versus Fuel-Rich Operation,” Catalysis Today  83 (2003): 71-84. 
       8. R.E. Hayes and S.T. Kolaczkowski, Introduction to Catalytic Combustion (Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, 
           1997); E.M. Johansson, D. Papadias, P.O. Thevenin, A.G. Ersson, R. Gabrielsson, P.G. Menon, P.H. Bjornbom and S.G. Jaras,    
           “Catalytic Combustion for Gas Turbine Applications,” Catalysis 14 (1999): 183-235; also see note 6 (Kolaczkowski). 
       9. R.J. Rollbuhler, “Fuel-Rich, Catalytic Reaction Experimental Results,” 27th Joint Propulsion Conference, Sacramento, CA, 
           24- 27 June 1991, NASA Technical Memorandum 104423, AIAA Paper No. 91-2463; T.A. Brabbs and S.A. Merritt, “Fuel-Rich  
           Catalytic Combustion of a High Density Fuel,” NASA Technical Paper 3281 (1993). 
       10. G.O. Kraemer, (1996). “Fuel-Rich Catalytically Stabilized Combustion for Aircraft Engine Applications,” Ph.D. thesis, Yale   
             University. 
       11. M.B. Colket, A.S. Kesten, J.J. Sangiovanni, M.F. Zabielski, D.R. Pandy, and D.J. Seery (1993). “Method and System for  
 
             Combusting Hydrocarbon Fuels with Low Pollutant Emissions by  Controllably Extracting Heat from the Catalytic Oxidation   
             Stage,” U.S. Patent No. 5,235,804. 
       12. J.P. Kesselring, W.V. Krill, E.K. Chu, and R.M. Kendall.  In proceedings of New fuels and advances in combustion   
 
             technologies symposium, Mar. 26-30, 1979, New Orleans, LA.
13. W.C. Pfefferle, L.L. Smith, and M.J. Castaldi (2002). “Method and Apparatus for a Fuel-Rich Catalytic Reactor,” U.S. Patent   
             No. 6,358,040.
14. See note 2 (Smith). 
       15. L.J. Spadaccini, and M.B. Colket, “Ignition Delay Characteristics of Methane Fuels,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 20 (1994):   
            431-460. 
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle

284
284
       16. See note 2 (Smith).
       17. L.L. Smith, S. Etemad, M.J. Castaldi, H. Karim, and W.C. Pfefferle (2002). “Method and Apparatus for a Fuel-Rich Catalytic   
             Reactor,” U.S. Patent No. 6,394,791.
       18. United States Department of Energy (2000). Clean Coal Technology Topical Report Number 19, “Tampa Electric Integrated   
             Gasiﬁ cation Combined-Cycle Project, An Update” July 2000; GE Power Systems (2002). “Gas Turbine and Combined Cycle   
             Products,” available at www.gepower.com/corporate/en_us/assets/gasturbines_heavy/prod/pdf/gasturbine_2002.pdf; R.D. 
             Brdar and R.M. Jones (2000). “GE IGCC Technology and Experience with Advanced Gas Turbines,” GE Power Systems  
 
             Report No. GER-4207, October 2000.
3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion

3.2.2 Catalytic Combustion & 3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion
Dr. Lance L. Smith is a senior research & development engineer in the Gas Turbine Products 
group at Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI), and a visiting assistant professor in the Engineering 
Department at Trinity College.  Dr. Smith has 14 years experience in combustion research and 
combustor development, including work in turbulent non-premixed combustion, premixed 
combustion and premixing, aerodynamic design of combustor components, pulsed combustion, 
and catalytic combustion.  His academic research has been primarily experimental, with a focus on 
laser-based measurements in ﬂ ames, including work conducted as a visiting researcher at Sandia 
National Laboratories and as a post-doctoral researcher at UCLA.  Dr. Smith is a principal engineer 
of, and holds multiple patents for, the RCLTM catalytic reactor.  At PCI, he works with OEM gas 
turbine manufacturers to develop integrated catalytic combustion systems for ultra-low emissions 
gas turbines.  A graduate of Brown University (B.S., 1986) and of University of California, Berkeley 
(M.S., 1990 and Ph.D., 1994), Dr. Smith is an elected member of the Tau Beta Pi and Sigma Xi 
honor societies, and a member of the Combustion Institute.
Dr. Lance L. Smith
Gas Turbine Group, Precision Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, 
North Haven, CT 06473
BIOGRAPHY  

Dr. Shahrokh Etemad
Gas Turbine Group, Precision Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, 
North Haven, CT 06473
phone: (203) 287-3700 x217
email: setemad@precision-combustion.com
Dr. Shahrokh Etemad as Manager of Gas Turbine Products at Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI) 
in North Haven, Connecticut, has full responsibility for technical and commercial development 
of two major products.  He manages an advanced technology group to develop low-emissions 
combustion products in close collaboration with several OEM gas turbine engine manufacturers 
and the U.S. Department of Energy.  Dr. Etemad is responsible for budgeting, funding opportunities, 
technology direction, proposal preparation and complete R&D operations including concept 
development, computational analysis, experimental testing, full-size performance demonstration 
and productionization.  Prior to his present position at PCI, he worked for several years at Textron 
Lycoming and United Technologies, Carrier. Dr. Etemad has published 28 technical articles and 
holds 28 patents in the ﬁeld of turbomachinery, combustion, and thermoﬂuid systems.  He earned 
bachelor’s and master’s degrees at Sussex University and University of London respectively, and 
received his Ph.D. from the University of Washington in 1984.  He has been a member of ASME 
since 1995 and won the 2003 ASME Gas Turbine award.

Dr. Hasan Karim is a senior research & development engineer at Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI), 
where his responsibilities include design, development, analysis, numerical and computational 
ﬂuid dynamics, and testing of catalytic combustors for natural gas, syngas, and liquid fuel.  He is 
the principal investigator for the catalytic combustor development project for the U.S. Navy and 
lead engineer for the catalytic pilot and catalytic combustor for downhole combustion programs. 
After receiving a bachelor’s degree from Indian Institute of Technology-Kharagpur in 1987, Dr. 
Karim earned his M.S. from New Jersey Institute of Technology in 1991, and his Ph.D. from Yale 
University in 1998.  He is a co-inventor of air-cooled rich and lean reactor technology.
Dr. Hasan Karim
Gas Turbine Group, Precision Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, 
North Haven, CT 06473

Dr. William C. Pfefferle
Gas Turbine Group, Precision Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, 
North Haven, CT 06473
Dr. William C. Pfefferle invented the original catalytic combustor for gas turbine engines in the 
early 1970s and now holds over 90 U.S. patents.  In 1986, Dr. Pfefferle co-founded Precision 
Combustion, Inc. (PCI), a Connecticut-based company dedicated to developing clean and efﬁ cient 
technology for clean air.  His research has led to important industrial advances such as the RCL 
catalytic combustor for ground power gas turbine engines, which is now in late-stage development 
and evaluation by several major gas turbine manufacturers, and the Microlith catalytic reaction 
system, which forms the basis for paradigm-shift, high heat mass transfer catalytic reactors for 
fast-lightoff automotive catalytic converters and fuel processor reactors.  With a B.S. in Chemical 
Engineering from Drexel University (1944) and a Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from the University 
of Pennsylvania (1952), Dr. Pfefferle is a member of the American Chemical Society (ACS), and 
received the ACS 31st Northeast Regional Industrial Innovation Award.  He was inducted into the 
New Jersey Inventor’s Hall of Fame in February 1990.  He continues to work full-time to develop 
catalytic devices for clean and efﬁ cient energy.
