255
255
3.2.2-1 Introduction
The earliest work on what is now termed catalytic combustion was conducted 
by Pfefferle at Engelhard Corporation in the 1970s and introduced the use of both 
catalytic and non-catalytic combustion reactions in a temperature range amenable 
to both1. The original-type catalytic combustor is a ceramic honeycomb monolith 
containing catalytically-coated parallel channels and placed within a combustion 
chamber2.  In this original-type catalytic combustor, surface reactions release heat and 
reactive intermediates into the boundary layer above the surface, eventually inducing 
gas-phase (non-catalytic) reactions.  As a consequence, combustor operation can be at 
lean limits well beyond those feasible without the inﬂ uence of a catalyst, and pollutant 
emissions can be extremely low.  Early work on systems of this type were conducted 
at Engelhard, Acurex, Westinghouse, NASA, the Air Force, and elsewhere3.
Active interest in catalytic combustion for power generation increased during 
the early 1990s as it became clear that continued pressure for reduced emissions 
could not be met simply by re-design of conventional combustors.  A new approach 
of partial conversion in the catalyst bed and the use of metal catalyst substrates to 
circumvent thermal shock issues, revived catalytic combustion for power generation. 
Metal-substrate type catalyst beds were thus employed for catalytic combustion with 
increasing success during the 1990s, demonstrating the low NOx potential of catalytic 
combustion for gas turbine applications4.
 
Ultimately, two very different systems emerged during this period: a fuel-lean 
catalyst system developed by Catalytica, Inc. and a fuel-rich catalyst system developed 
by Precision Combustion, Inc5. Engine tests of these two systems are described, 
respectively, in Yee et al. and Smith et al.6 . These systems are also described in greater 
detail in Sections 3.2.2.1.1 and 3.2.2.1.2 of this Handbook.
3.2.2-2 Role of Catalysis in Combustion
 
In broad terms, a catalyst is used to promote a desired chemical reaction. 
Catalysts ﬁ nd a wide range of applications in the production of energy and power, but 
for combustion turbines there are three basic classes of reactions that one may desire 
to promote: fuel preparation such as reforming prior to combustion, fuel oxidation 
with heat release, and pollutant destruction.  “Catalytic combustion” normally refers 
to fuel oxidation with heat release, particularly when the catalyst is placed inside an 
engine and within the combustor casing.  We restrict our discussion here to catalytic 
combustion and exclude other catalytic processes such as fuel reforming or exhaust-
gas cleanup.
 
In simple terms, the presence of a combustion catalyst enables complete 
combustion at lower temperatures than otherwise possible.  This fact can be used 
for multiple beneﬁ ts, but the primary motivation for low temperature combustion is 
reduced NOx emissions and/or increased combustor turndown.  In particular, most 
non-catalytic combustors operate with peak ﬂ ame temperatures higher than 1525°C 
(2780°F) to ensure adequate ﬂ ame stability and margin from blowout.  As is well 
known, NOx emissions even for perfectly premixed fuel-air ﬂ ames at 1525°C (2780° 
F) can exceed the 3 ppm threshold (at 15% O2) targeted for many new power plants7. 
Catalytic combustors, however, can operate stably with ﬂ ame temperatures far below 
1525°C (2780°F), offering both reduced NOx emissions and improved combustor 
turndown.
3.2.2-3 Catalyst Materials for Combustion 
Applications
 
By deﬁ nition a catalyst promotes a chemical reaction, such as fuel with 
oxygen, but is itself neither consumed nor produced by the reaction.  Precious 
metal catalysts are useful in promoting combustion reactions, and it is desirable to 
preserve such valuable catalysts by ﬁ xing them to a stationary, solid surface known 
as a substrate.  The reactants, fuel and air, react on contact with the catalyst surface 
Catalytic Combustion
3.2.2
Gas Turbine Group, Precision 
Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, CT 
06473
phone: (203) 287-3700 x217
email: setemad@precision-
combustion.com
Dr. Lance Smith
Dr. Hasan Karim
Dr. Shahrokh Etemad
Dr. William C. Pfefferle

256
forming combustion products.  For solid fuels such as coal, this means that liquefaction or gasiﬁcation of the fuel is required to enable 
contact with the solid catalyst surface in the presence of air.
 
Regardless of fuel type, the need for the reactants to contact a solid catalyst surface also means that a high substrate surface 
area is desirable, as is a high rate of mass transfer to the solid surface.  Thus, catalyst substrates typically take the form of small pellets, 
rods, wires, tubes, honeycombs, foams, or other high-surface-area shapes through which ﬂow can pass.  Channel diameters through such 
structures are typically between 1 mm and 1 cm in diameter, depending on size and pressure drop requirements.
 
Substrates can be made of metal or ceramic materials, but must withstand the expected operating environment in a gas turbine 
engine, particularly with regard to thermal gradients and thermal shock8.  Metal substrates best ﬁll this need, but their temperature must 
be limited to less than 950°C (1750°F) to ensure sufﬁcient material strength and long life.  Ceramic materials can operate at higher 
temperatures, but issues of thermal shock failure during the transient operating conditions required for gas turbine operation have not 
been fully resolved.  Thus, despite their inherent temperature limitations, metal substrates have been nearly universally adopted for gas 
turbine catalytic combustion, even for machines with ﬁring temperatures hundreds of degrees higher than 950°C (1750°F).  As a result, 
a prominent feature of successful catalytic combustor designs has been control or limitation of catalyst temperature without sacriﬁce in 
engine, combustor, or emissions performance.
 
Once the reactants are in contact with the substrate surface, it is also desirable that catalytic reactions proceed quickly.  This 
requires a large number of active catalyst surface sites per unit surface area of substrate.  For this purpose a high-surface-area “support” 
material such as a porous ceramic washcoat may be applied to the substrate, creating a new “rough” or porous surface that can have 
thousands of times the surface area of the raw substrate.  The catalyst is ﬁnely dispersed across this rough surface and throughout its 
pores, to give a high density of active sites for chemical reaction.  Speciﬁc procedures for preparing such supported catalysts have been 
disclosed in the literature9.  Figure 1 presents a cross-sectional view of an actual washcoat support, containing precious-metal catalyst, 
and bonded to an underlying metal substrate.
 
A high density of active surface sites is especially important in achieving the lowest possible lightoff temperature for a given 
catalyst.  For practical applications of catalytic 
combustion, lightoff temperature is a critical 
parameter that determines both system operation and 
system design.  The lightoff process can be depicted 
graphically as suggested by Pfefferle and Pfefferle 
and as shown schematically here in ﬁgure 210.
 
Prior to catalyst lightoff the temperature 
difference between the catalyst surface and the reactant 
gas stream is small (tens of degrees or less) and the 
reaction rate is slow enough that this temperature 
difference is sufﬁcient to remove all heat released 
at the surface.  Pre-lightoff operating conditions 
correspond to region I in ﬁgure 2.  However, if gas 
and catalyst temperatures are increased, reaction rates 
will increase exponentially with temperature until 
reactants are consumed as quickly as they arrive at 
the surface.  When this occurs, the surface reaction is 
said to be mass transfer limited, since mass transfer of 
fuel and oxygen to the surface now limit the overall 
reaction rate and temperature has little impact.  At 
this condition the catalyst temperature will greatly 
exceed (by hundreds of degrees) the temperature 
of the reactant gas stream, and in fact, the catalyst 
will operate close to the adiabatic ﬂame temperature 
of the reactant gas stream if no external cooling is 
provided.  This changeover to mass transfer limited 
operation at greatly increased catalyst temperature 
is known as catalyst lightoff, and occurs rapidly (on 
the order of seconds) once the lightoff temperature is 
reached.
 
Figure 2 indicates how lightoff temperature 
is deﬁned and why lightoff is rapid.  The solid curve 
represents heat release rate (in Watts, for example) 
from exothermic reactions at the catalyst surface, 
as a function of catalyst temperature.  The dashed 
curve indicates the effect of catalyst temperature on 
the rate of heat removal from the catalyst surface, 
Fig. 2.  Representation of heat generation and heat removal as 
a function of catalyst temperature, as during catalyst lightoff
Temperature (K)
Heat
Rate
(W)
I
II
III
Ql.o.
Tl.o.
heat release
heat removal
Tgas
Fig. 1.  Microscope photograph of sectioned catalyst support and substrate.  The 
catalyst support is a ceramic washcoat, bonded to the underlying metal substrate. 
The scale of this photograph is roughly 100 µm (0.004 in) in total height.
100 µm
(0.004 in)
substrate (solid)
reactants (gas)
catalyst / support

257
predominantly by convection to the reactant stream.  The dashed curve’s point of intersection on the x-axis is the gas stream temperature. 
Note that the solid curve is independent of gas stream temperature, but the dashed curve will slide left and right, depending on gas stream 
temperature, with a constant slope determined by the convective heat transfer coefﬁcient.
 
For steady-state operation heat removal must equal heat release, so operation must be at an intersection point of the solid and 
dashed curves.  Furthermore, for this intersection point to be a stable operating condition, an increase in catalyst temperature must lead 
to greater heat removal than heat release.  At lightoff, this stability condition fails, and lightoff temperature Tl.o. is deﬁned at the point of 
tangency between the solid and dashed curves, as shown.  At this point, any increase in catalyst temperature leads to greater heat release 
than heat removal, with the result that catalyst temperature rapidly increases until reaction rate is limited by mass transfer of reactants 
to the catalyst surface.  Thus, catalyst temperature passes through the unstable region II, and stabilizes at its mass-transfer-limited value 
in region III where the dashed curve and the solid curves again intersect.  Catalyst lightoff is therefore a rapid transient event, and can 
be measured for any catalyst material with only weak dependence on heat transfer coefﬁcient.  Note that some authors deﬁne lightoff 
temperature in terms of the gas temperature Tgas during lightoff, instead of catalyst temperature Tl.o. at lightoff as deﬁned here.
 
Catalyst materials for combustion applications have been carefully evaluated by a number of researchers11.  Methane and natural 
gas fuels have been the recent focus of interest because natural gas is currently the low-emissions fuel of choice for power-generating gas 
turbines.  Johansson and co-workers have reviewed the catalytic combustion literature and summarized lightoff temperatures for fuel-
lean oxidation of methane on various catalysts, as listed in table 112.  Dalla Betta (1997) reviewed and summarized fuel-lean methane 
reaction rates at 400°C (750°F) for a range of catalyst materials tested, and the more active of these are also listed in table 113.  In both 
reviews, palladium (Pd) catalysts show the greatest activity for methane oxidation, and in general the consensus in the literature has 
been that, for fuel-lean combustion of methane, Pd-based catalysts are the only practical choice because only they offer acceptable 
activity, lightoff temperature, and resistance to volatilization.  However, the adoption of Pd-based catalysts has come with difﬁculties 
resulting from the complex morphology and behavior of the Pd-PdO system and its reactions with methane, including deactivation at 
high temperature (above about 750°C (1380°F)), hysteresis in reaction rate over heating and cooling cycles, and oscillations in activity 
and temperature14.  In addition, lightoff and extinction temperatures are well above 300°C (570°F) for fuel-lean reaction of methane on 
Pd-based catalysts, thus requiring the use of a preburner in many engine applications15.
 
A wider choice of catalysts is possible for fuel-rich reaction of methane, and the complex behaviors of fuel-lean methane 
reaction on Pd are avoided.  For example, Lyubovsky et al. compared fuel-lean and fuel-rich activity for three precious metal catalysts 
in an isothermal reactor, and demonstrated that all three could be practically used for fuel-rich catalytic reactors16.  A comparison of 
measured catalyst activity for Pd, Pt, and Rh catalysts, under both fuel-rich and fuel-lean conditions, is shown here in ﬁgure 3 as a 
function of catalyst temperature17.  Note that ﬁgure 3 does not depict thermal lightoff in the same sense as ﬁgure 2, since the data in ﬁgure 
3 were obtained at isothermal conditions (heat transfer was essentially inﬁnite, so the catalyst could not self heat).
 
The ﬁrst observation to make in ﬁgure 3 is that, for all three catalysts, methane conversion (a measure of catalyst activity) 
is generally much higher under fuel-rich conditions than under fuel-lean conditions.  Furthermore, under fuel-lean conditions, only 
the Pd catalyst shows sustained measurable activity below 600°C (1110°F), whereas all three catalysts are always active in this range 
under fuel-rich conditions.  Evidently the oxidizing environment of fuel-lean mixtures leads to oxidation of the catalyst and this has a 
pronounced effect on catalyst activity.  Oxidation also leads to greater volatilization of Pt catalyst, limiting the usable life of Pt-based 
catalysts even at temperatures far below 950°C (1750°F).  For fuel-rich combustion of methane, however, Pd, Pt, or Rh-based catalysts 
may be used without suffering from oxidation.
                       
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle
Table 1  Lightoff temperature and reaction rate for methane oxidation under fuel-lean conditions, for various catalyst materials
Source:  see note 4 (Dalla Betta) and note 8 (Johansson).
Catalyst Type
Speciﬁc Examples
of Catalyst Type
1Lightoff 
Temperature(C)
2Reaction Rate
(10-7 mol / g-s)
Platinum Group Metals
Pd / Al2O3
340 – 460
300
Pt / Al2O3
590 – 710
50
Perovskite
390 – 690
La0.5Sr0.5CoO3
7
LaCoO3
1
Hexa-aluminate
500 – 700
Sr0.8La0.2MnAl11O19
3
Zeolite
600 - 750

258
 
For syngas and high-hydrogen fuels, catalyst lightoff of CO and H2 is of interest for both fuel-lean and fuel-rich conditions. 
Recent work at Precision Combustion, Inc., sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy, has shown a precious-metal catalyst lightoff 
temperature of 180°C (350°F) for fuel-rich reaction of syngas.  This value has been measured for a syngas mixture composed of 25% H2 
and 35% CO (remainder diluent), but the lightoff temperature is relatively insensitive to syngas composition unless CO levels drop to 
very low values, thus leaving essentially a high-hydrogen fuel having signiﬁcantly lower lightoff temperature.  Light-off temperatures 
for fuel-lean syngas mixtures were also measured below 180°C (350°F).  In all cases, the 180°C (350°F) or lower lightoff temperature 
is well below the compressor discharge temperatures of industrial and large-frame turbines, and the need for a preburner is thereby 
avoided.
Flame Temperature Considerations
 
Actual ﬂame temperatures for catalytic combustion will vary depending on the design approach used to integrate the catalytic 
reaction zone with the gas-phase combustion zone and also on the turbine inlet temperature requirement for the application engine. 
In any case, ﬂame temperatures greater than about 1100°C (2000°F) are required for gas-phase reactions to complete the burnout 
of hydrocarbon fuels and CO in a reasonable residence time (on the order of 10 ms).  Thus, systems which rely on catalyst-induced 
autoignition to stabilize combustion will normally have a minimum gas-phase combustion zone temperature of about 1100°C (2000° 
F), although the catalyst itself may be limited to temperatures well below this value.  Systems which use conventional ﬂameholding 
techniques without catalyst-induced autoignition (but with catalyst augmentation of ﬂame stability) normally require higher ﬂame 
temperatures to prevent blowout, with typical minimum ﬂame temperatures exceeding 1300°C (2400°F) for hydrocarbon fuels.
 
In most power generation applications, it is required that the turbine operates over a range of loads while meeting emissions 
regulations.  The combustor must therefore be designed to operate with ﬂame temperatures above the minimum achievable value at 
base load (full power) so that the machine can be turned down to a ﬂame temperature near the minimum achievable value at the lowest 
required low-emissions load point.  Thus, actual ﬂame temperatures at base load are generally higher than the minimums listed in the 
previous paragraph.
 
In addition, for modern high-efﬁciency engines having high turbine inlet temperatures, actual ﬂame temperatures at base load 
may need to be higher than the minimums listed above simply to meet the required turbine rotor inlet temperature after the addition of 
necessary cooling air.  For example, General Electric’s 7FA engine has a published turbine rotor inlet temperature of 1325°C (2420°F) 
(Eldrid et al., 2001) and a published temperature drop due to cooling air addition at the ﬁrst stage nozzle (stator) of 140°C (280°F), 
giving a minimum ﬂame temperature of 1480°C (2700°F) prior to the ﬁrst-stage nozzle18.
 
The above considerations establish the minimum required ﬂame temperature at base load, but for ultra-low NOx operation a 
maximum ﬂame temperature is also present, based on increasing formation of thermal NOx with increasing temperature19.  It is generally 
accepted that at temperatures above about 1525°C (2780°F) NOx emissions increase markedly with temperature, and generally exceed 
3 ppm (at 15% O2) for premixed ﬂames of hydrocarbon fuels in air.  Thus, for a given low-emissions application the design choice for 
base load ﬂame temperature falls within a window that is generally less than 1525°C (2780°F) but higher than the minimum required.
 
Based on such ﬂame temperature considerations, catalytic combustion systems for gas turbines can be classiﬁed in three basic 
categories as shown in table 2.  The categories are most directly stated in terms of turbine rotor inlet temperature requirements.  For the 
ﬁrst two categories in table 2 (low-temperature and high-temperature turbines), turbine rotor inlet temperatures are sufﬁciently below 
the 1525°C (2780°F) thermal NOx limit that catalytic combustion can be used to provide stable operation, thus providing ultra-low 
NOx emissions even at base load.  For the third category (ultra-high temperature turbines); however, ﬂame temperatures in excess of 
1525°C (2780°F) may be required simply to meet the required turbine rotor inlet temperature after the addition of necessary cooling 
air.  Therefore, NOx emissions for such applications may be higher than 3 ppm unless cooling air requirements are reduced (as in the 
steam-cooled H-engine for example), or unless alternative developments are advanced to allow low-NOx operation at higher ﬂame 
temperatures (as discussed further below).
3.2.2 Catalytic Combustion
Fig. 3.  Catalyst activity for methane oxidation under fuel-rich and fuel-lean 
conditions.  Filled symbols represent increasing temperature, and closed symbols 
represent decreasing temperature (the selected temperature ramp was externally 
controlled by electric heaters).

259
 
Note that in all cases, catalytic combustion provides additional beneﬁts other than low emissions.  In particular, catalytic 
combustion can be used to provide extended turndown by allowing stable combustion at low part-load ﬂame temperatures and can also 
be used to reduce combustion dynamics (combustion-induced pressure oscillations) by shifting fuel energy release to the catalyst surface 
and away from the gas-phase combustion zone.  Reduced combustion dynamics may be an especially important beneﬁt in high-ﬁring-
temperature machines that are susceptible to combustion dynamics as a result of their inherent high rate of fuel energy release.
Table 2  Categories for gas turbine applications of catalytic combustion, based on turbine rotor inlet temperature.  The term 1-Stage 
means a single stage system combining both catalyst and gas-phase reactions.  The term 2-Stage means that combustion occurs in two 
stages, sequential and separate, where the ﬁrst stage is catalytic and the second is gas-phase.  (See Figure 4 for schematic examples 
of 1-Stage and 2-Stage systems.)
Speciﬁc considerations for each of the categories in table 2 are discussed in the following subsections, especially as related to catalytic 
combustion system design for each category.
Catalytic Combustion at Low Flame Temperatures (Uncooled  Turbines)
 
For uncooled turbines such as microturbines, turbine inlet temperatures are generally within catalyst material temperature 
limits (less than 1000°C (1830°F).  This means that the catalyst and substrate can tolerate the maximum required ﬂame temperature, 
and if complete combustion can be sustained, there is no need to separate the gas-phase combustion zone from the catalyst.  Thus, a 
simple catalytic combustor for this application can comprise only a premixer and a catalyst bed, as shown schematically in the right-
hand panel of ﬁgure 4.  This simple system is considered a single-stage system, although fuel is oxidized within this single stage by both 
catalytic reactions on the catalyst surface and gas-phase reactions in the ﬂuid stream above the surface.   Because these reactions can go 
to completion (all fuel converted to products) within the catalyst stage, this single-stage system is also known as a “total conversion” 
catalytic reactor.
                   
 
Air 
Premixer Catalytic 
Reactor 
Homogenous 
Reaction 
Fuel 
Premixer 
Air 
Fuel 
Catalytic Reactor 
Partial Conversion 
Total Conversion 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.  Schematic examples of 2-Stage (partial conversion catalyst) and 1-Stage (total conversion 
 
 
            catalyst) catalytic combustors, in left and right panels, respectively
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle
Low-Temperature
(Uncooled) Turbines
High-Temperature 
(Cooled) Turbines
Ultra-High Temperature
(> F-Class) Turbines
Engine
Applications
Microturbines
Industrial  
D-, E-, F-Class
FB-Class 
G-Class
Approaches
to Catalytic
Combustion
1-Stage or 2-Stage
2-Stage
2-Stage
1- or 2-Stage
Ceramic
Low Oxygen 
2-Stage (EGR)
Beneﬁts:
1. Emissions
2. Turndown
3. Dynamics
√
√
√
√
√
√
?
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
Barrier
Issues
-
-
-
Materials
Develop.
Cycle & Machine
Develop.

260
 
Note that the single-stage “total conversion” catalytic reactor requires gas-phase reactions to complete the oxidation of all fuel 
in a reasonable length or residence time.  Complete combustion (e.g. 99.9% combustion efﬁciency) without gas-phase reactions would 
require mass transfer of nearly all fuel (e.g. 99.9%) to the catalyst surface for reaction, which would require an impractically sized 
catalyst in terms of length, cross-sectional area, and/or channel size.  Thus, the single-stage “total conversion” catalytic reactor must 
provide sufﬁcient catalytic reaction and concomitant heating of the fuel/air mixture that gas-phase autoignition is induced throughout, 
providing combustion completion even if the fuel/air mixture is outside its ﬂammability limits.  Based on the adiabatic ﬂame temperature 
of the fuel/air mixture passing over the catalyst, this autoignition requirement determines the minimum required catalytic conversion of 
fuel.  Or, in the opposite sense, based on the practically achievable catalytic conversion of fuel, the autoignition requirement determines 
the minimum adiabatic ﬂame temperature of the fuel/air mixture.
 
A separate consideration is, as stated earlier, the adiabatic ﬂame temperature of the fuel/air mixture must generally exceed at 
least 1100°C (2000°F) to provide complete burnout in a reasonable residence time.  At 1100°C (2000°F) metal substrates cannot be used 
to support the catalyst, and a ceramic substrate must be used.  Thus, the single-stage catalytic combustor is generally ceramics-based, and 
is prone to ceramics-related issues such as thermal stress and thermal shock.  Early catalytic combustors of the type originally developed 
at Engelhard were single-stage ceramics-based systems20.
 
Currently, however, metal substrates have gained favor in many catalyst applications, including catalytic combustion.  Metals 
are especially suitable for gas turbine applications since they are able to withstand gas turbine demands such as thermal stress and thermal 
shock.  But metal temperatures must normally be limited to less than about 950°C (1750°F) for long-term durability, and this precludes 
the use of the single-stage “total conversion” system described above.  Instead, a two-stage “partial conversion” system must be used 
where only a portion of the fuel is reacted in the catalyst stage, and gas-phase combustion completion occurs downstream of the catalyst. 
This is shown schematically in ﬁgure 5, where there are two physically distinct stages having different temperature requirements (< 950° 
C (1750°F) in the catalyst stage to meet long-term durability requirements, and > 1100°C (2000°F) in the gas-phase combustor stage to 
provide combustion completion).
 
The success of the two-stage system is dependent upon the catalyst stage’s ability to limit reactions (and thus temperature), so 
that the metal substrate within the reactor may operate below its maximum material temperature limit.  In the catalyst stage, the degree of 
reaction can be limited by chemical reaction rate upon the catalyst, by mass transfer of reactants to the catalyst, or by channeling within 
the reactor such that only a limited fraction of the fuel can contact the catalyst.  In all cases it is imperative that uncontrolled gas-phase 
reactions do not occur within the catalytic reactor, since this implies a loss of reaction limitation and ultimately the over-temperature and 
failure of the catalyst bed.
 
While there are many design variations and 
possibilities for the catalyst-stage, there are only two 
mechanisms for sustaining gas-phase combustion in the 
combustion stage: catalyst-induced autoignition (as implied 
schematically in ﬁgure 5), or ﬂameholding via backmixing of 
hot combustion products (as shown schematically in ﬁgure 
4, left panel).  If catalyst-induced autoignition is used in the 
two-stage system, the primary challenge is to prevent such 
autoignition from occurring within the catalyst-stage, as it 
does in the single-stage system described above.
Catalytic Combustion at Moderate Flame Temperatures (Low NOx Cooled Turbines)
 
For modern, cooled turbines having turbine rotor inlet temperatures well above 1100°C (2000°F), the single-stage catalytic 
combustor of ﬁgure 4 (right-hand panel) is no longer feasible since ﬂame temperatures prior to the addition of combustor and stator 
cooling air will generally exceed material temperature limits for available catalyst and substrate materials, even if ceramics are used.
 
Thus, two-stage catalytic combustion is used in these machines, and metal catalyst substrates have generally been adopted for 
their robustness in the gas turbine environment.  Catalyst-stage temperatures must therefore remain below 950°C (1750°F), while gas-
phase combustion temperatures may reach 1525°C (2780°F) before NOx emissions increase beyond acceptable levels.  Ultra-low NOx 
emissions have been successfully demonstrated in recent engine tests of two different two-stage systems21.
 
Note that if catalyst-induced autoignition (ﬁgure 5) is the intended means of sustaining gas-phase combustion, it becomes 
increasingly difﬁcult to prevent autoignition or ﬂashback from overheating the catalyst when gas-phase combustion temperatures 
increase to meet advancing turbine rotor inlet temperatures.  At F-engine type conditions, where ﬂame temperatures must reach 1480° 
C (2700°F) as discussed earlier22, no successful engine operation of a two-stage catalytic combustor has been reported using catalyst-
induced autoignition to sustain gas-phase combustion.  However, successful results have been obtained over a wide range of ﬂame 
temperatures, reaching 1480°C (2700°F) and beyond, by using conventional ﬂameholding techniques (backmixing of hot combustion 
products, left-hand panel of ﬁgure 4) while maintaining catalyst-stage temperatures below the autoignition temperature of the fuel/air 
mixture23.
3.2.2 Catalytic Combustion
 
Gas phase burnout 
>1100 C 
Fuel / Air 
Catalyst 
<950 C 
Ultra low emissions 
( NOx , CO, UHC) 
Fig. 5.  Schematic representation of metal-based two-stage 
catalytic combustion system, showing catalyst stage requiring < 
950 C (1750 F) temperature for long-term metal durability, and gas-
phase combustion stage requiring > 1100 C (2000 F) temperature 
for combustion completion

261
Catalytic Combustion at High Flame Temperatures (Tﬂame > 1525 C (2780 F))
 
In the highest ﬁring-temperature machines used for power generation, such as the recent FB-class and G-class machines, gas-
phase combustion temperatures may need to exceed 1525°C (2780°F), before addition of necessary cooling air, in order to meet turbine 
rotor inlet temperature requirements.  At the current level of machine, combustor, and catalyst materials development, this means that 
NOx emissions will likely exceed 3 ppm at 15% O2.  In spite of this, there are possible developments to reduce NOx emissions at these 
high ﬂame temperatures, and there are non-emissions-related beneﬁts of catalytic combustion (improved turndown and combustion 
dynamics) that are available immediately.
 
Combustion dynamics in particular have been problematic in low-emissions high-ﬁring-temperature machines24, and there is 
great incentive to ﬁnd an economical solution.  One possible solution is catalytic combustion.  Catalytic combustors have been reported 
to have low combustion dynamics (Smith et al., 2005; Schlatter et al., 1997), since gas-phase energy release in the combustor is the 
driving force for combustion-induced pressure oscillations (“combustion dynamics”) and these oscillations are reduced when a portion 
of the fuel is catalytically reacted prior to gas-phase combustion25.  Thus, regardless of pollutant emissions levels, catalytic combustion 
may prove useful even when ﬂame temperatures must be well in excess of 1525°C (2780°F) to meet high turbine inlet temperature 
requirements.  In fact, it is at these high ﬂame temperatures that combustion dynamics often become most problematic and a solution is 
most needed.
 
In addition, non-catalytic premixed combustors now often employ piloting or fuel staging to tune out combustion dynamics, 
at the cost of increased NOx emissions.  Thus, a catalytic combustor that operates with low combustion noise without piloting or fuel 
staging (that is, with more perfectly premixed combustion) may offer reduced NOx emissions as compared to an equivalent non-catalytic 
system, even at the same overall combustor outlet temperature.
 
There is also the potential that catalytic combustion may allow low-NOx operation even at ﬂame temperatures above 1525°C 
(2780°F).  While it has generally been reported that NOx emissions exceed 3 ppm (at 15% O2) when ﬂame temperatures exceed 1525° 
C (2780°F) for hydrocarbon fuels burning in air, these reports have typically focused on conventional ﬂame stabilization techniques 
that use recirculation or backmixing of hot combustion products to sustain combustion.  Schlegel and co-workers have shown through 
experiments and modeling that lower NOx emissions are possible for two reasons26.
 
First, their work shows that NOx production is most signiﬁcant in the stirred or backmixed ﬂame stabilization zone, and that NOx 
emissions can be reduced by reducing the “size” (bulk residence time) of such backmixing zones.  Catalytic combustion can facilitate 
such NOx reduction by improving ﬂame stability and lean blowout, such that “smaller” (shorter residence time) backmixed zones are 
feasible.   For example, model results by Schlegel and co-workers show that NOx emissions from a 1500°C (2730°F) combustion process 
can be reduced by more than 1 ppm by decreasing the stirred-zone residence time from 0.6 ms to 0.1 ms27. Because of this potential, 
a question mark was indicated in table 2 for the emissions beneﬁt of 2-stage catalytic combustion in ultra-high ﬁring-temperature 
machines.
 
Second, Schlegel and co-workers have shown that by increasing the percentage of fuel that is reacted on the catalyst, NOx 
emissions are reduced because the chemical mechanisms for NOx formation are affected in the gas-phase combustion zone28.  This 
effect is most pronounced at high levels of catalytic fuel conversion (> 50%, preferably > 80%) as shown in their 1500°C (2730°F) 
combustion experiments and modeling.  At these fuel conversion levels, NOx reductions of more than 1 ppm are possible at 1500°C 
(2730°F) ﬂame temperature.  Note that materials development will be required to effectively implement this technique with long-term 
durability, since catalyst operating temperatures will greatly exceed the limits of currently available materials at such high levels of 
fuel conversion.  Table 2 therefore indicates low emissions in a 1- or 2-stage ceramic-based catalytic combustor, with the caveat that 
materials development is  required for implementation.
 
The third approach to catalytic combustion listed in table 2 for ultra-high ﬁring-temperature machines is a low-oxygen 
environment, where NOx emissions can remain below 3 ppm even at ﬂame temperatures in excess of 1525°C (2780°F).  Exhaust gas 
recirculation (EGR) is one possibility for obtaining such a low-oxygen environment and has been investigated for gas turbine emissions 
reduction in the past without the use of catalysts29.  Because premixed combustion can be difﬁcult to sustain under such low-oxygen 
conditions, a catalytic combustor will be beneﬁcial in providing the needed ﬂame stability, and could permit ultra-low NOx emissions 
even from ultra-high temperature machines.  Development needs are great for such systems; however, since this concept requires a 
signiﬁcant change in the working ﬂuid of the engine.  This is indicated in table 2 with regard to both cycle and machine development 
needs.
3.2.2-4 Systems for Catalytic Combustion
 
As discussed earlier, two very different catalytic combustion systems have been developed and engine tested in recent years30 
, although both are based on the two-stage catalytic combustor concept and both use metal-based catalyst substrates.  Thus, in both 
systems combustion completion occurs in a downstream gas-phase combustion stage that is physically separated from the upstream 
catalyst stage.
 
The system developed by Catalytica, Inc. is much like that pictured schematically in ﬁgure 5, and is described in greater detail 
in Section 3.2.2.1.2 of this Handbook31.  The Catalytica system premixes all combustion fuel and air upstream of the catalyst, and uses a 
partial conversion catalytic reactor to oxidize only a portion of the fuel in the catalyst stage.  The temperature rise due to fuel oxidation 
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle

262
in the catalytic reactor induces gas-phase autoignition in the downstream gas-phase combustion stage, where combustion is completed. 
The catalyst stage is operated fuel-lean and uses a Pd-based catalyst. A preburner is generally employed to ensure that the catalyst 
remains active (lit off) during low-emissions engine operation.
 
The system developed by Precision Combustion, Inc. is shown schematically in ﬁgure 6, as originally developed for operation 
on natural gas32.  This system is described in greater detail in Section 3.2.2.1.1 of this Handbook.  Brieﬂy, the Precision Combustion 
system is based on fuel-rich operation of the catalyst, and sustains fuel-lean gas-phase combustion downstream of the catalyst via 
recirculation-based ﬂameholding.  All the fuel and part of the air pass through the catalyst with the remainder of the air providing catalyst 
cooling.  This cooling air then mixes with the catalyst efﬂuent establishing a fuel lean ﬂame.  Fuel-rich operation of the catalyst provides 
greater catalyst activity than fuel-lean operation, such that a preburner is not normally required during low-emissions engine operation. 
Flashback and autoignition issues are also precluded because fuel oxidation and heat release in the catalyst stage are limited by available 
oxygen, and the system can therefore be operated safely even at the highest desired combustion-stage temperatures.  Fuel-rich operation 
also allows similar catalyst and reactor performance with widely varying fuel types, since catalyst-stage reactions are starved of oxygen, 
thereby limiting the extent of fuel oxidation and heat 
release regardless of the fuel’s intrinsic reactivity on 
the catalyst.  The system has been successfully tested 
on multiple fuels, including Diesel No. 2, simulated 
reﬁnery fuel gas and syngas, and other low-Btu fuels. 
 
Catalytic combustion systems can also be 
combined with non-catalytic lean-premixed systems to 
offer unique capabilities in terms of performance, cost, 
pressure drop, and space requirements.  For example, 
Precision Combustion, Inc. has developed a catalytic 
pilot system that combines its RCL system with non-
catalytic swirl-based fuel/air injection.  This system 
has been tested in cooperation with Solar Turbines 
and is described by Karim and co-workers33.
3.2.2-5 Challenges for Catalytic Combustion
 
While the art and science of chemical reactor design using heterogeneous catalysis is well known, the application of this 
technology to catalytic combustion has required signiﬁcant development efforts due to both the exothermicity of combustion and the 
operational needs of gas turbine engines.  A catalytic process for a gas turbine engine must contend with rapid heat release and high 
operating temperatures, variable feed composition (fuel/air ratio may change, and fuel quality and composition may vary), variable 
thermodynamic conditions (inlet pressure and temperature), and variable reactor residence time (space velocity).  To provide this 
ﬂexibility, the catalytic combustor is not generally required to maximize yield or selectivity to a particular product; instead, the catalyst 
is required to provide stability to a combustion process, usually by providing a temperature rise to a fuel/air mixture.  For catalytic 
combustion, the overriding constraints are robustness and controlled catalyst temperatures over the wide operating range of the engine.
 
For natural gas combustion, these challenges have been met and initial engine demonstrations have successfully shown that 
catalytic combustion is capable of driving a gas turbine engine and delivering ultra-low NOx emissions.  For other fuels, however, further 
development and demonstration is required.  For catalytic combustion of liquid fuels such as Diesel No. 2, development of an adequate 
and robust prevaporizer technology is required to prevent wetting of the catalyst surface and to allow reaction of mixed, prevaporized 
fuel and air on the catalyst surface.  For solid fuels such as coal, gasiﬁcation is required upstream of the catalyst, and there has been 
growing interest in catalytic combustion of gasiﬁed coal or syngas.  
 
Because high-hydrogen fuels such as coal-derived syngas are prone to autoignition and ﬂashback, lean-premixed combustion 
has not been adopted for low-emissions combustion of these fuels34.  Instead, non-premixed combustion is used, and diluents such as 
nitrogen, water, and/or carbon dioxide have been used to reduce ﬂame temperatures and therefore NOx emissions35.  Unfortunately, ﬂame 
stability issues arise at high dilution levels, and NOx emissions below 3 ppm (at 15% O2) have not been reported for non-catalytic syngas 
combustion.
 
Catalytic combustion, however, can stabilize combustion at lower ﬂame temperatures, or with increased levels of dilution, 
and offers the potential for IGCC plant emissions below 3 ppm.  Precision Combustion, Inc. under contract to DOE has recently 
demonstrated NOx emissions below 3 ppm in high-pressure, sub-scale catalytic combustion rig tests simulating Tampa Electric’s Polk 
Power plant operating conditions.  However, further development is required to bring this technology to an engine, and eventually to 
commercialization.
 
As with conventional combustion of syngas, and especially after diluent addition, the very low Lower Heating Values (LHV) of 
such fuels means that a very high volume ﬂow of fuel is required.  For catalytic combustion, this high volume ﬂow must be accommodated 
within the catalytic reactor, and this raises issues of catalyst size and pressure drop, possibly requiring system level re-design and re-
development of the catalytic combustor.
3.2.2 Catalytic Combustion
Combustion
Fuel
Premixer Catalytic
Reactor
Post-Catalyst
Mixing
Catalyst
Cooling
Air
Burned Gas
Fig. 6.  Schematic of Precision Combustion’s two-stage catalytic combustion 
system, as originally developed for operation on natural gas.  Fuel-rich catalyst 
efﬂuent mixes with catalyst cooling air prior to fuel-lean gas-phase combustion, 
and the system is therefore called Rich-Catalytic Lean-burn combustion 
(trademarked as RCL by Precision Combustion, Inc.)

263
 
The propensity for high-hydrogen fuels to autoignite, together with their wide ﬂammability limits, require special attention 
to premixing design. In addition, syngas fuels carry trace levels of catalyst contaminants that may affect long-term catalyst durability, 
and this needs to be examined and remediated if problematic.  Long-term durability tests are required, preferably in an actual syngas 
slipstream at an operating IGCC plant, where real contaminants will be present.
3.2.2-6 Conclusions
 
Catalytic combustion has been established as providing low NOx emissions for modern gas turbines along with subsequent 
reduction in combustion dynamics and improved operability.    Feasibility of catalytic combustion has been established for both high 
and low ﬁring temperature gas turbines. 
 
For natural gas combustion, the challenges of catalytic combustion have been met and initial engine demonstrations have 
successfully shown that catalytic combustion is capable of driving a gas turbine engine and delivering ultra-low NOx emissions.  Further 
ﬁeld trials and engine operating experience will advance the catalytic combustion applications for gas turbines. For alternative fuels, 
particularly coal-derived syngas, further development is required; but, initial demonstrations have shown the potential for ultra-low 
emissions catalytic combustion in future IGCC power plants.
 
In recent years, metal catalyst substrates have been adopted, together with a two-stage approach to catalytic combustion 
that maintains catalyst temperatures within their material limits.  In addition, the two-stage approach allows gas-phase combustion 
temperatures to rise to the levels needed for good combustion efﬁciency and high efﬁciency turbine operation. Prior material limitations 
have been largely resolved through design concepts such as reactor backside cooling and reactor mode of operation as well as availability 
of high temperature metal alloys.
 
Multiple approaches to catalytic combustion have been pursued over the years in the quest for ultra-low NOx emissions from 
power generating gas turbines.  Low, single digit, NOx emissions with low combustion dynamics have been demonstrated in engine 
environments permitting a wider operating regime from part load to full load conditions. These beneﬁts make catalytic combustion a 
viable, low cost approach as compared to selective catalytic reduction (SCR) to meet the low emissions requirements.
3.2.2-7 Notes
________________________
1. W.C. Pfefferle, R.V. Carruba, R.M. Heck, and  G.W. Roberts, “Catathermal Combustion: A New Process for Low   
     Emissions Fuel Conversion,” ASME Paper No. 75-WA/Fu-1(1975).
2.  Ibid.
3. D.N. Anderson, R.R. Tacina, and T.S. Mroz, “Performance of a Catalytic Reactor at  Simulated Gas Turbine Operating Conditions,” 
     NASA Technical Memorandum X-71747(1975); J.P. Kesselring, W.V. Krill, E.K. Chu, and R.M. Kendall. In proceedings of New 
     fuels and advances in combustion technologies symposium, Mar. 26-30, 1979, New Orleans, LA; P.W. Pillsbury, “Update of Full-
     Scale Catalytic Burner Testing for Combustion Turbines,” ASME Paper No. 84-GT-54 (1984); T.J. Rosfjord, AIAA Paper No. 76-
     46 (Washington DC, Jan. 1976).
4. R.A. Dalla Betta et al.,  Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 119 (1997):,  844-851; P. Dutta, D.K. Yee, and R.A. 
     Dalla Betta, ASME Paper No. 97-GT-497 (1997); S. Etemad, H. Karim, L.L. Smith, and W.C. Pfefferle, “Advanced Technology 
     Catalytic Combustor for High Temperature Ground Power Gas Turbine Applications,” Catalysis Today 47 (1999): 305-313; D.A.   
     Smith, S.F. Frey, D.M. Stansel, and M.K. Razdan, ASME Paper No. 97-GT-311(1997).
5.  R.A. Dalla Betta, T. Shoji, D.K. Yee, and S.A. Magno. Catalyst Structure Employing Integral Heat Exchange. U.S. Patent  
     5,512,250; R.A. Dalla Betta, N. Ezawa, K. Tsurumi, J.C. Schlatter, and S.G. Nickolas, “Two Stage Process for Combusting Fuel 
     Mixtures,” U.S. Patent No. 5,183,401 (1993); W.C. Pfefferle, L.L. Smith, and M.J. Castaldi,  “Method and Apparatus for a Fuel-
     Rich Catalytic Reactor,” U.S. Patent No. 6,358,040 (2002).
6.  D.K. Yee, K. Lundberg, and C.K. Weakley, “Field Demonstration of a 1.5 MW Gas Turbine with a Low Emissions Catalytic 
     Combustion System,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 123 (2001): 550-556; L.L. Smith, H. Karim, M.J. 
     Castaldi, S. Etemad, W.C. Pfefferle, V.K. Khanna, and K.O. Smith,  “Rich-Catalytic Lean-Burn Combustion for Low-Single-Digit    
     NOx Gas Turbines,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 127 (2005): 27-35.
7.  G. Leonard and J. Stegmaier, “Development of an Aeroderivative Gas Turbine Dry Low Emissions Combustion System,” Journal  
     of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 116 (1994): 542-546.
8. E.M. Johansson, D. Papadias, P.O. Thevenin, A.G. Ersson, R. Gabrielsson, P.G. Menon, P.H. Bjornbom and S.G. Jaras, “Catalytic  
    Combustion for Gas Turbine Applications,” Catalysis 14 (1999): 183-235; R.E. Hayes and S.T. Kolaczkowski, Introduction to 
    Catalytic Combustion (Amsterdam:Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, 1997); D. Anson, M. DeCorso and W.P. Parks, 
    “Catalytic  Combustion for Industrial Gas Turbines,” International Journal of Energy Research 20 (1996): 693-711; S.T. 
     Kolaczkowski, “Catalytic Stationary Gas Turbine Combustors: A Review of the Challenges Faced to Clear the Next Set of 
     Hurdles,” Trans. I. Chem. E. 73 Part A (1995): 168-190.
Dr. Lance Smith, Dr. Hasan Karim, Dr. Shahrokh Etemad, Dr. William C. Pfefferle

264
264
9.  J.G. McCarty, “Kinetics of PdO Combustion Catalysis,” Catalysis Today 26 (1995): 283-293; R. Burch and P.K. Loader, 
     “Investigation of Pt/Al2O3 and Pd/Al2O3 Catalysts for the Combustion of Methane at Low Concentrations,” Applied Catalysis B: 
     Environmental 5 (1994):  149-164; R.J. Farrauto, M.C. Hobson, T. Kennelly, and E.M. Waterman, “Catalytic Chemistry of 
     Supported Palladium for Combustion of Methane,” Applied Catalysis A: General 81 (1992): 227-237; T. Kennelly and R.J.  
     Farrauto, “Catalytic Combustion Process Using Supported Palladium Oxide Catalysts,” U.S. Patent No. 5,216,875 (1993); R.A. 
     Dalla Betta, K. Tsurumi, and T. Shoji, “Graded Palladium-Containing Partial Combustion Catalyst and a Process for Using It,” U.S. 
     Patent No. 5,248,251 (1993).
10. L.D. Pfefferle and W.C. Pfefferle, “Catalysis in Combustion,” Catal. Rev.-Sci.  Eng. 29 (1987): 219-267.
11. W.S. Blazowski and D.E. Walsh, “Catalytic  Combustion: An Important Consideration for Future Applications,” Combustion 
      Science and Technology 10 (1975): 253-244; P. Forzatti and G. Groppi, “Catalytic Combustion for the Production of Energy,” 
      Catalysis Today 54 (1999): 165-180; J.H. Lee and D.L. Trimm, “Catalytic Combustion of Methane,” Fuel Processing Technology 
      42 (1995): 339-359; F.H. Ribeiro, M. Chow, and R.A. Dalla Betta (1994). J. Catal., 146 (1994): 537.
l2. See note 8 above (Johansson).
13. R.A. Dalla Betta, “Catalytic Combustion Gas Turbine Systems: The Preferred Technology for Low Emissions  Electric Power            
      Production and Co-generation,” Catalysis Today 35 (1997): 129-135.
14. R.J. Farrauto, J.K. Lampert, M.C. Hobson, and E.M. Waterman, “Thermal Decomposition and Reformation of PdO Catalysts;       
      Support Effects,” Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 6 (1995): 263-270; T. Furuya, K. Sasaki, Y. Hanakata, T. Ohhashi, M. 
      Yamada, T. Tsuchiya, and Y. Furuse, “Development of a Hybrid Catalytic Combustor for a 1300°C Class Gas Turbine,” Catalysis     
      Today 26 (1995): 345-350; Y. Ozawa, Y. Tochihara, N. Mori, I. Yuri, T. Kanazawa, and K. Sagimori, “High Pressure Test Results   
      of a Catalytically Assisted Ceramic Combustor for a Gas Turbine,” ASME Paper No. 98-GT-381  (Stockholm, Sweden, 2-5 
      June 1998); N.M. Rodriguez, S.G. Oh, R.A. Dalla-Betta, and R.T.K. Baker, “In Situ Electron Microscopy Studies of 
      Palladium Supported on Al2O3, SiO2, and ZrO2 in Oxygen,” J. Catalysis 157 (1995): 676-686; R. Carroni, V. Schmidt, and T.      
 
      Grifﬁ n, “Catalytic Combustion for Power Generation,” Catalysis Today 75 (2002): 287-295.
15. D.B. Fant, G.S. Jackson, H. Karim, D.M. Newburry, P. Dutta, K.O. Smith, and R.W. Dibble, “Status of Catalytic 
      Combustion R&D for the Department of Energy Advanced Turbine Systems Program,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines     
      and Power 122 (2000): 293-300.
16. M. Lyubovsky, L.L. Smith, M. Castaldi, H. Karim, B. Nentwick, S. Etemad, R. LaPierre, and W.C. Pfefferle, “Catalytic        
 
      Combustion over Platinum Group Catalysts: Fuel-Lean versus Fuel-Rich Operation,” Catalysis Today 83 (2003): 71-84.
17. M. Lyubovsky, private communication (2005).
18. T.C. Paul, R.W. Schonewald, and P.J. Marolda, “Power Systems for the 21st Century – H Gas Turbine Combined Cycles,” General  
      Electric Power Systems Report No. GER-3935A (1996).
19. C.T. Bowman, “Control of Combustion-Generated Nitrogen Oxide Emissions: Technology Driven by Regulations,” in proceedings 
      of Twenty-Fourth Symposium (International) on Combustion (1992):  859-878; S.M. Correa, “A Review of NOx Formation Under   
      Gas-Turbine Combustion Conditions,” Combustion Science and Technology 87 (1992): 329-362.
20. See note 2 above.
21. See note 6 above. 
22. R. Eldrid, L. Kaufman, and P. Marks, “The 7FB: The Next Evolution of the F Gas Turbine,” General Electric Power Systems  
 
      Report No. GER-4194 (2001); also, see note 18 above.
23. See note 6 above (Smith).
24. D.E. Hobson, J.E. Fackrell, and G. Hewitt, “Combustion Instabilities in Industrial Gas Turbines – Measurements on Operating  
 
      Plant and Thermoacoustic Modelling,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 122 (2000): 420-428; T. Lieuwen and   
      K. McManus, “Introduction: Combustion Dynamics in Lean-Premixed Prevaporized (LPP) Gas Turbines,” Journal of 
      Propulsion and Power 19 (2003):  721; H.C. Mongia, T.J. Held, G.C. Hsiao, and R.P. Pandalai, “Challenges and Progess in    
 
      Controlling Dynamics in Gas Turbine Combustors,” Journal of Propulsion and Power 19 (2003): 822-829.
25. J.C. Schlatter, R.A. Dalla Betta, S.G. Nickolas, M.B. Cutrone, K.W. Beebe, and T. Tsuchiya, “Single-Digit Emissions in a Full- 
 
      Scale Catalytic Combustor,” ASME Paper No. 97-GT-57 (1997); also see note 6 above.
26. A. Schlegel, P. Benz, T. Grifﬁ n, W. Weisenstein, and H. Bockhorn, “Catalytic Stabilization of Lean Premixed Combustion: Method  
      for Improving NOx Emissions,” Combustion and Flame 105 (1996): 332-340.
27. Ibid. 
28. Ibid. 
29. K.K. Botros, G.R. Price, and G. Kibrya, “Thermodynamic, Environmental and Economic Assessment of Exhaust Gas  
 
 
      Recirculation for NOx Reduction in Gas Turbine Based Compressor Station,” ASME Paper No. 99-GT-173 (1999).
30. See note 6 above.
31. See note 5 above. 
32. See note 5 above (Pfefferle). 
33. H. Karim, K. Lyle, S. Etemad, L.L. Smith, W.C. Pfefferle, P. Dutta, and K. Smith. “Advanced Catalytic Pilot for Low  
   
NOx Industrial Gas Turbines,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 125 (2003): 879-884.
34. R.M. Jones and N.Z. Shilling, “IGCC Gas Turbines for Reﬁ nery Applications,” General Electric Power Systems        
Report No. GER-4219 (2003).
35. Ibid. 
3.2.2 Catalytic Combustion

3.2.2 Catalytic Combustion & 3.2.2.1 Fuel-Rich Catalytic Combustion
Dr. Lance L. Smith is a senior research & development engineer in the Gas Turbine Products 
group at Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI), and a visiting assistant professor in the Engineering 
Department at Trinity College.  Dr. Smith has 14 years experience in combustion research and 
combustor development, including work in turbulent non-premixed combustion, premixed 
combustion and premixing, aerodynamic design of combustor components, pulsed combustion, 
and catalytic combustion.  His academic research has been primarily experimental, with a focus on 
laser-based measurements in ﬂ ames, including work conducted as a visiting researcher at Sandia 
National Laboratories and as a post-doctoral researcher at UCLA.  Dr. Smith is a principal engineer 
of, and holds multiple patents for, the RCLTM catalytic reactor.  At PCI, he works with OEM gas 
turbine manufacturers to develop integrated catalytic combustion systems for ultra-low emissions 
gas turbines.  A graduate of Brown University (B.S., 1986) and of University of California, Berkeley 
(M.S., 1990 and Ph.D., 1994), Dr. Smith is an elected member of the Tau Beta Pi and Sigma Xi 
honor societies, and a member of the Combustion Institute.
Dr. Lance L. Smith
Gas Turbine Group, Precision Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, 
North Haven, CT 06473
BIOGRAPHY  

Dr. Shahrokh Etemad
Gas Turbine Group, Precision Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, 
North Haven, CT 06473
phone: (203) 287-3700 x217
email: setemad@precision-combustion.com
Dr. Shahrokh Etemad as Manager of Gas Turbine Products at Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI) 
in North Haven, Connecticut, has full responsibility for technical and commercial development 
of two major products.  He manages an advanced technology group to develop low-emissions 
combustion products in close collaboration with several OEM gas turbine engine manufacturers 
and the U.S. Department of Energy.  Dr. Etemad is responsible for budgeting, funding opportunities, 
technology direction, proposal preparation and complete R&D operations including concept 
development, computational analysis, experimental testing, full-size performance demonstration 
and productionization.  Prior to his present position at PCI, he worked for several years at Textron 
Lycoming and United Technologies, Carrier. Dr. Etemad has published 28 technical articles and 
holds 28 patents in the ﬁeld of turbomachinery, combustion, and thermoﬂuid systems.  He earned 
bachelor’s and master’s degrees at Sussex University and University of London respectively, and 
received his Ph.D. from the University of Washington in 1984.  He has been a member of ASME 
since 1995 and won the 2003 ASME Gas Turbine award.

Dr. Hasan Karim is a senior research & development engineer at Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI), 
where his responsibilities include design, development, analysis, numerical and computational 
ﬂuid dynamics, and testing of catalytic combustors for natural gas, syngas, and liquid fuel.  He is 
the principal investigator for the catalytic combustor development project for the U.S. Navy and 
lead engineer for the catalytic pilot and catalytic combustor for downhole combustion programs. 
After receiving a bachelor’s degree from Indian Institute of Technology-Kharagpur in 1987, Dr. 
Karim earned his M.S. from New Jersey Institute of Technology in 1991, and his Ph.D. from Yale 
University in 1998.  He is a co-inventor of air-cooled rich and lean reactor technology.
Dr. Hasan Karim
Gas Turbine Group, Precision Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, 
North Haven, CT 06473

Dr. William C. Pfefferle
Gas Turbine Group, Precision Combustion, Inc.
410 Sackett Point Road, 
North Haven, CT 06473
Dr. William C. Pfefferle invented the original catalytic combustor for gas turbine engines in the 
early 1970s and now holds over 90 U.S. patents.  In 1986, Dr. Pfefferle co-founded Precision 
Combustion, Inc. (PCI), a Connecticut-based company dedicated to developing clean and efﬁ cient 
technology for clean air.  His research has led to important industrial advances such as the RCL 
catalytic combustor for ground power gas turbine engines, which is now in late-stage development 
and evaluation by several major gas turbine manufacturers, and the Microlith catalytic reaction 
system, which forms the basis for paradigm-shift, high heat mass transfer catalytic reactors for 
fast-lightoff automotive catalytic converters and fuel processor reactors.  With a B.S. in Chemical 
Engineering from Drexel University (1944) and a Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry from the University 
of Pennsylvania (1952), Dr. Pfefferle is a member of the American Chemical Society (ACS), and 
received the ACS 31st Northeast Regional Industrial Innovation Award.  He was inducted into the 
New Jersey Inventor’s Hall of Fame in February 1990.  He continues to work full-time to develop 
catalytic devices for clean and efﬁ cient energy.
