353
4.2.3-1 Introduction
 
The ﬂ ow in a gas turbine inﬂ uenced by the inner hub and outer casings of the 
airfoils is deﬁ ned as secondary or endwall ﬂ ows.  These ﬂ ows often contain vortices 
that give rise to velocity components that are orthogonal to the primary ﬂ ow direction 
as depicted in ﬁ gure 1 by the ribbon arrows, which is speciﬁ c to vane endwalls.  These 
ﬂ ows constitute one of the most commonplace and widespread three-dimensional 
ﬂ ows arising in axial ﬂ ow turbomachinery.  In typical modern day turbine designs, 
endwall ﬂ ows for ﬁ rst stage vanes are responsible for over 30% of the total pressure 
loss through a turbine stage leading to a reduction in turbine efﬁ ciencies on the order 
of 3%.  While overall airfoil losses have been reduced through the use of three-
dimensional geometries that make use of bowed or leaned airfoils, for example, the 
endwalls have remained fairly conventional and the source of much of the remaining 
pressure losses.  The heat transfer consequences are immense because of the increased 
convective coefﬁ cients and mixing out of ﬁ lm-coolant near the surface.  It is clear 
from a thermodynamic analysis of a turbine engine, that to improve performance, 
there is a need to increase the aspect ratio for turbine airfoils and to increase turbine 
inlet temperatures.  To improve a turbine’s performance, these trends require that 
endwall ﬂ ows be carefully considered in turbine designs.
The endwall ﬂ ow through an airfoil cascade under isothermal conditions 
with an approaching two-dimensional boundary layer agrees well with that depicted 
in ﬁ gure 1.  The ﬂ ow model shows that the inlet boundary layer separates from 
the approaching endwall to form what is known as a horseshoe vortex.  One leg of 
the horseshoe vortex, present on the pressure side of the airfoil (concave side), is 
convected into the passage and is promoted by the inherent pressure gradient between 
the two airfoil surfaces. This pressure side leg of the horseshoe vortex develops into 
what is known as the passage vortex.  The other leg of the horseshoe vortex, present 
on the suction side of the airfoil (convex side), has an opposite sense of rotation to 
the larger passage vortex and develops into what is known as a counter vortex.  The 
counter vortex can be thought of as a planet rotating about the axis of the passage 
vortex (sun).  The actual rotation of the vortices depicted in ﬁ gure 1 were drawn 
to exaggerate the vortex motion and for the passage vortex is generally about two 
rotations before exiting the airfoil passage. While this picture represents a time-
averaged representation, measured data indicates that the vortex is not steady.  While 
the development of the vortical structures originates in the endwall regions, the growth 
can be such that the passage vortex occupies a large portion of the airfoil exit. This 
353
4.2.3 
Airfoil Endwall Heat Transfer 
Karen Thole
Mechanical Eng. Dept, Penn State Univ.
University Park, PA 16802-1412
phone: (814) 865-2519
email: kthole@psu.edu
Fig. 1.  Classic secondary ﬂ ow pattern 
for a turbine airfoil passage.(reproduced 
with permission from American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers [ASME]).
Source:  Langston, L. S. “Crossﬂ ows in a 
Turbine Cascade Passage,” ASME J of 
Engineering for Power 102 (1980): 866 
- 874.
Fig. 2. Illustration of the near wall 
ﬂ ows as taken through oil and dye 
surface ﬂ ow visualization (reproduced 
with permission of the publisher from 
ASME).
Source: Friedrichs, S., Hodson, H. 
P. and Dawes, W. N., “Distribution 
of Film-Cooling Effectiveness on a 
Turbine Endwall Measured Using the 
Ammonia and Diazo Technique,” J of 
Turbomachinery 118 (1996): 613-621.

354
vortical structure growth extends up to 30-40% of the total span for older vane designs and has been reduced to approximately 10-15% 
of the total span in the last 15 years. 
The ﬂow patterns previously described make it difﬁcult to cool the endwall, particularly when considering the near endwall 
ﬂow, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.  The surface ﬂow visualization in ﬁgure 2, achieved through an oil and surface dye technique, illustrates 
the strong cross ﬂows that occur.  The cross ﬂows are driven by the inherent pressure gradients from the pressure to the suction side of 
adjacent airfoils.  For example, these cross ﬂows inﬂuence how the ﬁlm-cooling jets exit from the holes as well as inﬂuence the endwall 
heat transfer coefﬁcients.
This section brieﬂy describes a simpliﬁed theoretical approach to understanding vane endwall ﬂows.  Following this brief 
discussion the following will be provided: heat transfer coefﬁcients experienced along a turbine vane endwall with varying effects, ﬁlm-
cooling designs, and geometrical means for reducing endwall heat transfer.  Outer casing ﬂows of vanes are similar to inner hub ﬂows; 
however, for blades the outer casing ﬂows encompass yet another difﬁcult region which is the blade tip region.  Generally, there is a gap 
between the blade tip and outer casing that provides for a leakage ﬂow that is inherently driven by the pressure difference between the 
pressure and suction sides of the blades.  A brief section about tip ﬂows will be provided at the end of this section.
4.2.3-2 Theoretical Development of Endwall 
Flows
As the endwall boundary layer approaches a turbine airfoil, the 
ﬂow stagnates, whereby the total pressure becomes the static pressure 
along the span of the vane.  Given that the ﬂuid nearer to the endwall has 
a lower velocity, a stronger deceleration in the boundary layer occurs 
for the higher speed ﬂuid than for the lower speed ﬂuid.  As a result of 
these differences in the deceleration, a transverse static pressure gradient 
occurs along the vane span causing the higher speed ﬂuid to turn toward 
the endwall plate.  Subsequently, the formation of a horseshoe vortex 
occurs just upstream of the turbine vane.  One of the legs of the horseshoe 
vortex wraps around the pressure side of the vane and the other leg wraps 
around the suction side of the vane.  Figure 3a shows measurements of 
the horseshoe vortex upstream of the turbine vane and ﬁgure 3b shows 
extreme damage from the effects of this vortex on actual hardware.  These 
measurements were made for a simple case with an isothermal ﬂow and 
an approaching boundary layer that was 9 % of the vane span (Z/S = 
0.09).  From the combined contour/vector plot in ﬁgure 3a,  one can see 
where the ﬂow separates from the upstream endwall and how the ﬂow is 
then rolled into a vortex.  It is also clear to see that, if a ﬁlm-cooling jet 
were injected into this region, it would be difﬁcult to maintain the coolant 
along the endwall.
The ﬂow ﬁelds discussed thus far have described the condition 
for a uniform, isothermal ﬂow ﬁeld with an approaching two-dimensional 
boundary layer along the endwall.  In practice, this idealized ﬂow situation 
rarely happens since an upstream combustor is present whereby there can 
be large variations in the exiting ﬂow.   Non-uniformity of inlet proﬁles in 
addition to the viscous boundary layers along the endwall are caused by 
temperature gradients at the combustor exit. The development of cross-
ﬂow and vortical motions in a curved passage, such as an airfoil passage, 
can be understood by considering ﬂow along two streamlines, as shown 
in ﬁgure 4. Two idealized cases are considered:  a) a gradient of velocity 
due to a turbulent inlet boundary layer with an isothermal ﬂow, b) a linear 
temperature gradient typical at the exit of a combustor with a uniform 
velocity ﬁeld.
 
Assuming steady, incompressible, inviscid ﬂow with negligible 
variation of velocity in the n-direction, the centripetal acceleration for 
the streamlines A and B must be balanced by the pressure gradient 
across the pitch:
 
 
 
 
                 (1)
 
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(U2+W2)1/2/Uh = 1
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
-0.20
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
Z/S
X/C
Fig. 3a.  Measurements of the horseshoe vortex just 
upstream of the vane at the vane-endwall juncture 
(reproduced with permission from ASME).
Source:  M. Kang, A. Kohli, and K.A. Thole, “Heat 
Transfer and Flowﬁeld Measurements in the Leading 
Edge Region of a Stator Vane Endwall,” J of 
Turbomachinery 121 (1999): 558-568.
Fig. 3b.  Actual hardware showing 
effects of the horseshoe vortex on a ﬁrst 
vane

355
 
From boundary layer theory,          for both streamlines from the developing boundary 
layer on the sidewalls should be equal.  Therefore
 
 
 
     
 
 
                (2)
Due to the viscous turbulent boundary layer at the endwall, it is evident that VsB < VsA.  
So for the boundary layer assumption to hold, the radius of curvature of the streamline 
at B must be reduced.  This creates a crossﬂow in the boundary layer from the pressure 
surface towards the suction surface of the blade, and thus generates secondary ﬂow 
(ﬂow that is not aligned with the streamwise direction) as depicted in ﬁgure 4a.
 
Now consider ﬁgure 4b, a constant velocity proﬁle with linear temperature 
proﬁle.  The same physics hold for this case; however, the resulting vortex is reversed 
in direction.  In this instance the temperature at A is greater than at B, therefore ρA < 
ρB.  Now RB must be greater than RA for the normal pressure gradient to balance and the 
cross ﬂow is generated towards the pressure side of the adjacent vane row.  The change 
in streamline curvature would be less severe in this case compared to ﬁgure 4a since the 
velocity term is squared in the relationship of Equation 1. 
 
As one can see from these simple, idealized ﬂow situations, there can be large 
variation in the expected secondary ﬂow pattern that can be derived in a turbine vane 
passage.  The important driver for how the ﬂow develops in a turbine vane passage is 
the total pressure proﬁle entering the passage.  As this total pressure proﬁle becomes the 
static pressure along the vane stagnation, the ﬂow will be driven from a high pressure 
region to a low pressure region.  In most turbine designs there is a ﬂow leakage slot 
between the combustor and the turbine whereby cooler ﬂuid is injected into the main 
hot gas path.  This leakage can also have an effect on the secondary ﬂow patterns that 
develop.  The bottom line when considering endwall ﬂows is that the proﬁle exiting the 
combustor, which is often referred to as the combustor pattern factor that ultimately 
enters the turbine, should be known to fully predict the secondary ﬂows that will develop 
in the turbine passage.  In practice, the combustor pattern factor is one of the parameters 
used in designing cooling schemes for the airfoils and their associated platforms.  
4.2.3-3 Endwall Heat Transfer
 
The heat transfer coefﬁcients given in ﬁgure 5 are represented in terms of 
a non-dimensional Stanton number based on exit velocity. In the region upstream of 
the vanes, there is a high heat transfer region that occurs between the stagnation point 
and the reattachment of the ﬂow on the suction side of the airfoil.  This is the area 
which experiences very high acceleration.  As the ﬂow moves through the passage, it 
is apparent that the location of the peak Stanton numbers (peak heat transfer) is being 
swept from the outer pressure surface towards the suction side of the central vane.
 
 
Figure 6 presents the Stanton numbers for two freestream turbulence levels 
(Tu = 0.6% and 19.5%) approaching the stagnation location along a line parallel to the 
incoming velocity vector.  Figure 6 illustrates that at a location of approximately 15% 
of the chord (∆X/C = 0.15) upstream of the vane, the Stanton numbers begin to increase 
dramatically.  This increase can be related to the position where the ﬂow separates from 
the endwall, as shown by Figure 3a, which occurs at approximately X/C = 0.12.  The 
heat transfer continues to increase as the ﬂow approaches the vane.  
 
Depending upon the particular combustor design, the turbulence levels exiting a 
combustor that enter into the turbine can be relatively high.  In general, high levels 
of turbulence lead to higher levels of heat transfer.  Figure 6 illustrates this increase 
through both the Stanton numbers (left axis) and the augmentation of Stanton numbers 
(right axis) whereby augmentation refers to the Stanton number (convective heat transfer 
coefﬁcients) at high turbulence divided by the Stanton number at low turbulence levels.
Figure 6 illustrates that there is an approximate 20% increase in heat transfer resulting 
from a turbulence level of 19.5%.
Karen Thole
.
Fig. 4.  Illustration of different vortical 
patterns that are possible for two ideal-
ized ﬂow conditions:  a) isothermal with 
an inlet boundary layer and b) inviscid 
ﬂow with a temperature proﬁle.
Source:  B. Lakshminarayana, Fluid Dy-
namics and Heat Transfer of Turboma-
chinery (NY:  Wiley Interscience, 1996).
Fig. 5.  Contours of non-dimensional 
heat transfer coefﬁcients (reproduced 
with permission from the publisher of 
ASME).
Source:  See ﬁg. 3a above.
-1.00
-0.75
-0.50
-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
-0.250.00 0.25 0.50 0.75
Y/C
X/C
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20

356
Figure 7 compares the heat transfer coefﬁcients averaged over the pitch (vane-to-vane) for a range of axial positions.  As the 
ﬂow accelerates through the passage, the heat transfer coefﬁcients also increase, which is to be expected.  For most of the axial distance, 
the augmentation due to freestream turbulence is relatively constant at 25% above the low freestream turbulence case.  Only near the end 
of the vane where the passage vortex dominates, beyond X/C of 0.38, is there a decrease in the augmentation.   
 
Note that the heat transfer data shown in this paper were taken with a two-dimensional inlet boundary layer under low speed 
conditions, to allow for highly-resolved data, with matched Reynolds number conditions.  There is evidence in the literature that the 
secondary ﬂow patterns remain the same at both low and high Mach number conditions.  Rather, these secondary ﬂows are a stronger 
function of the airfoil geometry and inlet proﬁle conditions that of Mach number.  There is no data in the literature that discusses how the 
heat transfer on the endwall is altered depending upon an inlet ﬂow condition that is relevant to that exiting a combustor.  As was stated 
previously, it is important to consider that the proﬁle exiting the combustor can vary greatly 
from that of a two-dimensional boundary layer assumption.
4.2.3-4 Endwall Film-Cooling
One method of combating the high heat transfer coefﬁcients along the endwall 
is through the use of ﬁlm-cooling holes whereby cooler air is injected through discrete 
holes in the endwall.  Film-cooling hole placement, particularly in the endwall region, has 
traditionally been based upon designer experience whereby a number of design variables are 
considered.  For example, one should take into account leakage from a slot at the combustor-
turbine interface whereby cooler gases leak into the main gas path (combustor ﬁlm-cooling 
carryover).  Most turbines are designed such that pressures outside the main gas path are 
higher than those found in the main gas path to insure that the hot combustion gases are not 
ingested below the platform.  If designed properly, this leakage ﬂow could be relied upon as 
a source of coolant.  It is also important to remember that the secondary ﬂows that develop 
are affected by the leakage ﬂows at the vane inlet, as indicated by the previous discussion 
in this section.  Other design variables include roughness effects, ﬁlm-cooling migration 
(as will be discussed), ﬁlm-cooling limitations resulting from internal cooling schemes, and 
cooling hole manufacturing.  Manufacturing of cooling is generally done through the use 
of electro-discharge machining (EDM) or laser drilling with both being subjected to access 
limitations.  Generally, EDM is more expensive than laser drilling and conversely laser 
drilling can tend to be more limited in terms of hole geometries that can be manufactured.
Consider a leakage slot ﬂow between the combustor and turbine whereby the 
coolant is 0.75% of the core ﬂow.  The cooling to the endwall that can be provided is 
shown in ﬁgure 8.  Coolant exits across much of the width of the slot albeit in a very non-
uniform manner.  This non-uniform slot ﬂow arises from the static pressure distribution and 
secondary ﬂow development along the endwall. Although there is a large uncooled region, 
Fig. 6. Non-dimensional heat transfer coefﬁcients (left axis) along 
the endwall approaching the vane leading edge for low  (Sto) and 
high freestream turbulence (St); and augmentation factors (right 
axis) for heat transfer coefﬁcients (reproduced with permission from 
the publisher of ASME).
Source:  R. Radomsky and K. Thole, “High Freestream Turbulence 
Effects in the Endwall Leading Edge Region,” ASME J. of 
Turbomachinery 122 (2000):  699-708.
Fig. 7. Pitchwise averaged non-dimensional heat transfer 
coefﬁcients (left axis) for low and high freestream 
turbulence; and augmentation factors (right axis) for heat 
transfer coefﬁcients (reproduced with permission from 
the publisher of ASME).
Source:  See ﬁg. 6 above.
4.2.3 Airfoil Endwall Heat Transfer
Fig 8.  Measured adiabatic wall 
temperatures for coolant exiting 
a 
combustor/vane 
leakage 
slot 
(reproduced with permission from the 
publisher of ASME).
Source: 
 
D.G. 
Knost 
and 
K. 
Thole, 
“Adiabatic 
Effectiveness 
Measurements of Endwall Film-
Cooling for a First Stage Vane,”  J. 
of Turbomachinery 127 (2005):  297-
305.
2
4
6
8
10
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Tu 
Tu
Augmentation,
St
St/St
o
0.3
0.2
(x10
3)
=19.5%
=1%
St/Sto
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Tu = 19.5%
Tu = 0.6%
Augmentation, St/Sto
St
St/Sto
x/C
(x 10e-03)
x/C

357
often referred to as a bow wake, around much of the vane at the leading edge and along the pressure side of the airfoil, there is also a 
well-cooled region in the center of the passage.  As the slot ﬂow increases, the cooling potential also increases to a point after which the 
beneﬁt is small.    
As was previously mentioned, endwall ﬁlm-cooling has largely been based on designer experience.  One difﬁculty in designing the 
ﬁlm-cooling hole pattern is knowing beforehand the local static pressure along the endwall, which varies greatly along the endwall as 
the ﬂow accelerates through the passage.  If one considers that a single supply feeds all the ﬁlm-cooling holes and inviscid ﬂow through 
the holes, it can be shown that a global, ideal (loss-free) blowing ratio for all the ﬁlm-cooling holes is given by the following equation,
                                                           (3)
where Po,in and ps,in are deﬁned at the inlet to the turbine.  If one then wants to compute the local, ideal blowing ratio for each cooling 
hole (now taking into consideration that the local velocity varies), the following equation can be used
                                                              (4)
where ps,∞ is the local static pressure deﬁned at the exit of the cooling hole.  Equation 4 indicates that the same blowing ratio will occur 
for each hole placed along a constant static pressure line.  Designing an endwall cooling pattern to achieve a uniform blowing ratio is 
one methodology that some companies have used. 
 
Figure 9a shows a cooling hole pattern whereby the holes in the passage were placed along a constant static pressure line. 
Figure 9b shows an endwall cooling hole pattern with holes that were placed on lines parallel to the incoming ﬂow direction.  The 
endwall in Figure 9b also provides the space for including a mid-passage gap that occurs between vanes as the vanes are mated on the 
turbine disk.  Vanes are generally cast in either doublets or singlets and then placed in a turbine disk with some type of seal between the 
vane platforms.  Generally, relatively low levels of coolant leak from this mid-passage gap (less that 0.3%).  Figure 9c shows the same 
ﬁlm-cooling hole pattern as that in ﬁgure 9b with the exception being the mid-passage gap is present in ﬁgure 9c.
 
The coolant ﬂow conditions for all three vanes shown in ﬁgure 9 are the same with 0.75% of the core ﬂow exiting in the form 
of coolant from the upstream slot, 0.5% coolant exiting the ﬁlm-cooling holes and no net coolant ﬂow through the mid-passage gap for 
ﬁgure 9c.  The contours plotted in ﬁgure 9 represent the non-dimensional adiabatic wall temperatures.  As discussed in the previous 
section, adiabatic surface temperatures represent the local ﬂuid temperature.  From all three contour plots in ﬁgure 9, it is clear that the 
upstream slot can deﬁnitely be an important part of cooling mid portion of the endwall.  In comparing ﬁgure 9c to the rest, however, it 
Fig. 9.  Contours of adiabatic effectiveness for two ﬁlm-cooling hole patterns (left and center) with a mid-passage gutter 
for the cooling hole pattern in the center (right) (reproduced with permission from the publisher of ASME).
Source:  See ﬁgure 8 above.
Karen Thole
c
aw
T
T
T
T
−
−
=
η
∞
∞
  
 
9a
9b
9c

358
is also seen that the mid-passage gap limits the area of the cooling present.  The mid-
passage gap provides a convective coolant trough through which coolant from the 
upstream slot enters and passes through the gap along the mid-passage before exiting 
the gap near the trailing edge of the airfoil.
 
The streamlines superimposed upon the experimental measurements of the 
adiabatic wall temperatures presented in ﬁgure 9, were computed using computational 
ﬂuid dynamics (CFD).  These streamlines were extracted from the CFD simulations 
at a location very near to the endwall (less than 2% of the span).  The streamlines, 
for the most part, can be used to predict the trajectory of the coolant ﬂow exiting the 
cooling holes.  There are some regions, however, where the streamlines differ from 
the jet trajectories, such as at the entrance to the passage closer to the pressure side.
 
In comparing all of the cooling hole patterns in ﬁgure 9, it is clear that 
more uniform cooling can be achieved by placing cooling holes along constant static 
pressure lines as in ﬁgure 9a.  All three patterns illustrate the difﬁculty of cooling 
the endwall along the pressure side of the vane and along the leading edge-endwall 
juncture.  In general these are very difﬁcult areas to cool because of the secondary 
ﬂows that were described previously.  The horseshoe vortex in the stagnation region 
can lead to coolant being swept upstream of the holes at low blowing ratios, whereas 
at high blowing ratios the coolant separates from the endwall and impacts the vane 
surface rather than the endwall surface.  Despite the cooling holes injecting coolant 
towards pressure side of the vane, the sweeping motion of the passage vortex prevents 
cooling at the juncture between the pressure side of the vane and the endwall.
4.2.3-5 Leading Edge Modiﬁcations
 
Because industry is concerned with problems at the vane leading edge-
endwall juncture, a number of more recent studies have begun to evaluate geometric 
modiﬁcations to airfoils in this region.  Both overall vane endwall contouring, as 
shown in ﬁgure 10, as well as more speciﬁc geometric features particular to the 
leading edge region have been considered.  At this point there have been three 
different geometric concepts tested for an asymmetric airfoil geometry that include 
the following classiﬁcations:  fences, ﬁllets, and bulbs.  Methods using ﬂow control 
such as suction combined with injection have also been reported but are generally not 
feasible for gas turbines where gas temperatures exceed airfoil melting temperatures. 
Chung and Simon ﬁrst presented their concept for secondary ﬂow control in 1993 
that encompassed using a fence placed in mid-passage between two turbine airfoils1. 
While their tests indicated a reduction in strength of the passage vortex, industry’s 
concern was in cooling the fence and that it acted as a ﬁn conducting heat to the 
platform as it was exposed to the hotter main gas path ﬂuid. 
 
While the ﬁllet and bulb appear to be similar, as shown in ﬁgure 11a, the 
physical concepts behind why there are these two different modiﬁcations are quite 
different.   Sauer et al.  and Becz et al. studied the effects of various sized leading 
edge endwall bulbs as shown in ﬁgure 11a.2  The objective of this modiﬁcation was to 
intensify the suction side branch of the horseshoe vortex and, through an interaction 
of the stronger suction side branch with the passage vortex, weaken the passage 
vortex.  Becz et al. found that when compared with a ﬁllet geometry, such as that 
shown in ﬁgure 11b, there were slightly lower aerodynamic losses for a ﬁllet rather 
than a bulb3.  
 
The philosophy behind the Zess and Thole modiﬁcation, which was a ﬁllet 
as shown in ﬁgure 11b, was to eliminate the leading edge vortex thereby delaying the 
development of the passage vortex4.  They presented a direct comparison between 
measured and predicted ﬂow ﬁelds for an airfoil with no ﬁllet and an airfoil with 
a ﬁllet design.  Their results indicated no presence of a leading edge vortex for a 
ﬁlleted airfoil and a delayed passage vortex.  Moreover, their experimental results 
indicated a large reduction (by more than an order of magnitude in some locations) 
of turbulence levels for a ﬁlleted airfoil.  
The only papers to have considered the endwall heat transfer effects has 
been that of Shih and Lin, Lethander and Thole, and Han and Goldstein (who 
both performed computational studies to evaluate different ﬁllet designs)5.  Shih 
4.2.3 Airfoil Endwall Heat Transfer
 
Fig.11.  Various leading edge geometries: 
a) ﬁllet and bulb designs as shown by Becz 
et al. and b) CFD predictions and ﬂowﬁeld 
measurements for a ﬁlleted vane by Zess and 
Thole (reproduced with permission from the 
publisher of ASME).
Sources:  See notes 2 and 4.
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
-0.25 -0.20 -0.15 -0.10 -0.05
0
z/S
x/C
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
-0.25 -0.20 -0.15 -0.10 -0.05
0
z/S
x/C
(Measured)
(Measured)
Fig.10.  Example of contoured endwall for a 
ﬁrst vane design
Source:  W. Colban, K. Thole, and M. 
Haendler, “Heat Transfer and Film-Cooling 
Measurements on a Stator Vane with Fan-
Shaped Cooling Holes,” International Gas 
Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and 
Exposition, Reno, GT2005-68258.

359
and Lin, investigated not only the use of a leading edge modiﬁcation but also of inlet swirl to control secondary ﬂows in an airfoil 
passage.  Two different modiﬁcations along with no modiﬁcation were considered for three different inlet swirl conﬁgurations: no 
swirl and swirls of opposite rotation with linearly varying swirl angle from endwall to endwall.  The two modiﬁcations differed 
in how they blended into the vane geometry with one fading into the vane surface and the other fading into the endwall.  While 
no single case provided maximum reduction for every metric, a case with inlet swirl and no ﬁllet came very close to doing so.  In 
comparison, the aerodynamic and heat transfer beneﬁts realized for cases with ﬁllets and no inlet swirl were not as great.  The 
computational work by Lethander and Thole combined a three-dimensional computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) package along with 
an optimization package to design an optimal ﬁllet with a rather limited number of independent parameters.  Given their speciﬁed 
constraints, the results from their optimization study indicated a successful ﬁllet design was one that was relatively large.  While 
their aerodynamic losses were predicted to slightly increase with their optimal ﬁllet, the thermal environment for the airfoil platform 
was signiﬁcantly reduced.  Han and Goldstein used the ﬁllet design of Zess and Thole and found that there was a reduction in heat 
transfer but only near the leading edge-endwall juncture6.  In the downstream portion of the passage there was little reduction. 
 
Three-dimensional endwall contouring, which includes a more comprehensive geometric modiﬁcation than simply a 
modiﬁcation to the endwall-airfoil leading edge juncture, has also been investigated computationally by Harvey, et al. and experimentally 
veriﬁed by Hartland, et al.7. To design the endwall contour, they used a linear sensitivity matrix in conjunction with superposition 
methods prior to applying an inverse design algorithm.  The results of the experimental veriﬁcation conﬁrmed a predicted reduction 
in exit ﬂow angle deviations.  Moreover, the experiments indicated a 30% reduction in loss, which was higher than predicted.  In 
a later study, Brennan, et al. and Rose, et al. applied similar computational and experimental (respectively) methodologies as 
Harvey et al. and Hartland, et al.8.  They applied these methods to a high pressure turbine for a single stage in both the vane and 
blade passages.  They reported stage efﬁciency improvements of 0.59%, which exceeded their predicted improvement of 0.4%. 
 
Using endwall contouring and leading edge modiﬁcations show promise in reducing secondary ﬂows; however, there are 
numerous effects that need to be considered.  Because this modiﬁcation must be practically feasible, required manufacturing, space 
limitations, and cooling are all practical issues that must be addressed. Moreover, some of these designs may be sensitive to the inlet 
ﬂow conditions which need to be considered.
4.2.3-6 Other Relevant Vane Endwall Studies
As discussed in the previous section, a number of studies have been completed with regards to vane endwalls.  To form a more 
complete list of studies presented in the literature on this topic, this section describes additional studies of interest.
Blair measured adiabatic effectiveness levels and heat transfer coefﬁcients for a range of blowing ratios through a ﬂush 
slot placed just upstream of the leading edges of a single passage channel9.  One of the key ﬁndings was that the endwall adiabatic 
effectiveness distributions showed extreme variations across the vane gap with much of the coolant being swept across the endwall 
toward the suction side corner.  Granser and Schulenberg reported similar adiabatic effectiveness results in that higher values occurred 
near the suction side of the vane10. 
One of the more detailed endwall ﬁlm cooling studies have been conducted by Friedrichs et al.11.  The results of their studies 
indicated that the endwall cross-ﬂow was altered so that the cross-ﬂow was turned toward the inviscid streamlines as a result of ﬁlm-
cooling injection. There have been a few studies that have measured endwall heat transfer as a result of injection from a two-dimensional, 
ﬂush slot just upstream of the vane.  
A series of experiments have been reported for various injection schemes upstream of a nozzle guide vane with a contoured 
endwall by Burd and Simon, Burd et al., and Oke et al.12.  In the studies presented by Burd and Simon, Burd et al. and Oke et al., coolant 
was injected from an interrupted, ﬂush slot that was inclined at 45° just upstream of their vane13.  Similar to others, they found that most 
of the slot coolant was directed toward the suction side at low slot ﬂow conditions.  As they increased the percentage of slot ﬂow to 3.2% 
of the exit ﬂow, their measurements indicated better coverage occurred between the airfoils.  
Colban et al. reported ﬂow ﬁeld and endwall effectiveness contours for a backward-facing slot with several different coolant 
exit conditions14. Their results indicated the presence of a tertiary vortex that developed in the vane passage due to a peaked total pressure 
proﬁle in the near-wall region.  For all of the conditions simulated, the effectiveness contours indicated the coolant from the slot was 
swept towards the suction surface.  While this study was completed for the same vane geometry as that reported in our paper, the slot 
geometry had been altered to be ﬂush with the endwall surface.
In addition to the previously mentioned studies, the only other studies to have combined an upstream slot with ﬁlm-cooling 
holes in the passage of the vane were those of Kost and Nicklas  and Nicklas15.  One of the most interesting results from the Kost and 
Nicklas, and Nicklas studies was that they found for the upstream leakage slot ﬂow alone, which was 1.3% of the passage mass ﬂow, 
the horseshoe vortex became more intense.  This increase in intensity resulted in the slot coolant being moved off of the endwall surface 
and heat transfer coefﬁcients that were over three times that measured for no slot ﬂow injection.  They attributed the strengthening of 
the horseshoe vortex to the fact that for the no slot injection the boundary layer was already separated with ﬂuid being turned away 
from the endwall at the injection location.  Given that the slot had a normal component of velocity, injection at this location promoted 
the separation and enhanced the vortex.  Their adiabatic effectiveness measurements indicated higher values near the suction side of the 
vane due to the slot coolant migration.  
CFD studies have also been presented to characterize the endwall ﬁlm-cooling.   Results presented by Knost and Thole indicated, 
similar to the experiments, the presence of a warm ring on the endwall (bow wave) around the vane where no coolant was present despite 
the combined slot cooling and ﬁlm-cooling16.  
Karen Thole

360
4.2.3-7 Blade Tip Heat Transfer
The performance of a turbine engine is a strong function of the maximum gas temperature at the rotor inlet. Turbine blade designers 
concentrate on ﬁnding adequate cooling schemes for high pressure turbine blades, particularly the tip region where heat transfer is quite 
high.  The clearance between a blade tip and its associated outer casing, also known as the blade outer air seal, provides a ﬂow path 
across the tip that leads to aerodynamic losses and high heat transfer rates along the blade tip.  The ﬂow within this clearance gap is 
driven by a pressure differential between the pressure and suction side of the blade, 
and is also affected by the viscous forces as the ﬂuid comes into contact with the 
walls of the gap.  A complete description of blade tips and the associated problems 
is given by Bunker and is well described by ﬁgure 1217.  Gap size, rotational effects, 
blade geometries and Reynolds numbers were all highly inﬂuence the heat transfer 
coefﬁcients.  
One method for improving the thermal environment along the blade tip is to 
inject coolant into the tip region.  In a review paper on tip heat transfer, Bunker 
states that for blade tips there have been very few ﬁlm-cooling studies reported in 
the literature even though ﬁlm-cooling is widely used18.  The discussion given in this 
section is relevant to tip ﬁlm-cooling since that is what is typically used in industry.
Many tip heat transfer and ﬁlm-cooling studies have been completed without 
rotational effects.  In general, there is evidence in the literature that supports a widely 
variable effect of rotation, which warrants further studies.  One of the ﬁrst pioneers 
in this region is D. Metzger whereby Kim et al.presents a summary of his work19.  In 
addition to concluding that there is only a weak effect of the relative motion between 
a simulated blade and shroud on tip heat transfer coefﬁcient, they stated that there 
is a strong dependency of cooling effectiveness for a tip on the shape of the hole 
and injection locations.  Four hole conﬁgurations were discussed by Kim et al. that 
included the following: discrete slots located along the blade tip, round holes located 
along the blade tip, angled slots positioned along the pressure side and round holes 
located within the cavity of a squealer tip.  The studies reported by Kim et al. were 
performed in a channel that simulated a tip gap, whereby no blade with its associated 
ﬂow ﬁeld was simulated.  In comparing the discrete slots to the holes, their data 
indicated a substantial increase in cooling effectiveness using the discrete slots for 
all blowing ratios tested.  Injection from the pressure side holes provided cooling levels of similar magnitude to the holes placed on the 
tip with better spreading occurring in the case of the pressure side injection.  Kim et al. also reported that an increase in coolant mass 
ﬂow generally yielded improved cooling with tip surface holes, but for pressure side holes, increased coolant ﬂow yielded decreased 
cooling effectiveness.
Kwak and Han reported measurements for varying tip gaps with cooling holes placed along the pressure surface at a 30˚ breakout 
angle and on the tip surface at a 90˚ angle for both ﬂat and squealer tip geometries20.  They found a substantial improvement in 
effectiveness with the addition of a squealer tip.  The coolant circulated within the squealer tip providing a better distribution of the 
coolant along much of the tip compared with no squealer cases.  Only along parts of the suction side was the cooling effectiveness poor. 
They found that for the ﬂat tip, good cooling was provided to the trailing edge due to the accumulation of coolant that exited in this area. 
Their results also indicated that more coolant resulted in improved effectiveness.  
Results by Christophel et al. compared adiabatic effectiveness levels measured along a blade tip with injection along the pressure 
side of the blade21.  Their results indicated better cooling can be achieved for a small tip gap compared with a large tip gap with 
different ﬂow phenomena occurring for each tip gap setting.  They also found that increased blowing leads to increased augmentations 
in tip convective heat transfer coefﬁcients, particularly at the entrance region to the gap.  When combined with adiabatic effectiveness 
measurements it was found that the coolant provided an overall net heat ﬂux reduction to the blade tip when using ﬁlm-cooling and was 
nearly independent of coolant ﬂow levels.
Fig. 12. CFD prediction of streamlines across a 
blade tip (reproduced with permission from the 
publisher of ASME).
Source:  E.M. Hohlfeld, J.R. Christophel, E. 
L. Couch, and K.A. Thole, “Predictions of 
Cooling from Dirt Purge Holes Along the Tip of 
a Turbine Blade,” GT2003-38251.
4.2.3 Airfoil Endwall Heat Transfer

361
4.2.3-8 Notes
_________________________
 
1. J. T. Chung and T. W. Simon,  “Effectiveness of the Gas Turbine Endwall Fences in Secondary Flow Control at Elevated  
 
    Freestream Turbulence Levels,” ASME 93-GT-51(1993). 
 
2. H. Sauer, R.  Műller, and K. Vogeler,  “Reduction of Secondary Flow Losses in Turbine Cascades by Leading Edge  
 
    Modiﬁcations at the Endwall,” ASME 2000-GT-0473 (2000);S. Becz, M. S.  Majewski, and L. S. Langston,  “Leading Edge  
 
    Modiﬁcations Effects on Turbine Cascade Endwall Loss,” GT2003-38898 (2003). 
 
3. See note 2 above.  
 
4. G. A. Zess and K. A. Thole, “Computational Design and Experimental Evaluation of Using a Leading Edge Fillet on a Gas  
 
    Turbine Vane,” J of Turbomachinery 124 (2002): 167-175. 
 
5. Shih, T. I-P. and Lin, Y.-L., 2002, “Controlling Secondary-Flow Structure by Leading-Edge Airfoil Fillet and Inlet Swirl  
 
    to Reduce Aerodynamic Loss and Surface Heat Transfer,” ASME GT-2002-30529;Lethander, A. and Thole, K. A., 2003,  
 
    “Optimizing the Vane-Endwall Junction to Reduce Adiabatic Wall Temperatures in a Turbine Vane Passage,” ASME Paper GT- 
 
    2003-38940;Han, S. and Goldstein, R., 2005, “Inﬂuence of Blade Leading Edge Geometry on Turbine Endwall Heat (Mass)  
 
    Transfer,” GT2005-68590. 
 
6. See notes 4 and 5 above. 
 
7. J. C. Hartland, P. G. Gregory-Smith, N. W. Harvey, and M. G. Rose,  “Nonaxisymmetric Turbine End Wall Design: Part II  
 
    – Experimental Validation,”  J of Turbomachinery 122 (2000): 286-293;Neil W. Harvey, Martin G. Rose, Mark D. Taylor,  
 
    Jonathan Shahrokh and David G. Groegory-Smith, “Nonaxisymmetric Turbine End Wall Design: Part I – Three-Dimensional  
 
    Linear Design System,” J of Turbomachinery 122 (2000):  278-285. 
 
8. G. Brennan, N. W. Harvey, M. G. Rose, N. Fomison, and M.  Taylor,  “Improving the Efﬁciency of the Trent 500 HP Turbine  
 
    Using Non-Axisymmetric End Walls:  Part 1:  Turbine Design,” ASME 2001-GT-0444 (2001); M. G. Rose, N. W. Harvey, P.  
 
    Seaman, D. A. Newman, and D.  McManus, “Improving the Efﬁciency of the TRENT 500 HP Turbine Using Non-Axisymmetric 
 
    End Walls:  Part 2:  Experimental Validation,” ASME 2001-GT-0505(2001); also see note 7 above. 
 
9. M. F. Blair, “An Experimental Study of Heat Transfer and Film Cooling on Large-Scale Turbine Endwalls,” J of Heat Transfer  
 
    (November 1974): 524-529. 
 
10. D. Granser and T. Schulenberg,  “Prediction and Measurement of Film Cooling Effectiveness for a First-Stage Turbine Vane  
 
      Shroud,”  ASME Paper Number 90-GT-95 (1990). 
 
11. S.  Friedrichs, H. P. Hodson, and W. N. Dawes, “Aerodynamic Aspects of Endwall Film-Cooling,” J of Turbomachinery 119  
 
      (1997): 786-793;.S. Friedrichs, H. P. Hodson,  and W. N. Dawes, “The Design of an Improved Endwall Film-Cooling  
 
      Conﬁguration,” J of Turbomachinery 121 (1999):772-780. 
 
12. S. W. Burd,  and T. W. Simon, “Effects of Slot Bleed Ijection over a Contoured Endwall on Nozzle Guide Vane Cooling  
 
      Performance:  Part I:  Flow Field Measurements,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-199; S. W. Burd, C. J. Satterness, and T. W.  
 
      Simon, “Effects of Slot Bleed Ijection over a Contoured Endwall on Nozzle Guide Vane Cooling Performance:  Part II Thermal  
 
      Measurements,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-200; R. Oke, T. Simon, S. W.  Burd, and R. Vahlberg,  “Measurements in a Turbine  
 
      Cascade Over a Contoured Endwall:  Discrete Hole Injection of Bleed Flow,” ASME Paper Number 2000-GT-214; R. Oke,  
 
      T.  Simon, T. Shih, B. Zhu, Y.L.  Lin, and M. Chyu,  “Measurements Over a Film-Cooled, Contoured Endwall with Various  
 
      Coolant Injection Rates,” ASME Paper Number 2001-GT-140. 
 
13. Ibid. 
 
14. W. F. Colban, K. A. Thole, and G. Zess,  “Combustor-Turbine Interface Studies: Part 1: Endwall Measurements,” J 
 
      of Turbomachinery 125 (2002):.193-202; W. F. Colban, A. T. Lethander, K. A.  Thole, and G. Zess,  “Combustor-Turbine  
 
      Interface Studies: Part 2: Flow and Thermal Field Measurements,” J of Turbomachinery 125 (2002):.203-209. 
 
15. F. Kost and M. Nicklas,  “Film-Cooled Turbine    Endwall in a Transonic Flow Field:  Part I – Aerodynamic Measurements,”   
 
      ASME Paper Number 2001-GT-0145 (2001);M. Nicklas,  “Film-Cooled Turbine Endwall in a Transonic Flow Field:  Part II  
 
      – Heat Transfer and Film-Cooling Effectiveness Measurements,”  ASME Paper Number 2001-GT-0146 (2001). 
 
16. D. K. Knost, and K. A. Thole,  “Computational Predictions of   Endwall Film-Cooling for a First Stage Vane,” GT-2003-38252. 
 
17. R. Bunker, “Turbine Blade Tip Design and Tip Clearance Treatment,” von Karman Lecture Series 2004-02 (2003). 
 
18. R. S. Bunker,  “A Review of Turbine Blade Tip Heat Transfer,” Turbine 2000 Symposium on Heat Transfer in Gas Turbine  
 
      Systems, Cesme, Turkey, 2000. 
 
19. Y. W. Kim and D. E. Metzger,  “Heat Transfer and Effectiveness on Film Cooled Turbine Blade Tip Models,” J of  
 
      Turbomachinery 117 (1995);Y. W. Kim, J. P. Downs, F. O. Soechting, W.  Abdel-Messeh, G.  Steuber,  and S. Tanrikut, “A  
 
      Summary of the Cooled Turbine Blade Tip Heat Transfer and Film Effectiveness Investigations Performed by Dr. D. E.  
 
      Metzger,” J of Turbomachinery 117(1995): 1-11. 
 
20. J. S. Kwak and J. C. Han,  “Heat Transfer Coefﬁcient and Film-Cooling Effectiveness on a Gas Turbine Blade Tip,” GT2002- 
 
      30194;J. S. Kwak and J. C. Han,  “Heat Transfer Coefﬁcient and Film-Cooling Effectiveness on the Squealer Tip of a Gas  
 
      Turbine Blade,” GT2002-30555. 
Karen Thole

362
362
4.2.3 Airfoil Endwall Heat Transfer
 
21. J. R. Christophel, K. A. Thole, and F. Cunha,  “Cooling the Tip of a Turbine Blade Using Pressure Side Holes—Part 1: Film  
 
      Effectiveness Measurements,” J of Turbomachinery 127 (2005): 270-277; J. R. Christophel, K. Thole, and F. Cunha,   
 
      “Cooling the Tip of a Turbine Blade Using Pressure Side Holes—Part 2:  Heat Transfer Measurements,” J of  
 
      Turbomachinery 127 (2005): 278-286.

4.1 Introduction
4.2.3 Airfoil Endwall Heat Transfer 
Dr. Karen Thole holds a Professorship in Mechanical Engineering at Penn State University.
Her B.S. and M.S. degrees are in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Illinois, 
and her Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering is from the University of Texas at Austin.  After receiving 
her Ph.D. in 1992, she spent two years as a post-doctoral researcher at the University of Karslruhe 
in Karslruhe Germany.  After her post-doctoral position, she accepted an assistant professor 
position at the University of Wisconsin-Madison where she taught and performed research in 
the Mechanical Engineering Department.  In 1999 she accepted a position in the Mechanical 
Engineering Department at Virginia Tech where she was promoted to full professor in 2003.  Dr. 
Thole’s areas of expertise are heat transfer and ﬂ uid mechanics specializing in understanding high 
freestream turbulance effects.  Over the past few years she has developed a number of unique 
testing facilities directed towards gas turbine heat transfer issues including a combustor simulator 
that simulates the ﬂ ow ﬁ eld effects relevant to those entering the turbine section of an engine.  Dr. 
Thole has been responsible for attracting research funding amounting to over $4 million from such 
agencies at the Department of Energy, US Air Force, Pratt & Whitney, Modine Manufacturing, 
Siemens-Westinghouse and the National Science Foundation.  She has published over 100 peer 
reviewed papers with a number of these presentations given to international audiences. 
Karen Thole
William S. Cross Professor
Mechanical Eng. Dept, Penn State Univ.
University Park, PA 16802-1412
phone: (814) 865-2519
email: kthole@psu.edu
BIOGRAPHY  
