285
285
3.2.2.2-1 Introduction
 
Large frame gas turbine engines employ three different types of 
combustion systems: diffusion ﬂ ame, lean premixed combustion and catalytic 
combustion.  In diffusion ﬂ ame combustors the fuel and air are injected separately 
into the combustion zone where they mix and react.   Because of the nature of 
the design, these combustion systems tend to have ﬂ ame temperatures that are 
typical of stoichiometric combustion and therefore produce high NOx emissions. 
Obtaining reasonable emissions from a diffusion ﬂ ame combustion system generally 
requires the injection of diluents into the combustion section to lower the ﬂ ame 
temperature, typically either water or steam.  At current F-class ﬁ ring temperatures 
these systems can produce NOx emissions in the range of 25 ppm NOx.  In the 
lean premixed combustion system, the fuel and air are allowed to premix upstream 
of the ﬂ ame zone.  This results in a signiﬁ cantly lower ﬂ ame temperature than 
the standard diffusion ﬂ ame combustor resulting in lower NOx emissions without 
the need to inject water or steam.  The limitation on low emissions from the lean 
premixed combustion systems is the combustion instabilities which occur as the 
lean ﬂ ammability limit of the mixture is approached.  These instabilities can lead 
to large pressure ﬂ uctuation in the combustion chamber.  At F class temperatures 
the lean premixed combustion system can obtain NOx emissions in the range 
of 7-9 ppm.  The catalytic combustion system shows promise to achieve lower 
emissions because the combustion instabilities at the lean ﬂ ammability limit are 
no longer a limiting factor. Although catalytic combustion systems have not yet 
been employed in large industrial gas turbines, results from current development 
are encouraging and emissions in the range of 2-3 ppm are achievable.
3.2.2.2-2 Catalytic Combustion Design
 
The major development effort for catalytic combustion in large frame gas 
turbine engines was initiated as part of the DOE ATS program1.  The goal of the 
ATS program was the development of a high–efﬁ ciency, high-ﬁ ring temperature 
engine (>1700 K) with NOx emissions less than 10 ppm for lean premixed systems 
and 5 ppm for the catalytic system. On this program the basic design of the catalytic 
combustor for a large industrial gas turbine was developed.  Since this program, 
considerable progress has been made on the design.
 
At the high ﬁ ring temperatures of a typical gas turbine engine, it is not 
possible to design a pure catalytic approach where all of the fuel is reacted in the 
catalyst section.  In the current design philosophy a hybrid catalytic two stage 
system is employed where the catalyst stage is followed with a homogeneous 
burnout region.  Generally these systems will react 20-40% of the fuel in the 
catalytic stage.  By reacting a portion of the fuel in the catalyst the stability of the 
ﬂ ame in the homogeneous burnout zone is signiﬁ cantly improved.  The hybrid 
catalytic combustion systems that have been investigated for large gas turbine 
engines are the lean catalytic lean burn (LCL) design and the rich catalytic lean 
burn (RCL) design.
 
Figure 1 shows the basic concept of the LCL design.  In this design all 
of the fuel and air are premixed upstream and enter the catalyst section under fuel 
lean conditions. At the end of the catalyst section any fuel not reacted is burned out 
in a homogeneous reaction zone.  To insure proper catalyst activity, this concept 
requires an inlet temperature of fuel air mixture to the catalyst of approximately 
500 C.  Since this temperature is higher than the compressor exit temperature of 
a typical gas turbine engine, a preburner will be necessary to achieve the desired 
catalyst inlet conditions.  Operation of the catalyst in the lean region requires very 
close control of the air fuel ratio in the vicinity of the catalyst to avoid high reaction 
rates and excessive catalyst temperatures.  The lean combustion concept has been 
pursued by Catalytica in their patented Xonon technology.  This technology has 
been commercially operated on a small scale in the Kawasaki 1.5 MW engine. 
On large frame engines this technology has been studied by General Electric and 
Siemens Westinghouse.
3.2.2.2 
Catalytic Combustion in 
Large Frame Industrial 
Gas Turbines
Walter Ray Laster
Siemens Power Generation 
Corporation
4400 Alafaya Trail MC Q3 -042
Orlando, FL 32826
phone: (407) 736-5796
email: walter.laster@siemens.com

286
 
Figure 2 shows a basic concept of the RCL design.  In this design the inlet air ﬂow to the catalyst is separated into two streams. 
A portion of the air is mixed with the fuel and reacts on the surface of the catalyst under fuel rich conditions.  The remaining air is 
used to backside cool the catalyst.  The two streams mix at the catalyst exit and then react and burnout in the homogeneous reaction 
zone.  By operating the catalyst in the fuel rich region, the reaction rate is limited by the rate of diffusion of oxygen to the catalyst 
surface.  Therefore this design is able to tolerate wider variations in air fuel ratio within the catalyst region than the LCL design.  In this 
design the preburner is no longer required as the fuel and air react at compressor exit temperature typical of gas turbine engines.  The 
choice of catalyst material is critical for this design in order to insure proper catalyst lightoff.  Precision Combustion, Inc and Siemens 
Westinghouse have pursued the RCL combustion design2.
                 
B.S . Cooled Catalytic Reactor
Burnout of CH4 and CO
Mix Reacted and Non-Reacted 
Effluent
Air + Fuel @ 950F/500C
Inlet
Catalyst
Mixing
Flame
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. LCL Combustion System
 
Rich Catalytic/Lean Burn Module (ATCC3 PCI)
Air @ 750F/400C
No preburner
Air-Cooled Catalytic Reactor
Mix Air w/ Partially Reacted 
Fuel/Air
Fuel + Air @ 750F/400C
Burnout of
CH4 and CO
Catalyst
Fuel Inlet, with Air
Air Inlet
Flame
Mixing
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. RCL Combustion System

287
3.2.2.2-3 Rich Catalytic Combustion Applied to Large Gas Turbine Engines
 
As part of the ATS program, Siemens 
Westinghouse performed an evaluation of both 
the RCL and LCL systems. Based on subscale 
module testing of both technologies, it was clear 
that either design could meet the emission targets 
of the catalytic program.  The RCL design was 
chosen for two main reasons.  By eliminating 
the pre-burner, the design was much more 
compact and could be easily ﬁt into the existing 
envelope of the current gas turbine combustor 
without major modiﬁcation to the casing.  Also 
because of the operation in the rich region the 
design was much more tolerant of variations 
in both air and fuel ﬂow.  Over ﬁring tests 
were performed on both designs and the RCL 
design was able to survive a severe over fuel 
transient without damage. This was not the case 
for the LCL design. Under the ATS program, 
the basic design of the RCL catalytic module 
was developed and the conceptual design of 
catalytic basket was developed.  This design 
was continued for application to the lower ﬁring 
temperature SGT6-3000E engine.  Full scale 
basket testing was performed on this design at 
both E-class and F-class ﬁring temperatures.
 
During the initial development phase 
of the RCL design, testing was performed on the 
subscale module level. The full scale combustor 
basket was divided into 6 individual subscale 
modules each of which was designed to operate 
at 1/6 of the total combustor basket ﬂow. The 
basic design of the RCL catalytic module is 
shown in ﬁgure 3.  In this design the catalyst 
is composed of tubes with catalytic coating on 
the outside surface.  These tubes are brazed to a 
plate on the upstream end and ﬂared on the down 
stream end.  A portion of the inlet air (~15%) 
enters the fuel mixing chamber where fuel is 
injected and allowed to mix before entering the 
catalyst region.  This rich fuel air mixture ﬂows 
along the outside of the tubes and is allowed to 
react on the catalyst surface.  The remaining 
air enters the inside of the tubes and provides 
backside cooling for the catalyst surface.  Both 
streams are allowed to mix down stream of the 
catalyst zone before they enter the homogeneous 
reaction zone.  The ratio of air ﬂow between 
the reacting fuel region and the cooling air is 
determined by pressure drops between the two 
ﬂow paths. For a given design the fuel split 
is ﬁxed.  Figure 4 shows the catalytic module 
design used for testing.
 
Catalytic module testing was performed 
at full engine conditions for both the STG-6-
3000E and the STG-6-5000F engines. Module 
testing conﬁrmed that emissions could be 
maintained at less than 2 ppm NOx and 10 ppm 
Cooli
ng
Air
Inlet
~85%
306 - Tubes with Catalytic Coating on the Outside
Mixing Zone
Air Inlet
(~15%)
Fuel Inlet
Gas 
Jets
45o
Reactive 
Mixture
Fuel-MixerFuel
Manifold
Cooli
ng
Air
Inlet
~85%
306 - Tubes with Catalytic Coating on the Outside
Mixing Zone
Air Inlet
(~15%)
Fuel Inlet
Gas 
Jets
45o
Reactive 
Mixture
Fuel-MixerFuel
Manifold
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Rich Catalytic Module Design
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Rich Catalytic Module Design
 
Fig. 5. Catalytic Combustor for the Siemens SGT6-5000F Engine 
Walter Ray Laster

288
288
CO for a wide range of conditions including both the E and F class engines. 
Throughout all conditions the catalyst and metal temperatures remained within 
limits.  
 
A full scale combustor basket was designed using 6 catalytic modules 
surrounded by a central pilot3.  Figure 5 shows the combustor conﬁ guration 
envisioned for use in the Siemens gas turbine engine. The pilot is necessary 
to insure stable operation of the combustor basket at low loads.  The goal of 
the design is to minimize or completely shut off the fuel ﬂ ow to the pilot at 
baseload conditions.  Although the pilot contributes to NOx emissions, this can 
be minimized by replacing the standard diffusion pilot design with a premixed 
pilot. Based on this concept, a full scale basket was fabricated and tested at the 
Siemens full pressure single basket test facility in Italy.  This facility duplicates 
the geometry and ﬂ ow conditions (pressure, temperature, air and fuel ﬂ ow) of 
a single basket as installed in a Siemens gas turbine engine. Data was obtained 
for a range of ﬁ ring temperatures encompassing the SGT-6-3000E and the 
SGT-6-5000F engines.  The basket used for these tests is shown in ﬁ gure 6.  
 
As expected, the emissions for the full basket tests were slightly 
higher than those of the module tests due to the pilot.  For the SGT-6-3000E 
engine it was necessary to add dilution air to raise the combustor temperature 
in order to achieve proper CO burnout.  At these conditions the catalytic 
combustion system was able to produce emissions of 3.3 ppm NOx and 7 ppm 
CO.  When the temperature was increased to SGT-6-5000F conditions, the 
improved stability at higher temperatures enabled the combustor to run at a 
signiﬁ cantly lower pilot fraction.  The resulting NOx and CO emissions were 
nearly the same as for the lower ﬁ ring temperature conditions, 3.6 ppm NOx 
and 9 ppm CO.  Basket and catalyst metal temperatures and combustor pressure 
oscillations were well below the design limits during the test. As part of this 
test program, an overﬁ ring test was performed, with no damage to the catalytic 
module components.
3.2.2.2-4 Conclusions
 
The rich catalytic combustion approach has been designed for application to the Siemens SGT-6-3000E and STG-6-5000F 
engine.  Rig testing has shown that the design is capable of emissions in the range of 2 –3 ppm at SGT-6-5000F temperatures. This design 
has been shown to be robust with respect to variation in air and fuel ﬂ ow. Additional work is underway to reduce the emissions. Current 
development on the RCL concept is focused on the fuel ﬂ exibility aspects of the design and the application to syngas and hydrogen 
fuels.
3.2.2.2-5 Notes
_________________________
1. D.B Fant,G.S. Jackson, H. Karim, D.M. Newburry, P. Dutta, K.O. Smith, and R.W. Dibble, “Status of Catalytic Combustion R&D 
       for the Department of Energy Advanced Turbine Systems Program,” ASME Journal of Enginering for Gas Turbines and Power,     
       (2000): 293-300.
2. L. Smith, et al, US Patent No. 6,174,159, “Method and Apparatus for a Catalytic Firebox Reactor,” 1999; W.C. Pfefferle, L. 
        Smith, M.J. Castaldi, US Patent No. 6,358,040, “Method and Apparatus for a Fuel Rich Catalytic Reactor,” 2000.
3. D.M. Newburry, US Patent No. 6,415,608, “Piloted Rich-Catalytic Lean-Burn Hybrid Combustor,” 2000.
Fig. 6. Full Scale Catalytic Combustor
3.2.2.2 Catalytic Combustion in Large Frame Industrial Gas Turbines

3.2.2.2 Catalytic Combustion in Large Frame Industrial Gas Turbines
Walter Ray Laster
Siemens Power Generation
4400 Alafaya Trail MC Q3 -042
Orlando, FL 32826
phone: 407-736-5796
email: walter.laster@siemens.com
Dr Laster has a Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from Purdue University with a specialty in the 
area of combustion.  He taught combustion and heat transfer at Texas A&M University.  He has 12 
years industrial experience in the gas turbine ﬁ eld at Siemens Westinghouse.  He has been involved 
in the design of dry low NOx combustors and catalytic combustion systems. He has been involved 
in several projects related to alternatuve fuels for gas turbine systems.
BIOGRAPHY  
