67
67
1.2.1-1 Introduction
What is gasiﬁ cation?
 
Gasiﬁ cation is a process in which combustible materials are partially oxi-
dized or partially combusted.  The product of gasiﬁ cation is a combustible synthesis 
gas, or syngas.  Because gasiﬁ cation involves the partial, rather than complete, oxi-
dization of the feed, gasiﬁ cation processes operate in an oxygen-lean environment. 
As ﬁ gure 1 indicates, the stoichiometric oxygen-to-coal ratio for combustion is al-
most four times the stoichiometric oxygen-to-coal ratio for gasiﬁ cation of Illinois #6 
coal.  
 
Just as most combustion-based processes such as power plants operate with 
excess oxygen to ensure complete conversion of the fuel, gasiﬁ cation processes also 
typically operate above their stoichiometric oxygen-to-fuel ratio to ensure near com-
plete conversion to syngas.  The amount of oxygen used in gasiﬁ cation, however, is 
always far less than that used in combustion and typically is less than half.
 
In addition to coal, gasiﬁ cation processes can use petroleum coke, biomass, 
heavy oil, or even natural gas as the feedstock; however, this document will focus on 
coal gasiﬁ cation processes.
Comparison to coal combustion 
(advantages/disadvantages)
 
As indicated in ﬁ gure 1, the products of reaction change signiﬁ cantly as 
the oxygen-to-fuel ratio changes from combustion to gasiﬁ cation conditions.  These 
changes are summarized in table 1.  Because the mixture under gasifying conditions 
is fuel-rich, there are not enough oxygen atoms available to fully react with the feed. 
Consequently, instead of producing CO2, the carbon in the feed is converted primar-
ily to CO, and the hydrogen in the fuel is converted mostly to H2 rather than H2O. 
Both CO and H2 are excellent fuels for use in a combustion turbine; however, their 
combustion characteristics are signiﬁ cantly different from natural gas.  
1.2.1
Fig. 1. Diagram showing the products of reaction as a function of oxygen-to-
coal ratio  ( Reprinted from M. Ramezan,  “Coal-based Gasiﬁ cation Technolo-
gies: An Overview” NETL Gasiﬁ cation Technologies Training Course, Sept. 
2004.)
Different Types of Gasiﬁ ers 
and Their Integration with 
Gas Turbines
Jeffrey Phillips
EPRI / Advanced Coal Generation
P.O. Box 217097
Charlotte, NC 28221
phone: (704) 595-2250
email:  jphillip@epri.com

68
Table 1  Comparison of the primary products created by the 
main fuel constituents in combustion and gasiﬁcation


		
Carbon
CO2
CO
Hydrogen
H2O
H2
Nitrogen
NO, NO2
HCN, NH3 or N2
Sulfur
SO2 or SO3
H2S or COS
Water
H2O
H2
 
The fate of the fuel’s nitrogen and sulfur in a gasiﬁcation process has important and beneﬁcial consequences on the environ-
mental performance of an IGCC.  Fuel-bound nitrogen, which is predominantly converted to NOx in combustion, is converted to N2, 
NH3 or HCN in gasiﬁcation.  As discussed in the “Syngas Clean-up Requirements” section of this chapter, both NH3 and HCN can be 
removed to very low levels with the resulting cleaned syngas having essentially no fuel-bound nitrogen.  This signiﬁcantly limits NOx 
emissions of an IGCC.
 
The sulfur in fuel produces SOx in combustion processes but is converted to H2S and COS in gasiﬁcation conditions.  As will 
be described further on, both H2S and COS can be removed from the syngas using technology developed for the natural gas industry 
to levels of less than 20 ppm, which means that more than 99% of the sulfur can be removed from the fuel and will not be emitted as 
SOx.
 
Another major difference between combustion and gasiﬁcation is the amount of heat that is released by the chemical reactions. 
In combustion, all of the fuel’s chemical energy is released as heat (assuming it is fully converted), but in gasiﬁcation most of the fuel’s 
chemical energy is not released as heat.  In fact, an important measure of the efﬁciency of a gasiﬁcation process is the fraction of the 
feedstock’s chemical energy, or heating value, which remains in the product syngas.  This fraction is termed the “cold gas efﬁciency,” 
and most commercial-scale gasiﬁcation processes have a cold gas efﬁciency of at least 65% and some exceed 80%.  
 
Because signiﬁcantly less heat is released by the gasiﬁcation process, it is important to limit the amount of heat that is trans-
ferred out of the zone where the gasiﬁcation reactions are occurring.  If not, the temperatures within the gasiﬁcation zone could be too 
low to allow the reactions to go forward (a minimum of 1000oC or 1800oF is typically needed to gasify coal).  Consequently, unlike a 
boiler where the entire ﬁrebox is lined with water-ﬁlled tubes that capture the heat released by the process and produce steam, many 
gasiﬁers are refractory-lined with no water cooling to ensure as little heat loss as possible.  Gasiﬁers also typically operate at elevated 
pressure, sometimes as high as 6.2 MPa (900 psia), which allows them to have very compact construction with minimum surface area 
and minimal heat loss.
1.2.1-2  Generic Types of Gasiﬁers
Moving Bed
 
A diagram of a generic moving bed gasiﬁer is shown in ﬁgure 2. Moving bed gasiﬁers are countercurrent ﬂow reactors in which 
the coal enters at the top of the reactor and air or oxygen enters at the bottom.  As the coal slowly moves down through the reactor, it 
is gasiﬁed and the remaining ash drops out of the bottom of the reactor.  Because of the countercurrent ﬂow arrangement, the heat of 
reaction from the gasiﬁcation reactions serves to pre-heat the coal before it enters the gasiﬁcation reaction zone.  Consequently, the 
temperature of the syngas exiting the gasiﬁer is signiﬁcantly lower than the temperature needed for complete conversion of the coal.
Fig. 2. Diagram of a generic moving bed gasiﬁer

69
The residence time of the coal within a moving bed gasiﬁer may be on the order of hours.
Moving bed gasiﬁers have the following characteristics:1 
• 
Low oxidant requirements;
• 
Relatively high methane content in the produced gas;
• 
Production of hydrocarbon liquids, such as tars an oils;
• 
High “cold gas” thermal efﬁciency when the heating value of the hydrocarbon liquids are included;
• 
Limited ability to handle ﬁnes; and
• 
Special requirements for handling caking coal.
Fluidized Bed
 
A diagram of a generic ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁer is shown in ﬁgure 3.  A ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁer is a back-mixed or well-stirred reac-
tor in which there is a consistent mixture of new coal particles mixed in with older, partially gasiﬁed and fully gasiﬁed particles.  The 
mixing also fosters uniform temperatures throughout the bed.  The ﬂow of gas into the reactor (oxidant, steam, recycled syngas) must 
be sufﬁcient to ﬂoat the coal particles within the bed but not so high as to entrained them out of the bed.  However, as the particles are 
gasiﬁed, they will become smaller and lighter and will be entrained out of the reactor.  It is also important that the temperatures within 
the bed are less than the initial ash fusion temperature of the coal to avoid particle agglomeration.
 
Typically a cyclone downstream of the gasiﬁer will capture the larger particles that are entrained out and these particles are 
recycled back to the bed.  Overall, the residence time of coal particles in a ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁer is shorter than that of a moving bed 
gasiﬁer.
Fig. 3. Diagram of a generic ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁer
Generic characteristics of ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁers include:2 
• 
Extensive solids recycling;
• 
Uniform and moderate temperature; and
• 
Moderate oxygen and steam requirements.
Entrained Flow
 
A diagram of a generic entrained ﬂow gasiﬁer is shown in ﬁgure 4.   Finely-ground coal is injected in co-current ﬂow with the 
oxidant.  The coal rapidly heats up and reacts with the oxidant.  The residence time of an entrained ﬂow gasiﬁer is on the order of sec-
onds or tens of seconds.  Because of the short residence time, entrained ﬂow gasiﬁers must operate at high temperatures to achieve high 
carbon conversion.  Consequently, most entrained ﬂow gasiﬁers use oxygen rather than air and operate above the slagging temperature 
of the coal.
Generic characteristics of entrained ﬂow gasiﬁers include:3
• 
High-temperature slagging operation;
• 
Entrainment of some molten slag in the raw syngas;
• 
Relatively large oxidant requirements;
• 
Large amount of sensible heat in the raw syngas; and
• 
Ability to gasify all coal regardless of rank, caking characteristics or amount of ﬁnes.
Jeffrey Phillips

70
Fig. 4. Diagram of a generic entrained ﬂow gasiﬁer
Hybrid & Novel Gasiﬁers
 
In addition to the three main classiﬁcations of gasiﬁer types (moving bed, ﬂuidized bed, and entrained ﬂow) there are also gas-
iﬁers that are based on either hybrid combinations of those three classiﬁcations or novel processes such as a molten metal bath.
 
The transport reactor-based gasiﬁer developed by Kellogg Brown & Root (KBR) is an example of a hybrid gasiﬁer as it has 
characteristics of both a ﬂuidized bed and an entrained ﬂow gasiﬁer.  The KBR gasiﬁer will be described in more detail in the sub-section 
covering “pre-commercial” gasiﬁers.
1.2.1-3  Other Design Options
 
In addition to the generic reactor designs of a gasiﬁcation process, there are several other design options that a gasiﬁcation 
process can have.  Each of these options can have important impacts on the downstream processes in an IGCC including the combined 
cycle.
Atmospheric vs Pressurized
 
Gasiﬁers can operate at either atmospheric pressure or at pressures as high as 62 bar (900 psia).   Pressurized gasiﬁers are better 
suited for IGCC operation since the pressure of product syngas will be sufﬁcient to be fed directly into the GT fuel control system.  Low 
pressure or atmospheric pressure gasiﬁers will require a fuel gas compressor after the syngas clean-up processes.
 
High pressure gasiﬁers also have a positive impact on the cost and performance of the syngas clean-up section.  Because the 
volumetric ﬂow of the syngas is much smaller than it would be for an atmospheric process, the size of the clean-up equipment is smaller. 
For example, Hg capture can be accomplished by passing the syngas through a sulfur-impregnated, activated carbon bed.  The size of 
the bed is dictated by the residence time of the syngas in the bed.  Therefore, a smaller volumetric ﬂow of syngas will result in a smaller 
carbon bed.   
 
If CO2 capture is required in future IGCCs, high pressure gasiﬁer operation will improve the performance of physical absorp-
tion processes that can remove CO2 from the syngas.
Dry Feed vs Slurry Feed
 
Coal is typically fed into a pressurized gasiﬁer either pneumatically as a dry solid or pumped as coal-water slurry.  Slurry-fed 
feed systems have a lower capital cost, but result in less efﬁcient conversion of coal to syngas (referred to as the “cold gas efﬁciency” 
of the gasiﬁer).  This is because some of the syngas must be “burned” in order to generate the heat needed to vaporize the water in the 
slurry.  Consequently, the syngas produced by a slurry-fed gasiﬁer typically has more CO2 in it than a dry-fed gasiﬁer.  This is not det-
rimental to GT operations since the CO2 can act as an effective diluent for NOx control; however, it does impact the design of the “acid 
gas removal” section of the IGCC as that process must use a solvent which allows the CO2 to pass through with the syngas rather than 
being stripped out with the sulfur species.
Air-blown versus Oxygen-blown
 
Oxygen for the gasiﬁcation reactions can be provided by either air or high purity oxygen produced by a cryogenic air separation 
unit (ASU).  Air-blown gasiﬁers avoid the large capital cost of an ASU but produce a much lower caloriﬁc value syngas than oxygen-
blown gasiﬁers.  The nitrogen in the air typically dilutes the syngas by a factor of 3 compared to oxygen-blown gasiﬁcation.  Therefore, 
while a syngas caloriﬁc value of 300 Btu/scf might be typical from an oxygen-blown gasiﬁer, an air-blown gasiﬁer will typically produce 
syngas with a caloriﬁc value of 100 Btu/scf.  This has a signiﬁcant impact on the design of the combustion system of the GT.
 
Because the nitrogen in air must be heated to the gasiﬁer exit temperature by burning some of the syngas, air-blown gasiﬁcation 
is more favorable for gasiﬁers which operate at lower temperatures (i.e. non-slagging).
Different Types of Gasiﬁers and Their Integration with Gas Turbines
1.2.1

71
 
Air-blown gasiﬁers also have a negative impact on CO2 capture.  Because of the dilution effect of the nitrogen, the partial 
pressure of CO2 in air-blown gasiﬁer syngas will be one-third of that from an oxygen-blown gasiﬁer.  This increases the cost and 
decreases the effectiveness of the CO2 removal equipment.
Quench versus Heat Recovery
 
A ﬁnal design option involves the method for cooling the syngas produced by the gasiﬁer.  Regardless of the type of gasiﬁer, 
the exiting syngas must be cooled down to approximately 100oC in order to utilize conventional acid gas removal technology.  This 
can be accomplished either by passing the syngas through a series of heat exchangers which recover the sensible heat for use in the 
steam cycle of the IGCC, or by directly contacting the syngas with relatively cool water.  This latter process is called a “quench” and 
it results in some of the quench water being vaporized and mixed with the syngas.  The quenched syngas is saturated with water and 
must pass through a series of condensing heat exchanges which remove the moisture from the syngas (so it can be recycled to the 
quench zone).
 
Quench designs have a negative impact on the heat rate of an IGCC as the sensible heat of the high temperature syngas is 
converted to low level process heat rather than high pressure steam.  However, quench designs have much lower capital costs and can 
be justiﬁed when low cost feedstock is available.  Quench designs also have an advantage if CO2 capture is desired.  The saturated 
syngas exiting a quench section has near the optimum H2O/CO ratio for feed into a water-gas shift catalyst which will convert the CO 
in the syngas to CO2.  Non-quench designs that require CO2 capture will have to add steam to the syngas before it is sent to a water-gas 
shift reactor. 
1.2.1-4  Integrating with a Combined Cycle
Syngas Clean-Up Requirements
 
Before syngas can be fed to a GT, it must pass through a series of clean-up steps in order to remove species that would either 
harm the environment or the GT itself.
 
Particulate Matter qualiﬁes as being both bad for the environment and the gas turbine.  Particulates can be removed by “dry” 
processes such as a cyclone and rigid barrier ﬁlter or by “wet” processes such as a venturi scrubber.  
 
Gas turbines are fairly tolerant of sulfur species in the fuel.  A typical OEM speciﬁcation will call for no more than 250 ppmv 
of sulfur in the fuel.   Concentrations of sulfur greater than that will cause unacceptably rapid corrosion of hot section parts.   Even 
250 ppmv of sulfur in the fuel would result in a relatively high sulfuric acid dewpoint in the exhaust gas.  This would limit the amount 
of heat that could be recovered from the exhaust in the HRSG.  To allow stack gas temperatures that are typical of natural gas ﬁred 
combined cycles, the sulfur content of the syngas should be no more than 30 ppmv.
 
A coal with 1wt. % sulfur will typically produce a syngas with 3000 ppmv sulfur.  Obviously a sulfur removal step is required 
in order to meet the OEM’s fuel sulfur speciﬁcation.  As described earlier, well-proven technologies from the natural gas industry ex-
ist that can remove more than 99% of the H2S and COS in the syngas.   This also allows IGCCs to beat US New Source Performance 
Standards for sulfur emissions from coal-fueled power plants by a comfortable margin.
  
Nitrogen-containing species other than N2 must be removed to a low level to prevent formation of “fuel-bound NOx” in the 
GT combustor.  HCN and NH3 concentrations typically are on the order of hundreds of ppmv in raw syngas.  Because of its high solu-
bility in water, NH3 can be easily washed out of the syngas by contacting it with water in a counter-ﬂow packed column (the water then 
must be treated with neutralizing chemicals).  Catalysts have been developed which promote the reaction of HCN with water vapor to 
produce NH3 and CO.  Therefore, a HCN conversion catalyst is typically installed upstream of the NH3 water wash column.  
 
Chlorides must be removed from the syngas to prevent corrosion in the GT hot section.  HCl is quite soluble in water, and 
therefore the same water wash which removes NH3 for NOx control, will also remove chlorides to an acceptable level.
 
While it is not necessary for protection of the GT, mercury vapor in the syngas can be removed by passing the syngas through 
an activated carbon bed.  This bed will also remove heavy metal species such as arsenic, which can cause problems in the GT.
Air-Side Integration
 
For oxygen-blown gasiﬁers in an IGCC, the air for the ASU can be supplied by a stand-alone, electric motor-driven compres-
sor or it can be extracted from the discharge of the GT compressor.  It could also be supplied by a combination of those two options. 
 
Extracting the air from the GT has efﬁciency advantages (the electrical losses in the GT generator and compressor motor are 
avoided), but experience at two European IGCCs which rely solely on GT compressor discharge air for their ASUs has shown that it 
can be operationally difﬁcult, particularly during start-up.
 
Consensus is growing that using a combination of a stand-alone, electric motor-driven compressor and GT air extraction is 
the best option for supplying the ASU.  Typical designs call for at least 50% of the air to be supplied by the stand-alone compressor.
Steam-Side Integration
 
For IGCC which have a syngas cooler to recover heat from the hot syngas, there are two options for the steam that is pro-
duced by the syngas cooler.  The ﬁrst option is to send the steam to the HRSG of the combined cycle for superheating and reheating. 
The steam is combined with the steam produced by the HRSG and drives a single steam turbine.  The second option is to provide 
some level of superheat within the syngas cooler and send the steam to a separate steam turbine which only accepts the steam from 
the gasiﬁcation block.
Jeffrey Phillips

72
 
To date, all IGCCs have utilized the ﬁrst option.  However, with growing interest in retroﬁtting existing natural gas ﬁred com-
bined cycles, the second option may be of interest because an HRSG and steam turbine of an existing combined cycle will have to be 
modiﬁed to accommodate the additional steam produced by the syngas cooler.  The separate steam turbine option may also be attractive 
for applications in which the gasiﬁcation block must be located considerable distance away from the combined cycle.
1.2.1-5  Commercially Available Large-Scale Gasiﬁers
Four gasiﬁcation technologies have been proven at the large scale (>1250 tpd) needed for IGCC applications:
Lurgi
 
Lurgi gasiﬁers have gasiﬁed more coal than any other commercially available gasiﬁcation process.  Lurgi gasiﬁers use a mov-
ing bed design and operate below the ash melting point of the feed.  The coal does not have to be ﬁnely milled, only crushed.  In fact, 
one of the disadvantages of the Lurgi process is its inability to handle coal ﬁnes.
 
The coal is fed into the top of the gasiﬁer via lockhoppers.  Oxygen is injected at the bottom of the gasiﬁer and reacts with the 
coal which has been pre-heated by the hot syngas rising through the coal bed.  Ash drops off the bottom of the bed and is depressurized 
via a lockhopper.
 
The process was originally developed by Lurgi GmbH in the 1930s in Germany.  In total more than 150 Lurgi gasiﬁers have 
been built with the largest being able to process 1000 tpd of coal on a moisture & ash-free basis.  
 
The two most prominent applications of the Lurgi process are not IGCCs:  the coal-to-gasoline reﬁneries of Sasol in the Re-
public of South Africa and the Dakota Gasiﬁcation Synthetic Natural Gas plant in North Dakota.  Both applications feature a series of 
oxygen-blown gasiﬁers and use low rank coal from nearby mines as the feedstock.
 
A key disadvantage of the Lurgi process in IGCC applications is the production of hydrocarbon liquids in addition to syngas. 
The liquids represent about 10% of the heating value of the feed and therefore must be utilized in order to achieve competitive efﬁcien-
cies.  At Sasol and Dakota Gasiﬁcation the size of the gasiﬁcation operations (14,000 tpd at Dakota) makes it economical to recover the 
liquids and convert them into high value products such as naphtha, phenols and methanol.  It is not clear that the economies of scale for 
a 500 to 600 MW IGCC (4000 to 5000 tpd of coal) would allow those by-products to be recovered competitively.
 
The other drawback of the Lurgi process is the need to stay below the ash melting point of the coal.  For lower reactivity coals 
such as bituminous coal from the eastern US, this will result in lower carbon conversion due to the lower gasiﬁcation temperatures. 
Conversely, low rank, high ash coals provide a competitive advantage for the Lurgi process versus its higher operating temperature 
competitors.
GE Energy
 
The GE Energy gasiﬁcation process has the most extensive track record in IGCC applications.  Originally developed by Texaco 
in the 1950s, the technology was purchased by GE from Chevron-Texaco in 2004.  
 
The process uses an entrained ﬂow, refractory-lined gasiﬁer which can operate at pressures in excess of 62 bara (900 psia).  The 
coal is fed to the gasiﬁer as coal-water slurry and injected into the top of the gasiﬁer vessel.  Syngas and slag ﬂow out the bottom of the 
gasiﬁer.
 
Three options are available for heat recovery from the GE Energy process:  Quench, Radiant, and Radiant & Convective.   In 
the Quench option, both the syngas and slag are forced into a water bath where the slag solidiﬁes and the syngas is cooled and saturated 
with water vapor.  The slag is removed from the bottom of the quench section via a lockhopper while the saturated syngas is directed to 
gas clean-up equipment.
 
In the radiant option, the syngas and slag enter a long, wide vessel which is lined with boiler tubes.  The vessel is designed to 
cool the syngas below the melting point of the slag.  At the end of the radiant vessel both the syngas and slag are quenched with water.
 
In the radiant plus convective option instead of having a water quench for both the syngas and slag, only the slag drops into a 
water bath at the bottom of the radiant vessel.  The syngas exits at the side of the vessel and enters a convective syngas cooler.  Both ﬁre 
tube boiler and water tube boiler designs have been used for the convective cooler.
 
More than 100 commercial applications of the GE Energy gasiﬁcation process have been licensed since the 1950s.  Some of the 
most notable examples are described below.
 
It was used in the ﬁrst US IGCC, the Cool Water project, which was built in the early 1980s by a consortium of power industry 
organizations including Southern California Edison and EPRI.  It also received production subsidies from the federal synfuels program 
operated by the Treasury Department.  The Cool Water IGCC operated for ﬁve years starting in 1984 and gasiﬁed a total of 1.1 million 
tons of bituminous coal while proving the IGCC concept.  After the demonstration period, the gasiﬁcation block was sold, dismantled 
and moved to Kansas where it became the heart of a petroleum coke-to-ammonia plant.
 
The GE Energy process was also used at Tampa Electric Company’s Polk County IGCC.  That plant received DOE funding in 
Round III of the Clean Coal Technology program.  The Polk plant is designed to produce approximately 250 MW of power and began 
commercial operations in July 1996.  It has continued to operate after the end of the DOE-subsidized demonstration period and currently 
has the lowest dispatch cost of electricity in the Tampa Electric ﬂeet. 
Different Types of Gasiﬁers and Their Integration with Gas Turbines
1.2.1

73
 
The GE Energy process has also been used in several coal and petroleum coke-to-chemicals applications.  Besides the Kansas 
coke-to-ammonia plant, GE Energy gasiﬁers featuring the water quench design have been installed at the Ube Industries coke-to-am-
monia plant in Japan and the Eastman Chemical coal-to-chemicals facility in Tennessee.  These plants have operated with the very high 
availability factors expected in the chemicals industry for more than 20 years.
 
The GE Energy gasiﬁer can also be used to gasify petroleum reﬁnery liquid by-products such as asphalt residues.  Several IGCC 
projects based on these feedstocks have been built at reﬁneries around the world.
Shell Coal Gasiﬁcation Process (SCGP)
 
The Royal Dutch Shell group of companies (Shell) has developed two different gasiﬁcation processes.  The ﬁrst, called the 
Shell Gasiﬁcation Process or SGP, was developed to gasify liquid and gaseous feedstocks.  It features a refractory-lined gasiﬁer with a 
single feed injection point at the top of the gasiﬁer.  The gasiﬁcation products pass through a syngas cooler before entering a wet scrub-
ber.
 
The second process, called the Shell Coal Gasiﬁcation Process (SCGP), was developed speciﬁcally to gasify solid feeds.  The 
SCGP gasiﬁer features a water-cooled “membrane wall” similar to the membrane walls used in conventional coal boilers.  There are four 
feed injectors oriented horizontally in the mid-section of gasiﬁer vessel.  Slag ﬂows out of a slag tap at the bottom of the vessel where 
it falls into a water bath and syngas ﬂows out the top of the vessel.  As the syngas exits the gasiﬁer it is quenched with cool, recycled 
syngas to a temperature well below the ash melting point of the coal.   The quenched syngas is still quite warm (typically 900°C) and 
passes through a syngas cooler and a dry solids ﬁlter before a portion of the gas is split off for recycle to the quench zone.
 
The coal is fed to the SCGP gasiﬁer pneumatically using high pressure nitrogen as the transport medium.  The coal must ﬁrst 
be dried and ﬁnely ground in a roller mill where warm, inert gas ﬂows through the mill to remove the coal’s moisture.  The dried coal is 
then pressurized via a system of lockhoppers.  SCGP gasiﬁers operate at pressures up to approximately 40 bar.
 
Shell began development of the SGP process in the 1950s, and work on the SCGP process started as a joint project with Krupp 
Koppers in the mid-1970s.  Both companies agreed to go their separate ways in the development of coal gasiﬁcation in 1981, and Krupp 
Koppers developed a competing dry-feed, membrane wall gasiﬁer with the trade name PRENFLO.  The only commercial application of 
the PRENFLO process has been the 280 MW Elcogas IGCC in Puertollano Spain.  In 1999, Shell and Krupp Uhde agreed to join forces 
again in coal gasiﬁcation.  However, now only SCGP is being offered commercially by the two organizations.
 
The ﬁrst commercial application of SCGP was the 250 MW Demkolec IGCC built in 1994 in Buggenum, The Netherlands.  The 
plant was originally owned by a consortium of Dutch electric utilities, but was sold to Nuon in the late 1990s.  It is now operating as an 
independent power producer in the deregulated Dutch electricity market.
 
Shell has also sold licenses for 12 SCGP gasiﬁers which will be used in coal-to-chemicals projects in China.  The ﬁrst of those 
projects is expected to begin operations in 2006.
 
Perhaps the greatest advantage of Shell’s coal gasiﬁcation process is its feed ﬂexibility.  The 240 tpd SCGP demonstration built 
at Shell’s reﬁnery in Deer Park, Texas in the 1980s was able to process a full range of feedstocks including lignite, sub-bituminous coal, 
bituminous coal and pet coke.   The reason for SCGP’s ﬂexibility is the coal milling and drying process which eliminates the impact of 
moisture on the gasiﬁer performance (however, the fuel for the drying process has a negative impact on thermal efﬁciency).
 
The biggest disadvantage of the SCGP has been its higher capital cost which is inherent in the more expensive nature of the 
gasiﬁer design (boiler tubes are more expensive than refractory brick) and its dry feed system.
ConocoPhillips E-Gas
 
ConocoPhillips owns the E-Gas gasiﬁcation technology which was originally developed by Dow Chemical.  The E-Gas process 
features a unique two-stage gasiﬁer design.  The gasiﬁer is refractory-lined and uses coal-water slurry feed.  The ﬁrst stage of the gasiﬁer 
has two opposed, horizontally-oriented feed injectors.  The syngas exits the top of the ﬁrst stage and slag ﬂows out of the bottom into 
a water bath.  The syngas produced by the ﬁrst stage enters the second stage at temperatures comparable to the exit temperatures of the 
other two entrained ﬂow gasiﬁers, GE Energy and SCGP.  Additional coal-water slurry is injected into this hot syngas in the second gas-
iﬁer stage, but no additional oxygen is injected.  Endothermic gasiﬁcation reactions occur between the hot syngas and the second stage 
coal feed.  This lowers the temperature of the syngas and increases the cold gas efﬁciency of the process.  Upon exiting the top of the 
second stage of the gasifer, the syngas passes through a syngas cooler which features a ﬁretube design.  The cooled syngas then enters a 
rigid barrier ﬁlter where any unconverted char from the second stage is collected and recycled back to the ﬁrst stage of the gasiﬁer where 
the hotter temperatures ensure near complete carbon conversion.
 
Dow began development of the E-Gas process in 1976 with a bench scale reactor.  The work progressed to a 36 tpd pilot plant 
and then a 550 tpd “proto plant” located at Dow’s chemical manufacturing complex in Plaquemine, Louisiana.  The main feedstock 
tested in these early gasiﬁers was lignite.
 
In 1984 Dow entered an agreement with the federal US government’s Synthetic Fuels Corporation in which Dow received a 
price guarantee for syngas to be produced from a commercial scale E-Gas gasiﬁcation plant built in Plaquemine.  The plant began opera-
tion in 1987 and was operated by the Dow subsidiary Louisiana Gasiﬁcation Technology Inc. (LTGI).  The LGTI facility was designed to 
process 1600 tpd (dry basis) of sub-bituminous coal from the Powder River Basin.  The clean syngas was sent to two Westinghouse 501D 
gas turbines which were already operating on natural gas at the Plaquemine complex.  The total power output from the two turbines was 
184 MW.  
Jeffrey Phillips

74
 
LGTI operated from 1987 through 1995 and received a total of $620 million in price support payments from the Synthetic Fuels 
Corporation (SFC).  It was shutdown after SFC support ended.  In total, more than 3.7 million tons of sub-bituminous coal was gasiﬁed 
at the LGTI facility.
 
The E-gas process has also been used at the Wabash River IGCC repowering project in West Terre Haute, Indiana.  In 1991 the 
project was selected to receive partial funding from the US DOE as part of the Clean Coal Technology program.  The plant featured a 
new air separation unit, gasiﬁer, clean-up system, gas turbine and heat recovery steam generator, but it utilized an existing, 30-year old, 
100 MW steam turbine in Public Service of Indiana’s coal-ﬁred Wabash River Generation Steam.  The coal boiler that was originally 
built to supply steam to the steam turbine was retired when the IGCC equipment started up.
 
The Wabash River IGCC began operation in 1995 on bituminous coal from the Illinois basin.  However, today it operates ex-
clusively on petroleum coke.  
 
Unlike the Polk County IGCC owned by TECO, ownership of the Wabash IGCC is split in two.  The electric utility (Cinergy 
PSI) owns and operates the combined cycle plant while SG Solutions LLC owns and operates the gasiﬁcation plant including the air 
separation unit.  A commercial dispute between the previous owners of the gasiﬁcation plant and Cinergy PSI led to a prolonged shut-
down of the gasiﬁer in 2004.  However, with the recent change in ownership to SG Solutions, gasiﬁcation operations began again in May 
2005.
 
ConocoPhillips is actively developing several new IGCC projects; among those are the Mesaba IGCC and the Steelhead Energy 
project..  The Mesaba project is being developed by Excelsior Energy in northern Minnesota.  The project was awarded $36 million by 
the US DOE in 2004 as part of Round Two of the Clean Coal Power Initiative (CCPI).  The money will support the cost of the Front End 
Engineering Design (FEED) and Permitting activities for the project.
 
The Steelhead project, located in southern Illinois, will produce 600 MW of electricity as well as synthetic natural gas.  The 
project recently received $2.5 million in funding from the State of Illinois to support its FEED effort.
1.2.1-6  Near-Commercial Gasiﬁers of Interest
 
Several other gasiﬁcation technologies, which have not yet 
been tested at sizes of 1250 tpd or larger, have the potential for being 
used in IGCCs or have been proposed for IGCCs that are under devel-
opment.  They are reviewed in this sub-section.
KBR Transport Gasiﬁer
 
The Kellogg Brown and Root (KBR) Transport Gasiﬁer has 
been under development at the Power Systems Development Facility 
(PSDF) in Wilsonville, Alabama.  PSDF is a clean coal technology 
test facility built with US DOE sponsorship and has been operated by 
Southern Company Services since 1996.  The KBR Transport Gasiﬁer 
is a hybrid gasiﬁer that has characteristics of both an entrained ﬂow and 
a ﬂuidized bed reactor.  The technology is derived from KBR’s cata-
lytic cracker technology which has been used for decades in petroleum 
reﬁneries.  The KBR gasiﬁer operates at considerably higher circula-
tion rates, velocities, and riser densities than a conventional circulating 
ﬂuidized bed, resulting in higher throughput, better mixing, and higher 
mass and heat transfer rates.  
 
What is now the PSDF transport gasifer was mechanically 
completed in 1996; however, it originally operated as a combustor.  In 
1999 it was modiﬁed to operate as an air-blown gasiﬁer.   The PSDF 
also includes a small gas turbine which has been modiﬁed to burn the 
low Btu syngas produced by the air gasiﬁcation process.
Different Types of Gasiﬁers and Their Integration with Gas Turbines
1.2.1
Fig. 5. Schematic Diagram of the KBR Transport Gasiﬁer
 
Figure 5 is a diagram of the KBR gasiﬁer.  Dried, pressurized, 
pulverized coal is fed into the mixing zone of the gasiﬁer.  The oxidant 
is added at the bottom of the mixing zone.  The gasiﬁer temperature is 
maintained below the ash melting point of the coal, and this favors the 
use of air rather than oxygen as the nitrogen in the air serves to mod-
erate the temperatures within the ﬂuidized bed, while also supplying 
the velocity needed to entrain the solids.  Oxygen-blown operation has 
also been tested at the PSDF and would be the preferred mode for poly-
generation applications in which chemical products were produced as 
well as power.

75
Jeffrey Phillips
 
The riser section provides sufﬁcient residence time at hot temperatures to crack any tars which may be produced during de-
volatilization of the coal.  This gives the design a distinct advantage over ﬁxed bed gasiﬁers which also operate below the ash melting 
point.
 
Solids which are entrained out of the mixing zone of the gasiﬁer are captured in a hot cyclone and returned to the ﬂuidized bed. 
To maintain constant reactor inventory, gasiﬁer ash is removed periodically from the lower region of the standpipe.  If required, sand can 
be fed to increase reactor solids inventory.
 
Because of its lower operating temperature and its dry feed arrangement, the KBR reactor is most attractive for lower rank, high 
moisture coals.   The lower temperatures also eliminate the need for refractory lining of the gasiﬁer vessel. The PSDF Transport Gasiﬁer 
can process 38 tpd of coal in air-blown mode.  Coals which have been gasiﬁed at the PSDF include Powder River Basin Sub-bituminous, 
Illinois #6 and North Dakota Lignite.
 
The KBR Transport Gasiﬁer will be used in the 285 MW Stanton IGCC project which was selected by the US Department of 
Energy as part of Round Two of the CCPI in 2004.  Southern Company Services, KBR, and the Orlando Utilities Commission (OUC) 
are sponsors of the project, which will be located at an existing combined cycle power plant owned by the OUC.  Nonetheless, the IGCC 
will be a Greenﬁeld project rather than a retroﬁt of the existing combined cycle.   Powder River Basin coal will be the feedstock for the 
gasiﬁer.
Future Energy
 
The Future Energy entrained ﬂow gasiﬁcation process, formerly known as the Noell process, employs a single stage, downward 
ﬁring gasiﬁer that operates on a variety of liquid and solid feedstocks.  The reactants are fed in at the top of the gasiﬁer, which is cylin-
drical in shape and operates at temperature above ash fusion temperatures. At the bottom of the reaction chamber is a quench section, in 
which water is injected to cool the slag and the syngas.  The solidiﬁed and granulated slag accumulates and is discharged via a lockhop-
per; the cooled syngas then exits the gasiﬁer for further processing.  
 
There are two variations of the gasiﬁer, depending on the ash content of the feeds.  For high ash content feeds, the gasiﬁcation 
chamber is enclosed by a tube screen that carries cooling water to ensure a long life of the gasiﬁer.  The screen wall is coated with a thin 
layer of protective coating; as the slag ﬂows down the wall towards the quench section, a layer of solid slag is formed next to the wall 
due to the cooling effect.   In applications with low ash content feeds, the cooling screen is replaced with a refractory lining cooled with 
a water jacket screen.
 
Unlike other gasiﬁcation processes, the Future Energy process allows the option of using either dry feed or slurry feed. The 
process is currently used in a 440 MW Vresova IGCC plant in the Czech Republic.  The plant has 24 Lurgi gasiﬁers processing brown 
coal and 360 tpd of tars produced by those gasiﬁers are pumped to a single Future Energy gasiﬁer for conversion into syngas.
BGL Slagging Gasiﬁer
 
The British Gas/Lurgi (BGL) coal gasiﬁer is a dry-feed, pressurized, ﬁxed-bed, slagging gasiﬁer. The reactor vessel is water 
cooled and refractory lined. Each gasiﬁer is provided with a motor-driven coal distributor/mixer to stir and evenly distribute the incom-
ing coal mixture. Oxygen and steam are introduced into the gasiﬁer vessel through sidewall-mounted tuyeres (lances) at the elevation 
where combustion and slag formation occur.
 
The coal mixture (coarse coal, ﬁnes, briquettes, and ﬂux) which is introduced at the top of the gasiﬁer via a lock hopper system 
gradually descends through several process zones. Coal at the top of the bed is dried and devolatilized. The descending coal is trans-
formed into char, and then passes into the gasiﬁcation (reaction) zone. Below this zone, any remaining carbon is oxidized, and the ash 
content of the coal is liquiﬁed, forming slag.
 
Slag is withdrawn from the slag pool by means of an opening in the hearth plate at the bottom of the gasiﬁer vessel. The slag 
ﬂows downward into a quench chamber and lock hopper in series. The pressure differential between the quench chamber and gasiﬁer 
regulates the ﬂow of slag between the two vessels. 
 
Product gas exits the gasiﬁer at approximately 1050°F (566°C) through an opening near the top of the gasiﬁer vessel and passes 
into a water quench vessel and a boiler feed water (BFW) preheater designed to lower the temperature to approximately 300°F (150°C). 
Entrained solids and soluble compounds mixed with the exiting liquid are sent to a gas-liquor separation unit. Soluble hydrocarbons, 
such as tars, oils, and naphtha are recovered from the aqueous liquor and recycled to the top of the gasiﬁer and/or reinjected at the tuy-
eres.
 
A 720 tpd BGL gasiﬁer has been built recently in Germany by SVZ as part of a waste-to-methanol plant. The BGL technology 
was originally developed by British Gas, which built two demonstration gasiﬁers in the 200 to 500 tpd range in Westﬁeld, Scotland. 
Those gasiﬁers are now owned by Global Energy of Cincinnati, OH, which for a time owned the rights to the BGL technology.  The 
rights were recently acquired by the Allied Syngas Corporation (ASC) based in Wayne, PA.  ASC is currently pursuing projects based 
on a 1000 tpd BGL gasiﬁer.

76
76
Different Types of Gasiﬁ ers and Their Integration with Gas Turbines
1.2.1
MHI Air-Blown Gasiﬁ er
MHI has developed a two-stage, air-blown gasiﬁ er which will be used in the 250 MW Clean Coal Power R&D Co. Ltd. IGCC 
being built near Iwaki City in Japan.  Construction began in 2004, and the plant is scheduled to begin operation in 2007.  
 
The MHI gasiﬁ er operates in slagging conditions and, like the E-Gas process, injects coal without oxidant in the second stage. 
However, the gasiﬁ er features a water-cooled membrane wall rather than refractory lining and uses dry feed of coal rather than coal-
water slurry.  Unconverted char exiting the second stage is captured by a dry solids ﬁ lter and returned to the ﬁ rst stage where coal and 
air are injected (see ﬁ gure 7).  
 
The MHI gasiﬁ er has also been tested in the 1990s at a 200 tpd demonstration unit located at the same site where the Clean Coal 
Power R&D IGCC plant is being built.  
Fig. 7. Diagram of the MHI air-blown 
gasiﬁ er (with permission from Clean 
Coal Power R&D Co., Ltd.)
Fig. 6. BGL Slagging Gasiﬁ er
1.2.1-7 Conclusions
Four gasiﬁ cation technologies have been developed and demonstrated at sizes compatible with large scale IGCCs.  Three of 
these technologies are based on entrained ﬂ ow reactors which rapidly convert coal to a hot syngas.  The fourth is based on a moving 
bed reactor which uses long residence times to convert the coal and produces a more moderate temperature syngas along with liquid 
hydrocarbons.
 
Several other gasiﬁ cation technologies are nearing demonstrations of large scale gasiﬁ er which could be used in IGCCs.  The 
most appropriate gasiﬁ er to use in an IGCC is probably more a function of the type of coal to be gasiﬁ ed than anything else.  Lower rank, 
high moisture coals are more capable with dry-fed gasiﬁ ers, while high temperature slagging gasiﬁ ers are best for high rank coals which 
are less reactive.
1.2.1-8 Notes
_____________________________
1. D.R. Simbeck, et al., “Coal Gasiﬁ cation Guidebook:  Status, Applications, and Technologies,”  EPRI Final Report TR  
 
    102034 (Electric Power Research Institute).
 
2.  Ibid.
 
3.  Ibid.

1.2.1 Different Types of Gasiﬁ ers and Their Integration with Gas Turbines 
Dr. Phillips began his involvement with IGCCs when he did his PhD research at Stanford on the 
off-design performance of IGCCs.  He then spent 10 years working in the Royal Dutch/Shell group 
assisting in the development of the Shell Coal Gasiﬁ cation Process and then became an independent 
consultant, specializing in combustion turbine and combined cycle performance analysis.  Among 
his consulting projects was an analysis of the suitability of current combustion turbine technology 
for oxy-fuel cycles.  He recently accepted a position as project manager at EPRI where he directs 
projects related to IGCCs.
Jeffrey Phillips
EPRI / Advanced Coal Generation
P.O. Box 217097
Charlotte, NC 28221
phone: (704) 595-2250
email:  jphillip@epri.com
BIOGRAPHY  
