241
241
3.2.1.4.2-1 Introduction
 
Lean-premixed (LP) combustion technologies have been adopted by virtually 
every industrial gas turbine manufacturer as a Dry Low NOx (DLN) method to meet 
emissions regulations which are being implemented in the US and in many regions 
worldwide. But to meet more stringent ultra-low emissions standards being proposed, 
the DLN combustors have to operate at conditions near the lean limit of their stability 
envelopes where noise, instability, ﬂ ame blowoff, and ﬂ ashback can seriously affect 
engine performance. To mitigate these potential problems much effort has been devoted 
to explore passive control, e.g., fuel and/or air staging, and active control, e.g., feed-
back loop, strategies. Other alternatives invoke more costly exhaust gas clean up or 
catalytically assisted combustion. Undoubtedly, utilization of these new schemes would 
lead to more complex combustion devices consisting of tightly controlled sensors and 
actuators as well as many auxiliary components. For coal-based syngas engines the 
instability problems are further exacerbated due to the variability of the fuel contents. 
Therefore the injectors as well as the combustors have to be optimized or re-engineered 
to accommodate the changes in the combustion properties. Because most turbine 
combustors are designed for natural gas, they may not be readily adaptable or scalable 
to burn IGCC fuels. 
 
One promising solution to resolve fuel ﬂ exibility issues of IGCC turbines 
is a novel premixed combustion technology that operates on a unique low-swirl 
combustion (LSC) concept. Originally developed at the Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory as a small laboratory research burner (about 15 kW) for fundamental 
studies, a good understanding of its operating principle has been obtained1. This 
patented combustion concept  is based on exploiting the aerodynamic properties of the 
propagating premixed ﬂ ames2. It is a simple, robust, and readily adaptable technology 
for industrial process burners and gas turbine combustors to meet stringent emissions 
targets without signiﬁ cantly altering their system conﬁ gurations, efﬁ ciencies, turndown, 
and costs. LSC has been commercialized for industrial process heaters as low-swirl 
burners (LSB). Products of 150 kW to 7.5 MW (0.5 to 25 MMBtu/hr) with ultra-low 
emissions of 4 – 7 ppm NOx and CO (both @3% O2) have been available since late 
2003. Central to the commercialization pathway was the scientiﬁ c knowledge obtained 
from laboratory studies that has provided critical information for scaling as well as 
resolving system integration issues. LSC is also being adapted for natural gas turbines. 
Rig tests of prototype low-swirl injectors (LSI) for 10 MW size engines show it to be a 
very promising and cost-effective solution as “plug-in” injector replacements to enable 
current DLN turbines to meet the emission targets of < 5 ppm (@ 15% O2) for both NOx 
and CO.
 
The LSC concept is readily adaptable for burning other hydrocarbons and 
hydrogen enriched fuels. Its operating principle is based on matching the ﬂ owﬁ eld 
to the turbulent premixed ﬂ ame speeds of ultra-lean premixed ﬂ ames. Laboratory 
measurements of ﬂ ame speeds and ﬂ ame temperatures for the alternate fuels will be 
necessary to obtain basic information for optimizing the LSC design. This strategy has 
already been applied to develop fuel-ﬂ exible industrial LSBs. Prototypes have been 
tested with propane, ethylene, natural gas diluted with ﬂ ue gases (up to 40%), and reﬁ nery 
gases with large hydrogen constituencies (up to 50% H2). The main technical issue for 
adapting LSI to IGCC syngas turbines concerns the signiﬁ cantly different combustion 
properties of the two principal types of gasiﬁ ed coal fuels. Typical compositions of 
the syngas from oxygen blown coal gasiﬁ cation are 25% H2, 40% CO, 20% H2O, 
with a lower heating value of 200 BTU/ft3. With the addition of CO2 separation and 
sequestration, the syngas composition shifts to mostly hydrogen at 65-85% H2, and 
15-35% H2O. These syngases have diverse combustion properties and the LSI needs 
to be optimized for the slower and faster burning ﬂ ames (compared to natural gas) at 
operating conditions where the ﬂ ame temperatures are sufﬁ ciently low to prevent NOx 
formation. Other concerns stem from the high H2 diffusivity and short auto-ignition 
delay time. Therefore, issues on system integration will need to address the impact 
on ﬂ ashback, blow-off, light-off, shut-down, off-load, and load following. Currently, 
the research activities have been limited to proof-of-concept laboratory experiments 
using hydrogen and hydrogen/hydrocarbon blended fuels. More extensive laboratory 
studies will be necessary to develop basic LSI designs optimized for syngases and the 
accompanying scaling rules and engineering guidelines.
Low Swirl Combustion
3.2.1.4.2
Robert K. Cheng
Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory
MS70-108B, 1 Cyclorton Road
Berkeley, CA 94720
phone: (510) 486-5438
email: rkcheng@lbl.gov

242
3.2.1.4.2-2 Principle of Low-swirl Combustion and Technology Transfer History
 
Swirling ﬂow burners have been essential to both premixed and non-premixed combustion systems because of their signiﬁcant 
beneﬁcial inﬂuences on ﬂame stability, and combustion intensity, as well as the combustor performance. Until now, gas turbine 
combustors and industrial systems utilized a high-swirl type of burner in which the swirling motion generated by the injector (or burner) 
is sufﬁciently high to produce a fully developed internal recirculation zone at the entrance of the combustor. For conventional non-
premixed combustion, the role of the large recirculation zone, also know as the toroidal vortex core, is to promote turbulent mixing 
of the fuel and air. In premixed DLN systems, the recirculation zone provides a stable heat source for continuous ignition of the fresh 
reactants. Refer to the review of Syred and Beer for extensive background on the basic processes and practical implementation of high-
swirl combustors3.
 
Low-swirl combustion is a relatively recent development. It is an excellent tool for laboratory research on ﬂame/turbulent 
interactions4.  Its operating principle exploits the “propagating wave” nature of premixed ﬂames and is not valid for non-premixed 
combustion. Premixed ﬂames consume the reactants in the form of self-sustained reacting waves that propagate at ﬂame speeds controlled 
by the mixture compositions, the thermodynamic conditions, and turbulence intensities. In contrast, non-premixed diffusion ﬂames do 
not propagate (i.e., move through the reactants) because burning occurs only at the mixing zones of the fuel and oxidizer streams. To 
capture a fast moving turbulent premixed ﬂame as a “standing wave” that remains stationary, low-swirl combustion exploits a ﬂuid 
mechanical phenomenon called a divergent ﬂow. As the name implies, divergent ﬂow is an expanding ﬂow stream. It is formed when the 
swirl intensities are deliberately low such that vortex breakdown, a precursor to the formation of ﬂow reversal and recirculation, does 
not occur. Therefore, the LSC principle is fundamentally different from the high-swirl concept of typical DLN gas turbines where strong 
toroidal vortexes are the essential ﬂow elements to hold and continuously re-ignite the ﬂames.
 
The original LSB for laboratory studies known as the jet-LSB is shown in ﬁgure 15. This burner is essentially a cylindrical tube 
of 5.08 cm diameter ﬁtted with a tangential air swirler section consisting of four small inclined jets of 0.63 cm in diameter. Reactants at 
a given fuel air equivalence ratio is supplied to the bottom of the tube. After passing through a turbulence generating plate, the reactants 
stream interacts with the tangential ﬂow supplied through the jets. The size of the air-jets is kept small so that the swirling motions cling 
to the inner wall of the burner tube and do not penetrate into the center. When the ﬂow exits the burner, centrifugal force due to the 
swirling motions causes the ﬂow to expand and diverge. This divergent ﬂow has a non-swirling core surrounded by a swirling shroud that 
weakens progressively downstream. Within the non-swirling center core, the adverse mean axial pressure gradient is accompanied by a 
linear decrease in the mean axial velocity. This velocity “down ramp” provides a very stable ﬂow conﬁguration for a premixed turbulent 
ﬂame to freely propagate and settle at a position where the local ﬂow velocity is equal and opposite to the ﬂame speed. The ﬂame does 
not ﬂashback into the burner because it cannot propagate faster than the velocity at the burner exit. Blow off is also mitigated because 
the center non-swirling core provides a broad region where the ﬂame naturally settles. More importantly, over mixture inhomogeneity or 
slight ﬂow transients cause only a shift in the ﬂame position so that the likelihood of catastrophic ﬂameout is minimized. This is a robust 
self-adjusting mechanism for the ﬂame to withstand transients and changes in mixture and ﬂow conditions.
Fig. 1. 
A jet-LSB demonstrates the principle of low-swirl ﬂame stabilization.

243
 
The ﬂow feature crucial to ﬂame stabilization is illustrated by the axial velocity proﬁles. Plotted in ﬁgure 2 are measurements 
obtained by laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) published in Yegian and Cheng’s article where the effects of enclosure were evaluated 
by placing the jet-LSB inside quartz cylinders of 7.62 cm diameter, 20 and 30 cm in length with or without an exit constriction of 5.4 
cm diameter to simulate typical combustor enclosures6. The experimental conditions were CH4/air ﬂames with φ = 0.8 and 18.5 kW 
corresponding to a bulk ﬂow velocity of U0 = 3.0 m/s. From the mean axial velocity (u) proﬁles (top), it can be seen that the velocity 
at the burner exit is slightly lower than U0 (about 70%). In the region just outside the exit (x < 20 mm), a linear decaying trend (with 
increasing x) shown on all the U/U0 proﬁles is the characteristic feature of ﬂow divergence. The leading edge of the ﬂame brushes are 
marked by the abrupt upturn in the proﬁles at 20 < x < 40 mm. These increases are due to combustion-generated ﬂow acceleration. The 
minimum velocity on the U/U0 proﬁles corresponds to the velocity normal to the leading edge of the turbulent ﬂame brushes and offers 
a convenient means to determine the turbulent ﬂame speed, ST. Studies of ST using the jet-LSB show that a linear correlation exists 
between ST and turbulence intensity over a very broad range of turbulence intensities 7. This is an important property that enables the 
LSC concept to be scaled to the capacities of very large industrial combustion systems.
 
Technology transfer of LSC began with adaptation to residential pool heaters of 15 to 90 kW (50 to 300 KBtu/hr). These 
small domestic heaters are consumer products. To be price competitive they can only accept very simple and low-cost technologies that 
utilize rudimentary electronic controls. A LSB that has separate control for swirl jets and combustion air was deemed too elaborate to be 
economically and practically feasible. Therefore the key task was to develop a simpler burner that is easy to manufacture and requires 
few controls. The outcome of this work was a patented vane-swirler that has since been adapted for gas turbines.
 
The main challenge in the swirler development process was a lack of relevant background knowledge on low-swirl ﬂows. 
All prior research efforts on swirl combustion emphasized the generation of strong and stable ﬂow recirculation. Extensive laboratory 
experimentation by LDV led to the design of ﬁgure 3. This LSB was sized for domestic heaters of 18 KW with a radius Rb of 2.54 cm. 
The unique feature of the swirler is a center by-pass channel (Rc = 2 cm) to allow a portion of the reactants to pass without being swirled 
by the outer annulus swirl vane section ﬁtted with eight straight blades inclined at an angle α of 37.5°. The novelty of this design is 
the use of a perforated screen to control the ﬂow-split between the unswirled core and the swirled annulus. The screen also produces 
turbulence in the center unswirled core. Because turbulence scales with ﬂow velocity, it provides a crucial feedback control mechanism 
for the ﬂame to accelerate and decelerate in response to changes in bulk ﬂow, i.e. load change. The perforated screen ﬁtted to the LSB in 
ﬁgure 3 has 3 mm holes arranged in a rectangular grid to give 81% blockage. By recessing this swirler assembly inside the burner tube 
at a distance, L, this burner produces the key ﬂowﬁeld features same as the jet-LSB.
Robert K. Cheng
Fig. 2. 
Velocity proﬁle showing that enclosures have little effect 
on the ﬂame stabilization mechanism of a jet-LSB with CH4/air 
ﬂame of φ = 0.8 at 18.5 kW (reproduced with permission from 
Combustion Science and Technology). 
 
Source:  D.T. Yegian and R.K. Cheng, “Development of a Lean 
Premixed Low-Swirl Burner for Low NOx Practical  Applications,” 
Combustion Science and Technology 139 no. 1-6 (1998):  207-227. 

244
 
 
As show in ﬁgure 4, the ﬂame generated by the LSB is lifted with a bowl shape slightly different than the one produced by a 
jet-LSB. To demonstrate an exceptional feature of the LSC concept, all the components of the LSB in ﬁgure 3 were made of plastic to 
show that it does not receive signiﬁcant heat from the ﬂame. This has important practical signiﬁcance because the burner suffers little or 
no material degradation due to a substantial reduction in thermal stresses.
 
Subsequent to the development for pool heaters, several projects have been pursued to adapt LSB to industrial and commercial 
heaters. The efforts began by conducting parametric studies of LSB by varying Rb (2.54, 3.8, 5.1 and 6.35 cm) Rc (0.5 < R = Rc/Rb < 
0.8), α (37o to 45ο), and L (1 < L/Rb < 4). Also investigated were other geometric variations such as the number of vanes, vane types (i.e. 
,straight and aerodynamically shaped). types of center screens and their placement positions. The laboratory experiments and ﬁeld tests 
were all performed with natural gas. The scientiﬁc foundation obtained for LSC has been most valuable to support data analyses and to 
devise solutions that meet speciﬁc operational and performance requirements.
 
These studies proved that the LSB design 
is robust. To investigate turndown, the smallest 
LSB with Rb= 2.54 cm was ﬁred in the open and 
generated stable ﬂames from 10 to 600 kW that 
remained stationary despite the 60 to 1 change in 
input rate. At the lowest thermal input of 10 kW, 
the bulk ﬂow velocity Uo corresponds to 1.7 m/s. 
This is the minimum allowable operating point 
for natural gas ﬁring. Flashback becomes likely 
if Uo were reduced further because the velocity at 
the burner exit would be too close to the ST. The 
minimum Uo criterion to avoid ﬂashback applies 
unequivocally to the larger burners because the 
LSB subscribes to constant velocity scaling. This 
simply means that the thermal input of LSB is 
directly proportional to Uo and Rb
2. The effects 
of enclosure geometry on LSB performances 
was also investigated by testing several versions 
of the Rb = 6.35 cm LSB in boilers and furnaces 
at 150 kW to 2.3 MW. The results showed that 
vane shape and screen placement had little effect 
on ﬂame noise, ﬂame stability, and lean blow 
off. Most signiﬁcantly, emissions of NOx depend 
primarily on φ. As shown in ﬁgure 5 by the NOx 
emissions from LSB of various sizes, the trends 
with φ are similar despite differences in thermal 
inputs and combustor geometries to show its 
capability to accept different fuels. Additional 
tests of the 6.35 cm LSB were performed with 
alternate fuels including natural gas diluted with 
up to 40% ﬂue gases and reﬁnery gases with 
hydrogen constituent up to 50%. 
3.2.1.4.2 Low Swirl Combustion
Fig. 3. 
Schematics of a vane swirler developed for the low swirl burner.
Fig. 4.    A vane-LSB ﬁring at 18KW.                                                

245
 
In 2003, Maxon Corporation commercialized a line of industrial LSBs called M-PAKT burners. These products are developed 
for direct process heat applications of 0.3 to 1.8 MW (1- 6 MMBtu/hr) with a guarantee of 4 – 7 ppm NOx and CO (both at 3% O2) 
throughout its 10:1 turndown range. With these ultra-low emissions, the M-PAKT burners meet the most stringent air-quality rules in 
the U.S. As shown by the schematic in ﬁgure 6, the M-PAKT burner has a very simple compact design consisting of the swirler with 
air supplied by a blower through a plenum and a multi-port natural gas injector delivering fuel just upstream of the swirler. The control 
system is standard with conventional mechanical linkages and ﬂow dampers. The exceptional performance of these commercial LSBs 
demonstrates that the implementation of LSC not only provides very effective emissions control but also improves system performance 
and reliability by eliminating the need for elaborate controls and intricate auxiliary components. The economic and operational beneﬁt 
of this approach cannot be understated. In their continuing effort to commercialize LSC technology, Maxon engineers applied the 
scaling rules described in the next section to design a new LSB product of 7.5 MW (25 MMBtu/hr). The ﬁrst installation was complete 
in February 2005. This large burner has a radius Rb of 25.4 cm and has an improved 20:1 turndown. It also incorporates a liquid fuel 
injector for dual-fuel ﬁring.
3.2.1.4.2-3  Scaling rules and 
engineering guidelines
 
The current size range of LSB from the smallest 
laboratory 7 kW unit of Rb = 1.27 cm to the largest 7.5 MW 
industrial burner represents a scaling factor of over 1000. 
This has been accomplished by using a set of scaling rules 
for the geometric variables and engineering guidelines 
for the LSBs to meet system integration and operational 
requirements. These design rules and guidelines are the 
signiﬁcant outcomes of the technology development efforts. 
They represent the synthesis of the knowledge gained from 
extensive laboratory experiments and analyses based on 
theories on ﬂame temperature, ﬂame speeds, and reaction 
chemistry as well as combustion aerodynamics, turbulence, 
and turbulence/ﬂame interactions. Though these rules and 
guidelines have been developed for natural gas, similar 
guidelines can be obtained for other fuels to account for the 
resulting changes in combustion properties.
Robert K. Cheng
Fig 5.  NOx emissions of LSB in furnaces and boilers of 300 kW to 1.8 MW.
Fig. 6. 
Emissions and schematic of a commercial LSB 
manufactured by Maxon Corporation, Muncie, Indiana.

246
 
Central to the scaling rule is the deﬁnition of a swirl number, S, for the LSB. It is derived from the formal deﬁnition of S based 
on the ratio of angular to axial ﬂow momentum 8:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (1)
 
where Gang is the angular momentum in the swirled section and G’x is the linear momentum ﬂux through the unswirled center 
core and the swirled annulus. These terms can be calculated by integrating the mean axial, U, and the mean swirl, W, velocity components 
across the burner exit. However, this deﬁnition is not convenient because velocity data are not usually available. For engineering 
applications, a swirl number deﬁnition based on the geometry of the device is more amenable. With the assumption that the distribution 
of the axial ﬂow remains ﬂat, and U and W at the burner exit are kinematically related to the blade angle as tan α = U/W , the axial ﬂux 
of angular momentum in the annular section is then written as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
         (2)
 
Here, Ua is a mean axial velocity supplied through the swirl annulus. By assuming ﬂat axial velocity distribution, the linear 
momentum ﬂux from the two regions of the burner is then calculated as follows:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (3)
 
where Uc is a mean axial velocity through the center core. With Equation (1) as deﬁned, the geometric swirl number for the vane 
swirl burner is then:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (4)
 
Here, R is the ratio of centerbody to burner radii R= Rc / Rb. It is simpliﬁed further when Uc/Ua is expressed in terms of m the 
mass ﬂux ratio (ﬂow-split) 
a
c m
m
m

/
=
 through the centerbody (
c
m) and annular (
a
m). The mass ﬂux ratio is the same as the ratio 
of the effective areas of the center core and the swirl annulus and can be determined simply by the use of standard ﬂow pressure drop 
procedure. Obviously, it is a more convenient form for engineering designs.
 
The scaling rules were deduced from studying the inﬂuences of varying S, L and Rb on the burner operation. To start, the 
LSB prototype of ﬁgure 2 was used as a benchmark with its swirl number varied by the use of four different screens with 65 to 75% 
blockage. The swirl numbers were 0.4 < S < 0.44 corresponding to m of 0.8 to 1 meaning that 44 to 50% of the reactants bypassed the 
swirl annulus. These swirlers installed with L varied from 4 to 12 cm. The 16 LSBs with various combinations were tested with methane 
air ﬂames at 5 < U0 < 25 m/s covering a thermal input range of 18 to 90 kW. All burners were found to be operable. Increasing S pulled 
the ﬂame closer to the burner but the lean blowoff (LBO) remained relatively unaffected indicating that the performance of the LSB is 
not highly sensitive to a small variation in S. The differences were mainly with ﬂame positions and the fuel/air equivalence ratio at lean 
blowoff, φLBO . Large swirler recesses generated a highly lifted ﬂame but the overall ﬂame stability remained relatively unchanged. A 
short recess distance produces higher φLBO indicating a compromise in the capability to support ultra-lean ﬂames. 
 
Additional studies were performed to explore the impact of radius Rb as well as R (0.5 to 0.8) and α (30° to 45°). The swirl 
numbers of the burners with various combinations of Rb, R and α were varied by ﬁtting them with screens of different blockages. The 
most signiﬁcant ﬁnding was that the LSBs with larger diameters Rb operate at the same range of S (around 0.4 to 0.5) as the smaller 
burner. Their performances in terms of ﬂame stability and  φLBO were also identical. Moreover, decreasing R has no effects on emissions 
or performance but brings about a signiﬁcant beneﬁt in lowering the pressure drop of the LSB. This can be explained by the fact that 
reducing R enlarges the swirl annulus and lowers its drag. To maintain a swirl number of 0.4 to 0.5, a screen of lower blockage is 
required. For example, the screen used for the Rb = 6.35 cm with R = 0.5 has a 60% blockage compared to 65 to 81% needed for the R = 
0.8 LSB. This combination effectively lowers the overall pressure drop of the burner. The drag coefﬁcients determined for the different 
LSBs show them to depend only on R and independent of Rb. This knowledge is very important in the design of LSBs that will meet the 
various system requirements and efﬁciency targets.
3.2.1.4.2 Low Swirl Combustion

247
 
The scaling rules for the LSB were established from these results. They are the same regardless of burner radius (up to Rb = 
25.4 cm). For stable and reliable operation, S of a LSB should be between 0.4 and 0.55. The swirler can have straight or curved vanes 
with angle α from 37 to 45o. The optimum center channel to burner radius ratios R can be from 0.5 to 0.8. Once α and R are deﬁned, 
the blockage of the center channel screen can be varied to set S within the range of 0.4 to 0.5. In addition, L can be from 2 to 3 times 
the burner radius Rb. To determine the appropriate burner size, Rb, guidelines have been developed to optimize for the desired thermal 
input range, turndown, fuel pressure, fan power (pressure drop), combustion chamber size, and other physical constraints. The criterion 
for minimum thermal input is a bulk ﬂow velocity of Uo = 3 m/s. This is simply the ﬂashback point for natural gas (U0 ≈ 1.7 m/s) with 
a built-in safety factor. There is no restriction on the maximum thermal input owing to the high turndown (at least 20) available. To 
optimize for the fuel pressure and fan power, the drag coefﬁcient for different R can be used. The optimum enclosure radius for the LSB 
is between 3 to 4 times Rb. Smaller enclosures restrict ﬂow divergence and forces the ﬂame to move inside the burner. Larger enclosures 
allow the ﬂame to over-expand and generate internal ﬂow patterns that negatively affect emissions. These rules and guidelines are easy 
to apply and are versatile enough to provide many design options to build simple and low cost LSBs for easy integration to existing or 
new systems.
3.2.1.4.2-4  Flowﬁeld characteristics and their relevance to ﬂame stability
 
Low-swirl combustion exploits combustion aerodynamics. 
Understanding the ﬂowﬁeld characteristics of LSB and how these 
characteristics affect ﬂame properties is central to the future 
development of the technology for IGCC turbines. Laboratory 
experiments remain an important step to provide an understanding 
of the underlying mechanisms that enable LSB to maintain its 
performance over a large range of conditions. The advent of 
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) has greatly facilitated the 
characterization of the LSB ﬂowﬁelds. In a recent investigation, a 
series of experiments were conducted to investigate the evolution 
of ﬂow and ﬂame features with increasing Uo. PIV captures in 2D 
the velocity distributions in a relatively large region. Our system 
was conﬁgured to have a 13 x 13 cm ﬁeld-of-view covering the 
entire ﬂame region of the laboratory burners. Shown in ﬁgure 7 
is an example of the velocity vectors and turbulence stresses for 
a LSB with S = 0.53, Rb = 2.54 cm, R = 0.5, α = 37o and L = 6.3 
cm burning a methane/air ﬂame of φ = 0.8 and Uo = 5.0 m/s. The 
leading edge of the ﬂame brush is outlined by the broken line. These 
velocity vectors show that the LSB ﬂowﬁeld is relatively uniform 
and free of steep velocity gradients. The background contours of 
the positive (red) and negative (blue) shear stresses also show that 
high turbulence stresses are relegated to the outer edges where the 
reactants mix with the room air. The center ﬂow entering the ﬂame 
brush is in fact relatively free of large shear stresses. The absence 
of high stresses means that the ﬂames are much less vulnerable 
to stress induced non-uniform heat release and local quenching 
at ultra-lean conditions. This feature is very unlike those in other 
burners where steep velocity gradients are found at the ﬂame 
stabilization region and the shear stresses can lead to premature 
ﬂame blowoff. 
 
The evolution of the ﬂowﬁeld with Uo was investigated 
by applying PIV at 5 < U0 < 17.5 m/s. Shown in ﬁgure 8 are the 
normalized axial velocity proﬁles from the non-reacting cases. The 
fact that the proﬁles of the normalized axial velocity, U/U0, and 
the normalized two-component turbulent kinetic energy, q’/U0 (q’ 
= ((u’2 + v`2)/2)1/2) collapse to their respective trends shows that the 
LSB ﬂowﬁeld exhibits similarity feature. Similarity is also shown 
by radial proﬁles of U/Uo and V/Uo meaning that the key ﬂowﬁeld 
features are preserved at different bulk ﬂow velocities.
 
Robert K. Cheng
Fig. 7.  Velocity vectors and shear stresses (background 
contours) obtained in Rb = 2.54 cm LSB with methane air ﬂame 
of φ = 0.8 and U0 = 5 m/s. White dash line marks the leading 
edge of the ﬂame brush.

248
3.2.1.4.2 Low Swirl Combustion
Fig. 8. Normalized centerline proﬁles of non-reacting ﬂow 
produced by a laboratory LSB showing self similarity features.
 
 
Flowﬁeld similarity explains why the ﬂame maintains at a relatively ﬁxed position regardless of U0. This can be illustrated by 
invoking an equality at the leading edge position of the ﬂame brush, xf, (typically at 1.5 < x < 2.5 cm for this LSB).
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
(5) 
 
Here, xo is the virtual origin of the linearly divergent portions of the axial proﬁles and has a negative value. As discussed earlier, 
ST of the LSB is linearly dependent on the rms velocity of the turbulence u’ such that ST = SL (1+ K u’) where SL is the laminar ﬂame 
speed and K is an empirical constant that is in the order of 2.5 for methane. Substituting this into Eq. 5 and dividing both sides by Uo 
results in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 
 
The similar feature of the U/Uo proﬁles means that the normalized axial divergence rate (i.e., (dU/dx)/Uo) has a constant value 
( ≈ 8 m-1 from data of Fig 8a). On the right hand side, (1 + K u’)/Uo tends to a constant value for large u’. This is because the turbulence 
at the ﬂame stabilization point is isotropic such that u’ scales linearly with U0 as expected of turbulence produced by a perforated plate. 
Therefore, if SL is held constant, (i.e., at a ﬁxed φ) the ﬂame position xf attains a constant value that is independent of Uo and u’. As long 
as the ﬂow similarity is preserved, the ﬂame can be held at the same position. Changing φ will have an insigniﬁcant effect on xf because 
the range of SL for CH4 air ﬂames (0.2 to 0.5 m/s) is small compared to the other values and constants in Eq (6). This analysis also shows 
that the turbulent ﬂame speed ST is the important combustion parameter to consider when adapting the LSC for different fuels.
 
However, measurements and predictions of ST are still active areas of fundamental research and data for the type of fuels IGCC 
turbines utilize are unavailable. But a lack of scientiﬁc ST data does not present a signiﬁcant technical hurdle because the LSI developed 
for natural gas can be the benchmark to be adjusted for the slower and faster burning syngases. From Eq. (6) it can be seen that faster 
burning gases (e.g., high H2 constituents) need a lower divergence rate. Conversely, the slower burning gases (e.g., highly diluted 
syngas) need higher divergence rates. Of course, there are other combustion characteristics such as heat release ratios and preferential 
diffusion of the fuel components (e.g. between H2 and CH4) that need to be considered. From our studies of methane, ethylene, propane, 
and hydrogen ﬂames, contributions from these other factors tend to be of secondary nature.
a)
b)

249
Robert K. Cheng
3.2.1.4.2-5 Development of low-swirl injectors for natural gas turbines
 
To adapt low-swirl combustion for gas turbines the most pressing question is whether or not this ﬂame stabilization method 
is operable at elevated temperatures and pressures. To seek an answer, a jet-LSB of Rb = 3.8 cm was constructed for proof-of-concept 
test at Solar Turbines, San Diego. Successful ﬁring of this LSB at typical gas turbine combustor inlet temperatures (220 and 341°C), 
pressures (5 and 10 atm), and loads (0.6 to 1.2 kg/s air) showed the concept to be valid. Light-off of the LSB was easy even at elevated 
temperatures and pressures. The ﬂame remained very stable and free of unacceptable pressure ﬂuctuations towards lean blow-off. The 
trends of the jet-LSB emissions were also typical of other DLN injectors but the overall concentrations of NOx and CO were higher. This 
was caused by the poor mixing from a rudimentary fuel spoke injector and signiﬁcant dilution from the nitrogen swirl jets.
 
Following the proof-of-concept tests the next logical step was to design and evaluate a vane LSI prototype. The lack of 
relevant background knowledge on low-swirl ﬂows and turbulent ﬂame speeds at gas turbine conditions remained the main obstacle. To 
circumvent this difﬁculty and reduce engineering design efforts and prototype fabrication costs, a decision was made to pursue a fast-
track developmental path which exploited, as much as possible, the current injector hardware parts. Because the annulus swirler is the 
main component of Solar Turbines’ SoLoNOx Taurus 70 high-swirl injectors (HSI), the preferred option was to investigate if the HSI 
swirler could be converted to operate in the low-swirl mode.
 
The LSI (Fig. 9 a-c) converted from the HSI (Fig. 9 (e-f) has the same basic conﬁguration as the LSB. The SoLoNOx swirler 
(Fig. 9c) has a modular design such that the solid centerbody can be easily removed to form the center-channel for the LSI (Fig 9b). 
Thus, the two key parameters of the LSI, α (40o) and R (0.63), are ﬁxed by SoLoNOx swirler having an outer radius of 3.27 cm and 
a centerbody radius of 2.06 cm with 16 aerodynamically shaped curved vanes. To conﬁgure the other LSI parameters, S and L, the 
guidelines for atmospheric LSB were followed. The swirler recess of L = 9.5 cm satisﬁes the 2 < L/Rb, < 3 criterion. The swirl number, 
S, was set between 0.4 and 0.55 by the use of center channel screens with blockage of 50 to 73%. These screens were ﬁtted to the LSI 
and tested at laboratory conditions with CH4/air mixtures at a range of stoichiometry and a ﬁxed bulk ﬂow velocity, U0 = 5 m/s (≈ 35 
kW). The optimum was a 58% blockage screen that stabilized the ﬂame at 1.5 to 2.5 cm downstream of the injector exit. From effective 
area measurements, m for this LSI was 0.3, thus 23% of the reactants passed through the center channel unswirled. This gave a swirl 
number S of 0.5 for the LSI. In comparison, the swirl number determined for the HSI was 0.73. Even though the difference in S between 
LSI and HSI is slight, ﬁgure 9f shows that the HSI ﬂame is attached to the centerbody while the LSI ﬂame of ﬁgure 9c is detached.
Fig. 9.  Schematics and photographs of the LSI (top a-c) and the HSI (bottom d-f)

250
 
The ﬂowﬁelds of the LSI and the HSI ﬂames were also investigated by PIV9. Figure 10 shows the results obtained for CH4/air 
ﬂames with φ = 0.8 at 87 kW. Under these conditions, the bulk velocities for the LSI and HSI were 9.6 and 12 m/s respectively. To 
illustrate the differences between the ﬂowﬁelds of the two injectors, streamlines have been traced from the velocity vectors. For the 
LSI, its ﬂowﬁeld features are essentially the same as those of the LSB of ﬁgure 3. The spreading of the streamlines near the bottom 
corresponds to the divergent ﬂow and their slight bends through the ﬂame brush are associated with heat release effects. Downstream 
of the ﬂame brush, the streamlines are relatively parallel showing a uniform ﬂow of the hot products. The color ﬂooded contours of the 
shear stresses in the background illustrate again that the ﬂame does not experience high stresses.
 
In contrast, the ﬂowﬁeld of the LSI is characterized by several high shear regions with the ﬂame zones encountering the highest 
stress levels. These large velocity ﬂuctuations with very steep instantaneous local gradients make the ﬂame vulnerable to stress-induced 
non-uniform heat releases as well as local ﬂame extinctions. Downstream of the ﬂame, strong recirculation is shown by the streamlines 
forming into two separate loops. This is the crucial ﬂow structure for HSI that provides a steady source of hot products for igniting 
the incoming reactants and holding the propagating ﬂame. The PIV results clearly show that HSI ﬂowﬁelds are dominated by very 
large velocity gradients and vortex structures. With the LSI ﬂowﬁeld showing more uniformity, the ﬂame characteristics and behavior 
produced by the two injectors are fundamentally different.
 
Subsequent to the laboratory tests, the LSI was evaluated to determine its operability at gas turbine conditions as well as its 
effectiveness in lowering emissions. The ﬁrst set of tests was performed with preheated air at atmospheric pressure to observe ﬂame 
positions, ﬂame shift with Uo, and sensitivity to mixture homogeneity. Visual observation during these tests showed that the locations of 
the ﬂames were not highly sensitive to U0, φ and initial temperature T0. Flashback did not occur throughout the test matrix. The ﬂame 
size was similar to that of the HSI ﬂame indicating that the LSI can use the same combustor liner. Tests performed with two premixers 
with +/- 3% and +/- 10% mixture uniformity showed no effects on NOx emissions, overall ﬂame behavior and ﬂame characteristics.
3.2.1.4.2 Low Swirl Combustion
Fig. 10.  Streamlines and shear stresses of HSI and LSI burner CH4/air ﬂames at φ = 0.8 and 87 kW. 
The turbulent ﬂame brushes are outlined by the white dash lines.

251
Robert K. Cheng
 
Next the LSI was ﬁtted to a standard ﬁlm-cooled 
combustor liner and tested in a high pressure combustion 
rig. The combustor rig-test matrix covering To of 360 to 
430°C, P0 of 5 to 15 atm and air ﬂow of 0.4 to 1.33 kg/s 
represented the partial and full load conditions of Solar 
Turbines’ SoLoNOx engines of 5 to 7 MW. Successful 
ﬁring of the LSI at these conditions showed that its 
operating range is fully compatible with that of the 
HSI. Throughout these tests, there were no indications 
of shifting in ﬂame positions or ﬂashback. Excessive 
acoustic amplitudes were not observed and peak rms 
acoustics pressures were generally below the allowable 
3.4 kPa established for production hardware. Figure 11 
shows NOx and CO emissions from the LSI (corrected to 
15% O2) compared with the emissions of HSI. Due to the 
variation in T0 and P0, the combustion temperature was not 
proportional to φ. Instead, the emission data was plotted 
against the theoretical adiabatic ﬂame temperature Tad 
(for the combustor-rig Tad was calculated for the primary 
zone). As can be seen, all the NOx emissions from LSI 
collapsed onto a consistent trend that crossed the 5 ppm 
threshold at Tad < 1920K. The strong correlation of NOx 
emissions with Tad showed that thermal NOx was the predominant reaction pathway. In comparison, NOx emissions of HSI were generally 
higher and only approached the 5 ppm NOx threshold before LBO. The over 2.5 times NOx emissions reduction offered by LSI represents 
a signiﬁcant improvement of DLN technology. Moreover, these results imply that the LSI can operate farther away from LBO (higher 
Tad) where it is less prone to combustion oscillation. Although the CO emissions in ﬁgure 8b do not show a consistent trend, all but one 
point from the high T0 and P0 runs is below 5 ppm. Therefore, the LSI does not entail compromising CO for the sake of lowering NOx.
 
The emissions from LSI rig-tests are very encouraging and show that the LSI has the potential to bring about a substantial 
reduction in NOx emissions from DLN gas turbines without incurring signiﬁcant add-on cost or system complexity. The lowest NOx 
emission of < 2 ppm (at 15% O2) is comparable with those from the more costly and much less durable catalytic combustor. Despite 
the complexity of the NOx formation mechanisms, the ﬂowﬁeld characteristics of LSI may provide an explanation for why it is highly 
effective in reducing NOx. Recent studies of high-swirl combustion have shown a correlation between NOx emissions and the residence 
time within the recirculation zone. Trapped by the recirculation vortex, a portion of the combustion products resides for a prolonged 
period at high temperature, which allows the NOx formation mechanism to continue and increase in concentrations. The PIV results 
show clearly that the LSI does not have a recirculation zone to trap a large recirculating mass, therefore, the residence time of the hot 
products in a LSI is much shorter than in a HSI and truncates NOx formation in the post ﬂame region.
 
Continuing the effort to develop the LSI for SoLoNOx turbines, additional tests were conducted to show that the emissions 
and ﬂame stability of LSI are not highly sensitive to mixture inhomogeneity. Its design can easily incorporate components needed for 
normal engine operations, e.g., plenum, liner, ignitor, pilot, and premixer. Therefore, adaptation of LSI to current engines does not 
require signiﬁcant hardware modiﬁcations or change in control strategy or protocol. Currently, an engine-ready LSI prototype has been 
designed and has undergone a series of single-injector rig tests to verify its readiness for start up, shutdown, load change and ofﬂoad. It 
uses the production swirlers made for Solar Turbine’s Taurus 70 engines integrated with a pilot and a multi-spokes fuel injector similar 
to the kind used in current HSIs. The prototype LSIs have been designed to be backward-compatible as “drop-in” replacements for the 
current HSIs.
3.2.1.4.2-6 Development of LSI for IGCC
 
The development of LSI for natural gas turbines shows that laboratory research is directly applicable to engineering of the 
turbine hardware. This process is efﬁcient and cost effective and does not require extensive computational ﬂuid dynamics efforts. The 
same approach is being taken to adapt the LSI concept for IGCC turbines. Currently, progress has been limited to proof-of-concept 
laboratory demonstration of LSI burning hydrogen and hydrogen/hydrocarbon blended fuels. Much more extensive laboratory studies 
will be necessary to obtain better understanding of the properties of the various syngas ﬂames to conﬁgure the LSI to accommodate 
the changes in the reactivity, diffusivity and exothermicity. The laboratory studies will also be used for developing scaling rules and 
engineering guidelines that can be applied to IGCC gas turbines of different sizes.
 
Due to the different constituencies and concentrations of the two principal types of gasiﬁed coal fuels, accommodating the 
variability in fuel properties is the main challenge in adapting the LSC technology for IGCC turbines. From oxygen-blown coal 
gasiﬁcation, typical compositions of the syngas are 25% H2, 40% CO, 20% H2O. This fuel has a lower heating value of only 8.3 Mj/m3 
compared to 42 Mj/m3 for natural gas. Due to the high level of dilution, the ﬂame speeds of this syngas are much lower than those of 
natural gas and they also burn at lower ﬂame temperatures. The key design issue is to stabilize these weak and not highly ﬂammable 
ﬂames without affecting engine operability. Mitigating NOx emissions will not be a signiﬁcant challenge due to the lowered ﬂame 
Fig. 11.  NOx and CO emissions of natural gas LSI and HSI from  
            rig-tests at 5 < P0 < 15 atm and 360C < T0 < 430°C.

252
3.2.1.4.2 Low Swirl Combustion
temperatures. The second type of syngas is produced with CO2 separation and sequestration to change the compositions to mostly 
hydrogen at 65-85% H2, 15-35% H2O. This syngas is much more ﬂammable with ﬂame speeds several times higher than natural if it 
is not diluted by N2 from the air separation unit. The basic issues for LSI development are now shifted to stabilizing these potentially 
faster ﬂames at very lean conditions where the ﬂame temperatures are sufﬁciently low to prevent NOx formations. Additional issues 
arise due to the high diffusivity of H2 and its low ﬂammability limit. Moreover, H2 rich mixtures have shorter auto-ignition delays than 
hydrocarbon mixtures. Therefore, integration of the LSI with fuel injection and premixer will be a signiﬁcant part of the development.
 
To gain insights on some of these issues, a study was performed with a LSB of Rb = 2.54 cm, R = 0.6 by burning blended 
mixtures of laboratory grade CH4 and H2 with concentrations progressively varied from pure CH4 to pure H2. The test conditions were 
the same (Uo = 10 m/s) as the conditions for the original laboratory experiments performed to develop the natural gas LSI. While this 
LSB was found to burn pure H2-air ﬂames, a limiting ﬂame phenomenon was found. Shown in ﬁgure 12 is the ﬂame stabilization map 
obtained for the CH4-H2 mixtures consisting of the (LBO) limit as well as an additional limit where partially rim-attached ﬂames were 
observed. The LBO limit is the boundary between the blowoff region and the stable lifted ﬂame region. It has a decreasing trend towards 
lower φ values with increasing H2. This is consistent with increasing ﬂammability due to the presence of H2. However, for a mixture 
with more than 20% H2, the ﬂames transition from fully-lifted ﬂames to partially rim-attached ﬂames when φ is increased. The attached 
ﬂame indicates that the mixing layer between the swirling reactants and the surrounding air has become ﬂammable. This is caused by 
H2 diffusing preferentially into the surrounding ambient air when the overall fuel concentration increases with φ. Α partially attached 
ﬂame is a consequence of the tail end of the lifted ﬂame curled back upstream to ignite the mixing zones. While this phenomenon does 
not seem to affect the ﬂame at the center region, it alters the overall ﬂowﬁeld dynamics and how the ﬂame behaves within a combustor. 
The limit for partially attached ﬂames also showed a decreasing trend with increasing H2 and thus the range of conditions for pure H2 
ﬂames was very small. This phenomenon showed that the highly diffusive nature of H2 needs to be carefully considered in the design of 
LSI for syngases.
 
At test condition of U0 = 10 m/s, the 100% H2 ﬂames are close to the ﬂashback point. This is because of the high laminar ﬂame 
speeds compared to those of methane. In accord with Eq. (6), the faster burning H2 ﬂames also sit closer to the burner exit. The close 
proximity of the H2 ﬂames can be one of the contributing factors for the onset of partial ﬂame attachment. Therefore, to modify the 
current natural gas LSB for syngases with high H2 constituency, the ﬂame needs to be maintained at a position further downstream. This 
can be accomplished by relaxing the normalized divergence rate (dU/dx)/Uo through lowering of the swirl number S. Conversely, for 
syngases with low heating values, the current LSB will generate ﬂames that are further downstream and this is not optimum. To draw 
these ﬂames closer to the burner exit, it would be necessary to increase the normalized divergence rate by increasing S. This illustrates 
that the ﬂame speed is the important parameter for engineering the LSI for 
different fuels.
 
Consequently, adjusting the LSI swirl number for each fuel is the 
ﬁrst step toward development for IGCC turbines. Using the natural gas LSI as 
a benchmark, the strategy is to determine the S range for different fuels with 
various dilution levels. The results will be analyzed to obtain operating maps 
expressed in terms of S, Tad, and φ. Using the ﬂame temperature and NOx 
emissions as the reference parameters, these maps will guide the development 
of fuel-ﬂexible LSI prototypes that can accommodate several fuel types. 
Reﬁnement of the designs to further optimize for differences in combustion 
characteristics such as exothermicity, preferential diffusion of the fuel 
components (e.g., between H2 and CH4) and other non-linear behavior can be 
accomplished through further rig tests with preheated air and at simulated gas 
turbine conditions.
 
As LSI technology is still under development, issues concerning its 
full integration to gas turbine engines are still being investigated. The signiﬁcant 
outstanding issue is, of course, the combustion oscillation characteristics of 
the LSI. The interesting question from both the scientiﬁc and technological 
perspectives is whether or not the absence of a large recirculation zone in the 
LSI ﬂame will have an inﬂuence on the combustion oscillation characteristics. 
From ﬁeld tests of atmospheric boiler and furnaces, the LSBs show relatively 
low tendencies to incite combustion oscillations. Rig-tests of the LSI at 
simulated gas turbine conditions also indicate the absence of a strong 
characteristic acoustic signature from the ﬂame. Though these observations are 
encouraging, the combustion oscillation characteristics of LSB and LSI need 
to be investigated more systematically to gain a fundamental understanding 
for addressing issues that may arise when the technology is adapted for more 
complex systems such as IGCC gas turbines.
Fig. 12. Stability limits of a Rb = 2.54 cm, R = 
0.6 LSB for CH4-H2-air ﬂames at Uo = 10 m/s.

253
Robert K. Cheng
3.2.1.4.2-7 Conclusions
 
Low-swirl combustion (LSC) is a very promising simple, robust, and cost-effective solution to attain single-digit NOx operation. 
Already commercialized for industrial process heaters and currently being adapted for natural gas turbines, development of LSC for 
IGCC turbines can provide a simple and direct solution to resolve important complex coupling issues concerning fuel-variability, 
reliability, and emissions. LSC exploits a patented combustion aerodynamic process to burn ultra-lean premixed turbulent ﬂames that 
emit very low levels of NOx. Originally developed for basic research, a good understanding of its operating principle has been obtained. 
The principle is fundamentally different than the high-swirl method used in all current DLN engines. Instead of relying on a very high 
level of swirl to generate a well formed vortex to “hold” the ﬂame, LSC takes the opposite approach. By lowering the swirl intensity until 
a recirculation zone is not formed, it generates a divergent ﬂow with a non-swirling center ﬂow region. Linear velocity decay within the 
center region provides a stable ﬂow conﬁguration where the premixed ﬂame freely propagates and maintains itself at the position where 
the local ﬂow velocity is equal and opposite to the turbulent ﬂame speed. Flash back is prevented because the ﬂame cannot propagate 
faster than the velocity upstream. Blow-off is mitigated because the center ﬂow region provides a broad range of velocities where the 
ﬂame naturally re-settles during occasional swings in ﬂow or mixture conditions.
 
For practical implementations, the scientiﬁc background of LSC provides a sound foundation for the development of a patented 
vane swirler. It consists of an annulus swirl vane section found in many other swirler designs but with an open center channel that allows 
a portion of the reactants to remain unswirled. Laboratory experiments, prototype development and testing, and extensive analysis of the 
ﬂow and emission data have produced a set of scaling rules and engineering guidelines that have been applied successfully to develop 
and commercialize low-swirl burners (LSB) of 17 kW to 7.5 MW for meeting ultra-low emission goals of < 7 ppm NOx and CO at 5% 
O2. Central to the rules and guidelines is a new deﬁnition of the swirl number based on the geometric variables that include the vane 
angle, ratio of the center channel radius to burner radius, swirler recess, and the ﬂow split between the center core and swirled ﬂow. By 
setting speciﬁc ranges for the swirl number and for the geometric variables, LSB can be conﬁgured to meet emissions goals as well as 
system integration, performance, and operational requirements. These rules and guidelines have also been applied to develop low-swirl 
injectors (LSI) for 5 to 7 MW gas turbine engines. To be compatible with existing engines, the LSI prototypes were made using the 
key components engineered for current production high-swirl injectors. Single injector rig-tests of the LSI prototypes showed them to 
emit < 5 ppm NOx and CO at 15% O2 at simulated part-load and full-load conditions. This represents a 2.5 times emissions reduction 
compared to current DLN high-swirl combustion technology. These results also showed that atmospheric laboratory experiments are 
directly applicable for designing and engineering of gas turbine hardware. Upon the completion of the single injector rig-tests, a set of 
pre-production LSI prototypes is being fabricated for engine tests in late 2006. These prototypes have been designed to utilize many key 
components from current production DLN high-swirl injectors and conﬁgured to be “drop-in” replacements for existing engines. Due to 
the robust low-swirl combustion mechanism, the operability of the engine such as lightoff, shutdown, off load, and load change are not 
expected to be affected when the new LSI are used. From system integration and cost standpoints, the most signiﬁcant feature of both 
the LSBs and LSIs is that they can be fully compatible with current systems using some of the same components (i.e., plenum, swirler, 
air compressors, blowers, premixer, pilots and ignitor) but with signiﬁcant performance improvements in terms of emissions, turndown, 
and stability.
 
The laboratory studies also provide the scientiﬁc insights necessary for adapting the technology to accept different gaseous 
fuels. Measurements of the velocity distributions and turbulence statistics have shown that low-swirl produces self-similar ﬂowﬁelds 
that scale linearly with bulk velocities (i.e., input power). Because premixed turbulent ﬂames propagate at turbulent ﬂame speeds that 
also scale linearly with the turbulence intensity and bulk ﬂow velocity, the ﬂow and ﬂame features are coupled optimally to give LSC its 
exceptional performances. Therefore, the adaptation of LSC to different IGCC syngases involves primarily the adjustment of the LSC 
ﬂowﬁeld via the swirl intensity and other geometric variables to accommodate for the changes in the ﬂame speeds. Proof-of-concept 
laboratory experiments have already been performed and have shown that LSC can burn pure H2/air ﬂames. The plan towards further 
development for IGCC includes experimental measurements of the ﬂame speeds for syngases and developing guidelines for fuel-ﬂexible 
LSIs. 

254
254
3.2.1.4.2-8  Notes
___________________________
 
1. C.K. Chan et al., “Freely Propagating Open Premixed Turbulent Flames Stabilized by Swirl,”Proc. Comb. Inst., 24 (1992): 511-
        518; B. Bedat and R.K. Cheng, “Experimental Study of Premixed Flames in Intense Isotropic Turbulence,” Combustion and 
           Flame 100, no. 3 (1995): 485-494; R.K. Cheng, “Velocity and Scalar Characteristics of Premixed Turbulent Flames Stabilized 
           By Weak Swirl,” Combustion and Flame 101, no.1-2 (1995): 1-14.
 
2. R.K.Cheng, 1998. Ultralean Low Swirl Burner. U.S. Patent  5735681, (The Regents of the University of California), ﬁ led 
            March 19, 1993  and issued  April 7, 1998; R.K. Cheng and D.T. Yegian, 1999. Mechanical Swirler for a Low-NOx Weak-
            Swirl Burner. U.S. Patent  5,879,148, (The Regents of the University of California), ﬁ led April 16, 1997 and issued  March 9, 
           1999 .
 
3. N. Syred and J.M. Beer, “Combustion in Swirling Flow: A Review,” Combustion and Flame 23 (1974):  143-201.
 
4. T. Plessing et al., “Measurement of the Turbulent Burning Velocity and the Structure of Premixed Flames on a Low Swirl 
           Burner,” Proc. Comb. Inst. 28 (2000): 359-366; I. G. Shepherd et al., “Premixed Flame Front Structure in Intense Turbulence,” 
           Proc. Comb. Inst. 29 (2002): 1833-1840; R.K. Cheng, et al., “Premixed Turbulent Flame Structures in Moderate and 
         Intense Isotropic Turbulence,” Combustion Science and Technology 174, no.1(2002): 29-59; C. Kortschik, T. Plessing, and N. 
           Peters, “Laser Optical Investigation of Turbulent Transport of Temperature Ahead of the Preheat Zone in a Premixed Flame,” 
       Combustion and Flame 136, no.1-2 (2004): 43-50; L.P.H. de Goey et al.,  “Analysis of the Flame Thickness of Turbulent 
           Flamelets in the Thin Reaction Zones Regime,” Proc. Comb. Inst. 30, no 1 (2005): . 859-866; also see 
           note 2 above.
 
5. See note 2 above (Bedat & Cheng).
 
6. See note 1 above.
 
7. See note 2 above (Bedat & Cheng).
 
8. See note 4 above.
 
9. M.R. Johnson et al.,  “A Comparison of the Flowﬁ elds and Emissions of High-swirl Injectors and Low-swirl Injectors for 
 
    Lean Premixed Gas Turbines,” Proc. Comb. Inst. 30 (2005):  2867 - 287
3.2.1.4.2 Low Swirl Combustion

3.2.1.4.2  Low Swirl Combustion
Robert K. Cheng
Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory
MS70-108B, 1 Cyclorton Road
Berkeley, CA 94720
phone: (510) 486-5438
email: rkcheng@lbl.gov
Dr. Robert K. Cheng is a Senior Scientist  and the leader of the Combustion Technologies Group 
in the Environmental Energy Technolgies Division of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. He 
received a B. S., a M. S., and a Ph. D. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of California 
at Berkeley. Since 1977, he has been leading experimental research on fundamental combustion 
ﬂ uid mechanics with an emphasis on lean premixed turbulent ﬂ ames and has published over 
sixty papers on fundamental turbulent ﬂ ame properties. His recent discoveries of novel ﬂ ame 
stabilization concepts for ultra-low NOx combustion systems have generated three patents. These 
technologies are in various stages of development and commercialization for industrial heating 
equipment and gas turbines.
BIOGRAPHY  
