77
77
1.2.2-1 Introduction
 
A variety of industrial processes such as power plants, oil reﬁ neries, 
cement works, and iron and steel production emit large amounts of CO2.  Ap-
proximately a third of all the CO2 emissions due to human activity, however, 
come from fossil fuel-based power plants, with each power plant capable of 
emitting several million tonnes of CO2 annually. These emissions could be 
reduced substantially by capturing and storing the CO2 while other sources of 
emissions, such as transport and domestic buildings, cannot be tackled in the 
same way because of the large number of small sources of CO2.
 
The capture of CO2 in an IGCC power plant consists of gasifying the 
feedstock in an O2 blown gasiﬁ er system and shifting the CO to H2 by catalytic 
reaction with steam1:
 
 
   CO + H2O = CO2 + H2.         
 
                   (1)
 
The CO2 is then removed for sequestration from the syngas to pro-
duce a “decarbonized” fuel gas for combustion in a gas turbine.  There are 
primarily two schemes for these processing steps consisting of shifting, CO2
removal and desulfurization of the syngas for current or near term technology 
plants, i.e., plants incorporating cold gas cleanup: 
• Employ sour shifting of the syngas followed by desulfurization and CO2  
recovery within the same acid gas removal unit; or,
• Desulfurize the syngas ﬁ rst followed by shifting and then removal /recovery 
of the CO2. 
 
The choice of either scheme depends primarily on the gasiﬁ cation heat 
recovery system employed (i.e., the extent to which cooling of the raw gasiﬁ er 
efﬂ uent is accomplished in a syngas cooler before the syngas is quenched / 
scrubbed with water to remove particulate matter).
1.2.2-2 Implications for Gas Turbines
Syngas Composition and Thermal Diluents
 
Table 1 shows the composition of a decarbonized syngas (shifted and 
then 90% of the CO2 removed) as well as an “un-decarbonized” syngas leav-
ing the acid gas removal unit of a high-temperature slurry-fed entrained-bed 
gasiﬁ er fed with a bituminous coal2.  The H2 content of both the syngas streams 
is considered high enough to preclude the use of current design pre-mixed gas 
turbine combustors to limit the formation of NOx.  Diluent addition is required 
to the syngas in order to reduce the NOx generation when utilizing “diffusion” 
type combustors, the amount of diluent addition required by decarbonized syn-
gas, however, being higher than that required for the un-decarbonized syngas. 
Two types of diluents are available in an IGCC plant, water vapor introduced 
into the syngas stream by direct contact of the syngas with hot water in a coun-
ter-current column while recovering low temperature waste heat and / or N2
supplied by an elevated pressure air separation unit.  The choice of the diluent 
depends on a number of factors such as
• amount of low temperature waste heat available for the humidiﬁ cation 
operation, and
• amount of excess N2 available from the air separation unit.
1.2.2
Implications of CO2 
Sequestration for Gas 
Turbines
Ashok Rao, Ph.D., P.E.
Chief Scientist, Power Systems
Advanced Power and Energy Program
University of California
Irvine, CA 92697-3550
phone: (949) 824-7302 ext 345
email: adr@apep.uci.edu

78
 
The amount of low temperature waste heat available in a gasiﬁcation plant in turn depends primarily on the gasiﬁcation heat 
recovery system employed (i.e., the extent to which cooling of the raw gasiﬁer efﬂuent is accomplished in a syngas cooler before the 
syngas is quenched / scrubbed with water).  On the other hand, the amount of N2 available as a diluent for the gas turbine depends on
• 
the speciﬁc O2 consumption of the gasiﬁer - the amount of N2 produced by the air separation unit is lower when the speciﬁc   
 
O2 consumption of the gasiﬁer is lower; and,
• 
the type of gasiﬁer feed system - dry feed systems utilize signiﬁcant portions of the N2 as lock hopper pressurization gas as 
 
well as in the drying and transport of the coal into the gasiﬁer and only the remaining amount of N2 is available for gas 
 
turbine injection.  
 
A combination of the two diluents, i.e. water vapor and N2, may also be utilized, the relative amounts depending on the overall 
plant integration scheme and the trade-offs between efﬁciency and capital cost.  In such cases, an option available consists of introducing 
the moisture into the N2 stream instead of the syngas.  When N2 or moisturized N2 is utilized as a diluent, it may be either premixed with 
the decarbonized syngas before supplying it to the combustor of the gas turbine or it may be introduced into the combustor through a 
separate injector.  Premixing the diluents with the syngas versus keeping them separately upstream of the combustor will have implica-
tions on the effectiveness of the diluent in lowering the local combustion temperature; a diluent entering the combustor premixed with 
the syngas would be more effective in lowering the NOx than if it entered the combustor through a separate nozzle.  On the other hand, 
some savings in the N2 compressor horsepower may be realized in the case where the diluent is introduced into the combustor separately 
if the pressure drop associated with the fuel control valve is much higher than that for the diluent.   
 
It should be noted that the speciﬁc heat of the triatomic H2O molecule is signiﬁcantly higher than that of the diatomic N2 mol-
ecule on a mole basis and thus the relative amounts of diluents required, i.e. water vapor versus N2 on a volumetric or mole basis by a 
given amount of syngas are quite different.  
 
Thus, in summary, the composition of the syngas / diluent are dependent on the type of gasiﬁer, heat recovery and energy 
integration options and the type of air separation unit, i.e., whether it is an elevated pressure air separation unit which can supply high 
pressure N2 for use as a thermal diluent for NOx control. 
Gas Turbine Pressure Ratio
 
The pressure ratio of the gas turbine increases when ﬁring syngas, which is a much lower heat content gas than natural gas.  The 
increase in pressure ratio is dependent upon the amount and nature of the diluent added and the degree to which the compressor inlet 
guide vanes are closed.  The surge margin available in the compressor could thus constrain the amount of diluent that may be added and 
the resulting NOx emissions, in addition to the constraints set by the combustor design with respect to achieving stable combustion while 
limiting the CO emissions.  Air extraction from the compressor may be required in order to limit the increase in the engine pressure ratio, 
in which case the extracted air (after cooldown / heat recovery) may be used efﬁciently in an elevated pressure air separation unit. 
Gas Turbine Firing Temperature
 
The H2O vapor content of the working ﬂuid ﬂowing through the turbine, especially in the case when decarbonized syngas is the 
fuel and while utilizing water vapor as the diluent, is signiﬁcantly higher than that in the case when natural gas is the fuel (i.e., compared 
to the case when natural gas is ﬁred in dry low NOx combustors).  The following implications exist for the gas turbine in such applica-
tions:
• 
Derating of the turbine ﬁring temperature due the different aero-heat transfer characteristics3 and
• 
Life of the thermal barrier coatings, and any ceramics that may be utilized in advanced gas turbines in the future.
 
Additionally, a gas turbine designed for a certain ﬁring temperature on natural gas would see derating of the ﬁring temperature 
not only due to the increased concentration of H2O vapor in the working ﬂuid but also due to the increase in the pressure ratio since the 
temperature of the cooling air increases as the pressure ratio is increased.  In the case of a steam-cooled gas turbine, however, derat-
ing of the ﬁring temperature due to the increase in pressure ratio may be less signiﬁcant (since the cooling steam temperature may be 
maintained independently of the gas turbine pressure ratio), unless the low pressure air-cooled stages of the gas turbine become the 
bottleneck.  
Table 1 Typical Clean Syngas Compositions (Dry and Sulfur Free Basis)
Component
Non-decarbonized
Decarbonized
CO
50.1
2.8
H2
37.4
94.1
CO2
10.2
0.6
CH4
0.1
0.1
Ar + N2
2.2
2.4
 Total
100.0
100.0

79
 
Thus, the choice of the diluent to be utilized, i.e., H2O vapor versus N2 or their relative amounts should be included in the trade-
off / optimization studies, i.e., take into account not only the gasiﬁcation island heat recovery options but also the accompanying extent 
of the gas turbine ﬁring temperature reduction.
Bottoming Steam Cycle
 
The effect of lowering the ﬁring temperature while increasing the pressure ratio signiﬁcantly reduces the gas turbine exhaust 
temperature which has implications on the steam bottoming cycle.  With lower steam superheat and reheat temperatures as compared to 
those corresponding to a natural gas ﬁred combined cycle, the optimum steam cycle pressures would tend to be lower than those for the 
steam cycle in a natural gas ﬁred combined cycle. 
Use of Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR)
 
At the present time, gas turbine manufacturers are willing to guarantee 15 ppmV NOx (dry, 15% O2 basis) for gas turbines in 
IGCC applications with the requirement of the thermal diluent addition.  More stringent NOx emission requirements [e.g., 3 ppmV NOx 
(dry, 15% O2 basis)] in the future may require the installation of an SCR for post combustion control of the NOx or advanced gas turbine 
combustors that generate less NOx such as the trapped vortex combustor4.  
 
Development of low NOx combustors has a number of technical challenges to overcome due to the presence of a large concen-
tration of H2 in the syngas (auto-ignition and ﬂash-back being the challenges with pre-mixed combustor designs).  These technical chal-
lenges will be even more severe for the more advanced gas turbines which will have higher pressure ratios (to take full advantage of the 
higher ﬁring temperatures) and thus higher combustion air temperatures than current gas turbines in syngas applications.  Decarbonized 
syngas will make it more challenging since the H2 content of the decarbonized syngas is signiﬁcantly increased.  
 
Although SCRs have been utilized in coal ﬁred boiler plants, the application of SCRs in IGCC plants poses special challenges. 
The NH3 slip from the SCR is known to react with the SO3 formed during the combustion process as well as some formed in the SCR 
itself (depending on the vanadium content of the catalyst) to form salts (ammonium bisulfate, sulfate and bisulﬁte) as the gases are 
cooled during heat recovery.  Ammonium bisulfate tends to be especially sticky and can deposit on the cooler surfaces of heat transfer 
equipment causing fouling as well as corrosion.  Any unreacted NH3 that may be emitted to the atmosphere is by itself a pollutant.  In 
the case of a boiler, these problems are less severe since the NH3 slip from the SCR is preferentially adsorbed onto the ﬂyash while any 
ammonium salts formed are captured in the particulate control devices.  Furthermore, the air preheater in a boiler plant is cleaned peri-
odically by on-line “soot” blowers.
 
Operating combined cycle plants ﬁred with sulfur bearing fuel oil have shown fouling of the low temperature boiler feed water 
heater in the HRSG when equipped with an SCR.  Note that the salts that do not deposit within the HRSG will be emitted as particulate 
matter.
 
The use of SCRs in IGCC applications thus requires a syngas that is very low in sulfur content to reduce the SO3 content in the 
gas turbine exhaust.  SCRs have been installed in IGCC plants, the API Falconaro plant in Italy and the Negishi plant in Japan5.  The 
ISAB IGCC plant in Italy which also has an SCR, uses it only on fuel oil operation and bypasses it during syngas operation6.  For the 
Negishi plant, a syngas with a sulfur content of 8 ppmV is produced with a design maximum of 30 ppmV.  No problems associated with 
salt deposition in the HRSG have been experienced in this plant.  Both capital cost and thermal penalties are associated however, with 
deep sulfur removal in an IGCC for the following reasons:
• 
A COS hydrolysis unit may be required to convert the COS (which is more difﬁcult to scrub out in the acid gas removal unit)  
 
to H2S; and,
• 
A large circulation rate is required in the acid gas removal unit for deep sulfur removal.
 
In the case of an IGCC plant designed for producing a decarbonized syngas using sour shift and an acid gas removal unit to 
capture the CO2 and also perform desulfurization of the syngas, most of the COS is hydrolyzed to H2S in the shift reactors, while due to 
the very large solvent circulation rate maintained in the acid gas removal unit to capture the CO2, the sulfur content of the treated syngas 
is very low.  In such cases, the incremental heat rate and cost penalties associated with producing a low sulfur syngas suitable for ﬁring 
in a gas turbine equipped with an SCR are not signiﬁcant.
Engine Output 
 
The gas turbine when ﬁred with syngas with diluent addition can be fully loaded to maximize its power output, the limits being 
the surge margin of the compressor (pressure ratio being increased) and the shaft torque.  A nearly “ﬂat rating” of the engine output with 
respect to the ambient temperature may be realized by opening up the guide vanes as the ambient temperature increases, the compressor 
inlet guide vanes being typically closed at the lower ambient temperatures to compensate for the larger mass ﬂow rate of the syngas and 
the diluent. 
Ashok Rao, Ph.D., P.E.

80
80
1.2.2-3 Conclusions
 
Due to the high H2 content of the syngas stream, the use of current design pre-mixed gas turbine combustors to limit NOx 
formation is precluded.  Diluent addition is required to the syngas in order to reduce the NOx generation when utilizing diffusion 
type combustors; the amount of diluent addition required by decarbonized syngas is much higher that that required for the un-de-
carbonized syngas.
 
The H2O vapor content of the working ﬂ uid ﬂ owing through the turbine, especially in the case when decarbonized syn-
gas is the fuel and while utilizing water vapor as the diluent, is signiﬁ cantly higher than that in the case when natural gas is the 
fuel.  The implications for the gas turbine in such applications are that the turbine ﬁ ring temperature is derated due to the different 
aero-heat transfer characteristics and due to the higher cooling air temperatures caused by operation under a higher pressure ratio, 
while the life of the thermal barrier coatings and any ceramics that may be utilized in advanced gas turbines in the future may be 
adversely effected.
 
Use of a trapped vortex combustor holds promise as an alternate option for supressing the NOx emissions in syngas ap-
plication.
 
Penalty of utilizing a SCR in a decarbonized syngas ﬁ red combined cycle can be less severe as compared to its use in an 
IGCC without upstream CO2 capture. 
1.2.2-4 Notes
___________________________
 
1. A.D. Rao and R. Stobbs,, “An Evaluation of Coal Gasiﬁ cation with CO2 Capture” (presented at the 
 
   Combustion Canada Conference, Vancouver, September 2003); EPRI Report No. IE-7365, “Engineering and 
 
      Economic Evaluation of CO2 Removal from Fossil-Fuel-Fired Power Plants” (prepared by Fluor Daniel, Inc, June  
 
      1991).
 
 2.  See note 1 above (EPRI Report).
 
 3.  A.D. Rao and D. Du Plessis, “Prospects for 200 MW Western Canadian Coal IGCC with CO2 Capture” (presented 
 
      at the Combustion Canada Conference, Vancouver, September 2003).
 
 4.  K.Y. Hsu, L.P. Gross, and D.D. Trump, “Performance of a Trapped Vortex Combustor” (J. of Propulsion and Power, 
 
      Paper No. 95-0810, AIAA 33rd Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, Jan 9-12, 1995).
 
 5.  T. Ono, “NPRC Negishi IGCC Startup and Operation” (presented at the Gasiﬁ cation Technologies Conference, San 
 
   Francisco, California, October, 2003); D. Heaven and B. DeSouza, “Technical Issues with SCR in IGCC 
 
      Applications” (presented at the 6th European Gasiﬁ cation Conference, Brighton, UK, May 2004).
 
 6.  See note 5 above (Heaven & DeSouza).
1.2.2 Implications of CO2 Sequestration for Gas Turbines

Ashok Rao, Ph.D., P.E.
Chief Scientist, Power Systems
Advanced Power and Energy Program
University of California
Irvine, CA 92697-3550
phone: (949) 824-7302 ext 345
email: adr@apep.uci.edu
Dr. Rao serves as the Chief Scientist, Power Systems at UC Irvine Advanced Power and Energy Program. 
He worked in industry for more than 30 years in the energy conversion area, and previously worked at 
Fluor as Director in Process Engineering and Senior Fellow in design / development of gasiﬁ cation for 
power generation and synthetic fuels coproduction.  He received several patent awards in the energy 
conversion area and authored several papers on advanced power cycles and improved IGCC designs. 
Dr. Rao has also worked for Allis-Chalmers and McDowell Wellman Engineering in coal conversion; 
responsibilities included taking ideas from drawing board to demonstration scale plants.  He holds a 
Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering and a M.S. in Chemical Engineering.
1.2.2  Implications of CO2 Sequestration for Gas Turbines
1.3.2  Advanced Brayton Cycles
BIOGRAPHY  
