227
227
3.2.1.3
Rich Burn, Quick-
Mix, Lean Burn (RQL) 
Combustor
Scott Samuelsen
Professor of Mechanical, Aerospace, 
and Environmental Engineering
Director
Advanced Power and Energy Program
University of California
Irvine
92697-3550
phone: 949-824-5468
email: gss@uci.edu
3.2.1.3-1 Introduction
The Rich-Burn, Quick-Mix, Lean-Burn (RQL) combustor concept was 
introduced in 1980 as strategy to reduce oxides of nitrogen (NOx) emission from 
gas turbine engines.1  Later, in the 1990’s, the concept was targeted by the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for the reduction of nitrogen 
oxides in next generation aero-propulsion engines.  Today, the RQL is the anchor 
combustor technology in aeroengines deployed commercially by Pratt & Whitney 
under the name TALON (Technology for Advanced Low NOx).  Due to safety 
considerations and overall performance (e.g., stability) throughout the duty cycle, 
the RQL is preferred over lean premixed options in aeroengine applications.
In stationary applications, lean premixed combustor technology is 
the standard.  Safety considerations are not as severe, the duty cycle is more 
constrained, and the reduction in NOx emission is more substantial in contrast to 
RQL technology.  However, RQL combustor technology is of growing interest 
for stationary applications due to the attributes of (1) more effectively processing 
fuels of complex composition, and (2) processing fuels of varying composition. 
The latter is becoming of importance with the increasing international competition 
for fuels in general, the burgeoning interest in biomass fuels, the expanding use 
of “opportunity fuels” (land-ﬁ ll gases, digester gases, well-head gases), and the 
growing use of liqueﬁ ed natural gas to either complement domestic sources or 
serve as the sole source of natural gas to a large region of a country or the country 
as a whole.  The California Energy Commission is engaged in RQL technology 
research, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Energy, to explore the utility 
of RQL strategies as an alternative to combustors for niche applications in the 
stationary production of electrical power.
The RQL concept is predicated on the premise that the primary zone 
of a gas turbine combustor operates most effectively with rich mixture ratios 
(Figure 1).  First, a “rich-burn” condition in the primary zone (e.g., Ф = 1.8) 
enhances the stability of the combustion reaction by producing and sustaining a high 
concentration of energetic hydrogen and hydrocarbon radical species.  Secondly, 
rich burn conditions minimize the production of nitrogen oxides due to the relative 
low temperatures and low population of oxygen containing intermediate species 
(Figure 2).
The efﬂ uent emanating from the rich primary zone will be high in the 
concentration of partially oxidized and partially pyrolized hydrocarbon species, 
hydrogen, and carbon monoxide.  As a result, the efﬂ uent cannot be exhausted 
without further processing.  In particular, the addition of oxygen is needed to oxidize 
the high concentrations of carbon monoxide, hydrogen, hydrocarbon intermediates. 
This is accomplished by injecting a substantial amount of air through wall jets to 
mix with the primary zone efﬂ uent and create a “lean-burn” condition prior to the 
exit plane of the combustor.  Ideally, this will result in the emission of an efﬂ uent 
comprised of the major products of combustion (CO2, H2O, N2, O2) and a non-zero 
concentration of criteria pollutants (e.g., NOx, CO, HC).
Fig. 1. Rich-Burn, Quick-Mix, Lean-Burn Combustor (Ф, Equivalence Ratio)

228
A major challenge for the RQL is the selection of combustor liner material.  In the primary zone, for example, the use of air 
for cooling the liner wall is precluded in order to avoid the generation of near-stoichiometric mixture ratios and the associated production 
of nitrogen oxides in the vicinity of the wall.  As a result, the temperature and composition of gases in the primary zone create a 
demanding, reducing environment for the liner material.  The concentrations of hydrogen alone and the concomitant demands of hydrogen 
embrittlement in particular have combined to require a major investment in materials research in support of RQL technology.
A more demanding challenge is the design of the Quick-Mix section.  A key to the success of the RQL is the efﬁcacy of 
mixing the air with the efﬂuent exiting the primary zone.  The mixing of the injected air takes the reaction through the conditions most 
vulnerable for the high production of oxides of nitrogen (near stoichiometric conditions where both the temperature and oxygen atom 
concentrations are elevated).  The challenge then is to rapidly mix air into the rich-burn efﬂuent in order to rapidly create the lean-burn 
conditions (Figure 3).  As a result, the label “Quick-Mix” is adopted to emphasize the requirement to rapidly mix the air and primary 
zone efﬂuent.  As a result, RQL research has historically focused on Quick-Mix section designs to establish the most rapid mixing.
3.2.1.3-2 Quick-Mix Zone
Numerous jet in crossﬂow studies have been conducted under non-reacting conditions to yield insight on such ﬂow ﬁeld 
characteristics as jet structure and penetration, jet entrainment of crossﬂow ﬂuid, and the ﬂow ﬁeld distributions resulting from jet 
mixing.2  Heated jets or a heated mainﬂow, or the doping of either the jets or mainﬂow with a tracer have allowed the measurement of 
scalars in the ﬂow downstream of the jet oriﬁces 
in order to quantify the convective and diffusive 
mixing efﬁcacy.  Early studies of jets in crossﬂow 
were motivated by the aerodynamics associated 
with (1) vertical/short takeoff and landing 
(V/STOL) aircraft and (2) primary and dilution 
jets on conventional gas turbine combustors with 
a focus on jet trajectory, centerline decay, and jet 
shape for unconﬁned single jets.3  The interest in 
the Quick-Mix zone of the RQL combustor has 
constituted the focus of jet in crossﬂow studies 
over the past two decades.
A single round jet in a crossﬂow is 
presented in Figure 4.  The jet enters the crossﬂow 
and is deﬂected downstream in response to the 
momentum of the cross ﬂow.  A recirculation zone 
can form in the near-wall downstream wake of the 
jet.  The radial extent of jet penetration is governed 
by the angle of the jet relative to the crossﬂow, 
and the entry momentum of the jet in contrast to 
the momentum of the crossﬂow.  A variety of non-
reacting experiments have been used to establish 
empirical correlations for the maximum penetration 
of a single jet.  For example:4
Fig. 2. Nitric Oxide Formation
Figure 3   RQL Strategy
Fig. 4. Single Jet in Crossﬂow

229
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
         (1)
 
   Where:
 
   Ymax = Maximum Radial Penetration of the Jet Centerline
 
   dj = Diameter of the Jet Entry Oriﬁce
 
   J = Jet-to-Crossﬂow Momentum Flux Ratio =  
 
 
 
 
 
         (2)
 
   ρ = Density
 
   V = Velocity
 
   θ = Entry Angle of the Jet
In the gas turbine combustor, the jets are conﬁned and the interaction between multiple jets is a major factor in dictating 
mixing behavior.  As a result, studies has been conducted to address the mixing behavior associated with the mixing of primary and 
dilution jets in conventional gas turbine combustors; and optimizing the mixing section in the RQL combustor.5  For multiple jets in a 
tubular duct, the correlation for the maximum penetration of a single jet must account for the effects of blockage:6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (3)
Where:
MR = Jet-to-Crossﬂow Mass Flow Ratio
MR is much higher for an RQL combustor (~ 2.5) in contrast to the conventional combustor (~ 0.25).  Since the density and 
momentum-ﬂux ratios J are about the same in the two conﬁgurations, the biggest difference between the jets in conventional and RQL 
combustors is oriﬁce size.
Non-reacting studies have also been undertaken to evaluate geometrical features (e.g., oriﬁce shape, number of oriﬁces, 
axial staggering of oriﬁces) and operating features (e.g., momentum ﬂux ratio, density ﬂux ratio, mass ﬂow rate ratio) with the goal to 
optimize the mixing.  Traditionally, such studies have deﬁned “optimal mixing” as the shortest axial distance from the upstream edge 
of the jet oriﬁce where a uniform radial proﬁle is established of key mixing parameters (e.g., temperature, species concentration).  The 
hypothesis is that the optimal mixing deﬁned in this manner will minimize the production of nitrogen oxides.  Due to the complex set 
of variables, many of the studies have beneﬁted by a design of experiments statistical approach to explore the multiple factors that can 
affect jet mixing.7  In addition to non-reacting experiments and use of design of experiments methods, modeling has been effectively 
employed both independent of and in conjunction with the experiments.8 
While a variety of jet oriﬁce conﬁgurations has been studied (e.g., triangular, slanted, tear-drop), no option has been identiﬁed 
that penetrates signiﬁcantly farther or faster than a single, round jet.  For a cylindrical conﬁguration, a NASA design method developed 
by Holdeman and co-workers deﬁned a correlation that is used to design the jet mixing section of an RQL combustor utilizing round hole 
jets.9  The correlation, derived a study of jet-to-mainstream momentum-ﬂux ratio, establishes the number of circular holes for optimum 
mixing:
C
J
2
n
π
=
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         (4)
 
      Where:
 
 
      n = Number of Circular Jet Oriﬁces to Optimize Mixing
 
 
      J = Momentum Flux Ratio
 
 
      C = Empirical Constant = 2.5
Reacting ﬂow studies have also been conducted to complement the non-reacting studies and assess the impact of heat release 
on the mixing processes.  Typically, a mixture of propane and air is used to generate a representative rich-burn efﬂuent.  A specially 
designed section is used to create a uniform presentation (e.g., temperature, velocity, composition, concentration) of the rich efﬂuent to 
the mixing section.  The injection of the quick-mix jet air results in the ignition of a reaction between the rich-burn efﬂuent and the jet 
air (Figure 5).  Measurements of temperature, species composition, and species concentration can then be made downstream of the jet 
oriﬁces in order to establish the efﬁcacy of mixing as a function of downstream distance.10  The results from the reacting experiments 
reveal that the non-reacting experiments provide a satisfactory description of the mixing of jets in a crossﬂow.  Overall, the jets need to 
penetrate to the half radius in order to maximize the mixing and avoid either under-penetration or over-penetration.11
Scott Samuelsen
2
main
main
2
jets
jets
V
V
⋅
ρ
⋅
ρ

230
Fig. 5. Laboratory Model Combustor
Jet mixing in a crossﬂow has been studied in two primary mainstream geometries.  The cylindrical geometry has been the 
most extensively researched and is directly relevant to combustor can conﬁgurations.  In contrast, the modern annular combustor 
conﬁgurations have spawned investigations of jets in the crossﬂow of rectangular geometries.  For each, Holdeman has established the 
following procedures to design the most rapid mixing, Quick-Mix section:12
Cylindrical Geometry
1. 
Typical Mass Ratio: 
 
 
2.5
2. 
Typical Momentum Flux Ratio: 
   60
3. 
Optimal Number of Oriﬁces:
 
 
C
J
2
n
π
=
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (5)
4. 
Oriﬁce Size:  Determined by the desired mass-ﬂow ratio and the optimum number of oriﬁces for the given momentum-
ﬂux ratio.
Rectangular Geometry
1. 
Typical Mass Ratio: 
 
 
2.5
2. 
Typical Momentum Flux Ratio: 
 
60
3. 
Optimal Oriﬁce Spacing:
  
 
 
J
/
C
H
/
S
=
  
 
 
 
 
        (6)
Where:
S = Oriﬁce Spacing
H = Channel Height
4. 
Oriﬁce Size.  For a given momentum-ﬂux ratio, determined by the desired mass-ﬂow ratio and the optimum oriﬁce 
spacing.  For a rectangular duct the number of oriﬁces is inﬁnite. For an annulus, the number of oriﬁces will depend 
on the diameter and height of the mixing section.
5. 
Oriﬁce Conﬁguration.  Can be either in-line or staggered. The selection will depend on the application, and include 
such factors as momentum-ﬂux ratio.  In-line conﬁgurations are usually preferred as the oriﬁces are smaller.  The 
optimum spacing for staggered jets is four times the optimum spacing for in-line conﬁgurations.  As a result, the 
oriﬁce diameter for staggered jets must be doubled for the same total oriﬁce area.
3.2.1.3-3 Formation of Nitrogen Oxides
The hypothesis that the optimization of mixing in the Quick-Mix section will minimize the production of nitrogen oxides 
begs the question of proof.  The ﬁrst exploration of this relationship utilized the results of non-reacting experiments, and superimposed 
analytically the kinetics of NOx production.  The results suggested that the best mixer may not necessarily minimize NOx emissions.13
In more recent research (Figure 6), oxides of nitrogen have been measured with the ﬁnding that the module designed to optimize 
mixing (12 holes) produces 15% more NOx than an 8-hole module (Figure 6b).14  These results also suggest that an aerodynamically 
“optimum” mixer may not minimize NOx.  It is noteworthy that the data for all modules show that high concentrations of NOx occur 
in the wakes of the jets adjacent to the wall. This suggests that a signiﬁcant production of NOx likely occurs in the wakes of the jets, 
downstream of the oriﬁces.
3.2.1.3 Rich Burn, Quick-Mix, Lean Burn (RQL) Combustor

231
The research study reported in Figure 6 explored as well the effect of air preheat on NOx formation.  The main air and jet 
air streams were independently heated in order to assess the relative inﬂuence of independently preheating each ﬂow.  Three preheat 
conditions are presented in Figure 7.  The ﬁrst set of conditions is for no air preheat.  This serves as an anchor to which the results for the 
elevated inlet air temperature conditions can be compared.  The second set of conditions is for jet air preheat only (no main air preheat). 
The third set of conditions is for both jet air and main air preheat, representing the case usually encountered in practical combustors. 
The results reveal the small impact of preheated jet air on NOx.  The jet air comprises over 70 percent of the total air ﬂow, 
but preheating only the jet air results in relatively small increases in NOx emissions compared to the case where both the main and jet 
air are preheated. The latter condition resulted in the largest NOx production for all the modules.  The small effect of preheating the jet 
air is counter intuitive to the expectation that preheating jet air should promote NOx production via the thermal (Zeldovich) mechanism. 
The dominating inﬂuence of the main air preheat may be attributed to the total ﬁxed nitrogen (TFN) production in the fuel-rich zone.  In 
particular, the TFN generation in the fuel-rich zone, and its subsequent transformation to NOx in the mixing zone, may be inﬂuential in 
governing the total NOx emissions than expected.
The distributions of equivalence ratios reveal that preheat has a negligible effect on jet penetration. The equivalence ratio 
distributions are quite uniform which is also expected as the 12 hole conﬁguration as an optimum mixer.  In addition, the O2 distributions 
serve as an indice for jet penetration and are virtually the same for all preheat conditions.
3.2.1.3-4 Conclusions
The Rich-Burn, Quick-Mix, Lean-Burn (RQL) combustor has evolved over the past three decades as a major strategy for 
the reduction of oxides of nitrogen from gas turbine engines.  The concept has the attribute of high combustor stability due to the rich 
primary zone.  While the RQL is deployed commercially in aeroengine applications, lean premixed options have been selected for 
stationary applications in lieu of the RQL in order to achieve lower NOx emission.  Niche applications in the stationary market, however, 
are driving a role for the RQL where fuels with complex compositions or fuels of varying composition are being encountered.  This has 
prompted new research in the exploration of NOx formation in RQL conﬁgurations.  The hypothesis that optimal mixing in the Quick-
Mix section will lead to the minimization of NOx emission has been challenged by recent observations.  In particular, the generation 
of nitrogen containing species in the Rich-Burn zone and subsequent processing in the Quick-Mix section may affect the emission of 
NOx.  While the RQL concept is inherently a low-NOx generator, a further understanding of the primary zone chemistry and the coupling 
between the chemical kinetics and ﬂuid mechanics in the Quick-Mix section may be required in order to optimize the RQL design.  Fuels 
of varying composition and varying concentrations of fuel-bound nitrogen in stationary applications create a particular demand for this 
insight whereas the consistency of fuel composition in aeroengine applications allows insight derived from empirical evidence to be 
sufﬁcient for the design of commercial RQL systems.
Scott Samuelsen
Fig. 6. Composite NOx Emissions Data
Source: See note 17.
Fig. 7. Effect of Air Preheat on NOx Concentrations
Source: See note 17.

232
232
3.2.1.3-5 Notes
_________________________________
 
 
1. Mosier, S.A., and Pierce, R.M., 1980.  “Advanced Combustor Systems for Stationary Gas Turbine Engines, Phase I.  
 
    Review and Preliminary Evaluation,” Volume I, Contract 68-02-2136, FR-11405, Final Report, U.S. Environmental 
 
    Protection Agency.
 
 
2. Holdeman, J.D., 1993. “Mixing of Multiple Jets with a 
 
    Conﬁ ned Subsonic Crossﬂ ow,” Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, Vol. 19, pp. 31-70, August; 
 
    Holdeman, J.D., Liscinsky, D.S., Oechsle, V.L., Samuelsen, G.S., and Smith, C.E., 1997. “Mixing of Multiple 
 
    Jets With a Conﬁ ned Subsonic Crossﬂ ow:  Part I—Cylindrical Ducts,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines 
 
    and Power, Vol. 119, No. 4, October, pp. 852–862; Holdeman, J.D., Liscinsky, D.S., and Bain, D.B., 1999. 
 
    “Mixing of Multiple Jets With a Conﬁ ned Subsonic Crossﬂ ow: Part II—Opposed Rows of Oriﬁ ces in a Rectangular 
 
    Duct,” Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, Vol. 121, No. 3, July, pp 551-562. 
 
 
3. Margason, R.J., 1993. “Fifty Years of Jet in Cross Flow Research,” Presented at Computational and Experimental 
 
    Assessment of Jets in Cross Flow, AGARD Conference Proceedings 534, April;       Demuren. A.O: Modeling Jets in Cross  
 
         Flow. NASA Contractor Report 194965. August 1994; 
 
 
4. Lefebvre, A.H., 1999.  Gas Turbine Combustion, Taylor and Francis.
 
 
5. See Note 2.
 
 
6. See Note 4.
 
 
7. Hatch, M.S., Sowa, W.A., Samuelsen, G.S., and Holdeman, J.D., 1995,“Jet Mixing into a Heated Cross Flow in a 
 
    Cylindrical Duct:  Inﬂ uence of Geometry and Flow Variations,” Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 11, No. 3, 
 
    May-June, pp. 393–400;      Kroll, J.T., Sowa, W.A., Samuelsen, G.S., and Holdeman, J.D., 2000. “Optimization of Oriﬁ ce   
         Geometry for Cross Flow Mixing in a Cylindrical Duct,” Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol . 16, No. 6, 
 
    November-December, pp 929-936. 
 
 
8. See Note 2.
 
 
9. See Note 2.
 
 
10. Leong, M.Y., Samuelsen, G.S., and Holdeman, J.D., 1999. “Mixing of Jet Air With a Fuel-Rich, Reacting Crossﬂ ow,”  
 
      Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 15, No. 5, September-October, pp. 617-622;  
. Leong, M.Y., Samuelsen, G.S., and  
 
      Holdeman, J.D., 2000. “Optimization of Jet Mixing into a Rich, Reacting Crossﬂ ow,” Journal of Propulsion and Power, 
 
      Vol. 16, No. 5, September-October, pp. 729-735;    Demayo, T.N, Leong, M.Y, Samuelsen, G.S., and Holdeman, J.D.,  
 
           2003. “Assessing Jet-Induced Spatial Mixing in a Rich, Reacting Crossﬂ ow,” Journal of Propulsion and Power, 
 
      Vol. 19, No. 1, January-February, pp. 14-21. 
 
 
11. See Notes 7 and 10.
 
 
12. See Note 2.
 
 
13. See Note 7.
 
 
14. Samuelsen, G.S., Brouwer, J., Holdeman, J.D., Vardarkas, M.A, and Leong, M.Y., 2006, “The Effect of Air Preheat and  
 
      Number of Oriﬁ ces on Flow and Emissions in an RQL Mixing Section,” submitted for publication (see also NASA TM-  
 
      1999-209431, 1999).
3.2.1.3 Rich Burn, Quick-Mix, Lean Burn (RQL) Combustor

Professor Scott Samuelsen is Director of the Advanced Power and Energy Program (APEP) at the 
University of California Irvine and Professor of Mechanical, Aerospace, and Environmental Engineering. 
He directs as well the National Fuel Cell Research Center (NFCRC) and the UCI Combustion 
Laboratory (UCICL).  His research is directed to advanced power systems including gas turbines, fuel 
cells, and fuels.   He directs anchor research on advanced coal and natural gas power plants for the co-
production of electricity and hydrogen for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), distributed generation 
and information technology research for the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) in support of energy-
efﬁ cient and environmentally-responsible power generation, advanced energy systems research for 
the California Energy Commission, and coal-gas and hydrogen-fueled gas turbine combustion studies. 
His energy expertise is based on forty years of combustion research working with strategic alliances 
involving industry with applications to gas turbine propulsion, gas turbine electronic power generation, 
and combustion distributed generation resources.  He holds the Ph.D. degree from the University of 
California Berkeley.
Scott Samuelsen
Professor of Mechanical, Aerospace, and 
Environmental Engineering Director
Advanced Power and Energy Program
University of California
Irvine
92697-3550
phone: 949-824-5468
email: gss@uci.edu
3.2.1.1 Conventional Type Combustion
3.2.1.3 Rich Burn, Quick-Mix, Lean Burn (RQL) Combustor
BIOGRAPHY  
