321
321
4.2.2.2-1 Introduction
Gas turbines play a vital role in the today’s industrialized society, and as the 
demands for power increase, the power output and thermal efﬁ ciency of gas turbines 
must also increase.  One method of increasing both the power output and thermal 
efﬁ ciency of the engine is to increase the temperature of the gas entering the turbine. 
In the advanced gas turbines of today, the turbine inlet temperature can be as high 
as 1500°C; however, this temperature exceeds the melting temperature of the metal 
airfoils.  Therefore, it is imperative that the blades and vanes are cooled, so they can 
withstand these extreme temperatures.  Cooling air around 650°C is extracted from 
the compressor and passes through the airfoils.  With the hot gases and cooling air, 
the temperature of the blades can be lowered to approximately 1000°C, which is 
permissible for reliable operation of the engine.
It is widely accepted that the life of a turbine blade can be reduced by half if 
the temperature prediction of the metal blade is off by only 30°C.  In order to avoid 
premature failure, designers must accurately predict the local heat transfer coefﬁ cients 
and local airfoil metal temperatures.  By preventing local hot spots, the life of the 
turbine blades and vanes will increase.  However, due to the complex ﬂ ow around 
the airfoils it is difﬁ cult for designers to accurately predict the metal temperature. 
Figure 1 shows the heat ﬂ ux distribution around an inlet guide vane and a rotor blade. 
At the leading edge of the vane, the heat transfer coefﬁ cients are very high, and as 
the ﬂ ow splits and travels along the vane, the heat ﬂ ux decreases.  Along the suction 
side of the vane, the ﬂ ow transitions from laminar to turbulent, and the heat transfer 
coefﬁ cients increase.  As the ﬂ ow accelerates along the pressure surface, the heat 
transfer coefﬁ cients also increase.  The trends are similar for the turbine blade: the 
heat ﬂ ux at the leading edge is very high and continues decrease as the ﬂ ow travels 
along the blade; on the suction surface, the ﬂ ow transitions from laminar to turbulent, 
and the heat ﬂ ux sharply increases; the heat transfer on the pressure surface increases 
as the ﬂ ow accelerates around the blade.
4.2.2.2 
Enhanced Internal Cooling 
of Turbine Blades and Vanes
Fig. 1. Cross-Sectional View and Heat Flux Distribution of a Cooled Vane and Blade
Lesley M. Wright
Turbine Heat Transfer Laboratory
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas 77843-3123, 
USA
email: jc-han@tamu.edu
Je-Chin Han

322
Due to the complex ﬂow, designers need data that will aid them in the development of efﬁcient cooling designs.  They need 
detailed hot gas path heat transfer distributions.  Heat transfer and ﬁlm cooling data are also needed for the airfoils.  The surface heat 
transfer on a stator vane is affected by the combustor-generated high turbulence, the laminar-to-turbulent transition, acceleration, ﬁlm 
cooling ﬂow, platform secondary ﬂow, and surface roughness.  These factors as well as the rotational, centrifugal forces and blade tip 
clearance and leakage must be considered for the rotating blades.
After the potential hot spots on the airfoil surface are identiﬁed, the internal cooling schemes can be developed.  Designers need 
new internal heat transfer data to improve current rotor blade cooling performance.  They also need detailed ﬂow and heat transfer data to 
understand the ﬂow physics and to improve the current internal cooling designs.  Many techniques have been developed to enhance the 
heat transfer in these passages.  The cooling passages located in the middle of the airfoils are often lined with rib turbulators.  Near the 
leading edge of the blade, jet impingement (coupled with ﬁlm cooling) is commonly used.  Jet impingement is also used throughout the 
cross-section of the stator vanes.  Pin-ﬁns and dimples can be used in the trailing edge portion of the vanes and blades.  These techniques 
have also been combined to further increase the heat transfer from the airfoil walls.
A number of traditional cooling concepts are used in various combinations to adequately cool the turbine vanes and blades; 
these techniques are identiﬁed and described throughout this chapter.  In addition, newly developed, advanced cooling concepts are also 
introduced as possible cooling alternatives.  The interested reader is referred to Gas Turbine Heat Transfer and Cooling Technology 
by Han et al. for a more in depth description of turbine blade heat transfer and cooling1.  In addition, Lakshminarayana reviewed 
recent publications involving turbine cooling and heat transfer, and Dunn put together a detailed review of convective heat transfer 
and aerodynamics in axial ﬂow turbines2.  A symposium volume discussing heat transfer in gas turbine systems is also available by 
Goldstein3.
4.2.2.2-2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Vanes
 
A typical cooled turbine vane is shown in ﬁgure 2.  As shown in the 
ﬁgure, the vane is hollow, so cooling air can pass through the vane internally. 
The coolant is extracted from the internal channel for impingement and pin-
ﬁn cooling.  Jet impingement is a very aggressive cooling technique which 
very effectively removes heat from the vane wall.  However, this technique 
is not readily applied to the narrow trailing edge.  The vane trailing edge is 
cooled using pin-ﬁns (an array of short cylinders).  The pin-ﬁns increase the 
heat transfer area while effectively mixing the coolant air to lower the wall 
temperature of the vanes.  After impinging on the walls of the airfoil, the 
coolant exits the vane and provides a protective ﬁlm on the vane’s external 
surface.  Similarly, the coolant traveling through the pin-ﬁn array is ejected 
from the trailing edge of the airfoil.
Impingement Cooling 
Impingement cooling is commonly used near the leading edge of 
the airfoils, where the heat loads are the greatest.  With the cooling jets 
striking (impinging) the blade wall, the leading edge is well suited for 
impingement cooling because of the relatively thick blade wall in this area. 
Impingement can also be used near the mid-chord of the vane.  Figure 2 
shows jet impingement located throughout the cross-section of an inlet 
guide vane.  Several aspects must be considered when developing efﬁcient 
cooling designs.  The effect of jet-hole size and distribution, cooling channel 
cross-section, and target surface shape all have signiﬁcant effects on the 
heat transfer coefﬁcient distribution.  Jet impingement near the mid-chord 
of the blade is very similar to impingement on a ﬂat plate; however, the 
sharp curvature at the leading edge of the vane must be considered when 
utilizing impingement in this region.
Jet Impingement from Multiple Jets
 
As shown in ﬁgure 2, many jets are used to increase the heat transfer from the vane wall.  It has been shown by Metzger et al. 
that multiple jets perform very differently from a single jet striking a target surface4.  They concluded that for multiple jets, the Nusselt 
number is strongly dependent on the Reynolds number, while there is no signiﬁcant dependence on the jet-to-target plate spacing.  
The difference is due to the jet cross-ﬂow from the spent jets.  Studies by Florschuetz et al. and Koopman and Sparrow showed 
that the mass from one jet moves in the cross-jet ﬂow direction, and this ﬂow can alter the performance of neighboring jets5.  The cross-
ﬂow attempts to deﬂect a jet away from its impinging location on the target plate.  In situations with very strong cross-ﬂow and sufﬁciently 
Fig. 2. Schematic of a Turbine Vane Cross-Section with 
Impingement and Trailing Edge Pin-Fin Cooling

323
large jet-to-target plate spacing, the cross-ﬂow can completely deﬂect the jet away from the impingement surface.  Florschuetz and Su 
reported that cross-ﬂow decreases the overall heat transfer from the impingement surface6.  They determined that cross-ﬂow enhances 
the convective heat transfer, but the enhancement from the jets decreases, as the jets are deﬂected.  Because the enhancement from the 
impingement jets is much greater than the convective enhancement, the overall Nusselt numbers decrease in the presence of cross-ﬂow. 
A typical test model used by Florschuetz et al. is shown in ﬁgure 37.  As shown in this ﬁgure, the coolant jets impinge on the target surface 
from the jet plate in an inline array.  As the coolant travels along the test surface, the spent air from the upstream jets effects the heat 
transfer coefﬁcient distributions of the downstream jets, and this effect increases as more spent air accumulates on the target surface.
Correlations based on experimental data were developed by Kercher and Tabakoff and Florschuetz et al. to estimate the heat 
transfer enhancement from an array of impinging jets8.  Although the correlations are in different forms, they both demonstrate the 
dependence of the heat transfer enhancement on the amount of cross-ﬂow.  Florschuetz et al. also showed the cross-ﬂow effect is much 
stronger in staggered arrays of jets than an inline array9.  Bailey and Bunker extended the correlation developed by Florschuetz et al. to 
include the effect of jet spacing10.  The correlation has been extended to include dense impingement arrays.
Huang et al. controlled the direction of the cross-ﬂow and obtained detailed distributions of the heat transfer coefﬁcients for 
three target plates11.  Their results clearly indicate when the cross-ﬂow travels in two opposite directions, the heat transfer enhancement 
on the target plate is much greater than when the cross-ﬂow is restricted to one direction.  This study was extended by Ekkad et al. to 
include the effect of coolant extraction for ﬁlm cooling12.  The heat transfer enhancement on the target plate decreases near the edges 
due to the decreased coolant ﬂow (for ﬁlm cooling).  Wang et al. investigated cross-ﬂow through a conﬁned space; they also considered 
cross-ﬂow traveling in one direction and two directions13.  This study also concluded that increasing cross-ﬂow results in degraded heat 
transfer; however, the heat transfer coefﬁcient distribution is much more uniform.
The heat transfer coefﬁcient distributions on target plates with stretched arrays of impinging jets were studied by Gao et al.14. 
This array varies from the traditional square array in which the jets are evenly spaced.  They concluded the existing correlations for 
square arrays over-predict the effect of cross-ﬂow in the target surface.  
The presence of initial cross-ﬂow also effects the heat transfer enhancement from the target plate.  The cross-ﬂow described 
above is created by the spent ﬂow from the jets.  Therefore, the ﬁrst row of jets is not affected by the cross-ﬂow.  However, in many 
situations, cross-ﬂow may develop upstream of the ﬁrst row.  The ﬂow from upstream of the impingement jets can signiﬁcantly alter the 
ﬂow near the jets, and thus alter the heat transfer coefﬁcients on the target surface.  Florschuetz et al. investigated the effect of initial 
cross-ﬂow on the heat transfer enhancement15.  The results of this study were similar to those mentioned above describing cross-ﬂow: 
the heat transfer enhancement on the target plate decreases when initial cross-ﬂow is present.
Jet Impingement on a Curved Surface
 
The above studies investigated the heat transfer on ﬂat target plates.  The results obtained for ﬂat plates can be applied to 
impingement near the mid-chord of the blade.  However, the effect of target surface curvature must be considered when implementing 
jet impingement near the leading edge of the airfoil.  The curvature of the airfoil creates different cross-ﬂow behavior, and therefore, 
the heat transfer coefﬁcients on the curved surface are different than those on the ﬂat surface.  Chupp et al. studied impingement on a 
curved surface, and this group concluded that the average Nusselt number ratio increases as the curvature of the target plate increases16. 
The effect of target surface shape was also pursued by Bunker and Metzger17.  They concluded that a sharper nose radius yields a more 
Fig. 3. A Typical Test Model for Impingement Cooling Studies
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

324
uniform Nusselt number distribution compared to a smooth-nosed chamber.  This study was also extended to include the effect of coolant 
extraction for ﬁlm cooling18.  When the bleed from the pressure and suction surfaces is equal, the greatest reduction in the Nusselt 
numbers occurs.
Pin-Fin Cooling
Due to manufacturing constraints in the very narrow trailing edge of the blade, pin-ﬁn cooling is typically used to enhance the 
heat transfer from the blade wall in this region.  The pins typically have a height-to-diameter ratio between ½ and 4.  In a pin-ﬁn array 
heat is transferred from both the smooth channel endwall and the numerous pins.  Flow around the pins in the array is comparable to ﬂow 
around a single cylinder.  As the coolant ﬂows past the pin, the ﬂow separates and wakes are shed downstream of the pin.  In addition to 
this wake formation, a horseshoe vortex forms just upstream of the base of the pin, and the vortex wraps around the pins.  This horseshoe 
vortex creates additional mixing, and thus enhanced heat transfer. 
 
Many factors must be considered when investigating pin-ﬁn cooling.  The type of pin-ﬁn array and the spacing of the pins in 
the array effect the heat transfer distribution in the channel.  The pin size and shape also have a profound impact on the heat transfer in 
the cooling passage.  Because pin-ﬁns are commonly coupled with trailing edge ejection (as shown in ﬁgure 2), the effect of this coolant 
extraction must also be considered.  
Pin Array and Partial Length Pin Arrangement
There are two array structures commonly used. One is the inline array and the other is the staggered array. Figure 4 shows 
a typical experimental test model with a staggered array of pin-ﬁns.  Metzger et al. used staggered arrays of circular pins with 1.5 to 
5 pin diameter spacing in a rectangular channel19. A closer spaced array (smaller x/D) shows a higher heat transfer coefﬁcient.  Their 
observations clearly indicate that addition of pin-ﬁns signiﬁcantly enhances the heat transfer coefﬁcient. However, the addition of pins 
also increases the pressure drop in the ﬂow channel. Chyu et al. showed that the heat transfer coefﬁcient on the pin surface for both arrays 
is consistently higher than that of the channel endwall20. The pin surface heat transfer is observed to be 10 to 20 percent higher for the 
presented case. Experimental results have been correlated by Metzger et al. and VanFossen to predict the Nusselt number in channels 
with pin-ﬁn arrays21.  The average Nusselt number in a channel with short pin-ﬁns is primarily dependent on the Reynolds number of the 
ﬂow, and a weaker dependence is shown for the pin spacing.
Arora and Abdel-Messeh studied the effects of partial length pins in a rectangular channel22. The surface containing pins is not 
affected by the pin tip clearance. Whereas the opposite surface, that does not have pins, shows a decrease in heat transfer coefﬁcient with 
an increase in the pin tip clearance. The friction factor is lower for partial pins compared to full-length pins. In general, the heat transfer 
coefﬁcient decreases with partial length pins.
Fig. 4. A Typical Test Model and Secondary Flow for Pin-Fin Cooling Studies
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

325
Effect of Pin Shape and Array Orientation
Metzger et al. studied the effects of pin shape and array orientations23. They reported the effect of ﬂow incident angle on oblong 
pins. All incident angles except 90 yield higher Nusselt numbers than circular pins. The γ= 90° array yields signiﬁcantly lower Nusselt 
numbers, especially toward the lower end of the Reynolds number range. The γ= ±30° array has the highest Nusselt numbers, about 20 
percent higher than the circular pin array on the average. Except for γ= 90°, the pressure drop for oblong pins are signiﬁcantly higher than 
circular pins. This increase in the friction factor is associated with the ﬂow turning caused by oblong pins. The pin shapes mostly studied 
are straight cylinders. However, the casting or other manufacturing processes cannot make perfect cylinders and these manufacturing 
imperfections may affect the heat transfer performance. 
Chyu studied the effect of a ﬁllet at the base of the cylindrical pin24. Straight cylinders in staggered array formation have 
the highest heat transfer followed by ﬁlleted cylinders in the staggered formation. It is interesting to note that the ﬁllet cylinder inline 
formation has better heat transfer than the straight cylinders in the inline formation. Though a staggered array gives higher heat transfer 
coefﬁcients, performance of the inline straight cylinders is best among the group and the ﬁllet cylinders in staggered formation are the 
worst. In a different experimental work, Goldstein et al. studied the effect of stepped diameters on mass transfer coefﬁcients25. The 
diameter of the pin is axially varied. The base diameter is greater than the center diameter and no ﬁllet radius is provided. The array 
conﬁguration is staggered. Results show that the mass transfer increases or remains the same compared to a straight cylinder pin array 
when the radius is varied, but the pressure drop reduces signiﬁcantly for the stepped diameter cylindrical pins. 
Chyu et al. used cube and diamond shaped pins to enhance the heat transfer coefﬁcient from a surface26. The cube-shaped pins 
have the highest mass transfer coefﬁcients among the shapes considered and round pins have the lowest mass transfer coefﬁcients. 
Corresponding pressure loss coefﬁcients are higher for the cube and diamond shaped pins relative to the circular pins. 
Effect of Flow Convergence and Turning
The ﬂow channel in the trailing edge of an airfoil has a reducing cross-section, and therefore, the ﬂow in the channel accelerates. 
The results are row averaged and the accelerating ﬂow shows an increase in the heat transfer coefﬁcient27. Chyu et al. used mass transfer 
technique to study the effect of perpendicular ﬂow entry in two pin-ﬁn conﬁgurations28. They show that the turning inlet conﬁguration 
always results in lower average Sherwood numbers. The reduction is about 40-50% for the inline array and 20-30% for the staggered 
array.  
Pin-Fin Cooling With Ejection
The trailing edge pin-ﬁn channel normally has ejection holes through which the spent coolant exhausts to the main stream ﬂow. 
Kumran et al. investigated the effects of the length of coolant ejection holes on the heat transfer coefﬁcient in pin-ﬁns29. The length of the 
ejection hole can signiﬁcantly alter the discharge rate of coolant. More coolant ejection reduces the Nusselt number signiﬁcantly from 
no ejection. This decrease in the heat transfer coefﬁcient can be explained by the fact that coolant mass is extracted from the coolant 
channel before its cooling capacity is fully utilized. Results indicate that the correlation based on the local Reynolds number can predict 
the heat transfer coefﬁcient distribution for lower coolant ejection but does not adequately predict the heat transfer coefﬁcients at higher 
ejection rates.  Hwang and Lu  investigated a converging channel with ejection30.  They also found that increasing the ejection degrades 
the endwall heat transfer near the tall wall opposite of the ejection, and the heat transfer on the channel endwall surface near the ejection 
holes is increased.  They also concluded that square, diamond, and circular pin-ﬁn arrays enhance the heat transfer equally in channels 
with large ejection ﬂows.
Dimple Cooling
 
In recent years, dimples have been considered as an alternative to pin-ﬁn cooling.  Dimpled cooling is a very desirable alternative 
due to the relatively low pressure loss penalty (compared with pins) and moderate heat transfer enhancement.  A typical test section for 
dimple cooling studies is shown in ﬁgure 5; this ﬁgure also shows the dimple induced secondary ﬂow.  These concave dimples induce 
ﬂow separation and reattachment with pairs of vortices.  The areas of high heat transfer include the areas of ﬂow reattachment on the ﬂat 
surface immediately downstream of the dimple.  The heat transfer in the dimpled channel is typically 2 to 2.5 times greater than the heat 
transfer in a smooth channel with a pressure loss penalty of 2 to 4 times that of a smooth channel.  These values show little dependence 
on Reynolds number and channel aspect ratio.  However, the dimple size, dimple depth (depth-to-print diameter ratio = 0.1 to 0.3), 
distribution, and shape (cylindrical, hemispheric, teardrop) each effect the heat transfer distribution in the channel.  Recent studies have 
investigated the inﬂuence of these factors on the heat transfer in rectangular channels31.  Dimples have also been investigated in a circular 
channel and similar levels of heat transfer enhancement and frictional losses were measured32.
 
Syred et al. compared the heat transfer enhancement due a single dimple on both ﬂat and curved surfaces33.  From this study it 
was shown that the surface curvature signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the heat transfer enhancement.  The heat transfer is further enhanced on a 
surface that is concavely shaped (compared to a ﬂat surface); however, a convexly curved surface with a dimple decreases the level of 
heat transfer enhancement.
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

326
Compound and New Cooling Techniques
Several internal heat transfer enhancement techniques are discussed in previous sections. Most common methods of heat transfer 
augmentation in gas turbine airfoils are ribs, pins, and jet impingement. It is shown that these enhancement techniques increase heat 
transfer coefﬁcients, but can combining these techniques increase the heat transfer coefﬁcient more? Several researchers have combined 
these heat transfer enhancement techniques to improve the heat transfer coefﬁcient. However, it is not always recommended to combine 
more than one heat transfer augmentation technique. In addition to compounding more than one heat transfer enhancement technique, 
there are attempts to incorporate new concepts (e.g., jet swirlers and heat pipes) in the turbomachinery cooling. An introduction of several 
new cooling techniques with their applications is presented here.
Impingement on Ribbed, Pinned, and Dimpled Walls
Azad et al. studied the impingement effect on dimpled and pinned surfaces34. Because the dimples and pins are circular 
depressions and protrusions, respectively, these two target surfaces offer an interesting comparison of the heat transfer enhancement.  At 
lower Reynolds number the pinned surface performs better than the dimpled surface. At higher Reynolds numbers, the dimpled surface 
performs better than the pinned surface for a certain ﬂow orientation.  Taslim et al. reported a signiﬁcant increase in the heat transfer 
enhancement on a curved target surface roughened with conical bumps35.  This study was extended to include ﬁlm cooling holes, similar 
to the showerhead-type ﬁlm cooling on the leading edge36.  They concluded that the presence of leading edge extraction also signiﬁcantly 
increases the heat transfer on the target surface.  The heat transfer is further increased if the “racetrack” jet holes are used rather than 
traditional round jet holes37  
Combined Effect of Swirl and Impingement  
A new jet impingement and swirl technique was investigated by Glezer et al.38.  A preliminary test showed signiﬁcant improvement 
in the heat transfer performance. Based on that study, a new airfoil has been designed with swirling impingement in the leading edge. 
This new airfoil is tested in a hot cascade test section. Results indicate that screw shaped swirl cooling can signiﬁcantly improve the heat 
transfer coefﬁcient over a smooth channel and this improvement is not signiﬁcantly dependent on the temperature ratio and rotational 
forces. Moreover, it was concluded that optimization of the internal passage geometry in relation to location and size of the tangential 
slots is very important in achieving the best performance of the screw-shaped swirl in the leading edge cooling. Pamula et al. studied 
the heat transfer enhancement by a combination of impingement and cross ﬂow-induced swirl in a two-pass channel39. Results show that 
the new impingement system, from the ﬁrst pass to the second pass, using cross ﬂow injection holes produce signiﬁcantly higher heat 
transfer on the second pass walls. 
Combined Effect of Swirl Flow and Ribs
Kieda et al. experimentally investigated the single-phase water ﬂow and heat transfer in a rectangular cross-sectioned twisted 
channel40. Several aspect ratios and twist pitches were used. Results indicate that in a cooling application, this twisted channel performs 
similar to a ribbed pipe. Zhang et al. used different types of inserts to study the combined rib and twisted tape inserts in square ducts41. 
Four test conﬁgurations were used: twisted tape, twisted tape with interrupted ribs, hemi-circular wavy tape, and hemi-triangular wavy 
tape. The twisted tape with interrupted ribs provides higher overall heat transfer performance over the twisted tape without ribs and 
Fig. 5. A Typical Test Model for Dimple Cooling Studies with a Conceptual View of Dimple Induced Secondary Flow
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

327
hemi-circular wavy tape. The performance of the hemi-triangular wavy tape is comparable with the twisted tape plus interrupted ribs. 
Hemi-circular wavy tapes show the lowest heat transfer performance in this group.
Combined Effect of a Ribbed Wall with Grooves or Pins
Zhang et al. studied the heat transfer and friction in rectangular channels with a rib-groove combination42. The Stanton numbers 
for the ribbed-grooved walls are higher than that for the only ribbed walls at similar rib spacing values. Metzger et al. indicated that the 
addition of ribs does not change the heat transfer coefﬁcient from the pin-mounted surface43. However, the heat transfer coefﬁcient on 
the rib surface is signiﬁcantly higher than the pin-mounted surface. 
New Cooling Concepts
Heat pipes have very high effective thermal performance44. Therefore, they can transfer heat from high temperature to the low 
temperature regions. This concept may be used in the airfoil cooling. Heat is removed from the initial stage stator airfoils and the heat is 
delivered at a later stage to heat up the main ﬂow. This way the heat extracted can be recycled to the main ﬂow.  In a concept developed 
by Yamawaki et al.,  the heat is conducted away from the hot airfoil to the ﬁn assembly45. This passive heat extraction reduces the 
required cooling air. Most heat pipe applications are designed for the stator airfoils, where it is easier to mount the connecting pipes or 
ﬁns. Recently, Kerrebrock and Stickler proposed a design to incorporate heat pipe in the rotor46. 
The concept of cooled cooling air systems, through a heat exchanger, for turbine thermal management was reported by Bruening 
and Chang47. Results show that the use of a cooled cooling air system can make a positive impact on overall engine performance for 
land-based turbines. Commonly a closed loop steam cooled nozzle with thermal barrier coatings (TBC) is used in order to reduce the hot 
gas temperature drop through the ﬁrst stage nozzle (Corman and Paul48. A closed looped with mist/steam cooling was reported by Guo et 
al.49. Results show that an average heat transfer enhancement of 100% can be achieved with 5% mist (ﬁne water droplets) compared to 
the steam cooling; similar results were reported by Li et al.50 .
4.2.2.2-3 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades
Figure 6 shows several techniques to cool a modern gas turbine blade.  The blade consists of serpentine cooling passages lined 
with rib turbulators.  Jet impingement is used to cool the leading edge of the blade, and pin-ﬁn cooling with ejection is used near the 
trailing edge.  Although the techniques used to cool the blades are similar to those used to cool the vanes, the heat transfer trends in the 
vanes and blades are very different.  Because the blades are rotating, the ﬂow of the coolant in the passages is altered.  Therefore, the 
effect of rotation on the internal heat transfer enhancement must be considered. 
Fig. 6. Schematic of a Modern Gas Turbine Blade 
with Common Cooling Techniques
Fig. 7. A Typical Test Model for Turbulated Cooling Studies with 
Rib Induced Secondary Flow
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

328
Rib Turbulated Cooling
Rib turbulators are the most frequently used method to enhance the heat transfer in the internal serpentine cooling passages. 
The rib turbulence promoters are typically cast on two opposite walls of the cooling passage.  Heat that conducts from the pressure and 
suction surfaces through the blade walls is transferred to the coolant passing internally through the blade.  The heat transfer performance 
of the ribbed channel depends on the channel aspect ratio, the rib conﬁgurations, and the Reynolds number of the coolant ﬂow.  Many 
fundamental studies have been conducted to understand the coolant ﬂow through a stationary ribbed channel51.  The studies show as 
the coolant passes over a rib oriented 90° to the mainstream ﬂow, the ﬂow near the channel wall separates.  Reattachment follows 
the separation, and the boundary layer reattaches to the channel wall; this thinner, reattached boundary layer results in increased heat 
transfer coefﬁcients in the ribbed channel.  This rib induced secondary ﬂow is shown in ﬁgure 7.  If the rib turbulators are skewed 
to the mainstream ﬂow direction, counter-rotating vortices are created.  Figure 7 shows in a channel with angled ribs, two counter-
rotating vortices are formed in the cross-section of the cooling passage.  However, if V-shaped rib turbulators are used, four vortices are 
generated.   The additional set of counter-rotating vortices associated with the V-shaped ribs results in more heat transfer enhancement in 
a channel with V-shaped ribs than angled ribs.  The ribs also create turbulent mixing in the areas of ﬂow separation.  With this additional 
mixing, the heat is more effectively dissipated from the wall, and thus additional heat transfer enhancement.  Because only the ﬂow near 
the wall of the cooling channel is disturbed by the ribs, the pressure drop penalty by ribs affordable.  
Han and Han and Park developed correlations for both the pressure penalty and heat transfer enhancement in ribbed channels52. 
Given the Reynolds number of the coolant ﬂow and the rib geometry (e/D, P/e, W/H, and α), the average friction factor in a channel 
with two opposite ribbed walls, f , and the centerline average Stanton number on the ribbed walls, Str, can be determined from the 
correlations.  Figure 8 demonstrates the correlations developed for cooling passages with 90° ribs.  The friction roughness function, R, 
is only a function of rib spacing for the range of the roughness Reynolds number, e+, shown.  Based on the rib spacing (P/e), R can be 
calculated, and substituted into the following equation to determine f, the four ribbed wall friction factor.  
5.2
2
2
ln
5.2
2
2
1
+






+
⋅
+






=
W
H
W
D
e
f
R
 
 
 
    
 
         (1)
From f (the friction factor in a channel with ribs on all four walls) and the channel geometry (H/W), the average friction factor in a 
channel with ribs on two walls, f , can be calculated using Eqn. 2.
Fig. 8. Friction Factor and Heat Transfer Coefﬁcient Correlations for 90° Ribs
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

329
 
 
 
 
(
)
sf
f
W
H
f
f
−






+
=
  
 
 
 
     (2)
The friction factor in a channel with smooth walls, fs, is known from the existing Blasius correlation for smooth channel ﬂow.  
Using the four ribbed wall friction factor, f, the rib height, e/D, and the Reynolds number of the coolant ﬂow, Re, the roughness 
Reynolds number, e+, can be calculated using the deﬁnition shown in ﬁgure 8.  From e+ the top ﬁgure can be used to obtain G, the heat 
transfer roughness function, and Eqn. 3 can be used to calculate the Stanton number on the ribbed walls, Str. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
       
 
 
              
 
         (3)
The correlation shown in ﬁgure 8 is for a Prandtl number of 0.703.  Because G is inversely proportional to the Stanton number, a low 
heat transfer roughness function implies high heat transfer from the cooling passage wall.
 
With the understanding that skewed ribs yield higher heat transfer enhancement than orthogonal ribs, these correlations were 
extended to include the effect of the rib angle.  Figure 9 shows the correlations taking into account the rib angle, α.  From the rib angle 
(α), rib spacing (P/e), and channel aspect ratio (W/H), the roughness function, R, can be determined.  Eqn. 1 can used to calculate f, and 
Eqn. 2 is used to determine the friction factor in a channel with two ribbed walls.  Similar to channels with 90° ribs, R and e+ are then 
used to determine the Stanton number on the ribbed walls.  These correlations can be used over a wide range of channel aspect ratios and 
rib conﬁgurations; however one should refer to the original papers for speciﬁc restrictions of the correlations.
Because ribs are the most common heat transfer enhancement technique for the serpentine cooling passages, many studies have 
been conducted to study the effects of channel cross-section, rib conﬁguration, and coolant ﬂow Reynolds number.  As shown in ﬁgure 6, 
the aspect ratio of the channels changes from the leading to the trailing edge of the blade.  Near the leading edge of the blade, the channel 
may have an aspect ratio around ¼, but near the trailing edge, much broader channels are present with aspect ratios around 4.  
Multiple studies have shown that by skewing the ribs, so they are angled into the mainstream ﬂow, the heat transfer coefﬁcients 
can be further enhanced.  Placing the ribs with an attack angle between 30° and 60° results in increased heat transfer and reduces the 
pressure penalty.  Most studies focus on Reynolds numbers ranging from 10,000 to 80,000, but for today’s advanced gas turbines the 
coolant in the channel can have a Reynolds number up to 500,000.  The height of the ribs is typically 5-10% of the channel hydraulic 
diameter, and the rib spacing-to-height ratio varies from 5 to 15.  In addition, a limited number of studies have focused on the more 
closely spaced ribs with much larger blockage ratios.  
Fig. 9. Friction Factor and Heat Transfer Correlations in Rectangular Ribbed Channels 
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

330
With angled ribs performing superior to orthogonal ribs, many researchers have extended their studies to include a wide variety 
of rib conﬁgurations.  Han et al. showed that V-shaped ribs (ﬁgure 10) outperform the angled ribs; for a given pressure drop, the V-
shaped ribs give more heat transfer enhancement53.  Numerous other studies have shown the same conclusion that V-shaped ribs perform 
better than the traditional angled ribs in a variety of channels and ﬂow conditions54.  In an effort to further increase the heat transfer 
performance of the rib turbulators, discrete rib conﬁgurations were introduced.  Figure 10 shows discrete (or broken) ribs are similar to 
the traditional ribs, but they are broken in one or more locations, so the rib is not continuous.  In the majority of cooling channels, discrete 
ribs were shown to outperform the continuous angled or V-shaped ribs and Cho et al.55.  Han and Zhang compared the performance of 
many high performance rib conﬁgurations, and the comparison is shown in ﬁgure 1156.  As shown in this ﬁgure, the broken 45° angled 
ribs create more heat transfer enhancement than the continuous 45° angled ribs at a given friction factor ratio, and this conclusion can 
be extended to other broken versus continuous rib conﬁgurations.  
The majority of ribs used in experimental studies have a square cross-section; however, studies have investigated the heat 
transfer enhancement of various proﬁled ribs.  Delta-shaped ribs were studied by Han et al. and these ribs were also shown to result in 
higher heat transfer enhancement than the traditional angled ribs57.  Bunker and Osgood investigated the performance of ribs leaning 
into or away from the ﬂow58.  They concluded the traditional square ribs give greater heat transfer enhancement and less frictional losses 
than the ribs leaning into or away from the ﬂow.  
When the blades are cast, the ribs are unlikely to have sharp edges as the previous studies have considered.  The ribs are likely 
to have rounded edges, and this was taken into account by Taslim and Spring59.  From their experimental work, they concluded the effect 
of rounding decreases the level of heat transfer enhancement in the cooling channel.  Ribs with a higher aspect ratio (taller ribs) are 
more sensitive to the rounding effect; whereas, square ribs are only slightly affected by the rounded edges.  However, the pressure drop 
is signiﬁcantly less in the channels with rounded ribs.
Studies have also focused on ribbed channels with more blockage.  Bailey and Bunker and Taslim and Spring showed that 
increasing in the effective blockage, the heat transfer coefﬁcients can increase60.  However, this increase comes at the cost of a signiﬁcant 
increase in the pressure penalty.  Therefore, if the heat loads are extremely high and the high frictional losses can be tolerated, the 
additional heat transfer enhancement would be beneﬁcial. 
An additional factor that should be considered when determining the heat transfer distribution in cooling channels is the 
decreasing coolant ﬂow rate due to extraction for ﬁlm cooling.  Most modern turbine airfoils have ribs in the internal coolant channel and 
ﬁlm cooling for the outside surface. Therefore, some of the cooling air is bled through the ﬁlm cooling holes. The presence of periodic 
ribs and bleed holes creates strong axial and spanwise variations in the heat transfer distributions on the passage surface. Shen et al., 
Ekkad et al., and Thurman and Poinsette each studied the heat transfer enhancement by ribs in the presence of coolant extraction61. These 
studies showed that the heat transfer coefﬁcients in the near-hole regions increase, but no broader impact by these holes is noticeable in 
these results. Ekkad et al. showed that the regional-averaged Nusselt number ratios for different rib orientations are almost identical with 
and without bleed hole extraction, as shown in ﬁgure 1262. This indicates that 20 to 25% reduction of the main ﬂow can be used for ﬁlm 
cooling without signiﬁcantly affecting the ribbed channel cooling performance.  It was also shown that the heat transfer near the holes 
can be further enhanced if the ribs are placed near the bleed holes63.  
Fig. 10. High Performance Rib Turbulators for Turbine 
Blade Internal Cooling 
Fig. 11. Comparison of Heat Transfer Performance for Broken and 
Non-Broken Rib Conﬁgurations
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

331
Rotational Effect on Rib Turbulated Cooling
Heat transfer in rotating coolant passages is very different from that in stationary coolant passages. Both Coriolis and rotating 
buoyancy forces alter the ﬂow and temperature proﬁles in the rotor coolant passages and affect their surface heat transfer coefﬁcient 
distributions64. It is very important to determine the local heat transfer distributions in the rotor coolant passages under typical engine 
cooling ﬂow, coolant-to-blade temperature difference (buoyancy effect), and rotating conditions. Effects of coolant passage cross-section 
and orientation on rotating heat transfer are also important. As sketched in ﬁgure 13, the secondary ﬂows in a two-pass channel are 
different for radial outﬂow and radial inﬂow passes65. Since the direction of the Coriolis force is dependent on the direction of rotation 
and ﬂow, the Coriolis force acts in different directions in the two-passes. For radial outward ﬂow, the Coriolis force shifts the core 
ﬂow towards the trailing wall. If both the trailing and leading walls are symmetrically heated, then the faster moving coolant near the 
trailing wall would be cooler (therefore heat transfer would be enhanced) than the slower moving coolant near the leading wall (i.e., 
heat transfer would be decreased). Rotational buoyancy is caused by a strong centrifugal force that pushes cooler heavier ﬂuid away 
from the center of rotation. In the ﬁrst channel rotational buoyancy affects the ﬂow in a similar fashion as the Coriolis force and causes 
a further increase in ﬂow and heat transfer near the trailing wall of the ﬁrst channel; whereas, the Coriolis force favors the leading side 
of the second channel. The rotational buoyancy in the second channel tries to make the ﬂow distribution more uniform in the duct. 
Fig. 12. Heat Transfer Enhancement in Cooling Passages with and without Film Coolant Extraction Holes 
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

332
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wall Heating Condition Effect on Rotating Coolant Passage Heat Transfer
 From the above analyses, the rotation effect on channel heat transfer comes from the Coriolis and centrifugal forces. The centrifugal 
force is known as rotation buoyancy when there is a temperature difference between the coolant and the channel walls under rotating 
conditions. Since the temperature difference between the coolant and the channel walls varies along the coolant passages, so does the 
rotation buoyancy. Therefore, it is expected that the channel wall heating conditions would affect rotor coolant passage heat transfer. The 
channel heating conditions imply that the channel walls may be at the same temperature (or heat ﬂux) in both streamwise and circumferential 
directions, or the trailing wall temperature may be higher than the leading wall temperature in real turbine blade cooling applications. Han et 
al. studied the uneven wall temperature effect on rotating two-pass square channels with smooth walls66. They concluded that in the ﬁrst pass, 
the local uneven wall temperature interacts with the Coriolis force-driven secondary ﬂow and enhances the heat transfer coefﬁcients in both 
leading and trailing surfaces, with a noticeable increase in the leading side, as compared with the uniform wall temperature case. However, 
the uneven wall temperature signiﬁcantly enhances heat transfer coefﬁcients on both leading and trailing surfaces. Parsons et al. and Zhang 
et al. studied the inﬂuence of wall heating condition on the local heat transfer coefﬁcient in rotating two-pass square channels with 90° ribs 
and 60° ribs on the leading and trailing walls, respectively67. They concluded that the uneven wall temperature signiﬁcantly enhances heat 
transfer coefﬁcients on the ﬁrst-pass leading and second-pass trailing surfaces as compared with the uniform wall temperature condition. 
 
Combined Effect of Rotation and Rib Shape on the Heat Transfer in Rotating Channels
 
The above studies investigating the effect of rotation on the heat transfer in cooling channels only consider the heat transfer in 
channels with square ribs.  However, the shape of the rib can signiﬁcantly alter the heat transfer trends, as demonstrated in stationary 
channels. Acharya et al. investigated the heat/mass transfer in a square, two-pass rotating channel with various proﬁled ribs placed on 
the leading and trailing surfaces68.  It was shown that certain proﬁled ribs provide better heat transfer enhancement than the conventional 
square ribs.  The smooth sidewalls of the channel also see signiﬁcantly more enhancement than the smooth walls of channels with square 
ribs.
Effect of Channel Cross-Section and Channel Orientation on Rotating Channel Heat Transfer
 
The ﬁrst studies of heat transfer in rotating channels were performed on square channels oriented normal to the direction of 
rotation.  Wagner et al. reported that the heat transfer coefﬁcients on the trailing surface of the ﬁrst pass can be enhanced 2-3 times that 
of a non-rotating channel, while the leading surface experiences a declination of up to 50%69.  Opposite trends were present in the second 
pass of this smooth channel.  The cooling channel was lined with angled turbulators, and it was found there is less of an effect of rotation 
in a ribbed channel than a smooth channel70.  Because the heat transfer enhancement of the ribbed channel is already 3.5 times greater 
than that of a smooth channel, rotation does not provide the same percentage of enhancement in the cooling channel with ribs.  However, 
the additional enhancement is signiﬁcant and should be considered.  Similar to the non-rotating channel, 45° angled ribs provide more 
enhancement than 90° ribs in a rotating channel.  Park et al. conducted naphthalene sublimation experiments to examine the effects of 
rotation on the local heat and mass transfer distribution in a two-pass ribbed square channel71. They also found that the overall heat and 
mass transfer in a rotating channel with ribbed surfaces was not affected by the Coriolis force as much as that in a rotating channel with 
smooth surfaces.
Fig. 13. Conceptual View of Coolant Flow through a Two-Pass Rotating Channel 
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

333
When considering rotating channels, the orientation of the channels must be considered.  One can see in ﬁgure 14 that the 
orientation of the channel changes as on moves away from the middle of the blade.  Johnson et al. studied the effects of rotation on the 
heat transfer for smooth and 45° ribbed serpentine channels with channel orientations of 0° and 45° to the axis of rotation72. They found 
that the effects of Coriolis and buoyancy forces on heat transfer in the rotating channel are decreased with the channel at 45° compared 
to the results at 0°. This implies that the difference in heat transfer coefﬁcient between the leading and trailing surfaces due to rotation 
will be reduced when the channel is angled to the axis of rotation.  Parsons et al. investigated the effect of channel orientation on the 
heat transfer in a rotating, square two-pass channel with 60° angled ribs73.  The also concluded that difference between the heat transfer 
coefﬁcients on the leading and trailing surfaces decreases when the orientation of the channel changes from 90° to 45°.
Dutta and Han conducted an experimental study of regionally averaged heat transfer coefﬁcients in rotating smooth and ribbed 
two-pass channels; this study also investigated the effect of channel orientation on the heat transfer distributions in this square channel74. 
They found the effect of rotation is reduced for non-orthogonal alignment of the heat transfer surfaces with respect to the plane of 
rotation. They also concluded that the discrete V-shaped ribs have better heat transfer performance than the 90° ribs and the 60° angled 
ribs in the rotating channels.  Al-Hadhrami and Han used parallel and crossed 45° angled ribs in rotating two-pass square channels to 
study the effect of channel orientation on heat transfer75. They concluded that the parallel 45° angled ribs are better than the crossed 45° 
angled ribs. They also conﬁrmed the difference between the leading and trailing wall heat transfer coefﬁcients is reduced for the channel 
with a 45° angle to the axis of rotation.
As shown in ﬁgure 14, the cross-section of the cooling channels can vary depending on where the cooling channel is located 
within the blade.  Studies showed the heat transfer distributions in square channels can vary signiﬁcantly from those in rectangular 
channels.  Therefore, it is necessary to study the effect of rotation on heat transfer in rectangular channels.  As with the square channels, 
the orientation of the channel varies depending on the location in the blade.  
 
Guidez reported the effect of rotation on heat transfer in a straight rotating rectangular channel (AR = 2:1) with smooth walls76. 
Soong et al. conducted heat transfer experiments in rotating smooth straight duct with different aspect ratios ranging from 0.2 to 5.077. 
They concluded that the aspect ratio of the duct was a critical parameter in the secondary ﬂow patterns. Taslim et al. investigated the 
varying effect of rotation in square (AR = 1:1) and rectangular (AR = 2:1) with 45° crossed ribs78.  Azad et al. and Al-Hadhrami et al. 
studied heat transfer in a two-pass rectangular rotating channel (AR = 2:1) with 45° angled ribs and 45° V-shaped ribs, respectively, 
including the effect of channel orientation with respect to the axis of rotation79.  The heat transfer trends in these rectangular channels 
are similar to those of square channels: the heat transfer on trailing surface of the ﬁrst pass is enhanced with rotation while the heat 
transfer on the leading surface decreases (and the opposite is true in the second pass).  However, the difference between the leading and 
trailing surfaces decreases in the 2:1 rectangular channels.  As the orientation of the channels varies from 90° to 45°, the effect of rotation 
continues to decrease.  Similar to non-rotating channels, these studies concluded that the 45° V-shaped ribs perform better than the 45° 
crossed V-shaped ribs, and subsequently better than 45° angled ribs (ﬁgure 15).  
Fig. 14. Typical Cooling Passage Size and Orientation with 
Conceptual Views of the Rotation Induced Secondary Flow
Fig. 15. Advanced Rib Conﬁgurations 
Studied in Rotating Cooling Channels
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

334
 
Moving closer to the trailing edge, the aspect ratio of the cooling channels continues to increase, as the channel orientation is 
also changing.  Grifﬁth et al. studied heat transfer in a single pass rectangular channel (AR = 4:1) with smooth and 45° angled ribbed 
walls, including the effect of channel orientation with respect to the axis of rotation80. Results show that the narrow rectangular passage 
exhibits much higher heat transfer enhancement for the ribbed surface than the square and 2:1 channels previously investigated. Also, 
channel orientation signiﬁcantly affects the leading and side surfaces, yet does not have much affect on the trailing surfaces for both 
smooth and ribbed surfaces. Therefore, this investigation has determined that spanwise variations in the heat transfer distribution of 
rectangular cooling passages exist, and that the enhancement is a function of channel orientation with respect to the axis of rotation, 
surface conﬁguration (such as smooth or 45° angled ribbed walls), and channel aspect ratio.  Lee et al. also studied the heat transfer 
in a single pass rectangular channel (AR = 4:1)81; they compared the heat transfer performance of V-shaped and angled rib turbulators 
with and without gaps (ﬁgure 15), in a channel oriented at 135° to the axis of rotation. The results show that V-shaped rib conﬁguration 
produces more heat transfer enhancement than the angled rib conﬁgurations for both the stationary and rotating cases. There is only 
negligible difference in heat transfer enhancement between the parallel and staggered rib conﬁgurations for both the stationary and 
rotating cases. The results also show that the V-shaped ribs with gaps produce overall less heat transfer enhancement than the V-shaped 
ribs without gaps; whereas the angled ribs with gaps produce overall greater heat transfer enhancement than the angled ribs without gaps 
for the stationary case, and clearly the same enhancement for the rotating case. Most importantly, for narrow rectangular rib-turbulated 
channels oriented at 135° with respect to the plane of rotation, heat transfer enhancement on both the leading and trailing surfaces 
increases with rotation. This is quite different from the square channel where rotation enhances the trailing surface heat transfer but 
reduces the leading surface heat transfer for the radial outward ﬂow case. This provides positive information for the cooling designers. 
Wright et al. expanded the study of the 4:1 channel with ribs to examine not only the heat transfer performance, but the overall thermal 
performance82.  They investigated channels with six rib conﬁgurations: angled, V-shaped, W-shaped, discrete angled, discrete V-shaped, 
and discrete W-shaped (ﬁgure 15).  Figure 16 shows that similar to the stationary channels, the rotating channel with discrete V-shaped 
ribs produced more heat transfer than the V-shaped and angled ribbed channels.  However, the W-shaped and discrete W-shaped ribs 
yielded more heat transfer enhancement than the discrete V-shaped ribs.  However, the increased heat transfer enhancement in the 
W-shaped and discrete W-shaped ribs came at the cost of an increased pressure penalty; these two conﬁgurations resulted in greatest 
pressure drop of the six conﬁgurations considered.  Therefore, the overall performance of the discrete V-shaped and W-shaped ribs is 
comparable in the rotating channels.  The traditional angled ribs exhibited the worst overall performance.
 
The cooling channels near the leading edge of the blade typically a smaller aspect ratio compared to those near the center of the 
blade.  Cho et al.studied the effect of rotation on heat transfer with a naphthalene sublimation technique in a two-pass rectangular 
channel (AR = 1:2) with smooth and 70° ribbed walls83. They found that the effect of rotation diminishes in the second pass with inward 
ﬂow due to the strong inﬂuence of the 180° turn. This is quite different from the heat transfer trends found in the two-pass rectangular 
channels with aspect ratios greater than unity.  Agarwal et al. reported the effect of rotation on heat transfer with naphthalene sublimation 
technique in two-pass rectangular channels (aspect ratio = 1:1 and 1:4) with smooth and 90° ribbed walls84. They concluded that the 
1:4 rectangular channel provides lower levels of heat transfer enhancement along the trailing wall and higher levels of heat transfer 
degradation along the leading wall compared to the 1:1 square channel.  Fu et al. also experimentally investigated the heat transfer trends 
Fig. 16. Heat Transfer Enhancement, Frictional Losses, and Thermal Performance of Various Rib 
Conﬁgurations in a 4:1 Rotating Cooling Passage
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

335
in cooling channels located near the leading edge of the blade85.  The regionally averaged heat transfer coefﬁcients in rotating cooling 
channels with aspect ratios of 1:4 and 1:2 lined with 45° angled ribs were obtained.  This study concluded the rotation effect increased 
heat transfer on the trailing wall but decreased the heat transfer on the leading wall in the ﬁrst pass of both the 1:4 and 1:2 channels. In 
the second pass, the difference of the heat transfer between the leading and trailing walls was reduced under the rotating condition when 
compared to the ﬁrst pass.  This study included the effect of channel orientation, and it was shown that the 45° channel orientation creates 
less heat transfer difference between the leading and trailing walls than the 90° channel orientation for both aspect ratio ducts.  Rotation 
has a relatively small effect in the second pass of the 1:2 and 1:4 channels. It was suggested that the 180° turn induced vortices dominate 
the rotation induced vortices for the low aspect ratio ducts.  When the results from this study were compared to others with various aspect 
ratios, it could be seen that the leading wall heat transfer has a strong dependence on the buoyancy parameter for 1:2 and 1:4 ducts in 
the ﬁrst pass with radial outward ﬂow, but it has a weak dependence on the buoyancy parameter for 2:1 and 4:1 ducts. Increasing the 
buoyancy parameter reduced the heat transfer on the leading walls for the 1:2 and 1:4 ducts in the ﬁrst pass. The 1:4 duct has the largest 
heat transfer difference between the leading and trailing walls in the ﬁrst pass. 
 
Although the majority of rotating studies have focused on the heat transfer in square or rectangular cooling channels, a limited 
number of studies have focused on the heat transfer in channels with other cross-sections. Channels with a triangular cross-section might 
be used on some portion of the blade in order to provide compact channel structure and good cooling efﬁciency. Clifford et al. studied 
the mean heat transfer in a straight triangular-sectioned rotating duct with smooth walls86. Harasgama and Morris compared the effect 
of rotation on heat transfer in straight circular, triangular, and square duct with smooth walls87. Dutta et al. studied the effect of rotation 
on the heat transfer coefﬁcients in two-pass triangular channels with smooth and ribbed walls88. For the locations in the ﬁrst pass, the 
triangular-duct heat transfer coefﬁcients are mostly contained within the upper and lower limits imposed by the square duct. This is 
because in a triangular duct, there is less space for the coolant to form secondary ﬂow by rotation. However, in the second pass, the 
leading surface of the triangular duct shows much higher heat transfer coefﬁcients than the square duct. This is due to more mixing and 
favorable secondary ﬂow in the 180° turn for the triangular duct geometry.  Rathjen et al. investigated the heat/mass transfer in a two-
pass rotating channel with a near-engine cross-section; the ﬁrst pass of the channel (radial outward) was trapezoidal, and the second pass 
(radial inward) had a larger trapezoidal cross-section89.  They showed strong gradients after the 180° turn as the ﬂow is forced to follow 
the shape of the blade.
Fig. 17. Typical Experimental, Two-Pass Test Section with 45° Angled Ribs with a Conceptual View of the Rib and 
Turn Induced Secondary Flow
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

336
 
With the internal cooling passages of the blade can take on a variety of shapes, sizes, and orientations, it is interesting to 
investigate the effect of rotation in more detail.  Results drawn from Fu et al. are presented to show the isolated affect of rotation on the 
heat transfer enhancement in channels with aspect ratios ranging from 1:4 (near the leading edge) to 4:1 (in the trailing edge region)90. 
Speciﬁcally, they studied two-pass channels with aspect ratios of 1:4, 1:2, 1:1, and 2:1, and they included the work of Grifﬁth et al. to 
incorporate a 4:1 single pass cooling channel91.  As shown by the sample test section in ﬁgure 17, each of the two-pass test sections 
consists of twelve regions in the stream-wise direction; with region one at the inlet of the test section, and region twelve at the outlet. 
Because the hydraulic diameter of each channel is different, comparisons are made at speciﬁc regions (1 through 12), rather than speciﬁc 
x/D locations, and the regions are labeled in ﬁgure 17.  Figures 18-21 show the Nusselt number ratios at various regions in rotating 
channels with smooth walls, oriented at 90° to the direction of rotation, and ﬁgures 22-25 compare the heat transfer enhancement in 
cooling channels with smooth walls with various channel orientations (incorporating the probable channel location and orientation in an 
actual blade).  This comparison is extended to rotating channels with 45° angled ribs in ﬁgures 26-33.  The Nusselt number ratio shown 
is the measured Nusselt number in the rotating channel (NuR) – to – the Nusselt number measured in the identical stationary channel 
(NuS).  With this altered deﬁnition of the Nusselt number ratio, the effect of rotation is isolated from other factors inﬂuencing the heat 
transfer enhancement.  In addition, the Nusselt number ratio is presented as a function of the local buoyancy parameter.  
 
Figure 18 shows the Nusselt number ratios in region 4, on the leading and trailing surfaces (ﬁgure 18a), and the inner and outer 
surfaces (ﬁgure 18b); region 4 should represent fully developed ﬂow in the ﬁrst pass of each channel.  The effect of rotation is most 
clearly seen on the trailing surface of the various channels.  As the buoyancy parameter increases, the Nusselt number ratio increases in 
each channel, and the buoyancy parameter approaches zero, the Nusselt number approaches unity, as the effect of rotation diminishes. 
As explained earlier (and depicted in ﬁgure 13), the Coriolis and buoyancy forces combine to enhance the heat transfer coefﬁcients on 
the trailing (destabilized) surface.  Interestingly, the Nusselt number ratios on the trailing surfaces of the various channels all collapse 
to the same trend.  The increase of the heat transfer coefﬁcients on the trailing surface comes at the expense of the degradation of the 
heat transfer coefﬁcients on the leading surface.  In general, as the buoyancy parameter increases, the Nusselt number ratios decrease; 
indicating the adverse effect of rotation.  However, the Nusselt number ratios cover a larger range than the ratios on the trailing surface. 
Positive information for turbine designers is shown in ﬁgure 18(b).  As the buoyancy parameter increases, the Nusselt number ratios on 
both the inner and outer surfaces at region 4 increase.  
 
Figure 19 moves to region 11 in the second pass; this region is far away from the 180° turn, so it should represent fully developed 
ﬂow in the second pass.  As shown in ﬁgure 19, the overall effect of rotation is reduced (when compared to the ﬁrst pass) in second 
pass as the Coriolis and buoyancy forces act is opposite directions.   Although the effect of rotation is expected to decrease, previous 
studies have shown, it is not eliminated, and this is further conﬁrmed in ﬁgure 19.  The leading surfaces of each channel experience heat 
transfer enhancement as the buoyancy parameter increases.  However, the heat transfer enhancement due to rotation is much less on the 
leading surface of the second pass, than the trailing surface of the ﬁrst pass.  As shown in ﬁgure 18a, the enhancement due to rotation on 
the trailing surfaces increases the Nusselt number ratio up to (and beyond in the 4:1 channel) two times that of the stationary channel. 
However, on the leading surfaces in the second pass, the maximum heat transfer enhancement due to rotation does not exceed 1.5.  As 
expected the trailing surfaces are adversely affected by rotation, with the 1:1 and 2:1 channels experiencing the greatest declination.  The 
heat transfer coefﬁcients on all of the inner and outer surfaces of region 11 are slightly enhanced with rotation, as shown in ﬁugre 19(b). 
However, the level of enhancement in this region is less than the enhancement in the ﬁrst pass at region 4.
Fig. 18. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 4 (1st Pass, 
Fully Developed) in Smooth Rotating Channels (β = 90°)
Fig. 19. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 11 (2nd 
Pass, Fully Developed) in Smooth Rotating Channels (β = 90°)
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

337
 
In addition to considering the fully developed regions in the two-pass channel, the level of heat transfer enhancement in the 
sharp turn should also be considered.  Figure 20 shows the Nusselt number ratios at region 6 for the leading, trailing, inner, and outer 
surfaces.  Similar to region 4, the trailing surfaces at region 6 all experience heat transfer enhancement due to rotation.  While the Nusselt 
number ratios for the leading surfaces are generally below unity.  The variation between the leading and trailing surfaces is less than the 
difference in region 4, due to the onset of the sharp turn.  As ﬁgure 20(b) shows, the heat transfer coefﬁcients on both the outer and tip 
surfaces of region 6 are enhanced with rotation.  
 
Figure 21 shows the Nusselt number ratios in region 7 (the second half of the sharp turn).  The Nusselt number ratios on the 
leading surfaces in all the channels increase with the increasing buoyancy parameter, similar to region 11.  With the exception of the 1:4 
channel, the heat transfer coefﬁcients on the all of the trailing surfaces decreases with rotation.  The effect of rotation on the outer and tip 
surfaces of region 7 is less than the effect of rotation in region 6.  With the exception of the tip surface in the 2:1 channel, both the outer 
and tip surfaces are slightly elevated above the Nusselt number ratio of unity, and increasing the buoyancy parameter does not result in a 
signiﬁcant increase in the Nusselt number ratios.  With the ﬂow redirection created in the stationary channel, the heat transfer coefﬁcients 
are naturally elevated.  Therefore, the additional secondary ﬂow induced by rotation only slightly increases the already elevated Nusselt 
numbers.  
Fig. 20. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 6 (1st Pass Turn) in Smooth Rotating Channels (β = 90°)
Fig. 21.  A Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 7 (2nd Pass Turn) in Smooth Rotating Channels (β = 90°)
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

338
 
The effect of channel orientation is combined with the channel aspect ratio and local buoyancy parameters in ﬁgures 22 – 25. 
The 1:4 and 1:2 channels have orientations of 45°, the 2:1 and 4:1 channel are oriented at 135°, and the 1:1 channel maintains its previous 
orientation of 90°.  As shown in ﬁgure 22, in the fully developed region of the ﬁrst pass (region 4), the level of heat transfer enhancement 
on the trailing surfaces, due to rotation, is the same as in the channels with the 90° orientation.  However, the degradation due to rotation 
on the leading surfaces is less in these skewed channels.  Unlike the inner and outer surfaces of the channels with the 90° orientation, 
not all surfaces of every channel experience heat transfer enhancement with the increasing buoyancy parameter.  The heat transfer 
enhancement (or declination) is strongly dependent on the channel aspect ratio.  As shown in ﬁgure 14, the channel orientation affects the 
rotation induced vortices.  In the 1:4 and 1:2 channels with the 45° channel orientation, the vortices are impinging on the inner surfaces 
of the ﬁrst pass; thus increasing the heat transfer coefﬁcients.  However, the 135° of the 2:1 channel results in the vortices impinging on 
the outer surface, further increasing the heat transfer coefﬁcients on the outer surface, rather than the inner surface.
 
The Nusselt number ratios at region 11 in the smooth channels with skewed orientations are shown in ﬁgure 23.  The heat 
transfer enhancement on the leading surfaces of these skewed channels is similar to those with the normal orientation.  However, the 
Nusselt numbers on the trailing surfaces of the 1:4 and 1:2 channels are increased with rotation; this differs from the orthogonal rotating 
Fig. 22. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 4 (1st Pass, Fully Developed) in Smooth Rotating Channels (β = 45° or 135°)
Fig. 23. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 11 (2nd Pass, Fully Developed) in Smooth Rotating Channels (β = 45° or 135°)
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

339
channels.  The Nusselt numbers on the trailing surface 2:1 channel with the 135° orientation decrease with the increasing buoyancy 
parameter (similar the 2:1 channel with the 90° orientation).  The level of heat transfer enhancement on the inner and outer walls in the 
second pass of these channels with various orientation is similar to the orthogonally rotating channels, with the exception of the inner 
wall of the 2:1 channel.  The coolant is forced away from the corner between the inner and trailing walls to the corner between the 
leading and outer wall of the second pass.  As the heat transfer coefﬁcients on the trailing surface of the 2:1 channel sharply decrease, so 
do the heat transfer coefﬁcients on the inner surface.
 
The additional complexity of ﬂow through the sharp 180° turn is shown in ﬁgures 24 and 25.  The level of heat transfer 
enhancement is the same on the leading and trailing surfaces, as well as the outer and tip surfaces of region 6.  The dominant ﬂow 
behavior through the turn is not strongly effected by the channel orientation; therefore, the Nusselt number ratios are not strongly 
effected as the channel orientation shifts from 90°, and these conclusions can be extended to region 7 of the channels, as well (ﬁgure 
25).
 
The internal cooling passages of turbine blades generally do not have smooth surfaces.  Therefore, it is important to consider 
not only channels with smooth walls, but cooling channels with rib turbulators.  As described in previous sections, angled rib turbulators 
are commonly used in the blades.  Fu et al. experimentally studied the effect of buoyancy on the heat transfer enhancement in channels 
with rib turbulators as they did for smooth, rotating passages. Figures 26 – 29 show rotating – to – stationary Nusselt number ratios at 
various regions in orthogonal cooling passages with angled ribs92.  
Fig. 27. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 11 (2nd 
Pass, Fully Developed) in Rotating Channels (β = 90°) with 
45°Angled Ribs
Fig. 24. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 6 (1st Pass 
Turn) in Smooth Rotating Channels (β = 45° or 135°)
Fig. 25. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 7 (2nd Pass 
Turn) in Smooth Rotating Channels (β = 45° or 135°)
Fig. 26. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 4 (1st Pass, 
Fully Developed) in Rotating Channels (β = 90°) with 45° Angled 
Ribs
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

340
 
Figure 26 shows the effect of rotation on the heat transfer coefﬁcients at region 4 in the cooling channels with 45° angled 
ribs.  The general trends for the trailing (enhancement) and leading (declination) surfaces is same as for the smooth channel, as ﬁgure 
26(a) shows.  However, the effect of rotation on the trailing surface is less in the ribbed channels than the smooth channels.  The 
Nusselt number ratios in the stationary channel are elevated to the presence of the ribs, and additional enhancement due to rotation is 
less signiﬁcant in these ribbed channels.  The declination of the heat transfer coefﬁcients on the leading surface is more severe in these 
ribbed channels than the smooth channels; this is markedly clear in the 1:4 and 1:2 channels.  From the numerical predictions of Su et 
al., the interaction of the rotation and rib induced secondary ﬂow creates ﬂow reversal, and a small cell of relatively hot air is trapped 
near the leading surface93.  Within this cell, less mixing occurs with the core of the coolant ﬂow, and therefore, these leading surfaces are 
adversely affected by rotation.  Figure 26(b) shows that the Nusselt number ratios on both the inner and outer surfaces in region 4 are 
enhanced with rotation.
 
Figure 27 shows the effect of rotation is reduced in the second pass at region 11 when compared to the ﬁrst pass at region 4. 
In addition the effect of rotation on the leading and trailing surfaces is less in these ribbed channels than the smooth channels.  The heat 
transfer enhancement on the inner and outer surfaces at region 11 is strongly dependent on the channel cross-section.  The 1:4 channel 
is most strongly affected by rotation; both the inner and outer surfaces experience heat transfer enhancement.  The Nusselt number 
ratios of the remaining channels are not signiﬁcantly affected by rotation, as the Nusselt number ratios are approximately unity over the 
range of buoyancy parameters.  The inner surface of the 2:1 channels is the exception as a sharp decrease in the Nusselt number ratio is 
observed.  
 
Figures 28 and 29 show the effect of rotation in the turn of the ribbed channels.  Similar to region 4, ﬁgure 28(a) shows Nusselt 
number ratios on the trailing surface are increasing with buoyancy parameter, while they decrease on the leading surface; the greatest 
effect of rotation is seen in the 1:4 channel.  Meanwhile, the outer and tip surfaces of each channel are increasing with the increasing 
effect of rotation.  Figure 29 shows in the second half of the turn (region 7), all of the surfaces experience heat transfer enhancement with 
the increasing buoyancy parameter.  The level of enhancement on the outer and tip surfaces is strongly dependent on the channel aspect 
ratio.
 
With an understanding of the heat transfer enhancement in orthogonally rotating channels with rib turbulators, the additional 
complexities in skewed channels with angled ribs can be discussed.  Figures 30 – 33 show the Nusselt number ratios in cooling channels 
with angled ribs with non-orthogonal rotating angles.  As with the smooth channels, the 1:4 and 1:2 channels have orientation angles of 
45°, the 2:1 and 4:1 channels have orientation angles of 135°, and the 1:1 channels maintains an orientation of 90°.  As shown in ﬁgure 
30, the enhancement due to rotation is less in the skewed channels than the normal channels of region 4.  The declination in the Nusselt 
numbers is signiﬁcantly less in the channels with skewed orientations than the declination in the normal channels.  The orientation of the 
channel does not signiﬁcantly effect the heat transfer enhancement on the trailing, inner, or outer surfaces.
 
The effect of channel orientation on the heat transfer coefﬁcients decreases in the second pass.  Figure 31 shows that the trends 
and level of enhancement on the leading and trailing surfaces of the skewed channels are the same as those of the normal channels.  This 
can be anticipated as the effect of rotation decreases in the second pass, and altering the orientation angle further lessens the effect of 
rotation on the cooling channel heat transfer coefﬁcients.  The diminished effect of rotation is clearly seen on the inner walls of the 1:4 
and 2:1 channels.  Signiﬁcant enhancement is seen on the inner wall of the 1:4 channel while extreme declination is seen on the inner 
wall of the 2:1 channel (ﬁgure 27); however, neither of these trends are seen the skewed channels (ﬁgure 31).  
Fig. 28. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 6 (1st Pass 
Turn) in Rotating Channels (β = 90°) with 45° Angled Ribs
Fig. 29. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 7 (2nd Pass 
Turn) in Rotating Channels (β = 90°) with 45° Angled Ribs
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

341
 
 
Similar to the smooth channels, ﬁgures 32 and 33 show a minimal effect of channel orientation in the turn of the two pass 
channels.  The leading and trailing surfaces are affected less in the skewed channels than the normal channels in region 6; however in 
region 7, there is only negligible difference between the Nusselt number ratios on the leading and trailing surfaces.  The heat transfer 
coefﬁcients on the outer and tip surfaces of the 2:1 channel with the 135° orientation are positively inﬂuenced by the skewed channel 
orientation.
 
The effect of channel orientation is further discussed by considering the average heat transfer enhancement of the two pass 
channels.  Fu et al. presented the overall Nusselt number ratio (measured Nusselt number to the Nusselt number for turbulent ﬂow 
through a smooth tube, Dittus-Boelter correlation) in two pass smooth and ribbed channels94. The overall average Nusselt number ratio 
was taken as the 12 region average of both the leading and trailing surfaces.  Figure 34 shows the effect of rotation is greater in the 1:4 
and 1:2 smooth channels than the 1:1 and 2:1 smooth channels.  It should be noted that Fu et al. conducted their experiments at constant 
rotational speed (550 rpm)95.  Therefore, the rotation number varies inversely with the Reynolds number of the coolant ﬂow.  Therefore, 
the rotation number is the highest at the lowest Reynolds number.  Similar to the smooth channels, the effect of rotation is most apparent 
in the 1:4 channel.  
Fig.33. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 7 (2nd 
Pass Turn) in Rotating Channels (β = 45° or 135°) with 45° 
Angled Ribs
Fig. 30. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 4 (1st 
Pass, Fully Developed) in Rotating Channels (β = 45° or 135°)  
with 45° Angled Ribs
Fig. 31. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 11 (2nd 
Pass, Fully Developed) in Rotating Channels (β = 45° or 135°)  
with 45° Angled Ribs
Fig. 32. Nusselt Number Ratio Comparison at Region 6 (1st 
Pass Turn) in Rotating Channels (β = 45° or 135°)  with 45° 
Angled Ribs 
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

342
 
 
To further evaluate the viability of the various cooling 
channels, the frictional losses should be considered along with the 
heat transfer enhancement.  Figure 35 shows the friction factor 
ratios measured by Fu et al. for the various aspect ratio channels96. 
The friction factor ratios in the smooth channels are greater than 
unity due to the large pressure loss incurred in the 180° turns. 
The friction factor ratios in the ribbed channels vary signiﬁcantly 
depending on the channel aspect ratio.  The maximum friction factor 
is 5.8 in the 1:4 channel, while the friction factor in the 2:1 channel 
can be 11.5 times greater than the friction factor in a smooth tube 
as given by the Blasius correlation.  Physically the ribs in each of 
the four channels are the same size.  Therefore, the blockage due 
to the ribs in the 2:1 channel is 5 times greater than the blockage in 
the 1:4 channel, and at a Reynolds number of 25,000, the increased 
blockage results in a friction factor ratio increase of 2.3 times.  To 
heat transfer enhancement and the pressure penalty are combined 
in ﬁgure 36 to evaluate the overall thermal performance in each 
channel.  As expected the 1:4 channels have the greatest thermal 
performance, as they have the lowest friction factor ratios.
Numerical Simulations of Cooling Channel Heat 
Transfer Enhancement
 
Thus far a wide variety of experimental results have been discussed for the enhancement of cooling channel heat transfer. 
However, numerical predictions have helped researchers better understand the complex ﬂow phenomena in the cooling passages.  The k-
ε, low Reynolds k-ε, the two-layer k-ε, and the low Reynolds number k-ω turbulence models have been used to predict the ﬂow behavior 
and heat transfer enhancement in rotating cooling channels.  However, problems with each of these models can lead to inaccurate 
predictions of the complex ﬂow in rotating channels.  Prakash and Zerkle showed the k-ε model is unable to predict the ﬂow and heat 
transfer behavior in two pass rotating channels with angled ribs due to the isotropic turbulence assumption and the near surface wall 
function required by this model97.  However, Lin et al. showed the low Reynolds k-ω model is an adequate model for rotating two pass 
cooling channels with angled ribs98.  This model replaces the wall function in the near wall region with turbulence dissipation speciﬁed 
in terms of the turbulent kinetic energy.
 
Fig. 34. Channel Averaged Nusselt Number Ratios for Non-
Rotating and Rotating Channels
Fig. 35. Overall Friction Factor Ratios for Non-Rotating and 
Rotating Channels
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes
Fig. 36. Overall Thermal Performance for Non-Rotating and 
Rotating Channels

343
 
The advanced Reynolds stress model and the 
second moment closure model have also been applied to 
rotating cooling channels.  The second moment closure 
model requires more computing power than the previously 
mentioned models as six additional transport equations 
are solved in the three-dimensional turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld. 
Also, the eddy diffusivity in the momentum transport 
equation is replaced with the source terms developed 
from the turbulent Reynolds stress tensor.  At the expense 
of additional computational time, this model provides 
accurate predictions for ﬂow in two pass rotating channels 
with angled rib turbulators.
The second moment closure model used by Chen 
et al. has been applied to internal cooling channels with 
a wide range of turbulator conﬁgurations and channel 
aspect ratios99.  The model was applied to a single pass 
rotating channel with a square cross-section by Jang et 
al.100.  The predicted heat transfer coefﬁcients in channels 
with either 45° or 60° angled ribs compared favorably 
with experimental data.   Al-Qahtani et al.extended these 
predictions to include 2:1 two pass channels and 4:1 single 
pass channels with 45° angled ribs101.  Su et al. used this 
same second moment closure model to predict the heat 
transfer coefﬁcients in rotating 4:1 single pass channels 
with V-shaped ribs102.  Figure 37 shows the velocity vectors 
and temperature contours in non-rotating, single pass 4:1 
channels (with angled and V-shaped ribs) and a non-rotating, 
2:1 two pass channel with angled ribs.  The ﬁgures clearly 
show near the wall, the coolant follows the rib turbulators. 
The dimensionless temperature contours show the lowest 
coolant temperatures occur at the most upstream point on 
the ribs.  In addition, the wall temperature is relatively high 
just downstream of the ribs, due to the ﬂow separation that 
occurs as the coolant ﬂows over the turbulators.
The secondary ﬂow and temperature contours in 
a two pass, rotating channel with an aspect ratio of 2:1 is 
shown in ﬁgure 38103.  In this channel, with smooth walls, 
the shift of the coolant toward the trailing surface of the 
ﬁrst pass is clearly seen.  With the core of the coolant 
forced to the trailing surface, a steep temperature gradient 
near the trailing wall forms.  The thinner boundary layer on 
this destabilized trailing surface results in enhanced heat 
transfer coefﬁcients due to rotation.  The opposite behavior 
occurs in the second pass, as the core of the mainstream coolant is forced to the leading surface.  However, the temperature contours 
downstream in the second pass are inﬂuenced by the ﬂow through the 180° turn, so the ﬂow is not symmetrical in the channel cross-
section.
Similar to the experimental studies which cover a wide range of channel aspect ratios, Su et al. performed a complementary 
study to numerically predict the heat transfer coefﬁcients in the cooling channels with aspect ratios varying from 1:4 to 4:1104.  Figure 
39 shows the secondary ﬂow and dimensionless temperature contours in the ﬁrst pass of rotating cooling channels with 45° angled ribs. 
This study includes parameter variations which are unachievable in most experimental facilities.  They found that for the low Reynolds 
number and low rotation number cases, the rotation effect on the Nusselt number and friction factor ratios is more signiﬁcant in the 1:2 
channel than those observed in either the square or 1:4 channel due to the presence of strong turn-induced vortices.  However, in the 
under engine-like conditions with high rotation and high Reynolds numbers, the effect of rotation decreases as the channel aspect ratio 
changes from 1:1 to 1:2 and ﬁnally to 1:4.  
Although the previously mentioned studies are only a sampling of those utilizing the second moment turbulence model, they 
have demonstrated the power of this advanced second-order Reynolds stress turbulence model.  The models have been validated with 
existing experimental data, and upon validation, they have been extended to high Reynolds number and high rotation number ﬂows 
which cannot be obtained in most experimental facilities.  Over a wide range of ﬂow conditions, these predictions provide detailed 
velocity, pressure, and temperature proﬁles which are essential to understanding the complex ﬂow behavior in these rotating channels.
Fig. 37. Velocity Vectors and Temperature Contours: (a) AR = 4:1 
One-pass Channel with 45° Inclined Ribs, (b) AR = 4:1 One Pass 
Channel with V-shaped Ribs, (c) AR = 2:1 Two-Pass Channel with 
45° Inclined Ribs (Re = 10,000)
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

344
Fig. 38. Secondary Flow and Temperature Contours in Rotating AR = 2:1 Smooth Duct (Re = 10,000, Ro = 0.22)
 
Fig. 39. A Secondary Flow in the First Passage (before the 180° turn) of Rotating Ribbed Channels with Different Aspect Ratios 
(Re = 10,000, Ro = 0.14)
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

345
Flow Field Measurements in Rotating Cooling Channels
  
Heat transfer is a side effect of the ﬂow ﬁeld. Flow in a rotating channel is signiﬁcantly different from ﬂow in a non-rotating 
channel. The secondary ﬂow in rotation redistributes velocity and also alters the random velocity ﬂuctuation patterns in turbulent ﬂows. 
Lezius and Johnston examined ﬂow instability in a straight rectangular channel with smooth walls caused by rotation105. They reported 
that rotation increases ﬂow velocity and turbulence near the unstable trailing wall and reduces the turbulent ﬂuctuations signiﬁcantly 
near the stable leading wall. Elfert measured velocity and turbulence distributions in a rotating circular pipe106. Rotation shifts the bulk 
ﬂow toward the trailing side, and the turbulence proﬁle shows a different distribution due to rotation. Tse and Mcgrath used laser-
Doppler velocimetry to measure rotating ﬂow in a two-pass channel with smooth and ribbed walls107. Tse and Steuber investigated the 
mean ﬂow characteristics in the ﬁrst and second passages of a rotating four-pass coolant passage with 45° ribs of semi-circular cross 
section using LDA108. Cheah et al. used the LDA to measure the velocity and turbulence quantities in a rotating two-pass channel109. 
Bons and Kerrebrock measured the internal ﬂow in a straight smooth-wall channel with particle image velocimetry (PIV) for both heated 
and non-heated cases110. Schabacker et al. and Chanteloup et al. also used PIV to measure the ﬂows in stationary two-pass square ducts 
with 45° turbulators111. Son et al.  measured the ﬂows in two-pass channels with smooth and 90° ribbed walls using PIV112.  Liou and 
Chen measured the developing ﬂow in a two-pass channel with LDA113. Liou et al. studied ﬂuid ﬂow in a rotating two-pass duct with 
in-line 90° ribs using LDA114. Liou et al. also performed LDV and pressure measurements for in-line detached 90° ribs115.  Liou and Dai 
measured pressure and ﬂow characteristics in a rotating two-pass square duct with 45° angled ribs of square cross section by using the 
LDA116. Liou et al. measured ﬂow and pressure ﬁelds in a rotating two-pass duct with staggered 45° ribs of rounded cross section117. Both 
Liou and Dai and Liou et al. reported that the absence of periodic fully developed ﬂow condition in their tests118. The above-mentioned 
ﬂow measurements help to understand the ﬂow physics and serve to explain the heat transfer results obtained in two-pass rotating 
channels with smooth and ribbed walls.
Rotational Effect on Jet Impingement Cooling
Several studies were mentioned above that investigate jet impingement cooling.  Although a number of impingement studies 
have been completed, only a few studies consider the effect of rotation on impingement cooling.  Epstein et al. studied the effect of 
rotation on impingement cooling in the leading edge of a blade119. They reported that the rotation decreases the impingement heat transfer, 
but the effective heat transfer is better than a smooth rotating channel. The zero staggered cooling jets (i.e., jet direction is perpendicular 
to rotation direction) show lower heat transfer coefﬁcients compared to that with a staggered angle. Mattern and Hennecke reported 
the effect of rotation on the leading edge impingement cooling by using the naphthalene sublimation technique120. Their experiment 
did not include the rotating buoyancy effect. The jet direction has an offset angle with respect to the rotation direction. They found that 
the rotation decreases the impingement heat transfer for all staggered angles. The effect of rotation is least when jet direction has an 
angle of 45° to rotation direction. However, a maximum of 40% reduction in heat transfer is noted when jet direction is perpendicular 
to rotation direction. This may be because the Coriolis force creates a swirl action on the spent ﬂow and also deﬂects the jet when jet 
direction is parallel to rotation direction. Glezer et al. studied the effect of rotation on swirling impingement cooling in the leading edge 
of a blade121. They found that screw-shaped swirl cooling can signiﬁcantly improve the heat-transfer coefﬁcient over a smooth channel 
and the improvement is not signiﬁcantly dependent on the temperature ratio and rotational forces. 
Parsons et al. studied the effect of rotation on impingement cooling in the mid-chord region of the blade122. A central chamber 
serves as the pressure chamber, and jets are released in either direction to impinge on two heated surfaces. The jet impinging directions 
have different orientations with respect to the direction of rotation. They reported that the rotation decreases the impingement heat 
transfer on both leading and trailing surfaces with more effect on the trailing side (up to 20% heat transfer reduction). Akella and Han 
studied the effect of rotation on impingement cooling for a two-pass impingement channel conﬁguration with smooth walls123. The 
difference from the earlier experiment by Parsons et al. is that spent jets from the trailing channel are used as cooling jets for the leading 
channel124. Therefore, the cross-ﬂow in the trailing side is radial outward; for the leading side, it is radial inward. They reported that 
irrespective of the direction of rotation, the heat transfer coefﬁcient on the ﬁrst-pass and second-pass impinging wall decreases up to 
20% in the presence of rotation. Akella and Han included 45° angled ribs in the target surfaces of their two-pass impingement channel 
with rotation125. They reported that jet impingement on the ribbed wall can provide 10-50% more heat transfer compared to that on the 
smooth wall for jet Reynolds number increasing from 4,000 to 10,000. This is because the angled rib- induced secondary ﬂow gets 
stronger with higher cross-ﬂow at higher jet Reynolds number. They also found that the rotation decreases impingement heat transfer 
on the ﬁrst-pass and second-pass ribbed wall.  Parsons et al. extended their earlier work to include heat transfer on a smooth target wall 
with ﬁlm coolant extraction from a channel with four heated walls126.  
Rotational Effect on Pin-Fin Cooling
 
Pin-ﬁn cooling has been investigated for many years, but only recently has the effect of rotation been considered in channels 
with pin-ﬁns.  Recently, Willett and Bergles studied the effect of rotation on heat transfer in narrow rectangular channels (AR = 10:1) 
with smooth and with typical pin-ﬁn array, respectively, including channel orientation effect with respect to the plane of rotation127. They 
found that the heat transfer enhancement in the pin-ﬁn channel due to rotation and buoyancy was less than the enhancement in the smooth 
channel. They showed that heat transfer enhancement mainly is due to pin-ﬁn ﬂow disturbance; pin-ﬁns signiﬁcantly reduce the effect of 
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

346
rotation, but they do not eliminate the effect. Wright et al. studied the effect of rotation on heat transfer in narrow rectangular channels 
(AR = 4:1 and 8:1) with typical pin-ﬁn array used in turbine blade trailing edge design and oriented at 150° with respect to the plane 
of rotation128. Results show that turbulent heat transfer in a stationary pin-ﬁn channel can be enhanced up to 3.8 times that of a smooth 
channel; rotation enhances the heat transferred from the pin-ﬁn channels up to 1.5 times that of the stationary pin-ﬁn channels. Most 
importantly, for narrow rectangular pin-ﬁn channels oriented at 150° with respect to the plane of rotation, heat transfer enhancement on 
both the leading and trailing surfaces increases with rotation. This provides positive information for the cooling designers.
Rotational Effect on Dimple Cooling
Because dimple cooling has only recently been considered as an internal cooling technique, the number of studies available in 
open literature is limited.  The majority of dimple studies were described above, and they are only applicable for stator cooling designs. 
Only a few studies focus on rotor blade dimple cooling.  Zhou et al. studied heat/mass transfer in a rotating square channel with typical 
dimple array129. They found that heat transfer enhancement for the stationary dimple channel is around two times that of the smooth wall 
value; however, rotation enhances heat transfer on the trailing dimple surface and reduces heat transfer on the leading dimple surface in 
a similar manner as the rotational effect on the trailing and leading surfaces of the square channel with ribs. Grifﬁth et al. studied heat 
transfer in rotating rectangular channels (AR = 4:1) with typical dimple array on both leading and trailing walls, including the effect 
of channel orientation with respect to the plane of rotation130. The results show that rotation enhances heat transfer on both trailing and 
leading surfaces of the narrow dimpled channel in a similar trend as the rotational effect on the trailing and leading surfaces of the 
narrow rectangular channel with ribs or pins; however, the heat transfer enhancement of the ribbed or pinned channel exceeds that of the 
dimpled channel. Also, the dimpled channel oriented at 135° with respect to the plane of rotation provides greater overall heat transfer 
enhancement than the orthogonal dimpled channel. 
4.2.2.2-4 Concluding Remarks
With modern gas turbines operating at extremely high temperatures, it is necessary to implement various cooling methods, 
so the turbine blades and vanes survive in the path of the hot gases.  Simply passing coolant air through the airfoils does not provide 
adequate cooling; therefore, it is necessary to implement techniques that will further enhance the heat transfer from the airfoil walls. 
The internal heat transfer can be enhanced with jet impingement, pin-ﬁn cooling (used in the trailing edge), and internal passages lined 
with turbulence promoters.  The most commonly used turbulators are ribs.  The heat transfer distribution in cooling channels with ribs 
has been studied for many years because a number of factors combine to affect the heat transfer.   Because the ﬂow through non-rotating 
and rotating channels is very different, many studies have focused on the effect of rotation in ribbed channels.  Although the majority of 
studies concentrate on channels with a square cross-section, a limited number of investigations are now available for rectangular cooling 
channels with ribs.  A relatively new alternative to rib turbulators are dimples.  A limited number of studies are available to address 
the heat transfer in stationary channels with dimples, and even fewer studies are available that address the effect of rotation in cooling 
channels with dimples.  It is also important to investigate the effect of rotation on jet impingement and pin-ﬁn cooling, and in the recent 
years, such studies have become available.  
More studies are needed for the blade-shaped coolant passages with high performance turbulators and with or without ﬁlm 
cooling holes under realistic coolant ﬂow, thermal, and rotating conditions. Also, more studies are needed for rotating impingement 
cooling with or without ﬁlm coolant extraction as well as rotating pin-ﬁn cooling with or without trailing edge ejection in order to guide 
the efﬁcient rotor blade internal cooling designs. Highly accurate and highly detailed local heat transfer data is needed to aid engineers 
in their design of blades for advanced gas turbines.
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

347
4.2.2.2-5 Notes
________________________________________
 
1. J.C. Han, S. Dutta, and S.V. Ekkad,  “Gas Turbine Heat Transfer and Cooling Technology,” Taylor & Francis, Inc., New   
 
    York, New York, December 2000, ISBN # 1-56032-841-X, 646 pages. 
 
2. B. Lakshminryana, “Turbine Cooling and Heat Transfer,” Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer of Turbomachinery, John  
 
     
    Wiley, New York, 1996, pp. 597-721; M.G. Dunn, “Convection Heat Transfer and Aerodynamics in Axial Flow  
 
    Turbines,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery. 123 no.4 (2001):.637-686. 
 
3. R.J. Goldstein,  “Heat Transfer in Gas Turbine Systems,” Annuals of The New York Academy of Sciences, New York,  
 
    New York, Vol. 934, 2001, 2001, 520 pages. 
 
4. D.E. Metzger, L.W. Florschuetz, D.I. Takeuchi, R.D. Behee, and R.A. Berry,  “Heat Transfer Characteristics for Inline  
 
    and Staggered Arrays of Circular Jets with Crossﬂow of Spent Air,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer, 101 (1979): 526-531. 
 
5. L.W. Florschuetz, R.A. Berry, and D.E. Metzger,  “Periodic Streamwise Variations of Heat Transfer Coefﬁcients for  
 
    Inline and Staggered Arrays of Circular Jets with Crossﬂow of Spent Air,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer 102  
 
 
   
    (1980): 132-137; R.N. Koopman and E.M. Sparrow, “Local and Average Transfer Coefﬁcients Due to an Impinging  
 
    Row of Jets,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer  92 (1976): 73-82. 
 
6. L.W. Florschuetz and C.C. Su,  “Effects of Crossﬂow Temperature on Heat Transfer Within an Array of Impinging Jets,”   
 
   ASME Journal of Heat Transfer 109 (1987): 74-82. 
 
7. Ibid. 
 
8. D.M. Kercher  and W. Tabakoff,  “Heat Transfer by a Square Array of Round Air Jets Impinging Perpendicular to a  
 
    Flat Surface Including the Effect of Spent Air,” ASME Journal of Engineering for Power, Vol. 92 (1970): 73-82; L.W.  
 
       
    Florschuetz, C.R. Truman, and D.E. Metzger,  “Streamwise Flow and Heat Transfer Distributions for Jet Array  
 
    Impingement with Crossﬂow,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer  103 (1981): 337-342. 
 
9. See note 8 (Florschuetz, et al.). 
 
10. J.C. Bailey and R.S. Bunker,  “Local Heat Transfer and Flow Distributions for Impinging Jet Arrays of Dense and  
 
     Sparse Extent,” ASME Paper No. GT-2002-30473 (2002); also see note 8 (Florschuetz, et al.). 
 
11. Y. Huang, S.V. Ekkad, and J.C. Han, “Detailed Heat Transfer Distributions Under an Array of Orthogonal Impinging  
 
 
      Jets,” AIAA Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer  12 (1998): pp. 73-79. 
 
12. S.V. Ekkad, Y. Huang, and J.C.  Han,  “Impingement Heat Transfer on a Target Plate with Film Holes,” AIAA Journal of   
 
      Thermophysics and Heat Transfer  13 (1999): 522-528.  
 
13. T. Wang, M. Lin, and R.S. Bunker,  “Flow and Heat Transfer of Conﬁned Impingement Jets Cooling,” ASME Paper No.   
 
      2000-GT-223 (2000). 
 
14. L. Gao, S.V. Ekkad,  and R.S. Bunker,  “Impingement Heat Transfer Under Linearly Stretched Arrays of Holes,” ASME   
 
      Paper No. GT2003-38178 (2003). 
 
15. L.W. Florschuetz, D.E.  Metzger,  and C.C. Su,  “Heat Transfer Characteristics for Jet Array Impingement with Initial  
 
 
      Crossﬂow,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer  106 (1984):  pp. 34-41. 
 
16. R.E. Chupp, H.E. Helms, P.W.  McFadden,  and T.R. Brown, “Evaluation of Internal Heat Transfer Coefﬁcients for  
 
 
      Impingement Cooled Turbine Airfoils,” AIAA Journal of Aircraft. 6 (1969): 203-208. 
 
17. R.S Bunker  and D.E. Metzger, “Local Heat Transfer in Internally Cooled Turbine Airfoil Leading Edge Regions. Part I:   
 
      Impingement Cooling Without Film Coolant Extraction,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  112 (1990): 451-458. 
 
18. D.E. Metzger and R.S. Bunker,  “Local Heat Transfer in Internally Cooled Turbine Airfoil Leading Edge Regions. Part II:  
 
      Impingement Cooling with Film Coolant Extraction,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery. 112 (1990): 459-466. 
 
19. D.E. Metzger, R.A. Berry,  and J.P. Bronson, “Developing Heat Transfer in Rectangular Ducts With Staggered Arrays of   
 
      Short Pin Fins,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer  104 (1982): 700-706.  
 
20. M.K. Chyu, Y.C. Hsing, T.I.P. Shih, and V. Natarajan,  “Heat Transfer Contributions of Pins and Endwall in Pin-Fin  
 
 
      Arrays: Effects of Thermal Boundary Condition Modeling,” ASME Paper No. 98-GT-175 (1998).  
 
21. VanFossen, G.J., 1982, “Heat-Transfer Coefﬁcients for Staggered Arrays of Short Pin Fins,” ASME Journal of   
 
 
      Engineering for Power, Vol. 104, pp. 268-274; also see note 19. 
 
22. S.C. Arora and W. Abdel-Messeh,  “Characteristics of Partial Length Circular Pin Fins as Heat Transfer Augmentors for   
 
      Airfoil Internal Cooling Passages,” ASME Paper No. 89-GT-87 (1989).  
 
23. D.E. Metzger, S.C. Fan, and S.W. Haley, “Effects of Pin Shape and Array Orientation on Heat Transfer and Pressure Loss  
 
      in Pin Fin Arrays,” ASME Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power  106 (1984): 252-257.  
 
24. M.K. Chyu,, “Heat Transfer and Pressure Drop for Short Pin-Fin Arrays With Pin-Endwall Fillet,” ASME Journal of Heat  
 
      Transfer 112 (1990):  926-932.  
 
25. R.J. Goldstein, M.Y. Jabbari, and S.B. Chen,  “Convective Mass Transfer and Pressure Loss Characteristics of Staggered   
 
      Short Pin-Fin Arrays,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfe 37 (1994): Suppl. 1, pp. 149-160.  
 
26. M.K. Chyu, Y.C.  Hsing, and V. Natarajan, “Convective Heat Transfer of Cubic Fin Arrays in a Narrow Channel,” ASME   
 
      Journal of Turbomachinery 120 (1998):  362-367.  
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

348
 
27. D.E. Metzger, W.B. Shephard, and S.W. Haley, “Row Resolved Heat Transfer Variations in Pin-Fin Arrays Including  
 
 
      Effects of Non-Uniform Arrays and Flow Convergence,” ASME Paper No. 86-GT-132 (1986).  
 
28. M.K. Chyu, V. Natarajan, and D.E. Metzger, “Heat/Mass Transfer from Pin-Fin Arrays With Perpendicular Flow Entry,”   
 
      ASME HTD-Vol. 226 (1992), Fundamentals and Applied Heat Transfer Research for Gas Turbine Engines.  
 
29. T.K. Kumaran, J.C. Han, and S.C. Lau,  “Augmented Heat Transfer in a Pin Fin Channel with Short or Long Ejection  
 
 
      Holes,” International Journal of Heat Mass Transfer, 34 no. 10 (1991):  2617-2628.  
 
30. Hwang, J.J. and Lu, C.C., 2000, “Lateral-Flow Effect of Endwall Heat Transfer and Pressure Drop in a Pin-Fin   
 
 
      Trapezoidal Duct of Various Pin Shapes,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-0232. 
 
31. M.K. Chyu, Y.  Yu, H. Ding, J.P. Downs,  and O. Soechting, “Concavity Enhanced Heat Transfer in an Internal Cooling   
                    Passage,” ASME Paper No. 97-GT-437 (1997); H.K. Moon, T. O’Connell, and B. Glezer,  “Channel Height Effect  
    
     on Heat Transfer and Friction in a Dimpled Passage,” ASME Paper No. 99-GT-163 (1999); G.I. Mahmood, M.L.  Hill,  
 
     D.L. Nelson, P.M. Ligrani, H.K.  Moon, and B. Glezer,, “Local Heat Transfer and Flow Structure on and above a Dimpled  
 
     Surface in a Channel,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery 123 (2001): 115-123; S.W. Moon, and S.C. Lau, “Turbulent  
 
 
     Heat Transfer Measurements on a Wall with Concave and Cylindrical Dimples in a Square Channel,” ASME Paper  
 
     No.GT-2002-30208 (2002). 
 
32. R.S. Bunker and K.F.  Donnellan, “Heat Transfer and Friction Factors for Flows Inside Circular Tubes with Concavity  
 
 
      Surfaces,” ASME Paper No. GT-2003-38053 (2003). 
 
33. N. Syred, A. Khalatov, A. Kozlov, A. Shchukin, and R. Agachev, “Effect of Surface Curvature on Heat Transfer and  
 
 
      Hydrodynamics within a Single Hemispherical Dimple,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-236 (2000). 
 
34. G.M.S. Azad,Y. Huang, and J.C. Han, “Jet Impingement Heat Transfer on Dimpled Surfaces Using a Transient Liquid  
 
 
      Crystal Technique,” AIAA Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer 14 no. 2 (2000): 186-193; G.M.S. Azad, Y.  
 
 
      Huang, and J.C. Han, “Impingement Heat Transfer on Pinned Surfaces Using a Transient Liquid Crystal Technique,”  
 
      Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium on Transport Phenomena and Dynamics of Rotating Machinery  2 (2000): 
 
      731-738.  
 
35. M.E. Taslim, L.  Setayeshgar, and S.D. Spring, “An Experimental Evaluation of Advanced Leading Edge Impingement   
 
      Cooling Concepts,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-222 (2000). 
 
36. M.E. Taslim, Y.  Pan, and S.D. Spring, “An Experimental Study of Impingement on Roughened Airfoil Leading-Edge  
 
 
      Wall with Film Holes,” ASME Paper No. 2001-GT-0152 (2001). 
 
37. M.E. Taslim and L. Setayeshgar, “Experimental Leading-Edge Impingement Cooling Through Racetrack Crossover  
 
 
      Holes,” ASME Paper No. 2001-GT-153 (2001); M.E. Taslim,Y. Pan, and K. Bakhtari, “Experimental Racetrack Shaped   
 
      Jet Impingement on a Roughened Leading-Edge Wall with Film Holes,” ASME Paper No. GT-2002-30477(2002). 
 
38. B. Glezer, H.K.  Moon, J. Kerrebrock, J. Bons, and G. Guenette, “Heat Transfer in a Rotating Radial Channel With  
 
 
      Swirling Internal Flow,” presented at the International Gas Turbine & Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition, Stockholm,   
 
      Sweden, June 2-5, ASME Paper No. 98-GT-214 (1998).  
 
39. G. Pamula, S.V. Ekkad, and S. Acharya, “Inﬂuence of Cross-Flow Induced Swirl and Impingement on Heat Transfer in a   
 
      Two-Pass Channel Connected by Two Rows of Holes,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-235 (2000).  
 
40. S. Kieda, T. Torii, and K. Fujie, “Heat Transfer Enhancement in a Twisted Tube Having a Rectangular Cross Section With  
 
      or Without Internal Ribs,” ASME Paper No. 84-HT-75 (1984).  
 
41. Y.M. Zhang, G.M.S. Azad, J.C. Han, and C.P. Lee, “Heat Transfer and Friction Characteristics of Turbulent Flow in  
 
 
      Square Ducts with Wavy, and Twisted Tape Inserts and Axial Interrupted Ribs,” Journal of Enhanced Heat Transfer  7  
 
 
      (2000): 35-49.  
 
42. Y.M. Zhang, W.Z. Gu, and J.C. Han, “Heat Transfer and Friction in Rectangular Channels With Ribbed or Ribbed- 
 
 
      Grooved Walls,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer  116  no. 1 (1994):  58-65.  
 
43. D.E. Metzger and C.S. Fan, “Heat Transfer in Pin-Fin Arrays With Jet Supply and Large Alternating Wall Roughness  
 
 
      Ribs,” HTD-Vol. 226 (1992) Fundamental and Applied Heat Transfer Research for Gas Turbine Engines, pp. 23-30.  
 
44. Z.J. Zuo, A. Faghri, and L. Langston, “A Parametric Study of Heat Pipe Turbine Vane Cooling,” presented at the  
 
 
      International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition, Orlando, Florida, June 2-5, ASME Paper No. 97-GT-  
 
      443 (1997).  
 
45. S. Yamawaki, T. Yoshida, M. Taki, and F. Mimura, “Fundamental Heat Transfer Experiments of Heat Pipes for Turbine  
 
 
      Cooling,” ASME Paper No. 97-GT-438 (1997).  
 
46. J.L. Kerrebrock and D.B. Stickler, “Vaporization Cooling for Gas Turbines, the Return-Flow Cascade,” ASME Paper No.   
 
      98-GT-177 (1998).  
 
47. G.B. Bruening and W.C. Chang, “Cooled Cooling Air Systems for Turbine Thermal Management,” ASME Paper No. 99-  
 
      GT-14 (1999).  
 
48. J.C. Corman and T.C. Paul, “Power Systems for the 21st Century “H” Gas Turbine Combined Cycles,” GE Power  
 
 
      Systems, Schenectady, New York, GER-3935 (1995): 1-12. 
 
49. T. Guo,T. Wang, and J.L. Gaddis, “Mist/Steam Cooling in a Heated Horizontal Tube, Part 2: Results and Modeling,”  
 
 
      ASME Paper No. 99-GT-145 (1999). 
 
50. X.  Li, J.L. Gaddis,  and T. Wang, “Mist/Steam Heat Transfer in Conﬁned Slot Jet Impingement,” ASME Paper No. 2000-  
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

349
 
     GT-0221(2000); X. Li, J.L. Gaddis, and T. Wang,  “Mist/Steam Cooling by a Row of Impinging Jets,” ASME Paper No.   
 
     2001-GT-0151(2001); X. Li, J.L. Gaddis, and T. Wang, “Mist/Steam Heat Transfer with Jet Impingement onto a Concave   
 
     Surface,” ASME Paper No. GT-2002-30475(2002). 
 
51. J.C. Han, L.R. Glicksman, and W.M. Rohsenow, “An Investigation of Heat Transfer and Friction for Rib-Roughened  
 
 
     Surfaces,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer  21 (1978): 1143-1156; J.C. Han, J.S. Park, and C.K. Lei,  
 
 
     “Heat Transfer Enhancement in Channels with Turbulence Promoters,” ASME Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines   
 
     and Power  107 (1985): 628-635; J.C. Han, “Heat Transfer and Friction Characteristics in Rectangular Channels with Rib   
                   Turbulators,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer  110 (1988): 321-328; J.C. Han and J.S. Park, “Developing Heat Transfer in  
 
     Rectangular Channels with Rib Turbulators,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer  31(1988): 183-195. 
 
52. See note 51 (Han [1988]) and (Han & Park [1988]). 
 
53. J.C. Han, Y.M. Zhang, and C.P. Lee, “Augmented Heat Transfer in Square Channels with Parallel, Crossed, and V-shaped  
 
      Angled Ribs,” Journal of Heat Transfer, Transactions ASME  113 (1991): 590-596; J.C. Han and Y.M. Zhang, “High  
 
 
      Performance Heat Transfer Ducts with Parallel and V-Shaped Broken Ribs,” International Journal of Heat and Mass  
 
 
      Transfer 35 (1992): 513-523; S.V. Ekkad and J.C. Han, “Detailed Heat Transfer Distributions in Two-Pass Square  
 
 
      Channels with Rib Turbulators,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 40 (1997): 2525-2537; S.V. Ekkad,Y.   
 
      Yuang, and J.C. Han, “Detailed Heat Transfer Distributions in Two-Pass Smooth and Turbulated Square Channels with  
 
 
      Bleed Holes,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 41 (1998):, 3781-3791. 
 
54. S.C. Lau, R.T. Kukreja, and R.D. McMillin, “Effects of V-shaped Rib Arrays on Turbulent Heat Transfer and Friction of   
 
      Fully Developed Flow in a Square Channel,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 34 (1991): 1605-1616.;  
 
 
      M.E. Taslim, T. Li, and D.M. Kercher, “Experimental Heat Transfer and Friction in Channels Roughened with Angled, V-  
 
      Shaped, and Discrete Ribs on Two Opposite Walls,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery, 118 (1996): 20-28; X. Gao and  
 
      B. Suden,  “Heat Transfer and Pressure Drop Measurements in Rib-roughened Rectangular Ducts,” Experimental  
 
 
      Thermal and Fluid Science  24 (2001): 25-34; D.H. Rhee, D.H. Lee, H.H. Cho, and H.K. Moon, “Effects of Duct Aspect   
 
      Ratios on Heat /Mass Transfer with Discrete V-Shaped Ribs,” ASME Paper No. GT2003-38622(2003). 
 
55. H.H. Cho, S.J. Wu, and H.J. Kwon, “Local Heat/Mass Transfer Measurements in a Rectangular Duct with Discrete  
 
 
      Ribs,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery 122 (2000): 579-586; also see note 54 (Rhee, et al.). 
 
56. See note 53 (Han & Zhang). 
 
57. J.C. Han, J.J. Huang, and C.P. Lee, “Augmented Heat Transfer in Square Channels with Wedge-Shaped and Delta-Shaped  
 
     Turbulence Promoters,” Journal of Enhanced Heat Transfer 1 no.1 (1993): 37-52. 
 
58. R.S Bunker and S.J. Osgood, “The Effect of Turbulator Lean on Heat Transfer and Friction in a Square Channel,” ASME   
 
      Paper No. GT-2003-38137 (2003). 
 
59. M.E. Taslim and S.D. Spring, “Effects of Turbulator Proﬁle and Spacing on Heat Transfer and Friction in a Channel,”  
 
 
      AIAA Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer  8 no. 3 (1994): 555-562. 
 
60. J.C. Bailey and R.S. Bunker, “Heat Transfer and Friction in Channels with Very High Blockage 45° Staggered   
 
 
      Turbulators,” ASME Paper No. GT-2003-38611(2003);  M.E. Taslim and S.D. Spring, “Experimental Heat Transfer and   
 
      Friction Factors in Turbulated Cooling Passages of Different Aspect Ratios where Turbulators are Staggered,” AIAA  
 
 
      Paper No. 88-3014, 24th Joint Propulsion Conference (1988). 
 
61. J.R. Shen, Z. Wang, P.T. Ireland, T.V.  Jones,  and A.R. Byerley, “Heat Transfer Enhancement Within a Turbine Blade  
 
 
     Cooling Passage Using Ribs and Combinations of Ribs With Film Cooling Holes,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery   
 
 
     188 (1996): 428-433; D. Thurman and P. Poinsette,  “Experimental Heat Transfer and Bulk Air Temperature  
 
 
 
     Measurements for a Multipass Internal Cooling Model with Ribs and Bleed,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-233 (2000); also  
 
     see note 53 (Ekkad, Huang, and Han). 
 
62. See note 53 (Ekkad, Huang, and Han). 
 
63. See note 61 (Shen, et al.). 
 
64. J.H. Wagner, B.V. Johnson, and F.C. Kopper, “Heat Transfer in Rotating Serpentine Passages With Smooth Walls,” ASME  
 
     Journal of Turbomachinery  113 (1991): 321-330; S. Dutta and J.C. Han,  “Rotational Effects on the Turbine Blade  
 
 
     Coolant Passage Heat Transfer,” Annual Review of Heat Transfer  9 (1997): 269-314.  
 
65. J.C. Han, Y.M. Zhang, and K. Kalkuehler,  “Uneven Wall Temperature Effect on Local Heat Transfer in a Rotating Two-  
 
      Pass Square Channel with Smooth Walls,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer 114 (1993):  850-858.  
 
66.  Ibid. 
 
67. J.A. Parsons, J.C.  Han, and Y.M. Zhang, “Wall Heating Effect on Local Heat Transfer in a Rotating Two-Pass Square  
 
 
     Channel with 90-Degree Rib Turbulators,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer  37 no. 9 (1994):  1411-1420;  
 
     Y.M. Zhang, J.C. Han, J.A. Parsons, and C.P. Lee, “Surface Heating Effect on Local Heat Transfer in a Rotating Two-Pass  
 
     Square Channel with 60-Degree Angled Rib Turbulators,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery 117 (1995):  272-278. 
 
68. S. Acharya, V. Eliades, and D.E. Nikitopoulos, “Heat Transfer Enhancements in Rotating Two-Pass Coolant Channels  
 
 
     with Proﬁled Ribs: Part 1 – Average Results,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-0227 (2000). 
 
69. J.H. Wagner, B.V. Johnson, R.A. Graziani, and F.C. Yeh,  “Heat Transfer in Rotating Serpentine Passages With Trips  
 
 
     Normal to the Flow,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery 114 (1992):  847-857.  
 
70. B.V.  Johnson, J.H. Wagner, G.D. Steuber, and F.C. Yeh, “Heat Transfer in Rotating Serpentine Passages with Trips  
 
 
      Skewed to the Flow,” ASME Paper No. 92-GT-191, ASME Journal of Turbomachinery. 116 (1992): 113-123.  
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

350
 
71. C.W. Park, S.C. Lau, R.T. Kukreja,  “Heat/Mass Transfer in a Rotating Two-Pass Square Channel with Transverse Ribs.”   
 
      AIAA Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer  12 (1998):  80-86; C.W. Park, C. Yoon, S.C. Lau, “Heat (Mass)  
 
 
      Transfer in a Diagonally Oriented Rotating Two-Pass Channels with Rib-Roughened Walls,” ASME Journal of Heat  
 
 
      Transfer 122 (2000): 208-211. 
 
72. B.V. Johnson, J.H. Wagner,G.D. Steuber, and F.C. Yeh, “Heat Transfer in Rotating Serpentine Passages with Selected  
 
 
      Model Orientations for Smooth or Skewed Trip Walls,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  116 (1994):  738-744.  
 
73. J.A. Parsons, J.C. Han, and Y.M. Zhang, “Wall Heating Effect on Local Heat Transfer in a Rotating Two-Pass Square  
 
 
      Channel with 90-Degree Rib Turbulators,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 37 (1994): 1411-1420.  
 
74. S. Dutta and J.C. Han,  “Local Heat Transfer in Rotating Smooth and Ribbed Two-Pass Square Channels With Three  
 
 
      Channel Orientations,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer 118 (1996): 578-584.  
 
75. L. Al-Hadhrami and J.C. Han, “ Effect of Rotation in Two-Pass Square Channels with Parallel and Crossed 45 angled Rib  
 
      Turbulators,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46 (2003):  653-669. 
 
76. J. Guidez, “Study of the Convective Heat Transfer in a Rotating Coolant Channel,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  
 
 
      111(1989):  43-50. 
 
77. C.Y. Soong,, S.T.  Lin, and G.J. Hwang,  “An Experimental Study of Convective Heat Transfer in Radially Rotating  
 
 
      Rectangular Ducts,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer 113 (1991):  604-611. 
 
78. M.E. Taslim, L.A. Bondi, and D.M. Kercher, D.M., “An Experimental Investigation of Heat Transfer in an Orthogonally   
 
      Rotating Channel Roughened with 45 Deg Criss-Cross Ribs on Two Opposite Walls,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery   
 
      113 (1991): 346-353. 
 
79. G.M.S. Azad, J.M. Uddin, J.C. Han, H.K. Moon, and B. Glezer, “Heat Transfer in a Two-Pass Rectangular Rotating  
 
 
      Channel with 45-Degree Angled Rib Turbulators,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  124 (2001): 251-259; L. Al- 
 
 
      Hadhrami, T.S. Grifﬁth, and J.C. Han, “Heat Transfer in Two-Pass Rotating Rectangular Channels (AR=2) with Parallel   
 
      and Crossed 45° V-shaped Rib Turbulators,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer  125 (2002):  232-242. 
 
80. T.S. Grifﬁth, L. Al-Hadhrami, and J.C. Han, “Heat Transfer in Rotating Rectangular Cooling Channels (AR=4) with  
 
 
      Angled Ribs,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer  124 (2001): 617-625. 
 
81. E. Lee, L.M. Wright, and J.C. Han, “Heat Transfer in Rotating Rectangular Channels (AR = 4:1) with V-Shaped and  
 
 
      Angled Rib Turbulators with and without Gaps,” ASME Paper No. GT-2003-38900 (2003). 
 
82. L.M. Wright,W.L. Fu, and J.C. Han, “Thermal Performance of Angled, V-Shaped, and W-Shaped Rib Turbulators in  
 
 
      Rotating Rectangular Cooling Channels (AR=4:1),” ASME Paper No. GT 2004-54073 (2004). 
 
83. H.H. Cho,Y.Y. Kim, K.M. Kim, and D.H. Rhee, “Effects of Rib Arrangements and Rotation Speed on Heat Transfer in a   
 
      Two-Pass Duct,” ASME Paper No. GT 2003-38609 (2003). 
 
84. P. Agarwal, S. Acharya, and D.E. Nikitopoulos, “Heat/Mass Transfer in 1:4 Rectangular Passages with Rotation,” ASME   
 
      Paper No. GT 2003-38615 (2003). 
 
85. W.L. Fu, L.M. Wright, and J.C. Han,  “Heat Transfer in Two-Pass Rotating Rectangular Channels (A=1:2 and AR=1:4)  
 
 
       with Smooth Walls,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer  127 (2005): 209-356; W.L. Fu, L.M. Wright, and J.C. Han, “Heat   
 
       Transfer in Two-Pass Rotating Rectangular Channels (AR=1:2 and AR=1:4) with 45° Angled Rib Turbulators,” ASME   
 
       Paper No. GT 2004-53261 (2004); W.L. Fu, L.M. Wright, and J.C. Han, “Buoyancy Effects on Heat Transfer in Five  
 
 
       Different Aspect-Ratio Rectangular  Channels with Smooth Walls and 45-Degree Ribbed Walls,”  ASME Paper No. GT   
 
       2005-68493 (2005). 
 
86. R.J. Clifford, W.D.  Morris, and S.P. Harasgama, “An Experimental Study of Local and Mean Heat Transfer in a   
 
 
      Triangular-Sectioned Duct Rotating in the Orthogonal Mode,” ASME Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and  
 
      Power  106 (1984): 661-667. 
 
87. S.P. Harasgama and W.D. Morris, “The Inﬂuence of Rotation on the Heat Transfer Characteristics of Circular, Triangular,   
 
      and Square-Sectioned Coolant Passages of Gas Turbine Rotor Blades,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  110 (1988):   
 
      44-50. 
 
88. S. Dutta, J.C. Han, Y.M. Zhang, and C.P. Lee, “Local Heat Transfer in a Rotating Two-Pass Triangular Duct with Smooth   
 
      Walls,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  118 (1996):  435-443; S. Dutta, J.C. Han, and C.P. Lee, “Local Heat Transfer   
 
      in a Rotating Two-Pass Ribbed Triangular Duct with Two Model Orientations,” International Journal of Heat and Mass   
 
      Transfer 39 (1996): 707-715. 
 
89. L. Rathjen, D.K. Hennecke, S. Bock, S., and R. Kleinstuck, “Detailed Heat/Mass Transfer Distributions in a Rotating  
 
 
      Two Pass Coolant Channel with Engine-Near Cross section and Smooth Walls,” in Heat Transfer in Gas Turbine Systems,  
 
      edited by Richard J. Goldstein, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences  934 (2001): 432-439. 
 
90. See note 95. 
 
91. See note 81. 
 
92. See note 85 (ASME Paper No. GT 2005-68493). 
 
93. G. Su, H.C. Chen, J.C. Han, and D. Heidmann, “Computation of Flow and Heat Transfer in Two-Pass Rotating   
 
 
      Rectangular Channels (AR=1:1, AR=1:2, AR=1:4) with 45-Deg Angled Ribs by a Reynolds Stress Turbulence Model,”   
 
      ASME Paper No. GT2004-53662 (2004). 
 
94. See note 85. 
 
95. Ibid.
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

351
 
96. Ibid. 
 
97. C. Prakash and R. Zerkle, “Prediction of Turbulent Flow and Heat Transfer in a Radially Rotating Square Duct,” ASME   
 
      Journal of Turbomachinery  117 (1992):  255-261. 
 
98. Y.L. Lin, T.I-P  Shih, M.A.  Stephens, and M.K. Chyu, “A Numerical Study of Flow and Heat Transfer in a Smooth and   
 
      Ribbed U-Duct With and Without Rotation,” ASME Journal of Heat Transfer 123 no. 2 (2001): 219-232. 
 
99. H.C. Chen, Y.J.  Jang, and J.C. Han, “Computation of Flow and Heat Transfer in Rotating Two-Pass Square Channels by   
 
      a Reynolds Stress Model,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 43 no. 9 (2000): 1603-1616; H.C. Chen, Y.J.   
 
      Jang, and J.C. Han, “Near-Wall Second-Moment Closure for Rotating Multiple-Pass Cooling Channels,” AIAA Journal of  
 
      Thermophysics and Heat Transfer 14 no. 2 (2000): 201-209. 
 
100. Y.J. Jang, H.C. Chen, and J.C. Han, “Flow and Heat Transfer in a Rotating Square Channel with 45-Degree Angled Ribs  
 
        by Reynolds Stress Turbulence Model,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  123 no. 1 (2001): 124-132. 
 
101. M. Al-Qahtani,Y.J. Jang, H.C. Chen, and J.C. Han, “Prediction of Flow and Heat Transfer in Rotating Two-Pass  
 
 
        Rectangular Channels with 45-Degree Rib turbulators,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  124 ( April, 2002): 242-250. 
 
102. G. Su, S. Tang, H.C. Chen, and J.C. Han, “Flow and Heat Transfer Computations in Rotating Rectangular Channels with  
 
        V-Shaped Ribs,” AIAA Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer  18 no. 4 (2004): 534-547.  
 
103. See note 101. 
 
104. See note 93. 
 
105. D.K. Lezius and J.P. Johnston, “Roll-Cell Instabilities in Rotating Laminar and Turbulent Channel Flows,” Journal of  
 
 
        Fluid Mechanics  77 (1976): 153-175. 
 
106. M. Elfert, “The Effect of Rotation and Buoyancy on Flow Development in a Rotating Circular Coolant Channel,” 2nd  
 
 
        International Symposium on Engineering Turbulence Modeling and Measurements, May 31-June 2, 1993, Florence,  
 
 
        Italy. 
 
107. D.G.N. Tse and D.B. McGrath, “A Combined Experimental/Computational Study of Flow in Turbine Blade Cooling  
 
 
        Passage. Part I: Experimental Study,” ASME Paper No. 95-GT-355 (1995). 
 
108. D.G.N. Tse  and G.D. Steuber, “Flow in a Rotating Square Serpentine Coolant Passage with Skewed Trips,” ASME  
 
 
        Paper No. 97-GT-529 (1997). 
 
109. S.C. Cheah, H. Iacovides, D.C. Jackson, H.  Ji,,and B.E. Launder, “LDA Investigation of the Flow Development through 
 
        Rotating U-Ducts,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  118 (1996):  590-595. 
 
110. J.P. Bons and J.L. Kerrebrock,, “Complementary Velocity and Heat Transfer Measurements in a Rotating Cooling  
 
 
        Passage with Smooth Walls,” ASME Paper No. 98-GT-464 (1998). 
 
111. J. Schabacker, A. Bolcs, and B.V. Johnson,  “PIV Investigation of the Flow Characteristics in an Internal Coolant  
 
 
       Passage with 45° Rib Arrangement,” ASME Paper No. GT 99-120 (1999); D. Chanteloup, Y. Yuaneda, and A. Bolcs,  
 
 
       “Combined 3D Flow and Heat Transfer Measurements in a 2-pass Internal Coolant Passage of Gas Turbine Airfoil,”  
 
 
       ASME Paper No. GT 2002-30214 (2002). 
 
112. S.Y.  Son, K.D. Kihm, and J.C. Han, “PIV Flow Measurements for Heat Transfer Characterization in Two-Pass Square   
 
       Channels with Smooth and 90-degree Ribbed Walls,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 45 no. 24 (2002):   
 
       4809-4822. 
 
113. T.M. Liou and C.C. Chen, “LDV Study of Developing Flows through a Smooth Duct with a 180 Deg Straight-Corner  
 
 
        Turn,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery 121 (1999): 167-174. 
 
114. T.M. Liou, M.Y. Chen, and  M.H. Tsai, “Fluid Flow and Heat Transfer in a Rotating Two-Pass Square Duct with In-Line  
 
        90° Ribs,” ASME Paper No. GT 2001-0185 (2001). 
 
115. T.M. Liou, M.Y. Chen, and Y.M. Wang,  “Heat Transfer, Fluid Flow, and Pressure Measurements inside a Rotating Duct   
 
       with Detached 90° Ribs,” ASME Paper No. GT 2002-30201(2002). 
 
116. Liou, T. M., and Dai, G. Y., 2003, “Pressure and Flow Characteristics in a Rotating Two-Pass Square Duct with 45 Deg   
 
        Angled Ribs,” ASME Paper No. GT 2003-38346. 
 
117. T.M. Liou, Y.S.  Hwang, and Y.C. Li, “Flowﬁeld and Pressure Measurements in a Rotating Two-Pass Duct with  
 
 
       Staggered Rounded Ribs Skewed 45° to the Flow,” ASME Paper No. GT 2004-53173 (2004). 
 
118. See notes 116 and 117. 
 
119. A.H. Epstein, J.L. Kerrebrock, J.J. Koo, and U.Z. Preiser, “Rotational Effects on Impingement Cooling,” GTL Report  
 
 
       No. 184 (1985).  
 
120. C.H. Mattern and D.K. Hennecke, “The Inﬂuence of Rotation on Impingement Cooling,” ASME Paper No. 96-GT-161   
 
        (1996).  
 
121. B. Glezer, H.K. Moon, J. Kerrebrock, J.Bons, and G. Guenette, “Heat Transfer in a Rotating Radial Channel with  
 
 
        Swirling Internal Flow,” ASME Paper No. 98-GT-214 (1998). 
 
122. J.A. Parsons, J.C. Han, and C.P. Lee,  “Rotation Effect on Jet Impingement Heat Transfer in Smooth Rectangular  
 
 
       Channels with Four Heated Walls and Radially Outward Crossﬂow,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery 120 (1998): 79-  
 
       85.  
 
123. K.V. Akella and J.C. Han, “Impingement Cooling in Rotating Two-Pass Rectangular Channels,” AIAA Journal of  
 
 
        Thermophysics and Heat Transfer  12 no. 4 (1998): 582-588.
Je-Chin Han and Lesley M. Wright

352
352
 
124. J.A. Parsons and J.C. Han, “Rotation Effect on Jet Impingement Heat Transfer in Smooth Rectangular Channels with  
 
 
        Heated Target Walls and Film Coolant Extraction,” ASME Paper No. 96-WA/HT-9 (1996). 
 
125. K.V. Akella and J.C. Han, “Impingement Cooling in Rotating Two-Pass Rectangular Channels with Ribbed Walls,”  
 
 
        AIAA Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer 13 no. 3 (1999): 364-371.
 
126. J.A. Parsons, J.C.  Han, and C.P. Lee, “Rotation Effect on Jet Impingement Heat Transfer in Smooth Rectangular  
 
 
        Channels with Four Heated Walls and Film Coolant Extraction,” ASME Paper No. GT-2003-28905 (2003). 
 
127. F.T. Willett and A.E. Bergles, “Heat Transfer in Rotating Narrow Rectangular Ducts with Heated Sides Oriented at 60-  
 
        Degree to the R-Z Plane,” ASME Paper No. 2000-GT-224 (2000); F.T. Willett and A.E. Bergles, “Heat Transfer in  
 
 
        Rotating Narrow Rectangular Pin-Fin Ducts,” Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science  25 (2002): 573-582.
 
128. L.M. Wright, E. Lee, and J.C. Han,, “Effect of Rotation on Heat Transfer in Narrow Rectangular Cooling Channels 
 
       (AR = 8:1 and 4:1) with Pin-Fins,” ASME Paper No. GT 2003-38340 (2003). 
 
129. F. Zhou and S. Acharya,, “Mass/Heat Transfer in Dimpled Two-Pass Coolant Passages with Rotation,” Heat Transfer in   
 
       Gas Turbine Systems, ed., R. J. Goldstein, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 934 (2001): 424-431.
 
130. T.S. Grifﬁ th, L. Al-Hadhrami, and J.C. Han, “Heat Transfer in Rotating Rectangular Cooling Channels (AR = 4) with  
 
 
        Dimples,” ASME Journal of Turbomachinery  125 (2003): 555-563.
4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes

4.2.2.2 Enhanced Internal Cooling of Turbine Blades and Vanes
Je-Chin Han
Turbine Heat Transfer Laboratory
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas 77843-3123
phone: (979) 845-3738
email: jc-han@tamu.edu
Dr. Han is presently the Marcus Easterling Endowed Chair Professor at Texas A & M University. 
He has been working on many turbine blade cooling projects since 1980, including innovative 
cooling concepts, rotor coolant passage heat transfer, unsteady high turbulance effects on blade 
ﬁ lm cooling and turbine edge cooling (leading edge, trailing edge, blade tip, and end-wall regions). 
This research has been on both aircraft engines and industrial gas turbine applications funded by 
NASA- Glenn, GE - aircraft engines, DOE - AGTSR + UTSR, and Siemens Westinghouse.  He is 
the co-author of more than 150 referreed journal papers and one book in gas turbine heat transfer 
and cooling technology.  He has been doing research on gas turbine blade cooling for more than 
25 years.
BIOGRAPHY  

Lesley M. Wright
Turbine Heat Transfer Laboratory
Department of Mechanical 
Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas 77843-3123
phone: (979) 845-1767
email: lesleywright@neo.tamu.edu
Lesley Wright is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Texas A&M 
University.  She joined the Turbine Heat Transfer Laboratory in September of 2001 after obtaining 
her B.S. in Engineering from Arkansas State University.  While experimentally investigating the 
effect of rotation on internal gas turbine blade heat transfer, she earned her M.S. in Mechanical 
Engineering from Texas A&M in May of 2003.  Lesley continues to study both internal and 
external turbine blade heat transfer; in addition, she is considering new experimental methods and 
their application to better understand gas turbine heat transfer and cooling techniques. 
