217
217
3.2.1.2 
Lean Pre-Mixed Combustion
3.2.1.2-1 Introduction
 
Gas turbine designers are continually challenged to improve cycle efﬁ ciency 
while maintaining or reducing emissions.  This challenge is made more difﬁ cult by 
the fact that these are often conﬂ icting goals.  The path to improved efﬁ ciency is 
higher working ﬂ uid temperatures, but higher temperatures promote NOx formation 
and at 2,800 F the threshold for thermal NOx formation is reached.  Furthermore, 
reducing available oxygen to reduce NOx can result in higher carbon monoxide (CO) 
and unburned hydrocarbon emissions due to incomplete combustion.  Moreover, 
increasing ﬁ ring temperatures above 2,350 F represents a signiﬁ cant materials science 
challenge.1
 
To achieve lower pollutant emission rates, a variety of pre-formation and post-
formation control technologies have been utilized either individually or in combination, 
including:
• 
Wet controls (water or steam injection)
• 
Dry combustion controls (lean combustion, reduced residence time, lean 
premixed combustion,  and two-stage rich/lean combustion)
• 
Selective catalytic reduction
• 
SCONOX catalytic absorption
• 
Catalytic combustion (e.g. Xonontm )
• 
Rich Quench Lean Combustors
• 
CO oxidation catalysts
 
This section of the Handbook focuses on Lean Premixed (LPM) combustion, 
a pre-formation control strategy that has become the standard technique employed 
by gas turbine original equipment manufacturers (OEM), particularly for natural gas 
applications. 
 
OEMs have developed processes that use air as a diluent to reduce combustion 
ﬂ ame temperatures and reduce NOx by premixing fuel and air before they enter the 
combustor.  This lean premixed combustion process is referred to by a variety of trade 
names including General Electric’s and Siemens-Westinghouse’s Dry Low NOx (DLN) 
processes, Rolls-Royce’s Dry Low Emissions (DLE) process and Solar Turbines’ SoLo 
NOx process.  When ﬁ ring natural gas, most of the commercially available systems are 
guaranteed to reduce NOx emissions within the 15 to 25 parts per million by volume, 
dry (ppmvd) range, depending on the OEM, turbine model and application.  A few 
OEM’s have guaranteed single digit NOx emissions.
3.2.1.2-2 Emissions Overview
 
The primary pollutants emitted by gas turbine engines are NOx, CO and to a 
lesser extent, unburned hydrocarbons (UHC).  Sulfur dioxide, particulate matter (PM) 
and trace amounts of hazardous air pollutants may also be present when liquid fuels are 
ﬁ red.  
 
Both CO and UHC are the products of incomplete combustion.  Given 
sufﬁ cient time and at high enough temperatures, these two pollutants will be further 
oxidized to carbon dioxide and water. In the proposed standards of performance for new 
stationary combustion turbines (40 CFR 60, subpart KKKK, dated February 18, 2005), 
EPA states, “Turbine manufacturers have signiﬁ cantly reduced CO emissions from 
combustion turbines by developing lean premix technology.  Lean premix combustion 
design not only produces lower NOx than diffusion ﬂ ame technology, but also lowers 
CO and volatile organic compounds (VOC), due to increased combustion efﬁ ciency.”2
The proposed rulemaking concludes that “Stationary combustion turbines do not 
contribute signiﬁ cantly to ambient CO levels.”3 Accordingly, the primary pollutant of 
concern from gas turbines continues to be NOx.
 
There are two sources of NOx emissions in the exhaust of a gas turbine.  Most 
of the NOx is generated by the ﬁ xation of atmospheric nitrogen in the ﬂ ame, which is 
called thermal NOx.  Thermal NOx production rates fall sharply as either the combustion 
temperature decreases, or as the fuel to air ratio decreases.  Nitrogen oxides are also 
generated by the conversion of a fraction of any nitrogen chemically bound in the fuel. 
Emissions of NOx from fuel bound nitrogen are insigniﬁ cant when ﬁ ring natural gas, 
but must be considered when ﬁ ring lower quality distillates and syngas.4
William R. Bender
Technology & Management 
Services, Inc.
Gaithersburg, MD 20879
phone: (301) 670-6390 x144
email: wbender@tms-hq.com

218
3.2.1.2-3 Regulatory Overview
 
In the late 1970s, EPA established New Source Performance Standards (NSPS) for gas turbines (40CFR60, subpart GG) that 
limited NOx emissions from large utility gas turbines to 75 ppmvd (parts per million by volume, dry) when ﬁring natural gas.  In the 1980s, 
with the implementation of Best Available Control Technology (BACT), NOx emission limitations on gas were reduced to 42 ppmvd. 
With the implementation of EPA’s “top down” BACT strategy, NOx emissions further decreased to 25 ppmvd.  A recent search of EPAs 
RACT/BACT/LAER Clearinghouse data (years 2000 to 2005) for natural gas-ﬁred combustion turbines greater than 25 MW conﬁrms the 
trend towards single digit NOx emissions.
3.2.1.2-4 Combustion Principles
Fuel to Air Ratio
 
A signiﬁcant parameter used to characterize combustion is the fuel to air ratio (f/a), expressed either on a volume or mass basis.5 
With precisely enough air to theoretically consume all of the fuel, combustion is referred to as having a “stoichiometric” f/a ratio.  Adding 
more air produces combustion that is fuel-lean, and adding less air produces combustion that is fuel-rich.  Because differing fuels have 
different stoichiometric f/a ratios, it is convenient to normalize the f/a ratio by the stoichiometric value, producing the term equivalence 
ratio Ø:
Ø =  
(f/a)actual   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
          (1)
 
 
(f/a)stoich 
 
(Source: note 5 - G.A. Richards, et al, p. 143)
By referring to the equivalence ratio, combustion using different types of fuel is readily described as lean if Ø < 1 or rich if Ø > 1.
Flame Temperature
 
Another important combustion parameter is the ﬂame temperature.  Flame temperatures are determined by a balance of energy 
between reactants and products.  In principal, the highest ﬂame temperatures would be produced at Ø = 1, because all of the fuel and 
oxygen would be consumed.  In practice, the effects of species dissociation and heat capacity shift the peak temperature to slightly above 
stoichiometric (Ø ~ 1.05).  
 
Fuel type is important in determining the ﬂame temperature.  To provide a sense of magnitude, the list below compares calculated 
adiabatic ﬂame temperatures of two hydrocarbons, CO and H2.  This list applies to stoichiometric combustion in ambient air:
Table 1: Compared adiabatic ﬂame temperature calculations.
Species
Formula
Adiabatic Flame Temperature (K)
Methane
CH4
2223
Propane
C3H8
2261
Carbon Monoxide
CO
2381
Hydrogen
H2
2370
* Source: note 5 - G.A. Richards, et al, p. 144
 
It should be noted that the methane ﬂame temperature is approximately 150 K lower than hydrogen and CO.  This distinction 
makes it somewhat easier to produce low-emissions from natural gas, which is mostly methane, compared to syngases containing undiluted 
H2 and CO.
3.2.1.2-5 Combustor Designs
Diffusion Flames
 
The combustion process in a gas turbine can be classiﬁed as diffusion ﬂame combustion or lean-premix staged combustion.6 
In diffusion ﬂame combustion, both fuel and oxidizer are supplied to the reaction zone in an unmixed state. The fuel/air mixing and 
combustion take place simultaneously in the primary combustion zone.  This generates regions of near-stoichiometric fuel/air mixtures 
where the temperatures are very high.
 
At the beginning of gas turbine development, the primary design goal was to optimize performance while complying with 
applicable emission requirements.  Initially, emphasis was placed on maximizing combustion efﬁciency while minimizing the emission of 
unburned hydrocarbons and CO.  It was possible to fully realize these design goals by providing the diffusion ﬂame with a relatively high 
combustion chamber volume in which all chemical reactions were allowed to take place completely without the addition of dilution air. 
To enable the mixing process to occur rapidly and to achieve a uniform temperature in the primary zone, several burners were arranged 
in a common ﬂame tube.  This combustion chamber design yielded optimum thermodynamic properties with low pressure losses and a 
combustion efﬁciency of practically 100 percent.

219
Bill Bender
 
In the early 1970’s, when emission controls were introduced, the pollutant of primary concern to regulators shifted to NOx. 
For the relatively low levels of NOx reduction initially required, the injection of water or steam into the combustion zone produced the 
required reduction in NOx emissions with minimal performance impact.  In addition, the emissions of other pollutants (CO, VOC) did not 
increase signiﬁcantly.
 
To comply with the greater NOx reduction requirements imposed during the 1980’s, further attempts were made to utilize 
increased quantities of water/steam injection to ensure compliance.  These attempts proved detrimental to cycle performance and part 
lives, and the emission rates for other pollutants also began to rise signiﬁcantly.  Other control methodologies needed to be developed, 
which led to the introduction of the LPM combustor.
Lean Premixed (LPM) Combustion
 
The Gas Turbine Association deﬁnes Lean Premix 
Stationary Combustion Turbine as “Lean premixed stationary 
combustion turbine means any stationary combustion 
turbine designed to operate at base load with the air and fuel 
thoroughly mixed to form a lean mixture before delivery to the 
combustor.7  Mixing may occur before or in the combustion 
chamber.  A lean premixed turbine may operate in diffusion 
ﬂame mode during operating conditions such as startup 
and shutdown, low or transient loads and cold ambient.”8 
Premixing prevents local “hot spots” within the combustor 
volume that can lead to signiﬁcant NOx formation.  
 
In LPM systems, atmospheric nitrogen (from 
the combustion air) acts as a diluent, as fuel is mixed with 
air upstream of the combustor at deliberately fuel-lean 
conditions.  The f/a ratio typically approaches one-half of the 
ideal stoichiometric level, meaning that approximately twice 
as much air is supplied as is actually needed to burn the fuel. 
This excess air is a key to limiting NOx formation, as very 
lean conditions cannot produce the high temperatures that 
create thermal NOx.
 
Design of a successful LPM combustor requires the 
development of hardware features and operational methods 
that simultaneously allow the equivalence ratio and residence 
time in the ﬂame zone to be low enough to achieve low NOx 
emissions, but with acceptable levels of combustion dynamics, 
stability at part-load conditions and sufﬁcient residence time 
for CO burnout.9
 
In principle, the LPM strategy is quite simple: keep 
the combustion process lean at all operating conditions.  In 
practice, this is not easily achieved.  If the engine is already 
near the limit of lean operation at full power, it is not possible 
to reduce the combustor temperature rise on all of the fuel 
injectors, because the ﬂame will be extinguished.  To solve 
this problem, some of the fuel or air must be rerouted (or 
staged) to keep the ﬂame within its operating boundaries. 
Typically, engine designers use either fuel or air staging to 
accomplish this goal.   Fuel staging can be accomplished 
either radially or axially.  Examples of radial staging include 
the use of pilot ﬂames or reducing/eliminating fuel from some 
injectors completely.  Axial staging injects fuel at two places 
along the combustion gas ﬂowpath.  Products from the ﬁrst 
combustion zone are mixed with fuel and air in a subsequent 
combustion zone, providing an advantage for lean operation 
of the second zone.  Finally, some engine designs use air 
staging (also known as variable geometry) to accomplish the 
goal of maintaining low ﬂame temperatures.  This approach 
can maintain the desired combustion zone temperature at all 
operating conditions, but adds the complexity of controlling 
the large volume ﬂow of combustion air.
Fig. 1.  Dry Low NOx Combustor 
 
Source: note 6, Davis & Black, p. 3, Figure 5.
Fig. 2.  Fuel-Staged Dry Low NOx Operating Modes 
 
Source: note 6, Davis & Black, p.4, Figure 6.

220
3.2.1.2 Lean Pre-Mixed Combustion
 
GEs Dry Low NOx system, as described in note 7 (L.B. Davis), has been selected to illustrate the evolution and operation of a 
LPM staged combustion system in response to regulatory changes and efﬁciency upgrades.  The GE Dry Low NOx (DLN-1) combustor 
shown in ﬁgure 1 is a two-stage premixed combustor designed for use with natural gas and capable of operation on liquid fuel.  
 
As shown, the combustion system includes four major components: fuel injector system, liner, venture, and cap/centerbody 
assembly.  These components form two stages in the combustor.  In the premixed mode, the ﬁrst stage thoroughly mixes the fuel and 
air and delivers a uniform, lean, unburned fuel-air mixture to the second stage. The DLN-1 system operates in four distinct modes, 
illustrated in ﬁgure 2:
Modes of Operation for the DLN-1 system
• 
Primary – Fuel to the primary nozzles only.  Flame is in the primary stage only.  This mode of operation is used to ignite, 
accelerate, and operate the machine over low- to mid-loads, up to a preselected combustion reference temperature.
• 
Lean-Lean – Fuel to both the primary and secondary nozzles.  Flame is in both the primary and secondary stages.  This mode 
of operation is used for intermediate loads between two pre-selected combustion reference temperatures.
• 
Secondary – Fuel to the secondary nozzle only.  Flame is in the secondary zone only.  This mode is a transition state between 
lean-lean and premix modes.  This mode is necessary to extinguish the ﬂame in the primary zone, before fuel is reintroduced 
into what becomes the primary premixing zone.
• 
Premix – Fuel to both primary and secondary nozzles.  Flame is in the secondary stage only.  This mode of operation is achieved 
at and near the combustion reference temperature design point.  Optimum emissions are generated in premix mode.
 
At loads less than 20 percent of baseload, NOx and CO emissions from the DLN-1 were similar to those from standard (diffusion) 
combustion systems.
 
Other OEM’s offer similar systems, with the notable exception being Alstom.  Alstom’s sequential combustion DLN technology 
was developed originally by ABB for the GT24 and GT26 gas turbines.  Combustion takes place in the primary DLN combustor (EVtm) 
followed by fuel addition in a second (SEVtm) combustion chamber located aft of the ﬁrst row of turbine blades.  This DLN technology 
was commercialized in 1997 and applies the thermodynamic reheat principal.  The sequential combustion provides low NOx emissions 
due to the fact that the SEVtm combustor does not contribute to NOx production.10
 
The OEM’s continually strive to improve performance while complying with increasingly restrictive emissions requirements. 
As F-technology gas turbines became available in the late 1980s with their higher ﬁring temperatures, the OEMs were forced to redesign 
their DLN systems to maintain emissions at acceptable levels (~25ppmvd).  Studies conducted by GE concluded that air usage in the 
combustor other than for mixing with fuel would have to be strictly limited.  A design that repackaged DLN-1 premixing technology but 
eliminated the venture and centerbody assemblies that required cooling air was implemented and called DLN-2.  The DLN-2 combustion 
system is a single-stage dual-mode combustor that can operate on both gaseous and liquid fuels.  On gas, the combustor operates in a 
diffusion mode at low loads (< 50 percent load) and in a premixed mode at higher loads.  Oil operation on the DLN-2 combustor is in 
the diffusion mode across the entire load range, with diluent injection used for NOx control.  The DLN-2 combustor system has a single 
burning zone formed by the liner and the cap face.  In low emissions operation, 90 percent of the gas fuel is injected through radial 
gas injection spokes in the premixer, and combustion air is mixed with the fuel in tubes surrounding each of the ﬁve fuel nozzles.  The 
premixer tubes are part of the cap assembly.  The fuel and air are thoroughly mixed, ﬂow out of the ﬁve tubes at high velocity and enter 
the burning zone, where lean, low NOx combustion occurs.  The vortex breakdown from the swirling ﬂow exiting the premixers, along 
with the sudden expansion in the liner, are mechanisms for ﬂame stabilization.
 
In the early 1990s, continued regulatory pressures led the OEMs to develop 9 ppm combustion systems.  During this time, 
GE introduced the DLN-2.6 combustor for the Frame 7FA machine which allowed for approximately 6 percent additional air to pass 
through the premixers in the combustor.  The change in air splits was accomplished through reductions in cap and liner cooling air 
ﬂows, requiring increased cooling effectiveness.  A key feature of the DLN-2.6 combustor was the addition of a sixth burner, located in 
the center of the ﬁve DLN-2 burners.  By fueling the center nozzle separately from the outer nozzles, the f/a ratio could be modulated 
relative to the outer nozzles.  Another key feature of the DLN-2.6 combustor was the elimination of the diffusion mode, which required 
additional loading and unloading strategies.
 
GE’s H systemtm combustor called DLN-2.5 uses a simpliﬁed combustion mode staging scheme to achieve low emissions 
over the premixed load range.  The most signiﬁcant feature associated with this variant is that there are only three combustion modes: 
diffusion, piloted premix, and full premix.11
 
The modiﬁcations required to reduce the emissions from the Siemens Westinghouse 15 ppm DLN combustor to 9 ppm are 
predominately the use of a premixed pilot and support housing design changes.12  
3.2.1.2-6 LPM Technological Challenges
CO/NOx Tradeoff 
 
Since the optimum ﬂame temperature of a LPM combustor is designed to be near the lean ﬂammability limit, LPM combustor 
performance is characterized by a CO/ NOx tradeoff (ﬁgure 3).13  At the combustor design point, both CO and NOx are below target 
levels; however, deviations from the design point ﬂame temperature cause emissions to increase.  A reduction in temperature tends to 
increase CO emissions due to incomplete combustion.  Conversely, an increase in temperature will increase thermal NOx formation.

221
Bill Bender
 
The CO/NOx trade-off must be addressed 
during part-load operation when the combustor is 
required to run at an even leaner condition overall.  The 
tradeoff also comes into play in development efforts 
to reduce LPM combustor NOx emissions by further 
reducing the primary zone design point temperature.
Cold Ambient Temperatures
 
Below 
an 
OEM’s 
speciﬁed 
ambient 
temperature threshold (0 F or -20 F), emission rate 
warranties are generally not offered.  LPM turbines 
have demonstrated reliable operation below the ambient 
temperature warranty level, but the impact on the 
emissions signature is not well documented.  Emissions 
below the threshold can be impacted by speciﬁc engine 
control adjustments needed to maintain combustion 
stability and prevent oscillations.  The most commonly 
deployed control system is to increase the pilot fuel 
level, which increases NOx and CO emissions.
 
As a solution to extending the ambient 
temperature warranty range, OEMs are collecting cold 
ambient data in an effort to improve designs.  In the 
interim, many OEMs offer the option to incorporate an 
inlet air heating system as part of the design package.  
Low and Transient Load Operation
 
Low load or transient load events can affect the emissions performance of LPM gas turbines because of engine controls 
required to prevent combustor ﬂameout.  To prevent the formation of NOx, LPM combustors are designed to operate close to engine 
ﬂameout temperatures when compared to conventional combustors.  When load is reduced to a low level or increased/decreased rapidly, 
it is necessary to augment combustor ﬂame stability to prevent ﬂameout.  Most OEMs augment combustor ﬂame stability through a fuel 
distribution adjustment such as the addition of pilot fuel.  The addition of pilot fuel creates a diffusion ﬂame, which increases NOx, CO, 
and VOC emissions.
 
When operating at sustained low load conditions, CO emissions may increase signiﬁcantly as a result of incomplete combustion. 
Due to the lower temperatures in a LPM combustor at low loads and the introduction of pilot fuel, a rich stoichiometric fuel mixture 
results accompanied by incomplete combustion.  
3.2.1.2-7 LPM Future Developments 
 
Manufacturers continue to develop LPM gas turbine combustion as the preferred approach to meet future emission requirements.14 
From a life cycle cost perspective, preventing pollutant formation has been shown to be more cost effective than the use of post-
combustion techniques.  Work is in progress using the latest experimental and analytical tools to improve emissions and operating 
ﬂexibility of LPM systems.  
Combustor Liner
 
LPM combustor liner cooling methods can have a signiﬁcant effect on emissions.  The current generation of LPM combustors 
employs a variety of liner cooling methods including ﬁlm cooling (louver or effusion) and backside cooling.  Many ﬁrst generation 
LPM turbines use ﬁlm cooling to maintain acceptably low combustor wall temperatures, but many manufacturers have or will make the 
transition to backside-cooled technology with their next generation of LPM turbines.
 
Backside-cooled liners have been in use for some commercial products for several years.  Compared to ﬁlm cooling, backside 
cooled liners forego cooling air injection completely.  Instead, combustor wall temperatures are controlled solely through convective 
cooling by a high velocity airstream on the cold side of the liner.  In most instances, the high heat ﬂux from the ﬂame requires augmenting 
the backside convective process to keep the liner wall temperatures from becoming excessive.  Turbulators in the form of trip strips, 
ﬁns, and pins act to increase the cooling ﬂow turbulence at the liner wall and augment the heat removal process.  Those OEMs already 
utilizing backside cooling will optimize its design in order to warranty lower NOx levels.
Fig. 3.  NOx Production Rate 
 
Source: note 4, Pavri & Moore, p. 17, Figure 20.

222
3.2.1.2 Lean Pre-Mixed Combustion
Fuel Injectors
 
Incorporating LPM combustion into gas turbines also required signiﬁcant change to the fuel injectors.  LPM fuel injectors are 
signiﬁcantly larger than conventional injectors due to the higher air ﬂow through the injector swirlers and the required volume of the 
premixing chamber used to mix fuel and air.  Both axial and radial swirlers have been used by the OEM’s to swirl the premix air.  Fuel 
is injected either through the swirler vanes or fuel spokes.  Most LPM fuel injector designs include a pilot fuel injection point.  A pilot 
ﬂame is used to stabilize engine operation during load transients and low load operation.
 
Fuel injectors are being optimized to improve f/a mixing and reduce local hot spots while improving ﬂame stability.  Achieving 
an optimum f/a temperature proﬁle exiting the injector is essential.  Design modiﬁcations to the fuel injection points and the air swirler 
are being investigated both computationally and experimentally.
Combustor Air Management
 
Several combustor air management systems have been employed in LPM combustion systems to avoid combustor ﬂameout 
and expand the low emissions operating range.  Each technique ultimately provides control of the primary zone airﬂow to maintain the 
primary zone f/a ratio near its optimum low emissions level during part-load operation.
Casing air bleed
 
Some two-shaft gas turbines used for gas compression and mechanical drive bleed air from the combustor casing at part load. 
The case bleed method of variable geometry has proven effective in controlling CO emissions.  A consequence of air bleed, however, 
is deterioration in engine part-load thermal efﬁciency, since compressed bleed air no longer enters the turbine section of the engine to 
produce power.
Inlet guide vanes
 
Some gas turbines used for power generation maintain optimum primary zone f/a ratios by modulating the compressor inlet 
guide vanes (IGV).  Closing the IGVs reduces the airﬂow through the engine compressor and combustor.  Regulating IGVs for single-
shaft engines to control combustor airﬂow has a very small reduction in part-load thermal efﬁciency.  
Combustor/Injector staging
 
To enhance stability, some LPM turbines use fuel injection in multiple axial stages, with airﬂow to the additional stages being 
variable. Other LPM designs use multiple injector heads ﬁred as a function of load.
Control Systems
 
The control system for LPM engines modulates the air and fuel management systems to keep the combustion primary zone 
temperature within a speciﬁed range while maintaining acceptable engine turn-down and low-load operating stability.  Accurate control 
of the primary zone temperature is critical to controlling NOx and CO emissions, which is typically accomplished through power turbine 
inlet temperature as an indirect measurement of the combustor exit or turbine inlet temperature.
3.2.1.2-8 Dual Fuel Operation
 
Many gas turbine installations require operation on both gaseous and liquid fuels without affecting operability or environmental 
performance.15  Liquid fuels are more difﬁcult to mix and pose difﬁculties in achieving homogeneous f/a mixture distribution that is 
required for low- NOx combustion.
 
 
Testing has shown that the pre-mixer enabled comparable environmental performance with both natural gas and No. 
2 diesel fuel at representative temperatures and pressures.
3.2.1.2-9 Fuel Variability Concerns
 
The Advanced Turbine Systems (ATS) program has produced signiﬁcant advances in combustion technology.16  Careful 
development of premix systems allows state-of-the-art combustors to operate with NOx levels approaching single digit performance. 
Although this progress is notable, reliable attainment of ultra-low emissions is contingent upon tight control of manufactured components, 
engine operating parameters, and fuel speciﬁcations.  Failure to operate a premix combustor within planned speciﬁcations can lead to 
problems that range failure to meet emissions targets to hardware failure caused by ﬂashback or oscillating dynamics.  This sensitive 
behavior presents a challenge for expanded deployment of low-emission combustors that have been optimized almost exclusively for 
operation on natural gas fuel.  The desire to operate such combustors on various fuels or in unique engine cycles (e.g., highly humidiﬁed 
cycles, biomass gasiﬁcation combined cycles) poses a new set of constraints for low-emission operation.  

223
Hydrogen
 
Pathways to “zero” emissions power plants include the utilization of hydrogen directly as a fuel.  Because of its high combustion 
temperature, the development of hydrogen-fueled turbines with comparable performance to natural gas is problematic.  Stable, efﬁcient, 
low- NOx combustion requires rapid, homogeneous mixing of fuel and air, which is a challenge when ﬁring natural gas and made far 
more difﬁcult with highly reactive hydrogen.
Medium Heating Value Fuel
 
A common source for medium heating value fuel (200 to 800 Btu/scf) is oxygen-blown gasiﬁcation of coal or residual oil. 
Because these gases are “manufactured” from other fuels, they are commonly referred to as synthesis gas, or syngas fuels and typically 
contain signiﬁcant quantities of H2 and CO.  Compared to natural gas, the stoichiometry of these gas mixtures requires a smaller volume 
of air for complete combustion, producing higher ﬂame temperatures.  As a further complication, H2 has a very high ﬂame speed and 
very short ignition delay.  Thus it is very difﬁcult to avoid ﬂashback or autoignition in a premixed burner.  The standard approach to 
premixing is unlikely to work for these fuels.
Low Heating Value Fuel
 
For gas turbines, the usual source of low heating-value fuel (~200 Btu/scf) is air-blown gasiﬁcation of coal or biomass 
gasiﬁcation. A signiﬁcant feature of low-heating value fuels is that they often contain ammonia which can greatly complicate NOx 
reduction.  Because of the high dilution level, these fuels have lower ﬂame temperatures and lower ﬂame speeds than natural gas or 
medium heating-value fuels.  From the standpoint of thermal NOx emissions, this is an advantage.  Because the volume of fuel ﬂow is so 
great, the combustor aerodynamics are signiﬁcantly affected and must be re-designed.  This may impact low-emission backup operation 
on conventional fuels.  CO oxidation is also a concern.
3.2.1.2-10 Background Information
Regulatory Overview
Clean Air Act
 
Congress enacted the Clean Air Act (CAA) in 1970 to address growing concerns over the nation’s air quality.17  As a result of 
the Act, national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS) were established for criteria pollutants.  Areas of the country that exceed the 
NAAQS are considered “non-attainment for that pollutant.  The U.S. regulatory structure imposes more stringent air pollution control 
programs in non-attainment areas.  The CAA is a Federal law covering the entire country; however, States and local governments are 
allowed to develop and implement more stringent air pollution rules than those mandated by the CAA. The CAA also established New 
Source Performance Standards (NSPS) for a variety of potential emissions sources, including gas turbines.
NSPS
 
Emissions control requirements for oxides of nitrogen were ﬁrst applied to gas turbines by the Los Angeles County Air Pollution 
Control District (LAAPCD) and the San Diego Air Pollution Control District (SDAPCD) in the early 1970’s.  To comply with these 
regulations, water was injected into the combustor ﬂame zone to reduce ﬂame temperature.  The consequent reduction in NOx amounted 
to about 40 percent when half as much water as fuel was injected into the reaction zone.  The emission level achieved was approximately 
75 ppmvd (parts per million by volume, dry) on oil.  
 
These results and other data were used by the U.S. EPA to develop New Source Performance Standards that went into effect 
in September 1979.  The details of this NSPS are presented in 40CRF60 Subpart GG.  Turbines with heat input over 10 million Btu/hr, 
generating less than 30 MW electrical output, and supplying less than one-third of their electrical output to an electric utility, are required 
to meet a NOx emission standard of 150 ppm, corrected for efﬁciency.  Emergency turbines are exempt from this standard, as are certain 
other types of turbines.  Electric utility turbines with a heat input above 100 million Btu/hr must comply with a NOx standard of 75 ppm, 
corrected for efﬁciency.  Most turbines available today can achieve NOx emissions of 25 to 42 ppm or less without post-combustion 
controls.   Thus, the existing NSPS is not typically a controlling regulation for gas turbines.  
 
In July 2004, EPA updated the NSPS for gas turbines in a direct ﬁnal ruling.  Most notably, the revised standards require new 
LPM turbines that commence construction after July 8, 2004 to use a NOx continuous emissions monitoring system (CEMS) or, owners 
can continuously monitor engine parameters that indicate when the turbine is out of LPM combustion mode.  
 
On February 18, 2005, EPA proposed standards of performance for new stationary gas turbines in 40CFR60, subpart KKKK. 
The new standards would reﬂect changes in NOx emissions control technologies and turbine design and are intended to bring the 
emission limits up to date with the performance of current combustion turbines.
New Source Review
 
In addition to AAQS, the CAA established an air permitting program called New Source Review (NSR).  NSR is divided into 
two primary programs: Prevention of Signiﬁcant Deterioration (PSD) and Non-Attainment NSR.  Each program applies to “major 
sources” and “major modiﬁcations,” but in non-attainment NSR, a source can be considered “major” at much lower thresholds.  
Bill Bender

224
3.2.1.2 Lean Pre-Mixed Combustion
Best Available Control Technology (BACT)
 
If a source triggers PSD review, then the owner must identify the appropriate level of emissions controls for pollutants that 
exceed speciﬁc thresholds.  In attainment areas, the standard for evaluation is Best Available Control Technology (BACT).   A BACT 
determination establishes an achievable emissions limitation taking into account the energy, environmental and economic impacts of 
applying the pollution control technology necessary to meet that limitation.  EPA now requires that a “top-down” BACT analysis be 
followed for all PSD permit applications.18 
 
As a result of its structure, BACT is a “living” standard, which becomes more stringent over time as new, more efﬁcient, 
and lower cost control technologies become available.  BACT for a speciﬁc application can only be deﬁned in the context of current 
demonstrated technology and for a speciﬁc application.  Because BACT determinations are site-speciﬁc, generic BACT requirements 
do not exist; however, there have been recent BACT NOx determinations as low as 2 to 5 ppm for gas turbines greater than 25MW.
 
A recent search of EPAs RACT/BACT/LAER Clearinghouse data (years 2000 to 2005) for natural gas-ﬁred combustion turbines 
greater than 25 MWs has resulted in the following NOx emission limits:
Table 2: NOx emission limits.
Number of Permits
NOx Emission Limit (ppm)
37
<9.0
51
9.0
106
<15.0
11
15.0
117
<25.0
10
25.0
5
>25.0
This table conﬁrms the trend towards single digit NOx emissions.  For certain gas turbines, NOx emission rates > 9 ppm can be met using 
LPM combustors.  Permit limits less than 9 ppm require the application of post combustion controls.
Lowest Achievable Emission Rate (LAER)
 
Major sources/modiﬁcations in non-attainment areas are subject to a determination of LAER.  LAER is deﬁned as the most 
stringent emission limitation achieved in practice for the class or source category.  The primary difference between BACT and LAER is 
that LAER does not allow economic impacts to be considered when evaluating pollution control technologies leading to an emissions 
limitation.
Other Regulatory Programs
 
Other regulatory programs that could potentially impact gas turbine emissions include the Clean Air Interstate Rule, the 
President’ s Clear Skies Initiative, and Maximum Available Control Technology (MACT) standards.19 
3.2.1.2-11 Nitrogen Oxide Formation
 
Tropospheric ozone has been and continues to be a signiﬁcant air pollution problem in the U.S. and is the primary constituent 
of smog.20  Large portions of the country do not meet the ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) and thereby expose 
large segments of the population to unhealthy levels of ozone in the air.  NO2 reacts in the presence of air and ultraviolet light (UV) in 
sunlight to form ozone and nitric oxide (NO).  The NO then reacts with free radicals in the atmosphere, which are also created by the UV 
acting on volatile organic compounds (VOC).  The free radicals then recycle NO to NO2.  In this way, each molecule of NO can produce 
ozone multiple times.  This may continue four or ﬁve times until the VOCs are reduced to short chains of carbon compounds that cease 
to be photo-reactive.  
 
In addition to the NO2 and ozone concerns, NOx and sulfur oxides (SOx) in the atmosphere are captured by moisture to form 
acid rain.  Acid rain impacts certain ecosystems and some segments of our economy.  All of these facts indicate the need to reduce NOx 
emissions, but to do so requires an understanding of the generation and control mechanisms.
 
According to the Zeldovich equations, NO is generated to the limit of available oxygen (about 200,000 ppm) in air at temperatures 
above 1300C (2370F).  At temperatures below 760C (1,400F), NO is either generated in much lower concentrations or not at all.  
There are two mechanisms by which NOx is formed in gas turbine combustors:
1. 
The oxidation of atmospheric nitrogen found in the combustion air (thermal NOx and prompt NOx), and
2. 
The conversion of nitrogen chemically bound in the fuel (fuel NOx).
Thermal NOx
 
Thermal NOx is formed by a series of chemical reactions in which oxygen and nitrogen present in the combustion air dissociate 
and subsequently react to form NOx.  Prompt NOx, a form of thermal NOx, is formed in the proximity of the ﬂame front as intermediate 
combustion products such as HCN, N and NH that are oxidized to form NOx.  Prompt NOx is formed in both fuel-rich ﬂames zones and 

225
dry low NOx (DLN) combustion zones.  The contribution of prompt NOx to overall NOx emissions is relatively small in conventional 
near-stoichiometric combustors, but this contribution is a signiﬁcant percentage of overall thermal NOx emissions in DLN combustors. 
For this reason, prompt NOx becomes an important consideration for DLN combustor designs, establishing a minimum NOx level 
attainable in lean mixtures.
 
The chemical mechanisms that produce NOx are listed below.  These reactions represent the major pathways for NOx formation; 
see Nicol et al. for a more detailed description of the chemical pathways.21  Various authors have used different names for these pathways, 
or include different reactions.  This is a result of advances in understanding the relative importance of these mechanisms.  For example, 
until recently, the nitrous oxide path was simply included as an extension of the prompt mechanism22, but has emerged as an important 
chemical path in lean burning gas turbines and is now referred to as a distinct mechanism:
Extended Zeldovich mechanism:
(1) O + N2 ↔ NO + N
(2) N + O2 ↔ NO + O
(3) N + OH ↔ NO + H
Nitrous oxide:
(4) N2 + O + M ↔ N2O + M
(5) N2O + O ↔ NO + NO
(6) N2O + H ↔ NO + NH
Prompt:
(7) N2 + CH ↔HCN + N
 
The prompt mechanism is followed by a sequence of reactions converting HCN to NO; reaction (7) is just the initiation. 
The detailed sequence was reported by Fenimore, and the prompt mechanism is sometimes referred to as “Fenimore-prompt” or just 
“Fenimore”.23  The CH reaction is also important for fuels containing nitrogen which can directly form the HCN species.
 
The extended Zeldovich mechanism is also known as the thermal mechanism when O and H species are at equilibrium levels. 
The thermal route is a primary mechanism for NOx when ﬂame temperatures are above approximately 1800K (2780F).  Below this 
temperature, the thermal reactions are relatively slow.  Thus, a common approach to NOx control is to reduce the combustion temperature 
so that very little thermal NOx can form.
 
In the absence of thermal NOx, the other mechanisms become signiﬁcant.  Non-equilibrium concentration of O or H atoms in 
the ﬂame region can produce NOx via reactions (1) to (3), and this is known as Zeldovich NOx.  The nitrous oxide path depends on the 
intermediate species N2O which itself is generated by O-atom attack of nitrogen.
Fuel NOx
 
Fuel NOx is formed when fuels containing nitrogen are burned.  Molecular nitrogen, present as N2 in some kinds of natural gas, 
does not contribute signiﬁcantly to fuel NOx formation.  Some low-Btu synthetic fuels contain nitrogen in the form of ammonia (NH3). 
Other low-Btu fuels such as sewage and process waste-stream gases also contain nitrogen.  When these fuels are burned, the nitrogen 
bonds break and some of the resulting free nitrogen oxidizes to form NOx.  With excess air, the degree of fuel NOx formation is primarily 
a function of the nitrogen content in the fuel.  The fraction of fuel-bound nitrogen (FBN) converted to fuel NOx decreases with increasing 
nitrogen content, although the absolute magnitude of fuel NOx increases.  For example, a fuel with 0.01 percent nitrogen may have 100 
percent of its FBN converted to fuel NOx, whereas a fuel with a 1.0 percent FBN may have only a 40 percent conversion rate.  Natural 
gas typically contains little or no FBN.  As a result, when compared to thermal NOx, fuel NOx is not a major contributor to overall NOx 
emissions from stationary gas turbines ﬁring natural gas.
3.2.1.2-12 Conclusions
 
OEMs continue to improve LPM technology; simultaneously, regulators continue to lower emissions requirements.24  R&D 
efforts continue to advance technology and provide valuable contributions to design and manufacturing techniques to further enhance 
performance while reducing emissions and overall plant costs.  
 
Leveraging advances made in natural gas-fueled turbines through the ATS Program is critical to achieving performance goals 
established for future coal-based systems, especially Integrated Gasiﬁcation Combined Cycle (IGCC) plants and FutureGen.  Gas 
turbines utilized in IGCC plants operate on syngas derived from gasiﬁcation.  Syngas typically contributes 15 to 20 percent to the 
volumetric ﬂow through an advanced gas turbine to achieve the same heat input as natural gas.  The additional mass ﬂow theoretically 
increases gas turbine power output by 30 to 40 percent.  However, aerodynamic issues currently limit power gains to values lower than 
those theoretically possible.  
 
DOEs Fossil Energy Turbine Technology R&D Program being implemented by NETL was recently expanded with the selection 
of ten new projects valued at $130 million. The new program will advance turbines and turbine subsystems for integrated gasiﬁcation 
combined cycle (IGCC) power plants and address the use of hydrogen and syngas.
Bill Bender

226
226
3.2.1.2 Lean Pre-Mixed Combustion
3.2.1.2-13 Notes
_____________________________
1. U.S. Department of Energy Ofﬁ ce of Fossil Energy, NETL, Turbine Program, “Enabling Near-Zero Emission Coal-Based   
 
    Power Generation,” October 2005.
2. Federal Register: February 18, 2005 (Volume 70, Number 33), pages 8314 – 8332.
3. Ibid. 
 
4. R.Pavri and G.D. Moore, GE Power Systems, Gas Turbine Emissions and Control, GER-4211, 03/01
 
5. G.A. Richards, M.M. McMillan, R.S. Gemmen, W.A. Rogers, and S.R. Cully,  “Issues for Low-emission, Fuel-ﬂ exible  
 
                   Power Systems” (U.S. Department of Energy); A. Biro, “Effect of ﬂ ame-temperature on NOx emission during natural gas   
 
     firing,” (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 1998).
 
6. L.B. Davis and S.H. Black, “Dry Low NOx Combustion Systems for GE Heavy-Duty Gas Turbines,” GER-3568G: GE  
 
                  Power Systems, October 2000; R. Eldrid, L. Kaufman,  and P. Marks, “The 7FB: The Next Evolution of the Gas 
 
    Turbine,” GER-4194:  GE Power Systems April 2001; R.D. Brdar and R.M. Jones, “GE IGCC 
 
    Technology and Experience with Advanced Gas Turbines,” GER-4207:  GE Power Systems, October 2000; F.J. 
 
    Brooks, “GE Gas Turbine Performance Characteristics,” GER-3567H:  GE Power Systems, October 2000; L.B. Davis, 
 
    “Dry Low NOx Combustion for GE Heavy Duty Gas Turbines,” GER-3568A:  GE Power Generation, 1983.
 
7. See note 4 (Pavri & Moore) and (Davis); also see note 5 (Richards and others).
 
8. B. Rising, letter to U.S. EPA, February 2005.
 
9. See note 6 (Davis & Black, 2000).
 
10. Alstom Power, Sequential Combustion, http://www.power.alstom.com/home/equipment_systems/turbine/gas_turbines/ 
 
 
      GT24_andGT26__188MW_and_281MW.html.
 
11. R.K. Matta, G.D. Mercer, and R.S. Tuthill, “Power Systems for the 21st Century – “H” Gas Turbine Combined-Cycles,”   
 
     (GE Power Systems, October 2000).
 
12. R. Bland, et al, “Siemens W501F Gas Turbine: Ultra Low NOx Combustion System Development,” (Siemens  
 
 
 
      Westinghouse Power Corporation, 2004).
 
13. G. A. Richards, K.H. Casleton, D. J. Maloney, and R.S. Gemmen, “Federal Energy Technology Center, Addressing the  
 
 
      Challenge of Low-Emission Combustion” (Department of Energy); also see notes 4 (Pavri & Moore) and (Davis) 
 
      and note 5.
 
14. See notes 5 and 13.
 
15. See note 6 (Brdar & Jones) and (Davis); also see notes 5 and 13.
 
16. U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁ ce of Fossil Energy, NETL, Advanced Turbine Systems, Advancing the Gas Turbine
  
      Power Industry; also see notes 2, 5 and 13. 
 
17. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Ofﬁ ce of Air Quality, Technical Bulletin EPA 456/F-pp-006R, “Nitrogen 
 
      Oxides (NOx): Why and How They Are Controlled,” November 1999; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Ofﬁ ce of 
 
      Air Quality, AP 42, 5th ed. Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors Vol.1: Stationary Point and Area Sources, 
 
      Sec. 3.1; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Ofﬁ ce of Air Quality, Technology Transfer Network, Clean Air 
 
      Technology Center, RACT/BACT/LAER Clearinghouse; Energy and Environmental Analysis, Inc.,  Database 
 
      on State Permitting Issues –Air Regulations (http://www.eea-inc.com/rrdb/DGRegProject/RegBack.html); N.H. 
 
      Hydari, A.A. Yousuf, H.M. Ellis “Comparison of the Most Recent BACT/LAER Determinations for Combustion 
 
      Turbines by State Air Pollution Control Agencies, June 2002; California Environmental Protection Agency, 
 
      Air Resources Board, Report to the Legislature, Gas-Fired Power Plant NOx Emission Controls and Related 
 
      Environmental Impacts, May 2004; ONSITE SYCOM Energy Corp., Cost Analysis of NOx Control Alternatives for 
 
      Stationary Gas Turbines, 11/05/99.
 
18. J. Calcagni, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Memorandum dated June 13, 1989, Transmittal of Background  
 
 
      Statement on “Top Down” BACT.
 
19. A. Jones, L. Witherspoon, and L. Cowell, Solar Turbines, Inc., Meeting Regulatory Challenges Through Advances in Gas  
 
      Turbine Emission Control, 2004.
 
20. See note 7 (Davis & Black), (Pavri & Moore) and (Davis); also see note 17 (EPA Tech Bulletin, Nov. 1999), (CA EPA),   
 
      and (ONSITE Sycom); note 19.
 
21. D.G. Nicol, R.C. Steele, N.M. Marinov, and P.C. Malte, “The importance of the nitrous oxide pathway to NOx in lean  
 
 
      premixed combustion” ASME Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power :1995.
 
22. C.T. Bowman, “Control of combustion generated nitrogen oxide emissions: technology driven by regulations”  
 
      (Twenty-Fourth Symposium on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA 1992).
 
23. C.P. Fenimore, “Formation of nitric oxide in premixed hydrocarbon ﬂ ames,” 
 
      (The Thirteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA 1971).
 
24. See notes 1 and 16.

William R. Bender
Technology & Management 
Services, Inc.
Gaithersburg, MD 20879
phone: (301) 670-6390 x144
email: wbender@tms-hq.com
3.2.1.2 Lean Pre-Mixed Combustion
William R. Bender is a Senior Associate with Technology & Management Services, Inc. (TMS).  Mr. 
Bender has over 34 years of experience with gas turbine power systems as a Project Construction 
Manager, Project Manager, and Project Engineer.  While with a large A/E, he was a Project Engineer 
on Florida Power & Light’s Martin combined cycle Project and Tampa Electric’s Polk Power Station. 
As a TMS employee, Mr. Bender is responsible for the planning and analyzing of fossil energy 
systems, policy initiatives and research, development and deployment programs in support of DOE 
Headquarters and NETL.  His areas of expertise include coal, oil and gas power systems; technology 
and economic evaluation and assessments; energy and environmental policy analysis and multi-task 
project management.
BIOGRAPHY  
