
--- Page 1 ---

Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12540-020-00705-w
Thermal Barrier Coatings—A State of the Art Review
Jayant Gopal Thakare1 · Chandan Pandey2 · M. M. Mahapatra3 · R. S. Mulik1
Received: 28 January 2020 / Accepted: 17 March 2020 / Published online: 8 April 2020 
© The Korean Institute of Metals and Materials 2020
Abstract 
Thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) have seen considerable advancement since the initial testing and development of thermal 
spray coating. Thermal barrier coatings are currently been utilized in various engineering areas which include internal com-
bustion engines, gas turbine blades of jet engines, pyrochemical reprocessing units and many more. The development of new 
materials, deposition techniques is targeted at improving the life of the underlying substrate. Hence, the performance of the 
coating plays a vital role in improving the life of substrate. The scope for advancement in thermal barrier coatings is very 
high and continuous efforts are being made to produce improved and durable coatings. Thermal barrier coatings have the 
potential to address long term and short-term problems in gas turbine, internal combustion and power generation industry. 
The study of thermal barrier coating material, performance and life estimation is a critical factor that should be understood to 
introduce any advancement. The present review gives an overview of the thermal spraying techniques and current advance-
ments in materials, mechanical properties, understanding the high temperature performance, residual stress in the coating, 
understanding the failure mechanisms and life prediction models for coatings.
Keywords  Thermal barrier coating · Residual stresses · Life prediction · High temperature behavior · Spraying techniques
1  Introduction
The operating efficiency of a gas turbine or power generat-
ing unit can be improved by retarding the rate and extent of 
degradation experience by the component. Thermal spray 
coatings are extensively used for this purpose, a specially 
designed thermal spray coating called the thermal barrier 
coating (TBCs) is used to retard the material degradation 
due to higher heat flux [1]. The application of thermal bar-
rier coating maintains a thermal gradient between the coat-
ing surface and the substrate surface thus enhancing the 
operating temperature range and the efficiency. The develop-
ment of thermal barrier coatings is therefore vital to enhance 
the operating temperature range of the power generating unit 
[2]. The lower the thermal conductivity of the coating mate-
rial higher will the available temperature range which will 
increase the overall efficiency of the power generating unit.
Thermal barrier coatings typically consist of a metallic 
substrate generally a superalloy and followed by an interme-
diate metallic bond coat used to reduce the thermal expan-
sion gradient between the substrate and the top coat [3]. The 
top coat is a ceramic coating deposited using plasma spray-
ing technique or electron beam physical vapor deposition 
(EBPVD). The deposition method effects the properties of 
the TBCs, the material that are generally used to develop a 
thermal barrier coating include the NiCoCrAlY, NiCrAlY, 
NiAl etc. as bond coat material, YSZ, alumina and other 
advanced ceramics as the top coat material. Post spray pro-
cessing techniques are also used to enhance the durability 
and the performance of the TBCs [4].
The objective of this review article is to present an over-
view regarding the thermal spray coating technology and 
materials, advancement in thermal barrier coating mate-
rial and deposition techniques. The articles also present the 
properties of TBC system, residual stress in thermal barrier 
 *	 Chandan Pandey 
	
jscpandey@iitj.ac.in; chandanpy.1989@gmail.com
	
Jayant Gopal Thakare 
	
jayantgt88@gmail.com
	
M. M. Mahapatra 
	
manasmohan2@gmail.com; mmmahapatra@iitbbs.ac.in
1	
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, IIT 
Roorkee, Roorkee 247667, India
2	
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute 
of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, Rajasthan 342037, India
3	
School of Mechanical Sciences, IIT Bhubaneswar, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha 752050, India


--- Page 2 ---

1948
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
coating, high temperature performance of thermal barrier 
coating and advancement in life prediction of thermal bar-
rier coating.
2  Application of Thermal Spray Coatings
The structural components of a power generating unit mostly 
operate in a hostile and corrosive environment which lim-
its the component life [5]. The high temperature, pressure 
and the presence of flue gases accelerates the degradation 
of the metal components. This degradation may result in 
heavy losses resulting from the reduced efficiency and main-
tenance. The degradation can also lead to premature fail-
ure of the components. The failure of components can be 
avoided by the use of protective coatings or claddings which 
are resistant to high-temperature degradation [6]. However, 
the use of cladding is not recommended as it changes the 
microstructure of the underlying substrate which makes it 
susceptible to other modes of failure [7]. The use of a coat-
ing, on the other hand, turns out to be the safest mode of 
protecting the components against high-temperature degra-
dation and enhancing the life of the component.
The surface degradation of high-temperature components 
is a lifetime determining factor for a unit operating at high 
temperatures. The use of the coating increases the lifetime 
of the substrate by protecting the surface from the aggres-
sive oxidizing environment. This has resulted in appreciable 
increase in use of coatings in power generation units, oil and 
gas refineries, waste incinerators plants and other recycling, 
reprocessing units [8]. The use of coating has reduced the 
down time resulting from plant break down, increasing the 
overall efficiency of the unit. The coatings are deposited by 
various techniques which have been broadly classifiedinto 
gaseous state processes, solution state processes, molten or 
semi-molten state processes, and solid-state processes based 
on the physical states via which the coating is deposited. 
The gaseous state processes include physical vapor deposi-
tion (PVD), chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and ion beam 
assisted deposition (IBAD) process [9–13]. The chemical 
solution process, an electrochemical deposition process, and 
the sol gel process are the type of solution state processes. 
Welding, thermal spraying and laser technique are the pro-
cesses that deposit the coating in melted and semi-melted 
condition. The most versatile process which can be applied 
to components of any dimension is the thermal spray coat-
ing process. This coating process does not alter the micro-
structure of the substrate, unlike welding and laser cladding 
process.
3  Thermal Spray Coating
3.1  Introduction
Thermal spraying is a process in which un-melted, par-
tially melted, and completely melted feedstock particles 
are deposited on a pretreated substrate surface [14]. The 
process involves generating a stream of feedstock particles 
which deform plastically on bombarding the pretreated sub-
strate surface as shown in Fig. 1. The surface is pretreated 
to produce adequate surface roughness in order to anchor 
the incoming feedstock powder particles [15]. The coating 
deposited on the substrate surface with aim to enhance the 
wear resistance, minimize surface degradation via corrosion, 
thermal cycling etc. The coating material is selected such 
that the coefficient of thermal expansion of the two materi-
als is mutually compatible [16]. An intermediate metallic 
bond coat is preferred when the CTE difference between the 
substrate and the coating is large.
3.2  Thermal Spraying Techniques
The thermal spraying techniques are broadly classified 
based on the mode of energy input to the carrier gas-
ses. The Fig. 2 shows the broad classification of thermal 
spraying processes based on the energy input to the gases  
[17]. Chemical energy released via combustion and electric 
energy released by formation of arc are the two main sources 
of energy that elevate the thermal energy of the particles. 
Fig. 1   Schematic for thermal spray coating process


--- Page 3 ---

1949
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
An innovative advancement in the coating process called 
the cold spray technique does not involve providing thermal 
energy, the whole process of coating is executed under the 
influence of kinetic energy [18–23].
The Fig. 3 illustrates the classification of the thermal 
spraying process, every thermal spray coating process is 
unique in terms of the energy it provides to the powder par-
ticles and hence coating developed by difference processes 
has unique properties. The thermal spray coating techniques 
that are commonly used are explained in brief as below.
Flame spraying involves use of thermal energy generated 
due to the combustion of a fuel gas generating a flame as 
shown in Fig. 4. The fuel gas inlet is axial and the feedstock 
in form of powder or wires or rods are fed either axially 
or perpendicular to the flame. The feedstock melts to form 
molten droplets which are atomized by compressed air and 
carried to the substrate surface with appreciable kinetic 
energy. This coating process is used for depositing metals, 
alloys, and polymers. Spherical morphology of powders is 
preferred to facilitate the handling of powder. The air to 
fuel ratio and total gas flow are few parameters that are 
adjusted to control the thermal profile of the flame. The jet 
speed is of the order of 100 m/s and the particle velocity can 
rise to 80 m/s prior to impact. The coating deposited using 
flame spray technique has high porosity content of around 
10%–20% [24, 25].
Detonation gun (D-Gun) and high velocity oxy-fuel 
(HVOF) technique are other two variants that employ the 
chemical energy released as a result of the fuel combustion. 
These two variants differ in the way the fuel is burned, con-
tinuous burning is carried out in HVOF technique whereas 
the burning is intermittent in D-gun process. In D-gun pro-
cess shown in Fig. 5a, an explosive mixture of fuel, feed-
stock powder, and oxygen are fed into a narrow barrel [26, 
Fig. 2   Broad classification of 
thermal spray coating tech-
niques based on input energy
Fig. 3   Detailed classification of 
thermal spray coating processes


--- Page 4 ---

1950
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
27]. The narrow barrel constraints the explosive mixture 
which is detonated using a spark plug resulting in formation 
of pressurized heat wave. This heat wave travels down the 
water-cooled barrel carrying the powder and depositing on 
the pre-treated surface. Nitrogen is used to purge the barrel 
in between the detonations which occur at a frequency of 3 
to 6 Hz. The detonation gun produces a highly pressurized 
wave by which the particles attain a velocity of the order of 
800 m/s. These high particle velocities on contacting the 
surface form a coating with high bond strength and better 
density [28]. In HVOF process the combustion is continu-
ous, the fuel and oxygen are introduced in the water- or 
air-cooled combustion chamber. The exhaust and the flame 
make an exit from the nozzle with a supersonic velocity, 
the powder is introduced radially or axially in the flame as 
shown in Fig. 5b.
Air plasma spray (APS) process uses plasma to impart 
thermal energy to the particles. A plasma is hot ionized gas 
produced by transferring energy into the gas until the elec-
trons, positive ions are formed [29–31]. The electrons and 
the ions recombine once the energy input is removed releas-
ing large amount of thermal energy. When a certain amount 
of energy is supplied to the molecules of a gas, the mol-
ecules dissociate into atoms due to mutual collision. When 
very high magnitude of energy is supplied to a gas, the elec-
trons from the atomic shell are also forced out thus ionizing 
Fig. 4   Schematic of flame spray 
technique
Fig. 5   Schematic showing a 
D-Gun process, b high velocity 
oxy fuel technique


--- Page 5 ---

1951
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
the gas. The electron will have the tendency to return to 
its original lower energy state releasing energy in the form 
electromagnetic waves.
The plasma generator is shown in Fig. 6, consists of an 
anode and a cathode the electric arc is generated in the con-
stricted space. The anode is usually made of copper and a 
thoriated tungsten is used as cathode, the arc heats up the 
working gas which expand to form a jet. The carrier gas 
feeds the power into the jet which melts the powder and 
accelerates the particles towards the pretreated substrate 
surface. Argon gas is the most commonly used working 
gas, however a mixture of Ar, and hydrogen, or helium, or 
nitrogen is also used. The voltage is between 30 and 70 V 
and the temperature and the velocity attained at the exit of 
the nozzle is around 14,000 and 800 m/s. The velocities 
of the order 2500 m/s have been attained by using a high-
power plasma spray installation (Plazjet). There are differ-
ent variations of plasma spray process depending on the 
environment in which the spraying is carried out like the 
low-pressure plasma spraying, or vacuum plasma spraying, 
controlled atmospheric plasma spraying (CAPS). Plasma 
consists of partially ionized gas with high kinetic energy 
and high temperature [32]. In a vacuum plasma spraying 
process, the coating process is carried out in low pressure 
environment [33]. In CAPS the plasma torch is similar to the 
APS torch and the spray chamber can withstand a pressure 
of 0.4 MPa. The few other variants of plasma spray process 
are inert plasma spraying (IPS), shrouded plasma spraying 
(SPS), atmospheric temperature-controlled spraying (ATCS) 
[34, 35].
The ceramic coatings are found to be highly resistant 
to high temperature degradation and hence are commonly 
used as thermal and environment barrier coating (T/EBC) 
[36]. The requirement for high gas turbine inlet temperature 
has popularized the use of thermal barrier coatings. The 
T/EBC is also predominantly used in internal combustion 
engines, turbine blades, vanes, and other hot sections of a 
power generating unit. The architecture of a T/EBC consists 
of a substrate, a metallic bond coat and a ceramic top coat 
[8]. The most commonly used bond coat is nickel, cobalt or 
iron based MCrAlY metallic coating where “M” represents 
the main constituent of the bond coat. The aluminum in the 
coatings facilitates the formation of aluminum oxide which 
acts as a diffusion barrier to the detrimental species. The top 
coat is an air plasma sprayed ceramic coating usually a yttria 
(7%–8%) stabilized zirconia (YSZ) coating. The air plasma 
spray (APS) technique inherently produces porous ceramic 
coatings, the interconnected pores act as a pathway for detri-
mental species. The use of low-quality fuel (containing Na & 
V) for combustion results in formation of low melting salts 
like ­Na2SO4 and ­V2O5 on the coatings [37–39]. The molten 
saltreacts aggressively with the coating and the underlying 
substrate. The YSZ coating deteriorates as a result of the 
selective leaching of yttrium leading to degradation of the 
coating. The drawback of an APS YSZ coating is the lack of 
resistance to the infiltration of detrimental species.
3.3  Thermal Spray Coating Materials
Thermal spray coating materials can be classified based 
on the architecture of the coating and the coating mate-
rial. Three basic materials can be successfully thermally 
sprayed namely single-phase materials, cermet and com-
posites. The single-phase material comprises of metals, 
alloys, Intermetallics, polymers and ceramics, whereas the 
composite materials are cermet, reinforced ceramics, rein-
forced polymers, reinforced metals. The coatings are also 
classified based on the architecture of the coating as sin-
gle layer, bi-layer and functionally graded coating [8]. The 
metal and alloy coatings mainly include material which are 
used to repair the base metal and to improve the surface 
properties of the base metal. The most commonly sprayed 
Fig. 6   Schematic representing 
plasma generator and plamsa 
spray coating process


--- Page 6 ---

1952
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
metals and alloys include, stainless steel, cobalt, nickel, 
aluminum, bronze, zinc, molybdenum, NiCrAlY, NiCo-
CrAlY. Metal and alloy coatings are mainly used in piston 
rings, engine cylinders, bridges, petrochemical equipment 
and other corrosion prone applications. The ceramics are 
also thermally sprayed and are popular due to their high 
thermal insulation, electrical insulation and oxidation resist-
ance. The most commonly used ceramic coating include 
­Al2O3, ZrO2, YSZ, Cr3C2, and TiC etc. The ceramics gener-
ally have a very high melting point hence are most suitable 
to be sprayed by plasma spray techniques. Intermetallic are 
highly sensitive to oxidation at elevated temperature and 
hence should be sprayed in controlled or inert atmosphere 
[17]. Intermetallics are metallic alloys that exist in the form 
of compounds having an ordered crystal structure, high 
melting point and a brittle behavior.
Polymers are thermally sprayed using conventional flame 
spray and HVOF technique. Thermosetting plastics, ther-
moplastics, and copolymers like polytetrafluoroethylene 
(PTFE), poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA), polyimide 
etc. are commonly sprayed polymers. Composite materials 
are classified as particulate reinforced, fiber reinforced, and 
whisker reinforced composite. The cermet are ceramic parti-
cles dispersed in a metallic matrix and most common cermet 
coatings are WC/Co, ­Cr3C2/NiCr, and the metal matrix acts 
as binder for the ceramic particles.
4  Thermal Barrier Coating System
4.1  Introduction
A thermal barrier coating typically consists of a high tem-
perature structural material base, an intermediate metallic 
bond coat and a ceramic top coat. The ceramic top coat acts 
as an insulator and resists the heat transfer and also pro-
vides protection against high temperature degradation of 
the underlying substrate. The ceramic top coat is commonly 
deposited using electron beam physical vapor deposition 
(EB–PVD) or APS or any modified version of any of the 
two. In air plasma spray process the heating of substrate 
is not mandatory, however heating may be carried out to 
reduce the residual stress in the coating [40–44]. In case of 
EBPVD the preheating of the substrate is compulsory, and 
the rate of coating deposition is very low as compared to 
that of the plasma spraying process. The coatings produced 
by the two-process exhibit variation in the microstructure. 
The coating deposited via APS process exhibit a lamellar 
morphology whereas the coating deposited using EBPVD 
process exhibits a columnar morphology.
EBPVD TBCs can be classified into; two layered and 
functionally graded coating. A two layered coating consists 
of a MCrAlY bond coat (M=Ni, Co) and YSZ (6%–8%) 
as top coating [45]. A functionally graded TBC consists of 
bond coat and multiple layers of composite powder which 
tend to reduce the coefficient of thermal expansion gradient 
between the top coat and the bond coat [46]. The function-
ally graded thermal barrier coatings are used when the dif-
ference in CTE between the coating constituents drastically 
affect the performance of the coating.
In case of APS deposited coating porosity and defects 
in the form of minor cracks is an inherent part of the coat-
ing [47]. The presence of these defects reduces the thermal 
conductivity of the already low conducting YSZ. The APS 
techniques are predominantly applied as compared to the 
coating deposited using EB–PVD. The APS sprayed coat-
ing has another advantage in terms of the coating thickness, 
thick coating can easily be produced by APS coating. The 
coating microstructure of an APS sprayed coating consists 
of a complex porous lamellar structure [32].
The basic unit of a lamellar APS coating is a pancake 
shaped splat of thickness depending on the spray param-
eters can vary from 1 to 50 µm with diameter of the order of 
10–50 µm  [48]. This splats extent both along the plane and 
out of the plane of the substrate, the discrete splats overlap to 
form a coating, however a distinct boundary exists between 
the splats as shown in the schematic Fig. 7. The plasma 
sprayed coating shows the presence of pores with variable 
Fig. 7   Schematic of a typical 
plasma sprayed coating exhibit-
ing lamellar structure


--- Page 7 ---

1953
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
dimensions, cracks are also present in the form of horizontal 
and vertical micro defects [49]. The delaminating crack can 
be intra-lamellar or inter-lamellar. The vertical microcracks 
are cause as a result of lack of adhesion between the lamellas 
and the splats. Some of the cracking is also caused due to 
quenching of the coating constituents, resulting in relaxa-
tion of residual stress [50]. Many properties like adhesive 
strength of the coating are affected by the splat structure. 
Splat flattening is dependent on the impact velocity and 
heat input to the feedstock particles and is affected by the 
surface wettability, roughness and reactivity of the surface. 
The porosity in an APS coating increases if the wettability 
of the coating is lower  [51]. Higher surface roughness of 
the substrate results in development of thick coating. The 
substrate preheating also affects the impinging splat, splat 
quenching results in restricted contraction resulting in for-
mation of tensile residual stress [52]. Functionally graded 
coating might be helpful in reducing the residual stress in the 
coating. The functionally graded coating refers to the layered 
structure of the coating, which result in gradual change in 
thermal expansioncoefficient between the constituents of the 
coating and the substrate as in the case of a functionally 
graded coating [12].
The thermal barrier coatings ((TBCs) are typically con-
sists of a bond coat and a top coat. MCrAlY (M: nickel, 
cobalt, or a mixture of both elements) and heat resistant 
material, such as yttria stabilised zirconia (8YSZ) are the 
most commonly used material for the bond coat and top 
coat, respectively. To deposit the bond coat and top coat on 
metallic substrate, a thermal spray techniques are employed 
[34, 53].
A large number of porosities has been noticed for the 
plasma sprayed 8YSZ coating which allow the diffusion of 
the oxidizing species that leads the oxidation of the bond 
coat and resulted in the formation of thick thermally grown 
oxide (TGO) layer. The excessive growth of TGO layer leads 
the de-cohesion in the bond coat and resulted in final frac-
ture of the TBC [54, 55]. A number of research works have 
been published to evaluate the performance of the coating 
in the harsh working environment. The performance of the 
coating is mainly evaluated in terms of the degradation in 
microstructure [31, 56–58]. Hence, by altering the micro-
structure of the coating in bond coat might be helpful in 
improving the durability. The altering of the microstructure 
mainly deals with the controlling of the porosity and it can 
be achieved by varying the coating deposition process and 
post thermal spray treatment of the coating [59].
The current work mainly deals with the development of 
the coating by nano-size ceramics powders, cermet pow-
ders, and powders doped with rare earth oxides and these 
modification are mainly performed to alter the microstruc-
ture of the coating [54, 60–63]. Addition of the Alumina in 
YSZ powder is done to produce a coating with increased 
resistance to diffusion of detrimental species. Resistance to 
the diffusion resulted in the reduction in thickness of ther-
mally grown oxide and finally reduces the chance of the fail-
ure of coating due to excessive growth of thermally grown 
oxide [59, 64, 65].
4.2  Properties of Thermal Barrier Coating
There are certain properties that must be analyzed and con-
sidered to study the performance and durability of a thermal 
barrier coating. The properties include the elastic–plastic 
properties, cohesive strength, adhesive strength, fracture 
properties, thermo-mechanical fatigue properties, wear, 
and erosion. This properties of thermal barrier coatings 
vary with change in torch design, feedstock characteristics, 
and operating parameters [66]. The microstructure and the 
properties of the TBC is predominantly dependent on the 
process parameters. The properties of the coating are also 
affected by the interaction between the bond coat, top coat 
and the substrate at higher temperature. The TBC micro-
structure is non homogeneous and the properties are likely to 
be affected by the measurement techniques. The properties 
can be measured conventionally via bend test, tensile test, 
adhesion test [67–72]. Indirect measurement methods like 
nano-indentation, micro indentation are also effectively used 
to determine the properties of TBCs [73]. The properties can 
be measured on free standing coating or coated specimens, 
the properties exhibit variation for free standing coating and 
coated specimen.
The TBCs are subjected to intensive thermal cycling, 
thermal fatigue is a major cause of coating failure. The 
thermal stress cause cracking in the coating which even-
tually leads to delamination of the ceramic top coat. The 
elastic modulus of the top coat is fundamental in determin-
ing the resistance of the coating to crack propagation. The 
elastic modulus of the top coat is around10 GPa, 100 GPa 
and 200 GPa when measured via bending, micro indentation 
and nano indentation respectively [24, 26, 32]. The coating 
properties are affected by thermal exposure as a result of 
high temperature sintering. The sintering results in closure 
of micro-defects like cracks, and voids resulting from the 
grain growth across the splats.
The time–temperature dependent plastic properties of 
the bond coat should also be analyzed to understand the 
failure of the TBCs. The tensile stress in the bond coat 
are relaxed during the heating part of the thermal cycling, 
the oxide growth also introduces stress during the expo-
sure. The plastic properties of the bond coat are vital in 
preventing the fracture in the brittle interface. The creep 
strength of the bond coat should be sufficiently high to 
avoid the negative effects of compressive stresses induced 
in the TGO [75]. An in-plane compressive stress is setup 
in the top coat when the cooling rate is very high, this 


--- Page 8 ---

1954
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
compressive stress induces an out of the plane tensile 
stress which causes spallation of the top coat. A less duc-
tile and weak bond coat causes instability and buckling of 
TGO which is followed by TGO cracking [76]. A durable 
bond coat material should exhibit intermediate ductility 
and strength at both elevated temperatures and low tem-
peratures. MCrAlY coatings have higher ductility as com-
pared to aluminide coatings and hence are considered ideal 
for bond coat applications.
The operation and duty cycles in actual conditions is 
simulated in laboratory using burner rigs tests. The thermal 
shocks and the accelerated thermal cyclic tests correspond 
to the actual start up and shut down conditions. This accel-
erated thermal cyclic tests lead to spallation of the bond 
coat and top coat without affecting the substrate. Fracture 
properties of both the bond coat and the top coat are very 
critical to with stand this severe thermal fatigue conditions. 
During low cycle fatigue testing conditions cracks have been 
reported to be generated in the TGO or in the metallic bond 
coat [77]. The crack is directed perpendicular to the plane of 
bond coat moving towards the substrate. The crack generated 
in the TBC system has to propagate through the bond coat 
to render the TBC system useless. The fatigue properties 
are hence very critical in understanding the performance of 
the TBC system.
There are several parameters beyond those discussed 
above also affects the selection of the coating material [11]. 
The basic requirement of the coating material is to offer the 
high resistance to the reaction with the oxidizing specimen. 
The difference in thermal expansion coefficient between the 
coatings and substrate material should be marginal to stop 
any type of the delamination or cracking comes in the pic-
ture due to the CTE mismatch. The other factor is the stabil-
ity of the coating material at elevated service temperature 
condition and the coating constituents should also be chemi-
cally inert to the substrate.
To overcome the gradient in CTE between the substrate 
and top coat, TBCs and EBCs are comprises of two-layers, 
first is metallic bond coat and followed by the ceramic top 
coat. The deposition of the ceramic top coat is performed 
after the deposition of the metallic bond coat [78]. Plasma 
spray technique are most commonly employed for the 
ceramic coatings [79]. However, plasma sprayed coatings 
inherently consist of the high porosities which allow pen-
etration of oxidizing species and the excessive infiltration 
of the species leads to oxidation of bond coat and formation 
of thermally grown oxide (TGO) layer. The growth of the 
TGO layer thickness beyond a certain point has been rec-
ognized as the main reason for the failure of TBCs [54, 55].
Thedegradation in coating properties in the aggressive envi-
ronment occurs mainly due to microstructure instability [31, 
54, 56]. The coating performance in elevated service condi-
tion is mainly improved by altering the porosity, deposition 
parameters, feedstock composition, and post thermal spray 
treatment [59, 80].
In current years, an accelerated progress is reported in 
research and development of ceramic matrix composites, 
TBCs, EBCs, and solid oxide fuel cells [81]. The perfor-
mance of the coating is improved by altering the altering 
the microstructure, spray technique, architecture of the 
TBCs. As compared to conventional YSZ coating, a high 
performance 4 YSZ coating has been produced that offers 
improved mechanical behavior and thermal properties as 
compared to conventional YSZ [81, 82]. A two differed tri-
ple layered architecture is developed by Mahade et al. [83] 
to improve the TBC performance against CMAS (calcium 
magnesium alumina silicate) attack. Richards and Wadley 
[84] has been also produced a tri-layer Yb2SiO5 coating 
on a Si substrate using air plasma spray coating (APS). A 
double layered coating consists of the ­ZrB2, ­MoSi2, and SiC 
were developed by the APS technique and an excellentab-
lation resistance in high-frequency plasma were reported 
[85]. The effect of the doping of the some rare earth oxides, 
metals such as ­CeO2, ­ln2O3, and ­Sc2O3 on the performance 
of YSZ has also been evaluated and improved performance 
is reported after doping [86, 87]. The coating for advanced 
materials like ­La2ZrO7 are relatively less susceptible to 
molten salt at 1000 °C [88]. An improved mechanical prop-
erties, improved corrosion resistance and oxidation resist-
ance have also been reported for the coating produced by 
the nanostructure feedstock [82, 89–91]. Yu et al. [92] had 
produced the boron alumina-silicate glass–ceramic coatings 
on the titanium substratefor varying concentration of the 
­MoO3 and improvement was reported around 96% for 100 h 
oxidation at 850 °C. The doping of the alumina in YSZ coat-
ing is performed to enhance theresistance to diffusion of the 
detrimental species that reduces the TGO layer thickness and 
increases the life of the coating [30, 64].
4.3  Residual Stress in Thermal Barrier Coating
The application of coating in industrial applications is gov-
erned by the quality of the coating. The residual stress gen-
erated in the coating during the deposition phase can result 
in premature failure of the coating by spallation and crack-
ing [93, 94]. The initial stress state in the coating must be 
evaluated to predict the behavior of the coating under cyclic 
thermal or isothermal loading conditions [95, 96]. Destruc-
tive and non-destructive techniques have been developed to 
measure the residual stress in metallic and ceramic coatings. 
The residual stress generated in the thermally sprayed coat-
ing is a factor that invariably affects the life of the coating. 
The combined effect of the residual stress and the service 
stress results in failure of TBCs. The presence of residual 
stress in thick thermal barrier coating leads to generation 
of segmentation cracks which are visible along the cross 


--- Page 9 ---

1955
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
section immediately after the deposition of the coating [97, 
98].
Residual stress in thermally sprayed coating is generated 
during the deposition process when hot particles (melted or 
semi-melted) come in contact with a relatively cooler sub-
strate or a pre-existing coating lamella. The residual stress 
in the coating is generated as a result of two main sources, 
quenching of deposited particles and difference in coefficient 
of thermal expansion (CTE) between the deposited coat-
ing and the substrate. The quenching stresses are generated 
in the coating when the particles in flight come in contact 
with the substrate and experiences sudden cooling which is 
referred as primary cooling. The residual stress is also intro-
duced when the coating substrate system cools from deposi-
tion temperature to room temperature referred as secondary 
cooling [99]. The quenching stresses introduced due to pri-
mary cooling are tensile in nature and the residual stresses 
due to CTE mismatch are compressive in nature when the 
coating CTE is lower than that of the substrate and if not, 
the stresses are tensile in nature. The magnitude of residual 
stresses in the coating is also affected by inflight velocity of 
particles and particle size. The growth of thermally grown 
oxide and the influence of hot corrosion also effects the level 
of residual stress in the coating [100]. The presence of com-
pressive residual stress are favorable whereas the presence 
of tensile stresses leads to easy initiation and propagation 
resulting in delamination and loss of adhesion [101]. The 
estimation of residual stress is highly significant in evaluat-
ing the life of coating and the structural component. Resid-
ual stress is estimated by various techniques which can be 
classified under two main categories namely non-destructive 
and destructive. The X-ray diffraction, neutron diffraction 
are few of the nondestructive techniques and whereas the 
incremental hole drilling method, curvature method, modi-
fied layer removal method and other experimental techniques 
are few examples of destructive techniques [102–105].
The non-destructive methods are based on the measure-
ment in variation of the crystal lattice spacing (d) as com-
pared to the unstressed crystal lattice. The diffraction peaks 
exhibit a peak shift when measured at different orientations 
with respect to the specimen surface. The stress is deter-
mined from the strain measurements using elastic constants. 
Residual stress determination using indentation is also a 
potential nondestructive testing technique. The load–dis-
placement curve is continuously monitored to determine 
the residual stress in the coating.
The destructive testing techniques rely on the strain 
released as a result of the material removal. In the hole drill-
ing (HD) and layer removal method (LR) released strain 
is recorded after every subsequent cut using strain gauge 
attached to the coating or the substrate. The layer removal 
method was modified by Greying et al. [106] to evaluate 
the through thickness distribution of residual stress. The 
curvature method is one of the experimental techniques used 
to analyze the average stress value of the thermal spray coat-
ing. The residual stress was measured to be 200 MPa in 
Ni–Al2O3 composite coating using curvature measurement 
method [107]. The curvature method is very often used to 
determine the residual stress in the coating. However, the 
curvature cannot be measured very accurately. Material 
removal using chemical dissolution is have also been used to 
determine the residual stress in 8YSZ thermal barrier coat-
ing [108]. The residual stress measured in WC–10%NiCrBSi 
coating using hole drilling was found to be compressive. The 
magnitude was found to increase towards the interface [103]. 
A precision hole drilling machine is used to control the 
depth during drilling. The compressive stress at the interface 
is reported to be higher than that at the free surface of the top 
coat. The radial stress is reported to be around 190 MPa in 
the substrate and 150 MPa in the ceramic coating. Advanced 
micro drilling and milling process is also used to determine 
the residual stress in the coating. The combination of drill-
ing and milling operating at high drilling speeds, low feed 
rate and low drilling depth ensures negligible amount of 
induced stress in the during material removal process. The 
coating was found to have compressive residual stress which 
increased with the increase in preheating temperature. The 
coating also showed presence of tensile stresses, however 
the stresses were between 10 to 30 MPa [109]. The residual 
stress in high velocity oxy fuel sprayed nickel based coat-
ing determined using incremental hole drilling method was 
found to be tensile in nature with the magnitude between 150 
and 300 MPa [105].
The fracture properties of thermal barrier coating are 
dependent on the state of residual stress in the coating. The 
presence of lower compressive stress reduces the critical 
strain required to generate the first transverse crack. The 
substrate preheating temperature also affects the residual 
stress in the coating. A higher preheating temperature and 
deposition temperature, coating deposited at high tempera-
ture result in formation of higher compressive residual stress 
[110]. The increase in compressive residual stress results 
in increase in fracture toughness of the coating. The dep-
osition temperature not only affects the residual stress at 
coating surface but also affects the elastic modulus of the 
coating. The elastic modulus monotonically increases with 
increase in the deposition temperature. The elastic modulus 
in the coating increases due to two main reasons firstly the 
increase in deposition temperature increase the adhesion 
between the molten splats. The higher compressive stress 
resulting from the higher deposition temperature suppresses 
the micro crack initiation and inter splat sliding. The pro-
portion of quenching and thermal stresses governs the final 
state of stress in the coating. The average value of strength 
is reported to increase from 11.2 MPa to 73.6 GPa with 
an increase in deposition temperature from 186 to 748 °C, 


--- Page 10 ---

1956
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
the fracture toughness of YSZ was reported to vary from 5 
to 80 MPa [74, 111]. The fracture strength also increases 
with increase in the ration of residual stress and the elastic 
modulus of the coating. The effect of residual stress can 
be evaluated by the effect on bending strength of the coat-
ing. The coating with high compressive residual stress when 
subjected to external tensile stress less stress concentration 
will occur at the voids and other defect sites leading to lower 
cracking tendency.
4.4  High Temperature Behavior of Thermal Barrier 
Coating
The performance of a power generation plant is defined by 
the efficiency of the unit and the energy saving it provides to 
the unit. Increasing the turbine inlet temperature increases 
the efficiency of the power generating unit, however the 
materials of the structural components have specific oper-
ating limits  [112]. The increase in temperature should be 
accompanied with an improvement in material properties. 
The components operating at high temperature are subjected 
to variety of loads which include thermal and mechanical 
loading. This thermo mechanical loading is accompanied 
with the presence of chlorides, sulfides, slats and erosive 
particles, making the operating environment highly detri-
mental to the structural components. The operating condi-
tions also involve deposition of molten salt on the surface of 
the coating which finally leads to delamination and failure 
of the coating [113]. Thermally sprayed ceramic coating 
exhibit high thermal insulation, oxidation resistance, and 
enhances the life and performance of the structure  [114, 
115]. The thermal barrier coating typically consists of a 
metallic bond coat and a ceramic top coat. The bond coat 
is predominantly metallic and Ni, Co, Cr, Al, Ta, Si, Hf, 
Y, ­Y2O3, Pt are the most common constituents of the bond 
coat  [116]. The factors that affect the oxidation resistance 
of the bond coat are, the interdiffusion between the bond 
coat and the substrate, microstructure and the morphology 
of thermally grown oxides (TGO), cracking resulting from 
the phase transformation  [117–119]. In a TBC the most 
commonly used bond coats are MCrAlY (M=Ni/Co, NiCo) 
and platinum doped aluminides. A metal undergoes oxida-
tion when either the metal atoms experience an outward 
diffusion or oxidizing species diffuse inward and forms a 
metal oxide interface. At higher operating temperatures met-
als forms subsurface precipitates instead of a discrete oxide 
layer  [116]. The stresses are expected to generate due to the 
oxide formation as the oxide volume is different from the 
consumed metal  [120].
The performance of power generating units at high tem-
perature service exposure condition is strongly influenced 
by the hot corrosion (HC) resistance of metals [121]. In 
high-temperature operating power units, sections like gas 
turbines, gas combustion chambers, inlet pipes, steam boiler 
tubes etc. are subjected to HC [122–124]. To meet the 
advancement of the materials and high temperature service 
condition, creep strength enhanced ferritic-martensitic steels 
are developed [125]. At high temperature service condition, 
the degradation in life of that steel components are com-
monly reported in literatures and it is governed by the oxida-
tion and hot corrosion [124, 126]. The improved service life 
at high temperature can be achieved by increasing the HC 
behavior of materials.
To resist the degradation in service life or mechanical 
properties, these components are subjected to metallic, 
cermet and ceramic coatings on the surface [39, 127, 128]. 
Ceramics are commonly employed for thermal and envi-
ronmental barrier coatings (T/EBC) to resist the degrada-
tion and enhance the operating temperature of gas turbines 
[129–131]. 6–8 wt% Yttria-stabilized zirconia (6–8% YSZ) 
are most commonly employed ceramic coating and the depo-
sition on a metallic bond coat is carried out by air plasma 
spray technique (APS) or electron beam physical vapor 
deposition (EB–PVD) [44, 132].
Initially stage of the oxidation leads the formation of 
thermally grown aluminum oxide and after the complete 
depletion of the aluminum from the bond coat, Ni/Co based 
oxides and spinel’s formation occurs. The major failure 
occurred due to the excessive growth of TGO and spinel’s 
formation. A premature cracking of the coating was also 
reported and it occurs mainly due to the severely corrosive 
working environment [133]. The premature failure of the 
YSZ based TBC system was reported in presence of the 
impurities like Na, V, S that leads the formation of low qual-
ity combustion product like ­Na2SO4, ­V2O5 [134]. That impu-
rities react the ceramic top coat and reduces the durability 
of the TBC material [135, 136]. A very aggressive reaction 
is reported between V2O5 and zirconia-based TBC that 
results in the premature failure of the coating [20]. The air 
plasma sprayed conventional YSZ coating is characterized 
by a porosity range of 10%–25% [137].
In recent years, research is focused on improving the ser-
vice life of the coating and HCbehavior of the conventional 
YSZ based TBC and it is achieved by altering the deposition 
process, microstructure, architecture of the coating system 
and feedstock composition [138].
The HC behavior of the GdYb-YSZ coating was per-
formed by the Guo et al. [138]. Guo et al. [138] observed 
that the presence of ­Yb2O3 acted as phase stabilizer and 
retarded the phase transformation of zirconia. The presence 
of ­CeO2 in ­LZ7C3 coating makes it more resistance to HC 
attack as compared to ­La2Zr2O7 and conventional YSZ coat-
ing [138].
The functional behavior of the coating is strongly influ-
enced by the microstructural behavior and a better life is 
reported for the columnar microstructure as compared to 


--- Page 11 ---

1957
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
the lamellar morphology. Electron beam physical vapor 
deposition promotes the formation of columnar morphol-
ogy while lamellar morphology formation was obtained 
for the thermal spraying process. Suspension plasma 
spray technique might also be helpful to obtain a colum-
nar microstructure using sub-micron sized powders [29]. 
Attempts have also been made to improve the HC behavior 
of the conventional YSZ coating by engineering the archi-
tecture of the coating.
The improved HC behavior is also reported for the mul-
tilayered composite coating with varying percentage of alu-
mina exhibits as compared to the conventional YSZ coating 
[139]. Gadolinium zirconate, used as thermal barrier coating 
with YSZ base layer showed superior thermal cycling behav-
ior and HC behavior as compared to YSZ based TBC and 
single layered GZ coating [8]. The post-weld treatment like 
laser glazing, sintering may also improve the HC behavior 
of coating for APS coating [8]. The post-processing does 
not ensure improvement in the performance of the coating 
because it does not ensure complete closure of cracks.
The delamination failure of the coating exposes the 
underlying bare metal surface which ultimately leads to 
premature failure of the structure. The performance of the 
coating in harsh environment with and without the presence 
of molten salt should be analyzed to avoid any premature 
failure of the component. The understanding of degrada-
tion mechanism is very important to prolong the life of the 
coating and the structural component. The hot components 
operate in presence of oxygen containing flue gases which 
convert the metallic coating in metallic oxides which are 
referred as thermally grown oxides (TGO) [140]. The TGOs 
act as a diffusion barrier and retard the infiltration of the oxi-
dizing species. In alumina based metallic bond coat ­Al2O3 is 
the major component of the TGO and provides protection up 
to the melting point of underlying substrate whereas ­Cr2O3 
are protective up to 871 °C [140]. The TGO can be formed 
and maintained above a critical level when the Al, Cr, or 
Si does not fall below a critical level of around 4–5 at% 
[123]. The presence of sulphur in the operating environment 
reduces the life of the TGO and the incorporation of rare 
earth oxides in the bond coat improves the adherence of the 
coating. The metallic oxides should satisfy few criterions to 
render it protective  [116]. The oxide should be thermody-
namically stable and should form a adherent, uniform thick 
layer at a slow growth rate. The stability of the oxide is 
related to its ability of resist any undesirable phase change, 
lower rate of diffusion across the interface, minimum brittle 
phase formation and compositional uniformity across the 
cross section of the oxide. The CTE mismatch between the 
coating constituents and the oxide should be such that it 
minimizes the stress in the system. The oxide should have 
excellent creep related properties, good fatigue strength, 
resistance to impact failure.
The prominent mode of degradation in a TBC is the oxi-
dation of bond coat leading to the formation of thermally 
grown oxide (TGO) resulting in generation of stress due 
to coefficient of thermal expansion mismatch. The peg-
ging of the TGO of the bond coat induces stress resulting in 
cracking of the top coat  [141]. The formation of NiO and 
Ni(Cr,Al)2O4 as a part of the TGO serves as the weakest 
link between the top coat and the bond coat  [142]. The 
failure is commonly initiated at the TGO and is instigated by 
thermal expansion mismatch  [143]. A TGO typically con-
sists of α-Al2O3, ­Cr2O3 and few Ni based oxides and spinels, 
the TGO film is durable when the oxide is fine grained and 
uniformly thick and a smooth transition from mixed oxide 
zone to uniform oxide zone. A TGO with a thickness of less 
than 2 µm are observed to have high stability and effectively 
resists substrate oxidation  [144]. The TGO thickness greater 
than 5 µm introduces stresses of very high magnitude and 
results in premature failure of the coating system by coat-
ing detachment  [145]. The TGO thickness increases with 
increase in exposure duration, the growth is high during the 
initial 200 h which tends to gradually slow down  [77]. The 
growth of TGO is also affected by cyclic thermal exposure, 
the surface roughness of the TGO was found to increase with 
increase in number of thermal cycles [146]. The oxidation 
kinetics and degradation study of electron beam physical 
vapor deposition also emphasizes on the increase in bond 
coat- TGO interface thickness leading to failure of the coat-
ing  [147]. The presence of yttrium and hafnium increases 
the adhesion of the bond coat with the surface [9, 148]. 
The absence of hafnium in the bond coat accelerates the 
formation of delaminating crack resulting in spallation of 
the coating. The doping of Hf also results in the formation 
of uniform TGO, the presence of 0.5 at% Hf in NiAl bond 
coat improved the cyclic oxidation behavior of the coating. 
Increasing the Hf to 1.5 at% resulted in formation of straight 
TGO as compared to the lower Hf at% doping and undoped 
coating [149].
The degradation of coating in presence of molten deposits 
in molten salt environment is called hot corrosion. Hot cor-
rosion occurs when the metals, alloys, ceramics are covered 
with molten salt in a temperature range of 700–925 °C  [150, 
151]. Sodium sulphate salts are deposited on the surface 
of the component as a result of the reaction between the 
sodium salts and sulfur present in the flue gases. Hot corro-
sion which occurs at the melting point of the salt deposits is 
called type 1 hot corrosion. The hot corrosion occurring at 
a temperature lower than the melting point of salt deposits is 
type 2 hot corrosion. The molten salt destroys the protective 
oxides and renders the coating ineffective due to internal 
oxidation and sulfidation. The degradation occurs starts with 
the breakdown of the protective oxide followed by propa-
gation stage during which the molten salt gains access to 
the naked metal enhancing the rate of degradation. Figure 8 


--- Page 12 ---

1958
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
shows the hot corrosion rate of type 1 and type 2 superim-
posed on oxidation rate variation with temperature.
Hot corrosion has a pronounced effect on the life of TBC, 
the degradation enhances manifold due to the presence of 
molten deposits. The deposits affect the bond coat along 
with the top this occurs due to the inherent porosity of the 
APS yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ). The molten salt pen-
etrates the YSZ through the cracks, pores and reacts with 
the bond coat. The metallic nature of the bond coat makes 
it highly susceptible to degradation under the influence 
of molten salt [1, 152–154]. The phase transformation of 
YSZ from tetragonal to monoclinic results in degradation 
of the TBC. This phase transformation is accompanied by 
a 4% volumetric change which increases the stress in the 
top coat. In some cases, accelerated sintering of YSZ also 
occurs which increases the Youngs modulus resulting in 
degradation of life of the coating  [155]. The infiltration salt 
deposits introduce stress due to coefficient of thermal expan-
sion mismatch between the molten deposit and the YSZ. The 
in-service failure of YSZ can be classified into four regimes 
of the time vs temperature plot. The four regimes in the 
order of increasing time and temperature are infant mortal-
ity, erosion, molten salt infiltration and thermochemical phe-
nomena. The thermochemical phenomenon includes phase 
transformation, bond coat degradation, and sintering  [156].
4.5  Life Prediction Model for TBC
A study at National Bureau of Standards (NBS) conducted 
in 1942 can be consideredto the first application of ceramic 
coatings. The work was aimed to protect the ordinary steel 
(ex. SAE 1020) used in exhaust stacks. A thin ceramic coat-
ing was recommended by the NBS to increase the life of 
this component that operated inred-hot condition and was 
subjected to quick heating and cooling. The coated steel met 
the drastic requirements without suffering any significant 
damage. The successes of this development lead to an 
increased interest in ceramic coatings for heat-resistant 
alloys.
The success of this ceramic coating work on the develop-
ment of coatings for turbine blades and similar applications 
began at the NBS with financial assistance from National 
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (present-dayNASA). 
The work started by developing coatings using silica, feld-
spar, alumina, titania, and other refractory ceramics, the 
composition was designed to minimize the coefficient of 
thermal expansion (CTE) mismatch between the substrate 
and coating. The feedstock was melted in gas-fired pot fur-
nace and the coating was applied by spraying. Alumina, 
chromium oxide, and cobalt oxide singly and in combina-
tion successfully met the CTE requirement and were then 
subjected to various tests simulating the actual operating 
conditions [157]. This coating provided a high degree of 
protection to the alloys at a higher temperature and strong 
corrosive environment. The coatings increased the sur-
face oxidation resistance of the substrate and were found 
to enhance the life of the component. The frit coating was 
tested on turbine blades for next few years [158]. However, 
the problem related to spalling of coating persisted and was 
highlighted in XLR99 rocket engine application.
This coating failure caused the overheating of the sub-
strate which resulted in boiling of liquid ammonia in cir-
culation for the regenerative purpose. The ammonia vapors 
being highly corrosive made the failure of the conduit inevi-
table. The scope for improvement in the then used Rokide 
Z coating was marginal and hence emphasis was laid on 
development of a new coating system. A graded coating was 
proposed and developed with 100% metal composition near 
the substrate to 100% ceramic at the surface. The metal to 
ceramic ratio along the thickness was maintained by feeding 
appropriate premixed feedstock in the plasma arc during the 
coating deposition process. The graded coating consisted of 
a molybdenum primer with Nichrome graded to zirconia. 
The results of the engine tests were encouraging, the coating 
showed a significant improvement for at least 5 min as com-
pared to the RokideZ coating. The graded coating improved 
the adherence of thermal barrier coating (TBC) and pre-
vented premature failure of the combustion chamber. Drum-
mond and Alves [152] studied different plasma sprayed and 
slurry-based TBC. The coatings consisted of thin layers of 
metal and metal oxides. The metal oxides included alumina, 
zirconia, chroma and molybdenum, nichrome, tungsten were 
metals included in the graded coating. Tungsten rich coat-
ing system exhibited superior performance based on coating 
loss. The surface coating having alumina-nichrome graded 
coating with zirconia top coat showed the minimum depth of 
surface cracking and coating loss. The coatings were tested 
in hydrogen plasma and the majority of the tested coatings 
did not flake or spall under the severe testing conditions.
Fig. 8   Schematic representation of type 1 and type 2 hot corrosion 
rate


--- Page 13 ---

1959
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
Drummond and Alves [152] further investigated the 
structural integrity and thermal conductivity of three differ-
ent metallic-ceramic composite coating. The thermal con-
ductivity of these coatings made them effective for thermal 
barrier coating applications. The performance of the coat-
ing which was not sprayed at optimum spray parameters did 
not exhibit satisfactory performance. The graded zirconia 
and molybdenum layered coating with zirconia and hafnia 
outer layer functioned for 17 cycles and exhibited less than 1 
percent damage after 213 s of testing. The type 3 and 5 coat-
ing, a graded series of alumina, nichrome, molybdenum and 
zirconia, nichrome, molybdenum respectively functioned 
without failure for 6 cycles and 182 cycles of operation. 
The lower thermal conductivity of plasma sprayed coating 
was a result of higher contact resistance between the plasma 
sprayed particles.
Hodge et al. [159] studied the effect of stabilizers on the 
performance of the zirconia coating. The performance of 
CaO, MgO, and ­Y2O3 stabilized ­ZrO2 in the molten salt 
environment was evaluated. A few Specimens were prepared 
by slip casting and few by air plasma spray technique. Metal/
ceramic graded coating was deposited by plasma spraying on 
button shaped specimens. These button-shaped specimens 
were subjected to burner rig isothermal and cyclic tests at 
926 °C. Stabilized zirconia in the form of slip cast tubes was 
immersed in molten ­Na2SO4 at 898 °C for a period of 100, 
200, 300, and 1000 h. Some of the slip cast hollow speci-
mens were coated with graded metal/ceramic system and 
subjected to burner rig test. The coated slip cast hollow spec-
imens were subjected to a temperature gradient by maintain-
ing 1040 °C and 815 °C on the external and internal surfaces 
respectively. The slip cast specimens did not exhibit gross 
salt penetration and suffered minor deterioration during the 
1000 h of exposure. In case of plasma sprayed samples, 
the deterioration of the metal phase the underlying alloy 
occurred only for those specimens that did not contain vapor 
deposited CoCrAlY initial coating. The samples subjected 
to cyclic test suffered greater damage than the isothermally 
treated specimens. This increased attack is a result of coat-
ing spallation caused by the thermal shock that rendered the 
coating unprotective. The coating in addition to being cor-
rosion resistant should remain intact during thermal cycling 
or must contain an adherent innermost protective layer. The 
coated hollow specimen exhibited greatest temperature gra-
dient for ceramic outer layer. The ceramic layer showed pres-
ence of cracks as compared to the specimen with metallic 
outermost layer. The metal or ceramic phase of the coating 
showed little sulfidation attack even when the external layer 
were at very high temperatures. The TBC system deposited 
by plasma spray technique offered high corrosion resistance 
and improved thermal insulation. However efforts should be 
taken to improve the coating adherence either by varying the 
composition or modifying the microstructure.
Stecura [160] developed a bilayered plasma sprayed 
TBC system for protecting air-cooled gas turbine compo-
nents. The most promising TBC system had a bond coat 
Ni–16Cr–6Al–0.6Y (wt%) and ­ZrO2–12Y2O3 (wt%) as 
the top coat. This TBC system withstood 3200 and 275 
cycles without cracking or spallation. ­ZrO2 stabilized with 
3.4%MgO and 5.4%CaO was also subjected to cyclic heating 
and cooling, the MgO and CaO stabilized coating cracked 
and spalled after 460 and255 cycles respectively at 975 °C. 
The failures occurred in the top coat at bond coat-top coat 
interface. At Mach 0.3 burner rig test the substrate temper-
ature was found to be 140–190 °C lower than that of the 
ceramic surface exposed to the flame. The ­ZrO2–12Y2O3 
TBC system deposited on air-cooled turbine blades with-
stood 3200 and 275 cycles at 1280 °C and 1490 °C. This 
coating system was most resistant to erosion and crack-
ing with very high adherence as compared to that of other 
coating systems. The TBC ceramic layer became thinner 
with time in the burner rig test but no gross spallation was 
observed.
Drummond and Alves [152] in 1979 studied the effect 
of compositional changes on the performance of TBC sys-
tem. TBC system included a bond coat containing 16Cr, 
6Al and 0.15 to 1.08Y % with zirconia top coat. The top-
coat composition was varied by introducing 4.0 to 24.4 wt% 
­Y2O3. The coatings were evaluated in furnace cyclic heating 
and cooling from 990 to 280 °C and 1095 to 280 °C. The 
solid specimens, air-cooled gas turbine blades were tested 
with the surface exposed to 1580 °C temperature. The test 
was carried out using a natural gas-oxygen torch test rig, in 
case of turbine blades, a flame operating at Mach 1.0 was 
employed. The results indicated best thermal barrier coating 
had a bond coat combination of Ni–16.4Cr–5.1Al–0.15Y 
and Ni–17.0Cr–5.4Al–0.35Y. The top coat with 6.2% and 
7.9% ­Y2O3 provided best TBC performance. These coating 
withstood for 1500 and 100 h of cyclic life at 990 °C- 280 °C 
and 1095 °C- 280 °C respectively in furnace thermal cyclic 
test. In natural gas-oxygen torch test rig system the solid 
specimen withstood 590 to 790 cycles at 1200–100 °C. In 
case of Mach 1.0 burner rig test the two systems withstood 
over 1400 and 2000 cycles without failure at 1480 °C and 
1470 °C of surface temperature respectively.
The failed coatings exhibited formation of cracks that 
grew parallel to the bond-top coat interface. The solid speci-
mens exhibited cracks that were at 90 °C to the bond coat 
and the coating on the turbine blades were either at 90 °C or 
at 35–45 °C angle to the bond coating. The application of 
TBC was extended to engine parts to determine the potential 
benefits of coating system. The application was extended 
to turbine vanes, high pressure advanced core engine parts. 
The coating system was tested at high pressure and high 
temperature inlet condition to simulate the gas inlet condi-
tion. The durability test results of the ceramic coating on the 


--- Page 14 ---

1960
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
turbine blades and vanes in furnace and during turbine oper-
ation were encouraging. The coating successfully reduced 
the metal temperature by 390 °C at a constant gas coolant 
flow rate. The ceramic coating thickness can be increased 
to decrease the coolant flow rate without affected the under-
lying substrate temperature. Zirconia thickness of 195 µm 
increased the allowable turbine inlet gas temperature by 
around 500 °C. The coating thickness in the range of 51 µm 
to 510 µm showed adequate adherence to the vane and blade 
metal walls without any sign of spallation for 40 cycles of 
heating and air cooling [161].
The plasma sprayed zirconia coatings performance was 
studied after post plasma spray treatment. Zaplatynsky [72] 
evaluated the performance of laser treated ­ZrO2 coating in 
cyclic oxidation and corrosion burner rig tests. ­ZrO2 coating 
with two thickness 200 µm and 400 µm were laser treated to 
partially melt the coating surface. The cyclic life of the coat-
ing was unaffected by the laser treatment. However the laser 
treated samples showed fourfold life improvement in corro-
sion test carried out in flame containing 100 PPM of sodium 
fuel equivalent. The life of the samples was inversely related 
to the thickness of the coating. The laser glazed zirconia top 
coat showed striations, segmentation and mud flat cracking 
produced by melting. The laser-induced segmentation did 
not have any effect on the performance of the coating. The 
crack propagation in top coat, near and parallel to the top 
coat-bond coat interface lead to failure of the TBC system.
The failure of the coating is a critical factor in decid-
ing the component life. The need for a model to predict the 
life of a coating was addressed by miller et al. A oxidation 
based approach was used for life prediction and a model was 
developed to related the heating cycle duration and cycles 
to failure [152]. The model was used to realte the number 
of cycles to failure to the duration of heating cycle. The 
model was based on the assumption that oxidation is the 
predominant time dependent factor that limits the life of the 
coating. The oxidation induced strain promotes the crack 
growth in the ceramic coating. The radial component of the 
CTE mismatch strain (εr) is considered as the strain that 
directly contributes to the crack porogation at the interface. 
The critical amount of oxidation was characterised by a criti-
cal specific weight gain ­(wc) such that tahe coating fails in 
the first cycle itself. The value of ­wc will depend on many 
factors like the coating thickness, porosity, properties of the 
bond coat, and specimen geometry. The boundary conditions 
can be expressed as:
Cycle to failure ­(Nf) = 1, when w = ­wc and Mismatch strain 
(ε) = Critical strain (εr)
Cycle to failure ­(Nf) = Maximum number of cycles to failure 
­(Nfo), when w = 0and ε = εr
Cycle to failure ­(Nf) = 1, when w = 0and Mismatch strain 
(ε) = failure strain (εf). The failure strain is a material specific 
property at a particular location for a particular specimen. The 
differecne between the effective strain (εe) and CTE msimatach 
strain (εr) will be directly proprtional to the speicifc weight 
gain due ot growht of oxide. The final expression for coating 
life was given as 
The term b represents the subcriticla crack growth exponent 
which have been reported as 17 for plasma sprayed 8% YSZ 
coating. The papameter m refers the order of relationship 
beween the strain and the wieht gain due ot oxidation.
Thermomechanical life prediction models have been devel-
oped to predict life of aiur plasma sprayed and electron beam 
deposited TBC. Fracture mechanics and statstical methods 
have been developed to relate the tensile and the compressive 
strain for the thermalmechcnial life model. The life predic-
tion models were developed for four modes of failure zirco-
nia spallation, bond coat oxidation, molten salt film damage, 
and carbon particle errosion [152]. Life predication models 
by Drummond and Alves [152] have also been developed to 
evaluate the effect of coating edges, oxidation of bond coat, 
creep behaviour of bond coat, top coat and bond coat thick-
nee. The model predicts that the TBC life can be imporoved 
by minimizing the edge effect of the coatings. The bond coat 
oxidation producing strain due to volumetric increment, it also 
reduces the strain due to thermal expansion mismatch between 
the bond coat and the top coat. A model was developed using 
experiment analysis and finite element analysis to relate nor-
mal strain and the shear strain develoed during thermal cycles. 
The model is as given below:
ΔεRZ and ΔεR represents the shear strain range and the nor-
mal strain range and ­Nf is the number of cycles to failure.
The spallation of the coating is dependent both on the 
cyclic thermal loading and the thermal exposure. A damage 
accumulation model was developed by Drummond and Alves 
[152] using both tha cyclic and exposure induced damage. 
The cyclc dammage was related to the inelastic strain and the 
time dependent exposure damage was related to the oxida-
tion kinetic of the bond coat. The cyclic plastic strain ( Δ휀p ) is 
related to the single cycle failure strain 
(Δ휀t
)
 by manson–coffin 
type relation, as given below:
A spallation life model for EBPVD ceramic coating 
was developed by Meier et al. [162] by analysing the 
(1)
Nf
∑
N=1
[(
1 −εr
εf
)(wn
wc
)m
+ εr
εf
]b
= 1
(2)
Δ휀RZ + 0.4Δ휀R = 0.084N−1.445
f
(3)
Number of inelastic strain cycles to failure(N) = K
( Δ휀t
Δ휀p
)b


--- Page 15 ---

1961
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
quantitative cyclic thermal spallation life data, interfacial 
oxide characteristics, coating adherence and other mechan-
ical properties of the coating. The spallationwas found to 
occur by cracking at TGO at the top coat-bond coat inter-
face. The properties of the coating were measured by ten-
sile and compression testing of thin walled single crystal 
superalloy tubes deposited on the external diameter. The 
elastic strength was found to be around 310–345 MPa at 
537 °C. A bond coat oxidation model was developed for 
the EB PVD coating by analysing the furnce test results. 
The following oxide scale thickness model was developed:
The terms δis the oxide thickness in microns, Q is the 
ration of apparent activation energy and universal gas 
constant, ­TO is the temperature constant = 2423.7 K and 
t = time (s).
The TBC life was modelled by developing a correlation 
between the spallation life and the TGO growth character-
istics and the TGO strain levels during a burner rig test. 
The burner rig teat cycles were simulated to meet strain 
emphasied, oxide growth emphasised and mixed mode 
condition. The strain emphasied condition was simulated 
by rapid thermal cycling and the oxide growth was simu-
lated by conducting the test at maximum temperature 
of the cycle. The inelastic deformation is a critical life 
parameters for ceramic coatings however the burner rig 
test for EBPVD coating indicate that the coating reamins 
elactic. The cracking was found to occur at the TGO and 
bond coat interface hence the modelling efforts have used 
elastic strain for development of life predication model. 
The mechanical strain in the TGO was calcuated by sub-
stracting the strain due to free eleongation of the TGO 
from the total strain.
ε = is the mechanical strain in the TGO, εSS = total strain of 
the substrate
The cyclic life is represented by power law as below,
A is the empirical normalising constant and b the the power 
law coefficient. The predictive capability of the life predic-
tion model was verified using three verification tests.
A Fracture mechanics based approach was used by 
Traeger et al. [163] to develop an finite element model 
based on the crack growth predication. The FE model was 
influenced by the thickness of the TGO ­(dTGO), bond coat-
top coat interface surface roughness. The behaviour of the 
material was assumed to be fully elastic and the thermo 
(4)
훿=
{
exp
[
Q
(
1
TO
−1
T
)]
t
}n
(5)
ε(T) = εSS(T)−(δL(T)∕L)
(6)
Cyclic life(N) = AΔ휀b
mechanical stresses are assumed to be generated as a result 
of coefficent of thermal expansion mismatch. The stress 
distribution was expressed by the analytical expression in 
the form given below;
The terms A, L and R represent the roughness amplititute, 
wavelength and the radial coordinate of the TGO. The term 
σavg represents the thermal stress induced due to CTE mis-
match between the coating and the substrate. The development 
of anlyatic model for stress is follwed by modelling of crack 
growth. The initial cracks are assumed to be formed under the 
influence of tensile stress. The state of stress is altered when a 
certain amount of oxide growth occurs at the BC-TC interface. 
The cracks are generated at peak tips when the state of stress 
become compressive, this crakcs grow and lead to spallation 
of the coating. The crack growth rate is represnted by a power 
law as given below;
νO is the growth rate when K = KIC and is assumed to be 
7.6 × 10−5 m/s, m = 18 and the critical stress inentsity 
factor(KIC) is 1 MPa 
√
m . Y is the geometry function, σ is 
the stress rangel for a cycle σmax–σmin = σ. The TGO thick-
ness ­dox is expressed as below;
ETGO is the activation energy and ­ko is the pre-factor, ­KB is 
the boltzman constant and T is the interface temperature. 
The youngs modulus and the stress in the coating varies 
with the number of thermal cycles. The increase in stress 
after each cycle is assumed to be the reason for failure of the 
coating. The expression representing the youngs modulus is 
as given below;
Esint is the activation energy and ­Ao is the pre-factor.
The stress in the coating at the interface is a summation 
of the thermal stress, CTE mismatch stress and stress due to 
addition external strains.
(7)
g(t) =
[
R훼
Le
(
−훿
A
dTGO(t)
)
+ 1.803
(A
L
)0.5
×
[(
L
휉A
)0.5 dTGO(t)
A
−1
]]
휎O
휎av
e
−
(
훽R
L
)
훶A
L1.5
(8)
da
dt = 휈O휎ma
m
2
(
Y
KIc
)m
(9)
dox(t, T) =
(
ko e−ETGO
KBT t
)0.5
(10)
E(t, T) = EO + AOe
−Esin t
kBT t0.5
(11)
Thermal stress
(
휎therm
) = Δ훼ΔT(E(t, T) −EO
)g(t)


--- Page 16 ---

1962
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
The FEM model developed with stress distribution patterns 
as shown above was found to have reasonable aggrement 
with the experimental results.
A fracture mechancis based life prediction model was 
developed by Ni et al. [164] the failure location was found 
to be TBC–TGO interface and occurred as a result of crack 
propogationa and coalescence. During thermal cycling 
a large amount of stress is developed at the top coat and 
bond coat interface. This stress inititates crack at the metal 
ceramic interface which propogates and results in failure of 
the coating. The TGO thickness is time dependent related 
as shown below;
“m” is the time exponent and “kP”is the temperature depend-
ent growth rate. The critical crack length is 8.8 mm and is 
given by the expression given below:
ETBC, ­VTBC is the youngs modulus and the poissions ratio.
αTBC and αsubis the coefficient of thermal expansion of TBC 
and the substrate.
The crack propogation rate was related to the stress inten-
sity factor (ΔK) with power n
Δ휎 is the stress range at minimun temperature, C is the 
length of crack. A life oprediction model is developed by 
fitting the experimental data which is represented by the log 
form of the paris law with an calculated values of ­A* and n.
The bond strength of the TBC is affected by the ther-
mal fatigue experienced by the coating. Song et al. [165] 
developed a life prediction model based on the variation of 
bond strength of the coating with the number of cycles. The 
Eqs. (18), (19) and (20) shows the relationship between the 
bond strength for sample after N thermal fatigue cycles with 
15 min, 20 min, and 30 min of heating duration in a cycle. 
(12)
휎sub = 17MPa × 0.005m
r휎av
E(t, T)Δ훼ΔT
(13)
휎max =
[
R훼
l e−훿휎oe
[
−훽R
L
]
훶A
L1.5
]
× −
η휀_mech
Δ훼sub −TGOΔT
(14)
Thickness of TGO
(
dTGO
) = kptm
(15)
C ≈2.21 DTBC
(
ETBC
(1 −V2
TBC
)
)0.5
휎=
ETBC
1 −VTBC
(훼TBC −훼sub
)ΔT
(16)
dc
dN = A∗(ΔK)n
(17)
ΔK = Δ휎
√
휋C
The effect of duration of heating was also considered, the 
model is given as below in Eq. (23)
Wei et al. [166] developed a numerical life prediction 
model by predicting the failure stress of the top coating. 
The numerical results were found to be consistant with the 
experimental results. The TGO thickness was related to the 
dwell peroid (1 h) and the thermal cycles using the followign 
relation.
The coating was assumed to fail when an delaminating 
crack was visible at the surface of the coating. The FEM 
model was based on the following failure reasons (1) failure 
due to roughnening of TC/TGO/BC interface (2) excessive 
TGO growth (3) creep (4) sintering due to high temperature 
exposure (5) CTE mismatch between the TC, TGO and the 
BC. The life prediction model development methodology 
was developed in 3 steps, the first step involved the analysis 
of SEM images to obtain a cumulative probablity of micro-
structural characteristics. The FEM model was build on the 
boundary conditions obtained from TGO thickness. The next 
step was to consider the creep, oxidation, and sintering and 
calculate the stress and strain at hold temperature (Tmax) 
and on cooling refered as σ(Tmax), ε(Tmax) and σ(Tmin), ε(Tmin) 
respectively. The third step was to finalize the failure crite-
rion of the coating which was (peak stress) σ(Tmin) > failure 
stress. The lifetime of the TBC lies in between 1
thold
(
Δh(i−1)
B
) 1
m 
and 1
thold
(
Δh(i)
B
) 1
m for the TGO thickness when varied from 
Δh(i-1) to Δh(i).
5  Future Work
The hot corrosion resistance of YSZ thermal barrier coating 
is lower, no attempts are seen in the literature to develop a 
composite coating to improve the hot corrosion behaviour 
(18)
휎15min = −0.215 × N + 62.5
(19)
휎20min = −0.271 × N + 62.5
(20)
휎30min = −0.355 × N + 62.5
(21)
a = ao × f(t) = −0.215 (1 + 0.0442t)
(22)
휎= −0.215(1 + 0.0442t) × N + 62.5
(23)
At failure (휎= 0) N =
−휎O
ao × f(t) =
290.70
1 + 0.0442t
(24)
TGO thickness (h) = 0.86 × (no. of thermal cycles)0.3


--- Page 17 ---

1963
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
of thermal barrier coating. Effect of whisker reinforcement 
on the dispersion of particles on fracture toughness of the 
TBC has not been reported in the literature. There are very 
few stress relaxation techniques for determining the residual 
stress in the TBC. A cost effective and convient method for 
quantifying the residual stress in the coating. There is very 
less literature availble in life prediction model in presence 
of molten salt environment.
6  Conclusions
The future of thermal barrier coating (TBCs) require design 
and development of advanced materials for protecting the 
turbines and other engine components resulting in improve-
ment in better fuel efficiency, engine reliability and reduced 
downtime of the unit. The study of various aspects like the 
residual stress, high temperature performance of TBCs is 
very critical in development of newer coating material and 
TBC systems. The development of life prediction model of 
coatings is essential before the newly developed coatings 
are used in actual working environment. The understanding 
of failure mechanism and process induced stresses is very 
important before application of next generation advanced 
TBCs.
References
	 1.	 M. Schütze, Fundamentals of high temperature corrosion. 
Mater. Sci. Technol. A Compr. Treat. (2000). https​://doi.
org/10.1002/97835​27619​306.ch2
	 2.	 M.O.T.A. Cruse, S.E. Steward, Thermal barrier coating life pre-
diction model development. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power. (1991). 
https​://doi.org/10.1115/91-GT-040
	 3.	 A.H. Pakseresht, M. Saremi, H. Omidvar, M. Alizadeh, Micro-
structural study and wear resistance of thermal barrier coating 
reinforced by alumina whisker. Surf. Coat. Technol. 366, 338–
348 (2019). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2019.03.059
	 4.	 K. Wang, H. Peng, H. Guo, S. Gong, Effect of sintering on ther-
mal conductivity and thermal barrier effects of thermal barrier 
coatings. Chin. J. Aeronaut. 25, 811–816 (2012). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/S1000​-9361(11)60449​-4
	 5.	 C. Pandey, M.M. Mahapatra, P. Kumar, N. Saini, J.G. Thakre, 
Nano-size particle evolution during heat treatment of P91 steel 
and their effect on micro hardness. Trans. Indian Inst. Met. 
(2017). https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1266​6-017-1215-6
	 6.	 N. Rana, M.M. Mahapatra, R. Jayaganthan, S. Prakash, High-
temperature oxidation and hot corrosion studies on NiCrAlY 
coatings deposited by flame-spray technique. J. Therm. Spray 
Technol. 24, 769–777 (2015). https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1166​
6-015-0237-z
	 7.	 J. Sun, Q.G. Fu, R.M. Yuan, K.Y. Dong, J.J. Guo, Corrosion 
and thermal cycling behavior of plasma sprayed thermal barrier 
coatings on die steel. Mater. Des. 114, 537–545 (2017). https​://
doi.org/10.1016/j.matde​s.2016.10.065
	 8.	 S. Mahade, K.P. Jonnalagadda, N. Curry, X.H. Li, S. Björklund, 
N. Markocsan, P. Nylén, R.L. Peng, Engineered architectures of 
gadolinium zirconate based thermal barrier coatings subjected 
to hot corrosion test. Surf. Coat. Technol. 328, 361–370 (2017). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2017.09.005
	 9.	 J.A. Haynes, B.A. Pint, K.L. More, Y. Zhang, I.G. Wright, Influ-
ence of sulfur, platinum, and hafnium on the oxidation behavior 
of CVD NiAl bond coatings. Oxid. Met. 58, 513–544 (2002). 
https​://doi.org/10.1023/A:10205​25123​056
	 10.	 A.K. Keshri, J. Huang, V. Singh, W. Choi, S. Seal, A. Agarwal, 
Synthesis of aluminum oxide coating with carbon nanotube rein-
forcement produced by chemical vapor deposition for improved 
fracture and wear resistance. Carbon 48, 431–442 (2010). https​
://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbo​n.2009.08.046
	 11.	 K.N. Lee, R.A. Miller, Development and environmental durabil-
ity of mullite and mullite/YSZ dual layer coatings for SiC and 
Si3N4 ceramics. Surf. Coat. Technol. 86–87, 142–148 (1996). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0257​-8972(96)03074​-5
	 12.	 R. Eriksson, Thermal Barrier Coatings: Durability Assessment 
and Life Prediction (Linköping University Electronic Press, 
2013)
	 13.	 L. Ma, A. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Lu, H. He, C. Li, A new fabrica-
tion method of uniformly distributed ­TiO2/CNTs composite film 
by in situ chemical vapordeposition. Mater. Lett. 96, 203–205 
(2013). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.matle​t.2013.01.033
	 14.	 L. Pawolowski, The Science and Engineering of Thermal Spray 
Coatings, 2nd edn. (Wiley, New York, 2008)
	 15.	 D.J. Varacalle, L.B. Lundberg, R.S. Hartley, J. Walker, I. Falls, 
Surface Preparation via Grit-Blasting for Thermal Spraying, 
No. INEL- 94/00136; CONF-9509182-7. (EG and G Idaho, Inc., 
Idaho Falls, ID, United States, 1995)
	 16.	 Y.X. Kang, Y. Bai, W. Fan, T. Yuan, Y. Gao, C.G. Bao, B.Q. 
Li, Thermal cycling performance of ­La2Ce2O7/50 vol.% YSZ 
composite thermal barrier coating with CMAS corrosion. J. Eur. 
Ceram. Soc. 38, 2851–2862 (2018). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jeurc​erams​oc.2018.02.025
	 17.	 J. R. Davis, Handbook of. Technology, 9(2) (2000)
	 18.	 H. Koivuluoto, P. Vuoristo, Structural analysis of cold-sprayed 
nickel-based metallic and metallic-ceramic coatings. J. Therm. 
Spray Technol. 19, 975–989 (2010). https​://doi.org/10.1007/
s1166​6-010-9481-4
	 19.	 T. Hussain, Cold spraying of titanium: a review of bonding 
mechanisms, microstructure and properties. Key Eng. Mater. 
533, 53–90 (2012). https​://doi.org/10.4028/www.scien​tific​.net/
kem.533.53
	 20.	 Y.Y. Zhang, X.K. Wu, H. Cui, J.S. Zhang, Cold-spray process-
ing of a high density nanocrystalline aluminum alloy 2009 coat-
ing using a mixture of as-atomized and as-cryomilled powders. 
J. Therm. Spray Technol. 20, 1125–1132 (2011). https​://doi.
org/10.1007/s1166​6-011-9652-y
	 21.	 M. Meyer, R. Lupoi, An analysis of the particulate flow in 
cold spray nozzles. Mech. Sci. 6, 127–136 (2015). https​://doi.
org/10.5194/ms-6-127-2015
	 22.	 A. List, F. Gärtner, T. Schmidt, T. Klassen, Impact conditions for 
cold spraying of hard metallic glasses. J. Therm. Spray Technol. 
21, 531–540 (2012). https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1166​6-012-9750-5
	 23.	 Y. Bai, Z.H. Wang, X.B. Li, G.S. Huang, C.X. Li, Y. Li, Cor-
rosion behavior of low pressure cold sprayed Zn–Ni composite 
coatings. J. Alloys Compd. 719, 194–202 (2017). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jallc​om.2017.05.134
	 24.	 S. Harsha, D.K. Dwivedi, A. Agrawal, Influence of WC addi-
tion in Co–Cr–W–Ni–C flame sprayed coatings on microstruc-
ture, microhardness and wear behaviour. Surf. Coat. Tech-
nol. 201, 5766–5775 (2007). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​
oat.2006.10.026
	 25.	 M. Walker, Microstructure and bonding mechanisms in cold 
spray coatings. Mater. Sci. Technol. (United Kingdom) 34, 2057–
2077 (2018). https​://doi.org/10.1080/02670​836.2018.14754​44


--- Page 18 ---

1964
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
	 26.	 S. Kamal, R. Jayaganthan, S. Prakash, S. Kumar, Hot corrosion 
behavior of detonation gun sprayed ­Cr3C2–NiCr coatings on Ni 
and Fe-based superalloys in ­Na2SO4–60% ­V2O5 environment 
at 900 °C. J. Alloys Compd. 463, 358–372 (2008). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jallc​om.2007.09.019
	 27.	 J.G. Thakare, C. Pandey, R.S. Mulik, M.M. Mahapatra, Micro-
structure and mechanical properties of D-Gun sprayed ­Cr3C2–
NiCr coating on P91 steel subjected to long term thermal expo-
sure at 650 °C. Mater. Res. Express. 6, 1 (2019). https​://doi.
org/10.1088/2053-1591/ab526​5
	 28.	 O. Racek, The effect of HVOF particle-substrate interactions 
on local variations in the coating microstructure and the corro-
sion resistance. J. Therm. Spray Technol. 19, 841–851 (2010). 
https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1166​6-010-9483-2
	 29.	 K. Vanevery, M.J.M. Krane, R.W. Trice, H. Wang, W. Porter, 
M. Besser, D. Sordelet, J. Ilavsky, J. Almer, Column formation 
in suspension plasma-sprayed coatings and resultant thermal 
properties. J. Therm. Spray Technol. 20, 817–828 (2011). https​
://doi.org/10.1007/s1166​6-011-9632-2
	 30.	 M. Saremi, A. Afrasiabi, A. Kobayashi, Microstructural analy-
sis of YSZ and YSZ/Al2O3 plasma sprayed thermal barrier 
coatings after high temperature oxidation. Surf. Coat. Tech-
nol. 202, 3233–3238 (2008). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​
oat.2007.11.029
	 31.	 P. Bengtsson, T. Johannesson, Characterization of microstructural 
defects in plasma-sprayed thermal barrier coatings. J. Therm. 
Spray Technol. 4, 245–251 (1995). https​://doi.org/10.1007/
BF026​46967​
	 32.	 S. Li, Y. An, H. Zhou, J. Chen, Plasma sprayed YSZ coatings 
deposited at different deposition temperatures, part 1: splats, 
microstructures, mechanical properties and residual stress. Surf. 
Coat. Technol. 350, 712–721 (2018). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
surfc​oat.2018.07.074
	 33.	 Muehlberger, Stephan E. (San Clemente, CA) High tempera-
ture plasma gun assembly, Patent, United States Electro-Plasma, 
Inc., Irvine, CA, 5412173, (1995), http://www.freep​atent​sonli​
ne.com/54121​73.html
	 34.	 J.E. Jackson, Method for shielding a gas effluent, US Patent for 
Method of shielding effluents in spray devices Patent (Patent # 
7,045,172), (1969)
	 35.	 A.R. Stetson, C.A. Hauck, Plasma spraying techniques for toxic 
and oxidizable materials. J. Met. 13, 479–480 (1961)
	 36.	 A. Kulkarni, A. Vaidya, A. Goland, S. Sampath, H. Her-
man, Processing effects on porosity–property correlations in 
plasma sprayed yttria-stabilized zirconia coatings. Mater. Sci. 
Eng. A 359, 100–111 (2003). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0921​
-5093(03)00342​-3
	 37.	 B.S. Sidhu, S. Prakash, Performance of NiCrAlY, Ni-Cr, Stel-
lite-6 and ­Ni3Al coatings in ­Na2SO4–60% ­V2O5 environment at 
900 °C under cyclic conditions. Surf. Coat. Technol. 201, 1643–
1654 (2006). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2006.02.035
	 38.	 J.G. Thakare, R.S. Mulik, M.M. Mahapatra, R. Upadhyaya, Hot 
corrosion behavior of plasma sprayed 8YSZ-alumina-CNT com-
posite coating in ­Na2SO4–60% ­V2O5 molten salt environment. 
Ceram. Int. 44, 21533–21545 (2018). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ceram​int.2018.08.217
	 39.	 X. Wang, L. Guo, H. Peng, L. Zheng, H. Guo, S. Gong, Hot-
corrosion behavior of a ­La2Ce2O7/YSZ thermal barrier coat-
ing exposed to ­Na2SO4 + V2O5 or ­V2O5 salt at 900 °C. Ceram. 
Int. 41, 6604–6609 (2015). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceram​
int.2015.01.107
	 40.	 M. Movchan, Y. Rudoy, Composition, structure and properties 
of gradient thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) produced by elec-
tron beam physical vapor deposition (EB–PVD). Mater. Des. 19, 
253–258 (1998)
	 41.	 J.R. Nicholls, M.J. Deakin, D.S. Rickerby, A comparison between 
the erosion behaviour of thermal spray and electron beam physi-
cal vapour deposition thermal barrier coatings. Wear (1999). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0043​-1648(99)00214​-8
	 42.	 P.S. Anderson, X. Wang, P. Xiao, Effect of isothermal heat 
treatment on plasma-sprayed yttria-stabilized zirconia studied 
by impedance spectroscopy. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 88, 324–330 
(2005). https​://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-2916.2005.00088​.x
	 43.	 Z. Wang, A. Kulkarni, S. Deshpande, T. Nakamura, H. Her-
man, Effects of pores and interfaces on effective properties of 
plasma sprayed zirconia coatings. Acta Mater. 51, 5319–5334 
(2003). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S1359​-6454(03)00390​-2
	 44.	 R. Vaßen, M.O. Jarligo, T. Steinke, D.E. Mack, D. Stöver, 
Overview on advanced thermal barrier coatings. Surf. Coat. 
Technol. 205, 938–942 (2010). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​
oat.2010.08.151
	 45.	 D. Liu, C. Rinaldi, P.E.J. Flewitt, Effect of substrate curva-
ture on the evolution of microstructure and residual stresses in 
EBPVD-TBC. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 35, 2563–2575 (2015). https​
://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeurc​erams​oc.2015.02.024
	 46.	 G. Shanmugavelayutham, A. Kobayashi, Mechanical properties 
and oxidation behaviour of plasma sprayed functionally graded 
zirconia–alumina thermal barrier coatings. Mater. Chem. Phys. 
103, 283–289 (2007). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.match​emphy​
s.2007.02.066
	 47.	 J.G. Thakare, C. Pandey, R.S. Mulik, M.M. Mahapatra, 
Mechanical property evaluation of carbon nanotubes reinforced 
plasma sprayed YSZ-alumina composite coating. Ceram. 
Int. 44, 6980–6989 (2018). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceram​
int.2018.01.131
	 48.	 G. Montavon, S. Sampath, C.C. Berndt, C. Coddet, Effects of 
vacuum plasma spray processing parameters on splat. Mor-
phology 4, 5–6 (1995)
	 49.	 M.H. Foroushani, M. Shamanian, M. Salehi, F. Davar, Poros-
ity analysis and oxidation behavior of plasma sprayed YSZ 
and YSZ/LaPO4 abradable thermal barrier coatings. Ceram. 
Int. 42, 15868–15875 (2016). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceram​
int.2016.07.057
	 50.	 M.R. Rokni, S.R. Nutt, C.A. Widener, V.K. Champagne, R.H. 
Hrabe, Review of relationship between particle deformation, 
coating microstructure, and properties in high-pressure cold 
spray. J. Therm. Spray Technol. 26, 1308–1355 (2017). https​
://doi.org/10.1007/s1166​6-017-0575-0
	 51.	 P. Fauchais, G. Montavon, M. Vardelle, J. Cedelle, Devel-
opments in direct current plasma spraying 201, 1908–1921 
(2006). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2006.04.033
	 52.	 S. Sampath, X.Y. Jiang, J. Matejicek, L. Prchlik, A. Kulkarni, 
A. Vaidya, Role of thermal spray processing method on the 
microstructure, residual stress and properties of coatings: 
an integrated study of Ni-5 wt% Al bond coats. Mater. Sci. 
Eng. A. 364, 216–231 (2004). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
msea.2003.08.023
	 53.	 S.R. Choi, Mechanical Properties of Plasma-Sprayed ZrO2–
8wt% Y2O3 Thermal Barrier Coatings (Glenn Research Center, 
Cleveland, 2004)
	 54.	 A. Afrasiabi, M. Saremi, A. Kobayashi, A comparative study on 
hot corrosion resistance of three types of thermal barrier coat-
ings: YSZ, YSZ + Al2O3 and YSZ/Al2O3. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 478, 
264–269 (2008). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2007.06.001
	 55.	 U. Saral, N. Toplan, Thermal cycle properties of plasma sprayed 
YSZ/Al2O3 thermal barrier coatings. Surf. Eng. 25, 541–547 
(2009). https​://doi.org/10.1179/02670​8408X​34359​1
	 56.	 G.F. Ribas, D.C. Padró, L.M.L. Pitarch, M.A. Gomila, Ther-
mal shock resistance of Y-TZP with Palmqvist craks. J. Eur. 
Ceram. Soc. 23, 107–114 (2003). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0955​
-2219(02)00065​-1


--- Page 19 ---

1965
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
	 57.	 B. Choules, K. Kokini, T. Taylor, Thermal fracture of thermal 
barrier coatings in a high heat flux environment. Surf. Coat. 
Technol. 106, 23–29 (1998). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0257​
-8972(98)00485​-X
	 58.	 G. Sreedhar, V.S. Raja, Hot corrosion of YSZ/Al2O3 dispersed 
NiCrAlY plasma-sprayed coatings in ­Na2SO4-10 wt% NaCl melt. 
Corros. Sci. 52, 2592–2602 (2010). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
corsc​i.2010.04.007
	 59.	 S. Mohsen, A. Abbas, K. Akira, Bond coat oxidation and 
hot corrosion behavior of plasma sprayed YSZ coating on Ni 
superalloy †. Trans. JWRI. 36, 41–45 (2007)
	 60.	 P. Jana, P.S. Jayan, S. Mandal, K. Biswas, Hot corrosion behav-
iour of rare-earth magnesium hexaaluminate based thermal 
barrier coatings under molten sulphate-vanadate salts. Surf. 
Coat. Technol. 322, 108–119 (2017). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
surfc​oat.2017.05.038
	 61.	 M.P. Schmitt, A.K. Rai, R. Bhattacharya, D. Zhu, D.E. Wolfe, 
Multilayer thermal barrier coating (TBC) architectures utiliz-
ing rare earth doped YSZ and rare earth pyrochlores. Surf. 
Coat. Technol. 251, 56–63 (2014). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
surfc​oat.2014.03.049
	 62.	 K.M. Doleker, A.C. Karaoglanli, Comparison of oxidation 
behavior of YSZ and ­Gd2Zr2O7 thermal barrier coatings 
(TBCs). Surf. Coat. Technol. 318, 198–207 (2017). https​://
doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2016.12.078
	 63.	 J. Xia, L. Yang, R.T. Wu, Y.C. Zhou, L. Zhang, B.B. Yin, 
Y.G. Wei, On the resistance of rare earth oxide-doped YSZ 
to high temperature volcanic ash attack. Surf. Coat. Tech-
nol. 307, 534–541 (2016). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​
oat.2016.09.033
	 64.	 M. Saremi, A. Keyvani, M. Heydarzadeh Sohi, Hot corrosion 
resistance and mechanical behavior of atmospheric plasma 
sprayed conventional and nanostructured zirconia coatings. 
Int. J. Mod. Phys. Conf. Ser. 05, 720–727 (2012). https​://doi.
org/10.1142/S2010​19451​20026​7X
	 65.	 T.A. Taylor, Thermal properties and microstructure of two 
thermal barrier coatings. Surf. Coat. Technol. 54–55, 53–57 
(1992). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0257​-8972(09)90027​-5
	 66.	 T.A. Taylor, D.L. Appleby, A.E. Weatherill, J. Griffiths, 
Plasma-sprayed yttria-stabilized zirconia coatings: structure-
property relationships. Surf. Coat. Technol. 43–44, 470–480 
(1990). https​://doi.org/10.1016/0257-8972(90)90098​-W
	 67.	 X. Zhou, J. Wang, J. Yuan, J. Sun, S. Dong, L. He, X. Cao, 
Calcium–magnesium–alumino–silicate induced degradation 
and failure of ­La2(Zr0.7Ce0.3)2O7/YSZ double-ceramic–layer 
thermal barrier coatings prepared by electron beam-physical 
vapor deposition. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 38, 1897–1907 (2018). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeurc​erams​oc.2017.10.057
	 68.	 J.A. Thompson, Zirconia top coats in plasma-sprayed TBCs. 
Acta Mater. 49, 1565–1575 (2001)
	 69.	 A.K. Ray, R.W. Steinbrech, Crack propagation studies of ther-
mal barrier coatings under bending. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 19, 
2097–2109 (1999)
	 70.	 J.H. Kim, M.C. Kim, C.G. Park, Effects of Defects on the Ther-
mal Fatigue Behavior of Detonation-Gun Sprayed Thermal 
Barrier Coatings, 7 (2001)
	 71.	 J.S. Wallace, J. Ilavsky, J.S. Wallace, J. Ilavsky, C. Division, 
Plasma Sprayed Deposits. J. Ther. Spray Technol. 7, 521–526 
(1998)
	 72.	 I. Zaplatynsky, Performance of laser-glazed zirconia ther-
mal barrier coatings in cyclic oxidation and corrosion burner 
rig tests. Thin Solid Films 95, 275–284 (1982). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/0040-6090(82)90020​-7
	 73.	 H. Kim, Y. Kweon, Elastic modulus of plasma-sprayed coat-
ings determined by indentation and bend tests. Thin Solid 
Films 342, 201–206 (1999)
	 74.	 D. Schwingel, R. Taylor, T. Haubold, J. Wigren, C. Gualco, 
Mechanical and thermophysical properties of thick PYSZ 
thermal barrier coatings: correlation with microstructure and 
spraying parameters. Surf. Coat. Technol. 109, 99–106 (1998)
	 75.	 A.W.L.S. Cook, Temperature dependence of dynamic Young’ s 
modulus and internal friction in LPPS NiCrAIY. J. Mater. Sci. 
29, 5104–5108 (1994)
	 76.	 A.M. Karlsson, T. Xu, A.G. Evans, The effect of the thermal 
barrier coating on the displacement instability in thermal barrier 
systems. Acta Meter 50, 1211–1218 (2002)
	 77.	 M. Jinnestrand, H. Brodin, Crack initiation and propagation in air 
plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings, testing and mathemati-
cal modelling of low cycle fatigue behaviour. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 
379, 45–57 (2004). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2003.12.063
	 78.	 K.N. Lee, Current status of environmental barrier coatings for 
Si-based ceramics. Surf. Coat. Technol. 133–134, 1–7 (2000). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0257​-8972(00)00889​-6
	 79.	 R.A. Miller, History of Thermal Barrier Coatings for Gas Turbine 
Engines, (2009)
	 80.	 B.S. Sidhu, S. Prakash, Studies on the behaviour of stellite-6 as 
plasma sprayed and laser remelted coatings in molten salt envi-
ronment at 900 °C under cyclic conditions. J. Mater. Process. 
Technol. 172, 52–63 (2006)
	 81.	 M. Belmonte, Advanced ceramic materials for high temperature 
applications. Adv. Eng. Mater. 8, 693–703 (2006). https​://doi.
org/10.1002/adem.20050​0269
	 82.	 K. Jiang, S. Liu, X. Wang, Phase stability and thermal conductiv-
ity of nanostructured tetragonal yttria–stabilized zirconia ther-
mal barrier coatings deposited by air–plasma spraying. Ceram. 
Int. 43, 12633–12640 (2017). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceram​
int.2017.06.142
	 83.	 S. Mahade, N. Curry, S. Björklund, N. Markocsan, P. Nylén, 
Engineered thermal barrier coatings deposited by suspension 
plasma spray. Mater. Lett. 209, 517–521 (2017). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.matle​t.2017.08.096
	 84.	 B.T. Richards, H.N.G. Wadley, Plasma spray deposition of 
tri-layer environmental barrier coatings. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 
34, 3069–3083 (2014). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeurc​erams​
oc.2014.04.027
	 85.	 B. Xu, C. Hong, S. Zhou, J. Han, X. Zhang, High-temperature 
erosion resistance of ­ZrB2—based ceramic coating for light-
weight carbon/carbon composites under simulated atmospheric 
re-entry conditions by high frequency plasma wind tunnel 
test Outer-layered coating SiC whisker CBCFs (d). Ceram. 
Int. 42, 9511–9518 (2016). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceram​
int.2016.03.029
	 86.	 X. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. Gu, B. Zou, Y. Wang, X. Cao, Hot corro-
sion behaviour of plasma sprayed YSZ/LaMgAl 11O19 compos-
ite coatings in molten sulfate—vanadate salt. Corros. Sci. 53, 
2335–2343 (2011). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.corsc​i.2011.03.019
	 87.	 G. Di Girolamo, C. Blasi, M. Schioppa, L. Tapfer, Structure and 
thermal properties of heat treated plasma sprayed ceria-yttria 
co-stabilized zirconia coatings. Ceram. Int. 36, 961–968 (2010). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceram​int.2009.10.020
	 88.	 B.R. Marple, J. Voyer, M. Thibodeau, D.R. Nagy, Hot corrosion 
of lanthanum zirconate and partially stabilized zirconia thermal 
barrier coatings. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 128, 1 (2019). https​
://doi.org/10.1115/1.19245​34
	 89.	 A. Keyvani, M. Saremi, M.H. Sohi, Surface and coatings technol-
ogy an investigation on oxidation, hot corrosion and mechanical 
properties of plasma-sprayed conventional and nanostructured 
YSZ coatings. Surf. Coat. Technol. 206, 208–216 (2011). https​
://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2011.06.036
	 90.	 H. Jamali, R. Mozafarinia, R.S. Razavi, R. Ahmadi-pidani, Com-
parison of thermal shock resistances of plasma-sprayed nano-
structured and conventional yttria stabilized zirconia thermal 


--- Page 20 ---

1966
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
barrier coatings. Ceram. Int. 38, 6705–6712 (2012). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ceram​int.2012.05.060
	 91.	 B. Liang, H. Liao, C. Ding, C. Coddet, Nanostructured zirco-
nia-30 vol.% alumina composite coatings deposited by atmos-
pheric plasma spraying. Thin Solid Films. 484, 225–231 (2005). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsf.2005.02.040
	 92.	 F. Yu, D. Gu, Y. Zheng, Y. Luo, X. Li, H. Chen, L. Guo, Influ-
ence of ­MoO3on boron aluminosilicate glass-ceramic coating 
for enhancing titanium high-temperature oxidation resistance. J. 
Alloys Compd. 729, 453–462 (2017). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jallc​om.2017.09.189
	 93.	 R.C. Hendricks, Residual stress in plasma sprayed ceramic tur-
bine tip and gas path seal specimen, (n.d.)
	 94.	 C.-C. Chiu, Determination of the elastic modulus and 
residual stresses in ceramic coatings using a strain gage. 
J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 73, 1999–2005 (1990). https​://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1151-2916.1990.tb052​58.x
	 95.	 C.O. Ruud, C.P. Gazzara, Residual stress measurements in alu-
mina and silicon carbide. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 68, 67–68 (1985)
	 96.	 O.B. Soroka, Evaluation of residual stresses in PVD-coatings. 
Part 1 Rev. 42, 287–296 (2010)
	 97.	 S. Kuroda, Generation mechanisms of residual stresses in 
plasma-sprayed coatings. Vacuum 41, 1297–1299 (1990)
	 98.	 S. Kuroda, The quinching stress in thermal sprayed coating. Thin 
solid films 200, 2–3 (1991)
	 99.	 A. Bhattacharyya, D. Maurice, Mechanics of Materials Residual 
stresses in functionally graded thermal barrier coatings. Mech. 
Mater. 129, 50–56 (2019). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.mechm​
at.2018.11.002
	100.	 Y.Y. Santana, J.G. La Barbera-Sosa, M.H. Staia, J. Lesage, 
E.S. Puchi-Cabrera, D. Chicot, E. Bemporad, Measurement of 
residual stress in thermal spray coatings by the incremental hole 
drilling method. Surf. Coat. Technol. 201, 2092–2098 (2006). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2006.04.056
	101.	 A.F.M. Arif, K.S. Al-athel, K. Fahd, S. Arabia, Residual Stresses 
in Thermal Spray Coating (Elsevier Ltd., Amsterdam, 2017). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-80358​1-8.09199​-2
	102.	 S. Kuroda, T. Fukushima, S. Kitahara, Simultaneous measure-
ment of coating thickness and deposition stress during thermal 
spraying. Thin Solid Films 164, 157–163 (1988). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/0040-6090(88)90127​-7
	103.	 R. Ahmed, M.E. Fitzpatrick, N.H. Faisal, Surface & Coatings 
Technology A comparison of neutron diffraction and hole-
drilling residual strain measurements in thermally sprayed coat-
ings. Surf. Coat. Technol. 206, 4180–4185 (2012). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2012.04.018
	104.	 J.H. Dautzenberg, R.O.E. Vijigen, Mechanical measurement of 
residual stress in thin PVD films. Thin Solid Films. 270, 264–269 
(1995)
	105.	 Y.Y. Santana, P.O. Renault, M. Sebastiani, J.G. La Barbera, J. 
Lesage, E. Bemporad, Characterization and residual stresses 
of WC–Co thermally sprayed coatings. Surf. Coat. Tech-
nol. 202, 4560–4565 (2008). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​
oat.2008.04.042
	106.	 D.J. Greying, E.F. Rybicki, J.R. Shadley, Through-thickness 
residual stress evaluations for several industrial thermal spray 
coatings using a modified. J. Therm. Spray Technol. 3, 379–388 
(1994)
	107.	 O. Kesler, M. Finot, Determination of processing induced 
stresses and properties of layeres and graded coatings: experi-
mental method and reuslts of plasma sprayed Ni-Al2O3, Acta 
Mater. 45 (1997)
	108.	 Y. Song, Q.Z. Fang, T.J. Wang, Experimental investigation of 
residual thermal stress in thermal barrier coating (TBC), in: 
Key Engineering Materials, (2011), pp. 295–300. https​://doi.
org/10.4028/www.scien​tific​.net/KEM.462-463.295
	109.	 M. Buchmann, R. Gadow, J. Tabellion, Experimental and numer-
ical residual stress analysis of layer coated composites. Mater. 
Sci. Eng. A 288, 154–159 (2000)
	110.	 X. Zhang, M. Watanabe, S. Kuroda, Effects of residual stress 
on the mechanical properties of plasma-sprayed thermal barrier 
coatings. Eng. Fract. Mech. 110, 314–327 (2013). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.engfr​acmec​h.2013.08.016
	111.	 A.M. Limarga, S. Widjaja, T. Hon, Mechanical properties and 
oxidation resistance of plasma-sprayed multilayered ­Al2O3/
ZrO2 thermal barrier coatings. Surf. Coat. Technol. 197, 
93–102 (2005). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2005.02.087
	112.	 K. Hirano, Application of eutectic composites to gas turbine 
system and fundamental fracture properties up to 1700 °C. 
J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 25, 1191–1199 (2005). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jeurc​erams​oc.2005.01.003
	113.	 K. Ogawa, T. Shoji, H. Aoki, N. Fujita, T. Torigoe, Mechanistic 
understanding for degraded thermal barrier coatings. JSME Int. 
J. Ser. A Solid Mech. Mater. Eng. 44, 507–513 (2001). https​://
doi.org/10.1299/jsmea​.44.507
	114.	 S.M. Meier, D.K. Gupta, The evolution of thermal barrier coat-
ings in gas turbine engine applications. J. Eng. Gas Turbines 
Power 116, 250–257 (1994). https​://doi.org/10.1115/1.29068​
01
	115.	 G.W. Goward, Protective coatings—purpose, role, and design. 
Mater. Sci. Technol. 2, 194–200 (1986). https​://doi.org/10.1179/
mst.1986.2.3.194
	116.	 S. Bose, High Temperature Coatings (Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Oxford, 2007). https​://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-7506-8252-7.
X5000​-8
	117.	 H.M. Tawancy, N. Sridhar, B.S. Tawabini, N.M. Abbas, T.N. 
Rhys-Jones, Thermal stability of a platinum aluminide coating 
on nickel-based superalloys. J. Mater. Sci. 27, 6463–6474 (1992). 
https​://doi.org/10.1007/BF005​76299​
	118.	 B.A. Pint, I.G. Wright, W.Y. Lee, Y. Zhang, K. Prüßner, K.B. 
Alexander, Substrate and bond coat compositions: factors affect-
ing alumina scale adhesion. Mater. Sci. Eng., A 245, 201–211 
(1998). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0921​-5093(97)00851​-4
	119.	 R. Lowrie, D.H. Boone, Composite coatings of CoCrAlY plus 
platinum. Thin Solid Films 45, 491–498 (1977). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/0040-6090(77)90236​-X
	120.	 H.E. Evans, Stress effects in high temperature oxidation of met-
als. Int. Mater. Rev. 40, 1–40 (1995). https​://doi.org/10.1179/
imr.1995.40.1.1
	121.	 R.A. Rapp, Y.-S. Zhang, Hot corrosion of materials: fundamental 
studies. JOM 46, 47–55 (1994). https​://doi.org/10.1007/BF032​
22665​
	122.	 N. Eliaz, G. Shemesh, R.M. Latanision, Hot corrosion in gas 
turbine components. Eng. Fail. Anal. 9, 31–43 (2002). https​://
doi.org/10.1016/S1350​-6307(00)00035​-2
	123.	 R. Rajendran, Gas turbine coatings—an overview. Eng. Fail. 
Anal. 26, 355–369 (2012)
	124.	 P.J. Ennis, A. Czyrska-Filemonowicz, Recent advances in creep-
resistant steels for power plant applications. Sadhana. 28, 709–
730 (2003). https​://doi.org/10.1007/BF027​06455​
	125.	 C. Pandey, M.M. Mahapatra, P. Kumar, N. Saini, J.G. Thakre, 
R.S. Vidyarthy, H.K. Narang, A brief study on δ-ferrite evolu-
tion in dissimilar P91 and P92 steel weld joint and their effect 
on mechanical properties. Arch. Civ. Mech. Eng. 18, 713–722 
(2018). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.acme.2017.12.002
	126.	 C. Pandey, A. Giri, M.M. Mahapatra, Effect of normalizing 
temperature on microstructural stability and mechanical prop-
erties of creep strength enhanced ferritic P91 steel. Mater. 
Sci. Eng. A 657, 173–184 (2016). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
msea.2016.01.066
	127.	 T.S. Sidhu, R.D. Agrawal, S. Prakash, Hot corrosion of some 
superalloys and role of high-velocity oxy-fuel spray coatings—a 


--- Page 21 ---

1967
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968	
1 3
review. Surf. Coat. Technol. 198, 441–446 (2005). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2004.10.056
	128.	 F. Presuel-Moreno, M.A. Jakab, N. Tailleart, M. Goldman, J.R. 
Scully, Corrosion-resistant metallic coatings. Mater. Today 11, 
14–23 (2008). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S1369​-7021(08)70203​-7
	129.	 B.R. Marple, J. Voyer, M. Thibodeau, D.R. Nagy, R. Vassen, Hot 
corrosion of lanthanum zirconate and partially stabilized zirconia 
thermal barrier coatings. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 128, 144 
(2006). https​://doi.org/10.1115/1.19245​34
	130.	 J. Sun, Q.-G. Fu, R.-M. Yuan, K.-Y. Dong, J.-J. Guo, Corrosion 
and thermal cycling behavior of plasma sprayed thermal barrier 
coatings on die steel. Mater. Des. 114, 537–545 (2016). https​://
doi.org/10.1016/j.matde​s.2016.10.065
	131.	 M.R. Loghman-Estarki, R.S. Razavi, H. Edris, S.R. Bakhshi, M. 
Nejati, H. Jamali, Comparison of hot corrosion behavior of nano-
structured ScYSZ and YSZ thermal barrier coatings in the pres-
ence of molten sulfate and vanadate salt. Ceram. Int. 42, 7432–
7439 (2016). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceram​int.2016.01.147
	132.	 D.R. Clarke, S.R. Phillpot, Thermal barrier coating materials. 
Mater. Today 8, 22–29 (2005). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S1369​
-7021(05)70934​-2
	133.	 R.L. Jones, Some aspects of the hot corrosion of thermal barrier 
coatings. J. Therm. Spray Technol. 6, 77–84 (1997). https​://doi.
org/10.1007/BF026​46315​
	134.	 R. Ahmadi-Pidani, R. Shoja-Razavi, R. Mozafarinia, H. Jamali, 
Evaluation of hot corrosion behavior of plasma sprayed ceria and 
yttria stabilized zirconia thermal barrier coatings in the presence 
of ­Na2SO4V2O5 molten salt. Ceram. Int. 38, 6613–6620 (2012). 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceram​int.2012.05.047
	135.	 S.M. Jiang, X. Peng, Z.B. Bao, S.C. Liu, Q.M. Wang, J. 
Gong, C. Sun, Preparation and hot corrosion behaviour of a 
MCrAlY + AlSiY composite coating. Corros. Sci. 50, 3213–3220 
(2008). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.corsc​i.2008.08.018
	136.	 P. Mohan, B. Yuan, T. Patterson, V.H. Desai, Y.H. Sohn, Deg-
radation of yttria-stabilized zirconia thermal barrier coatings by 
vanadium pentoxide, phosphorous pentoxide, and sodium sulfate. 
J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 90, 3601–3607 (2007). https​://doi.org/10.11
11/j.1551-2916.2007.01941​.x
	137.	 N.P. Padture, Thermal barrier coatings for gas-turbine engine 
applications. Science 296, 280–284 (2002). https​://doi.
org/10.1126/scien​ce.10686​09
	138.	 L. Guo, C. Zhang, M. Li, W. Sun, Z. Zhang, F. Ye, Hot cor-
rosion evaluation of ­Gd2O3–Yb2O3 Co-doped ­Y2O3 stabilized 
­ZrO2 thermal barrier oxides exposed to ­Na2SO4 + V2O5 molten 
salt. Ceram. Int. 43, 2780–2785 (2017). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ceram​int.2016.11.109
	139.	 M. Mohammadi, A. Kobayashi, S. Javadpour, S.A.J. Jahromi, 
Evaluation of hot corrosion behaviors of ­Al2O3–YSZ com-
posite TBC on gradient MCrAlY coatings in the presence of 
­Na2SO4–NaVO3 salt. Vacuum 167, 547–553 (2019). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.vacuu​m.2018.04.042
	140.	 J. Pokluda, M. Kianicov, Damage and performance assessment 
of protective coatings on turbine blades. Gas Turbines. (2012). 
https​://doi.org/10.5772/10214​
	141.	 N. Wu, Z. Chen, S.X. Mao, Hot corrosion mechanism of compos-
ite alumina/yttria-stabilized zirconia coating in molten sulfate-
vanadate salt. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 88, 675–682 (2005). https​://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-2916.2005.00120​.x
	142.	 J. Kim, M.G. Dunn, A.J. Baran, D.P. Wade, E.L. Tremba, Deposi-
tion of volcanic materials in the hot sections of two gas turbine 
engines. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 115, 641 (1993). https​://doi.
org/10.1115/1.29067​54
	143.	 B.R. Marple, J. Voyer, M. Thibodeau, D.R. Nagy, R. Vassen, Hot 
corrosion of lanthanum zirconate and partially stabilized zirconia 
thermal barrier coatings. J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 128, 144 
(2005). https​://doi.org/10.1115/1.19245​34
	144.	 M.J. Pindera, J. Aboudi, S.M. Arnold, The effect of interface 
roughness and oxide film thickness on the inelastic response 
of thermal barrier coatings to thermal cycling. Mater. Sci. 
Eng. A 284, 158–175 (2000). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0921​
-5093(00)00750​-4
	145.	 M.Y. Ali, S.Q. Nusier, G.M. Newaz, Mechanics of damage 
initiation and growth in a TBC/superalloy system. Int. J. Solids 
Struct. 38, 3329–3340 (2001). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0020​
-7683(00)00261​-4
	146.	 V.K. Tolpygo, D.R. Clarke, K.S. Murphy, Evaluation of inter-
face degradation during cyclic oxidation of EB–PVD thermal 
barrier coatings and correlation with TGO luminescence. 
Surf. Coat. Technol. 188–189, 62–70 (2004). https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.surfc​oat.2004.08.001
	147.	 M.H. Li, Z.Y. Zhang, X.F. Sun, H.R. Guan, W.Y. Hu, Z.Q. 
Hu, Oxidation and Degradation of EB–PVD Thermal-Barrier 
Coatings. Oxid. Metals 58, 499–512 (2002)
	148.	 A.G. Evans, D.R. Clarke, C.G. Levi, The influence of oxides on 
the performance of advanced gas turbines. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 
28, 1405–1419 (2008). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeurc​erams​
oc.2007.12.023
	149.	 H. Guo, L. Sun, H. Li, S. Gong, High temperature oxidation 
behavior of hafnium modified NiAl bond coat in EB–PVD 
thermal barrier coating system. Thin Solid Films 516, 5732–
5735 (2008). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsf.2007.07.031
	150.	 T.S. Sidhu, S. Prakash, R.D. Agrawal, Hot corrosion and per-
formance of nickel-based coatings. Curr. Sci. 90, 41–47 (2006)
	151.	 G.W. Goward, Low-temperature hot corrosion in gas turbines: 
a review of causes and coatings therefor. J. Eng. Gas Turbines 
Power 108, 421–425 (1986). https​://doi.org/10.1115/1.32399​
21
	152.	 A. Drummond, E.D. Alves, Perfil socioeconômico e demográ-
fico e a capacidade funcional de idosos atendidos pela Estratégia 
Saúde da Família de Paranoá, Distrito Federal. Rev. Bras. Geriatr. 
e Gerontol. 16, 727–738 (2013). https​://doi.org/10.1590/s1809​
-98232​01300​04000​07
	153.	 J.A. Goebel, F.S. Pettit, G.W. Goward, Mechanisms for the 
hot corrosion of nickel-base alloys. Metall. Trans. 4, 261–278 
(1973). https​://doi.org/10.1007/BF026​49626​
	154.	 C. Leyens, I.G. Wright, B.A. Pint, Hot corrosion of an EB–PVD 
thermal-barrier coating system at 950 °C. Oxid. Met. 54, 401–
424 (2000). https​://doi.org/10.1023/A:10046​34400​479
	155.	 C. Leyenp, U. Schulz, B.A. Pint, I.G. Wright, Influence of EB–
PVD TBC microstructure on thermal barrier coating system per-
formance under cyclic oxidation conditions. Surf. Coat. Technol. 
120, 68–76 (1999)
	156.	 M.P. Borom, C.A. Johnson, L.A. Peluso, Role of environment 
deposits and operating surface temperature in spallation of air 
plasma sprayed thermal barrier coatings. Surf. Coatings Tech-
nol. 86–87, 116–126 (1996). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0257​
-8972(96)02994​-5
	157.	 W.N. Harrison, D.G. Moore, J.C. Richmond, Review of an inves-
tigation of ceramic coatings for metallic turbine parts and other 
high-temperature applications (1947)
	158.	 F.B. Garrett, C.A. Gyorgak, Adhesive and Protective Character-
istics of Ceramic Coating A-417 and Its Effect on Engine Life of 
Forged Refractaloy- 26 (AMS 5760) and Cast Stellite 21 (AMS 
5385) Turbine Blades (1953)
	159.	 P.E. Hodge, R.A. Miller, M.A. Gedwill, Evaluation of the hot cor-
rosion behavior of thermal barrier coatings. Thin Solid Films 73, 
447–453 (1980). https​://doi.org/10.1016/0040-6090(80)90513​-1
	160.	 S. Stecura, Two-Layer Thermal Barrier Coating for Turbine 
Engine Airfoils—Furnace and Burner Rig Test Results, NASA/
TM-x-2425. (1976) 1–17


--- Page 22 ---

1968
	
Metals and Materials International (2021) 27:1947–1968
1 3
	161.	 C.H. Liebert, F.S. Stepka, Memorandum Nasa Tm X-3352 Poten-
tial Use of Ceramic Coating As a Thermal Insulation on Cooled 
Turbine Hardware, Report. (1976)
	162.	 S.M. Meier, D.M. Nissley, K.D. Sheffler, T.A. Cruse, Thermal 
barrier coating life prediction model development, Nasa Tech-
nical report, Report/Patent Number: NASA-CR-182230, NAS 
1.26:182230, PWA-5970-40, Document Id: 19900004072, 
Accession Number: 90N13388, (1989)
	163.	 F. Traeger, M. Ahrens, R. Vaßen, D. Stöver, A life time model 
for ceramic thermal barrier coatings. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 358, 
255–265 (2003). https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0921​-5093(03)00300​
-9
	164.	 L. Ni, C. Liu, C. Zhou, A Life Prediction Model of Thermal Bar-
rier Coatings. Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 24, 3161–3166 (2010). https​
://doi.org/10.1142/s0217​97921​00662​52
	165.	 H. Song, Y. Kim, J.M. Lee, J. Yun, D.J. Kim, J.M. Koo, C.S. 
Seok, Life prediction of thermal barrier coating considering 
degradation and thermal fatigue. Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. 17, 
241–245 (2016). https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1254​1-016-0031-y
	166.	 S. Wei, W. Fu-chi, F. Qun-bo, M. Zhuang, Lifetime prediction 
of plasma-sprayed thermal barrier coating systems. Surf. Coat. 
Technol. 217, 39–45 (2013). https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfc​
oat.2012.11.069
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
